A DISCOURSE FOR TAKING OFF THE TESTS AND Penal Laws ABOUT RELIGION.

The Disciples said, Lord, will thou that we command Fire to come down from
Heaven and consume them, even as Elias did? But he turned, and rebuked them,
and said, Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of. For the Son of Man is
not come to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them.

Luke 9.54, 55, 56. LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor.
MDCLXXXVII.

The Preface.
Reader,
Whatever thy Thoughts may be of the Author of the following Discourse, I can
give thee Arguments enough, were it needful, to satisfy a Rational and
Considering Mind, that He is most sincerely concerned for the Preservation of
the Protestant Religion, and the Universal Peace and Quiet of every good
Subject.

He has made some Remarks on the Measures, which some of his Majesty's Royal
Predecessors have taken to Establish Religion, but could never observe, that
Penal Laws did ever effectually suppress a False, or propagate the True
Religion. The many Severities against the Lollars, from the Sixth of Richard
the Second, to the end of Henry the Eighth, could never put a Stop to the
Spreading of their Opinions; for under Edward the Sixth, the whole Nation
became Lollars: And the Extremities endured under Queen Mary, though they Damm'd
up the Water for a while, yet it was but in order to the Overflowing the whole
Kingdom ever since. And it is to be presumed, that there are wise Men among the
Roman-Catholic, who observing the mischievous Effects of Penal Laws then, for
so they must esteem them, are so very much set against all such Ways now. And
ever since Q. Eliz. entered the Throne, a Considering Protestant will see more
reason to conclude, that it is not the making Sanguinary Laws against the
Papist, but the Power of Truth, that has hindered the Growth of Popery: For,
notwithstanding the most violent Persecutions, that have been of late Years
against the Protestant Dissenters, they have waxed strong, and their Party more
numerous now than it was some Years ago.

It Is true, many, to escape the Penalty, have wounded their Consciences; and
others, who did not run the same Course with them, have been ruined, to the
great Damage of the whole Nation; but none have been convinced, that the Church
of England has the more Truth on her side, because she has exercised so much of
her Persecuting Power. Penal Laws for Religion have occasioned great Disorders
and Confusions amongst us, but never yet did any good; and therefore it is that
the Author heartily wishes, that all such Laws may be so vacated, as not to
receive Life amongst us any more.

I am very confident, that nothing can afford greater Satisfaction to the
Author, than to see the very Principle, on which Persecution is raised, so
effectually eradicated, that none for the future may be exposed to Corporal
Mulcts for their Religion; No, not the Quaker, Anabaptist, Independent,
Presbyterian, Churchman, nor Papist. The Author is afraid, that so long as the
Persecuting Principle lives, the prevailing Party, of what Persuasion soever,
will make use of it. Let the Principle then, according to his Majesty's Royal
Resolution, be destroyed, and there are hopes of Peace and Quiet to the whole
Kingdom. The fear is, that if the Tests, which are a Branch arising from the
Persecuting Principle, be taken off, the Papists will be Empowered to Establish
Persecuting Laws; but what greater Assurance can we have against this Fright,
than that his Majesty, designing the Prevention of all such Mischiefs, will
accept of any Expedient that shall be offered to him, and found sufficient to
secure us?

The Design therefore of these Papers, is to prepare and dispose his Majesty's
Subjects to a Closure with what may Establish our Peace and Tranquillity on a
sure Bottom; and the Author doubts not, but that our wise and thoughtful Gentry
will weight what is urged, and act as becomes good Englishmen and Christians,
and concur with his Majesty, who desires to make us all Happy with a Great
Charter, Declaratory of the Ancient Constitution of our Government, whereby
Liberty of Conscience may be secured on the same Foundation our Civil Rights
and Property are, and be settled amongst the Inalienable Rights of the
Englishman. And the Reader is importuned to consider, that this is a Design,
that no way lessens the Church of Englands True Happiness, or Just Glory; for
it will not deprive any deserving Person of that Communion of any Advantage.
The whole they are sought unto for, is, that their Neighbors be not destroyed
for not acting contrary to their Consciences, and for not prostituting their
Souls to the Lusts of Persecutors. And what Injury is done that Church, when
nothing more is insisted on? unless it be said, that their Happiness consists
in other Men's Miseries. And I may be bold to speak thus much on the behalf of
the Dissenters, that they can cheerfully forgive all the past Injuries and
Wrongs received from the Church of England Clergy and their Creatures; I must
confine the Forgiveness to them, because the Wrong was only from them. And it
must be Recorded to the Glory of our English Gentry, that they ever hated those
Severities, and no doubt, having seen the Havoc of a vehement Execution of
Penal Laws for Religion, and of the Excesses which the Prosecutors fell into,
will rejoice to have an Opportunity to manifest more fully their Dislike, by
concurring with his Majesty in a Repeal.

But to return, The Dissenter, I am sure, does not only Forgive, but can easily
Forget all that these Clergymen and their Adherents have done against them,
longing to see that Day, wherein the Lamb may lie down with the Lion, and in
which Ephraim shall not envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim. God is the God of
Peace, and he has commanded it, and therefore the Dissenters desire to pursue
it. It Is really a Matter of unspeakable Grief to the Dissenters, when they
consider how much some of the Church of England do revile them, for studying
the Things that would make even for their Churches Peace. And what an amazing
Consideration must this be, that the Church of England express themselves so
vehemently against the Persecution of Foreign Papists, and yet are so very
angry with Protestant Dissenters, for joining with the English Papists, in
putting a stop to the Persecution at home? For whilst they plead for Penal Laws
against the Papists for their Religion, they justify the Penal Edicts that are
against Protestants. To say that none must be punished for an adherence to
Truth, but for a closure with Error, is no more than the most violent
Persecutor will concur with you in; for they never punished any for a good Work
as such, but for what they esteemed Evil.

The whole Controversy about Penal Laws for Religion, must be reduced to this
Head, viz. Whether it be agreeable to the Divine Will, that any Man be punished
Corporally, or deprived of his Civil Rights for the sake of his Religion? If it
be Query'd, Whether it be lawful to punish any one Corporally for his being of
the True Religion? All will hold in the Negative, and yet keep up Persecution.
For the Higher Powers esteeming their own Religion the True, and all other
Religions False, though they are severe in punishing all others, yet it is because
they are of a False Religion. But if the Question be stated as above, and if it
be held in the Negative, all Corporal Punishments for Religion are laid aside,
and a Stop put to Persecution.

It must be carefully observed, that the Protestant cannot have so ill an
Opinion of the Papist, but the Papist has as bad an one of the Protestant, and
so long as it is held lawful to propagate the Truth and suppress Error by
Corporal Mulcts, the Papists will have as much reason for the use of these
Methods to propagate what he takes to be True, and suppress what he judges an
Error, as the Protestant can.

This then must be fixed, That it is not agreeable to the Will of God, to
punish any Man Corporally, or deprive him of his Civil Rights for the sake of
his Religion. The settling this Principle will put an end to all Persecutions,
nothing else can do it.

Thus much the Author would inculcate on the Minds of his Readers, and is not
in the least moved by that extravagant Question, What, would you not have
Blasphemers and Murderers punished, if they pretend it is their Religion to
Blaspheme and Murder? for it is manifest to all, that the Religion we are
speaking of, is what leans on Positive Revelation, and not that which the Light
of Nature makes known. What is discovered by Natures Light, and is a part of
Natural Religion, is so very manifest to all Men, that no Man, without laying a
Violence on his own Faculties, can pretend, that what is really contrary unto
it, is a part of his Religion. Though those Scriptures, from which are drawn the
Rules of Positive Religion, must be acknowledged to be so obscure and dark,
that a Rational Man, who means well, may mistake their true and genuine Sense,
yea tho he has the help of a Guide pretending Infallibility, yet Natures Laws
are so plain, so clear and manifest to all Rational Men, that there is no room
left for any ones falling into such Mistakes as are alleged, and pretend that
it is his Religion to Blaspheme and Murder. Mistakes therefore touching the
Sense of a Scripture, are to be rectified by Scriptural Reasonings; but such
Faults as are committed against the Laws of Nature, are to be punished by the
Civil Magistrate: I say, such must be punished, because they act contrary to
their own Light.

The Difference between Crimes that the Light of Nature discovers, and those
Mistakes that are about the Sense of a Scripture, is so very great, that we
cannot so argue from the one to the other, as to infer a necessity of treating
those who mistake the Sense of a Text, with the like Severity they ought to be
dealt with, who violate Natures Laws.

Thus much the Author insists on, as what is agreeable to the Light of Nature,
to the Ancient Constitution of our Government and the Rules of Christianity,
and accordingly forms his Arguments for the Taking off the Tests, and all Penal
Laws for mere Religion, proposing such Things to Consideration, as may so move
the Church of England Clergy, the Protestant Dissenter, and Roman-Catholic,
that notwithstanding the great Differences there are between 'em in Matters of
Religion, they may agree on this one thing, namely, to Live peaceably together.
And that the Papists may never be in a Capacity to Persecute any more in this
Land, the Author makes it his Endeavor to persuade our Nobility and Gentry to
concur with his Majesty in settling Liberty of Conscience on such a Bottom, that
it may never be in the power of any to Persecute. And he is confident that this
is the only Way to settle the Peace of the Church of England; for nothing can
so much endanger her as an obstinate Adherence to Penal Laws and Tests, which
will provoke the Body of the Nation to conclude Her their only Enemy, and that
it is their Interest to guard against her as such. A too resolute Endeavor to
keep up her Persecuting Power, may issue in her loss of that, and all her
External Pomp and Glory. It Is well known, that if the Pope in Henry the
Eighth's Days had been more yielding, he might have kept this Nation much
longer under his Power; and if our Clergy will be content with their present
Standing, and part with their Penal Laws and Tests, none will envy their
Happiness. God give them Wisdom, not only to see their Error, which some say
they now do, but to improve the present Opportunity, by a Christian Concurrence
with his Majesty, in Settling their own and the Nations Peace.

A DISCOURSE For taking off the PENAL LAWS and TESTS About RELIGION.
THE many Discourses that have been, and still are about the TESTS, being on a
Point of the Highest Importance, both to the King's Majesty, and to the whole
Kingdom, it does most undoubtedly become every Englishman to consider, with the
greatest Caution, not only the Nature of the Thing, but what may be the
Tendency, either of the Damning or Establishing 'em: And whoever ventures to
offer his Thoughts about them, must remember, he has a very narrow Bridge to
pass over, where one false Step will be fatal; for there is such a thwarting of
Opinions, as makes the Case marvellously perplexed and intricate. Some Great
Men are fully persuaded, that a Taking them off will prove pernicious to the
Protestant Subject; And there are others of as great a Figure, who are
convinced, that in this Juncture a sticking to 'em will be more mischievous to
all, than the destroying 'em can be to any. And because of the different
Apprehensions Men of a great Character have of this Thing, the Inferior sort
are hugely distracted, and in a Commotion amongst themselves; which makes it
necessary to do somewhat more than yet has been done to enlighten and settle
the Body of the Nation on a sure Basis, in their Reasonings about it: And I
cannot think of a better Method than the giving a just Account of the Ancient
Constitution of our Government, and the several Interests of the KING and
PEOPLE: For, what is most agreeable to that Constitution and these Interests,
is undoubtedly most safe and meet to be done. I will therefore keep to this
Method, and in the first place mention just so much of the Ancient Constitution
of the Civil Government as is necessary to the present purpose, and it is this.

THE Civil Government must be recognized to be a thing entire within it self,
and of distinct Consideration from Religion. For although there may be many
Religions in a Kingdom, yet the Government is but One and the same; and though
there may be great Alterations made on the Religion of the State, yet that
makes no Alteration on the Government. The blending any particular Religion so
very close to Government, that a change of the former must infer a ruin on the
latter, is quite contrary to the Ancient Constitution of this Nation, in which
the Religions have been various, even when the Government remained the same,
unaltered and unshaken. The change of Religion from Heathen to Christian made
no Alteration on the Government, nor did the turning it from Popish to
Protestant. Under all these Vicissitudes and Changes, the Civil Government (for
of that I still speak) was the same.

And as Civil Government is distinct from Religion, and entire without it; so
the different Subjects and Ends of the one and the other makes it apparent.
Civil Government, in the Intention of the Ordainer, is designed to maintain
Peace among Men as Men, and is Conversant about the Outward Man, regulating it
by that Law which is revealed by a Light common to Mankind, and makes use of
Coercion for the enforcing Obedience: But the Design of Religion is to procure
a Peace between God and Man, and its Subject is of a far larger Extent; for it
reaches the Souls of Men, giving Laws for their Regulation, which are
Sanction'd by Spiritual, not Corporal Retributions.

I doubt not but the Intelligent Reader will do me right in the taking it for
granted, that when I distinguish Civil Government from Religion, it is meant of
that Religion that leans on Positive Revelation, and not of Natural Religion,
that lies in an Observing of the Laws given us with our Being: For it is the
great End of Civil Government, to see that Men frame their Manners in
conformity to those Laws, and by Corporal Mulcts to punish such as violate 'em.
But the Religion that is founded on Positive Revelation, tho it comprehends
Natural Religion within its compass, yet as contradistinguish'd from it, the
chief Duty it requires is Faith, which can no ways be forced; and being to
regulate Men's Hearts, it can operate no otherwise, but by the proposal of
Spiritual Encouragements and Threats.

Here then does arise a clear difference between Civil Government, and Positive
Religion: The one is only conversant about the Outward Man, taking no
cognizance of Men's Thoughts but in order to the Outward Act; The other is
conversant about the Hearts of Men. The one therefore makes use of Coercion, or
Corporal Enforcements; the other of Spiritual only. The Ecclesiastical Law and
the Temporal Law have several Proceedings, and to several Ends; The one being
Temporal, to inflict Punishment on the Body, Lands, or Goods; The other being
Spiritual, prosalute animae. The one to punish the Outward Man, the other to
Reform the Inward. And this appears in 20 Hen. 7.22. and 10 Edw. 4.10 Coke,
Caudrey's Case.
If a Man violates those Laws that are adjusted for the keeping Peace amongst
Men, as such, he is obnoxious to a Corporal and External Penalty; but if his
Crimes lie only in transgressing those Laws that are brought to light by
Positive Revelation, he is only liable to a Spiritual Punishment, not to what
is Corporal.

Thus the Civil Government (I say) regards the Outward Conversation, the
Keeping an External Peace amongst Men, by taking care that they observe the
general Laws of Nature, and every other particular Law, which either Custom, or
the present State of Affairs declare to be necessary for the good of the
People. But Religion respects the Consciences of Men, having only the advantage
of Persuasion to propagate, or at least defend it self against Foreigners; to
which is added the power of casting all Domestic Adversaries out of Communion,
that cannot be prevailed with by Persuasion.

The confounding these has proved mischievous to Kingdoms, and so has the
twisting Religion with the Government of the State, so as to make it lawful to
deprive the Subject of his Civil Liberty or Property for not closing with the
Religion. Thus much I may safely affirm, although I should also (as I do) grant,
that it is the Duty of the Government to encourage that Religion which it
esteems best; for there is a great difference between the encouraging Men of
one Religion, and the destroying all of another. Besides, such is the Nature of
true Religion, as obliges its Professors to be content with Religious (without
calling in the Aid of Civil) Methods for its Security and Defense. And its no
part of Civil Government to use Coercion for the advantage of any Religion: Be
the Religion what it will, unless it can defend it self by dint of Argument, it
may fall, for any help the Civil Powers are bound to give it. And let all the
Religions stand in equal Favor with the Higher Powers, it is not to be doubted,
but supposed, that what is True will be found to prevail and conquer. And thus
much we boldly assert, according to Christ's Doctrine, which assures us of no
other destruction of all Heresies, than by the Brightness of his Coming; and no
other overcoming all his Adversaries, but by the Sword that goes out of his
Mouth, viz. the Word of God.

It is therefore to be observed very much to our purpose, what was the Practice
of the first Christian King amongst the Saxons, as venerable Bede in his
Ecclesiastical Story expressly avers. For Ethelbert (says Bid) after due
deliberation received Christ's Religion, and though resolved to give the greatest
Countenance to those who became Christian, yet would compel none to receive the
same Faith he did, Nullum tamen cogeret ad Christianifmum, sed solummodo
credentes arctiori dilectione quasi concives sibi regni coelestis
amplecteretur. Didiceret enim and a Doctoribus, auctoribusque suae salutis
servitium Christi Voluntarium, non Coacticium debere esse. Bid Histor. Eccles.
Gent. Angl. l. 1. c. 26.
believing, as he was taught, that the Service of Christ ought to be Voluntary,
and not by Constraint. Now according to this first Record in our English
History, I must aver, that after the strictest Endeavor I could make for the
investigation of Truth in this Particular for succeeding Generations, I have
been induced from the whole to conclude, That as Government and Religion are
two distinct Things, their Subjects and their Ends distinct; in like manner as
True Religion rejects all Coercive Props and Supports, as what is contrary to
some special Rules given by our Lord Jesus Christ himself; So the Ancient
Constitution of our Government is such, as offers Protection to all that demean
themselves like good Subjects, of what Religion soever they be; That Liberty
and Property are too sacred to be invaded for the sake of an Opinion that no
way hurts it; And that the Temporal Peace and Quiet, which is the result of an
entire enjoyment of Liberty and Property, is so much the Englishman's Right,
that no one without unjust Violence can deprive him of it for his Religion. The
truth of which is so very obvious, that every particular English Spirit cannot
but find it as it were engraven on his own Soul; for what People under the Cope
of Heaven are more tender of Liberty and Property than the English?

And I am sure, that the other day a great Lawyer expressed himself very freely
touching the Subjects Rights, affirming, That as Kings have their Prerogatives
too great for an Act of Parliament to bound or limit, and as the next Heir to
the Crown has so firm a Right to the Succession, that no Consideration of
Religion, no, nor that of Treason it self, can be made a Bar to exclude him,
for Jura Sanguinis nullo jure Civili dirimi possunt; So Subjects have their
various and different Rights, either by Inheritance, Creation, or Election,
answerable to their several Qualities, which no Act of Parliament can divest
them of, insomuch that if a Statute be de facto made contrary to a Fundamental
Right of the Subject, it is void and null; and if any one in pursuance of such a
Statute, ravish from the Subject his Liberty and Property in one King's Reign,
he may (as it has been heretofore) suffer for it in the Reign of another. I
insist not nevertheless at this time on this Great Man's Opinion, any farther
than to offer it to the Consideration of the Learned in the Law, that (if
possibly I may do it) they may be provoked to an Enquiry, and to give the
People some farther Satisfaction than he did, when he only told me it was so
plain, that instead of confirming it by Authorities, he must defere to the
known Rule, viz. In rebus manifestis errat, qui authoritates Legum allegat,
quia perspicue vera non sunt probanda. For let this Opinion be cleared, 'twill
contribute extremely toward the ending the present Controversy, especially if
the other thing he mentioned also (which indeed concludes our whole Argument)
be made out, viz. That amongst the Inalienable Rights of the Subjects, we must
reckon this, That no Freeman may be deprived of his Liberty or Property, or
any other Civil Right or Privilege, for the sake of his Religion, so long as
his Religion has no influence on the Government. Let this, I say, be made good,
'twill unavoidably follow, that all the Penal Laws for mere Religion, and the
Securing the Tests must appear to be ab initio, void and null; and a Great
Charter Declaratory of so much, will put a stop to Persecution for evermore for
Conscience sake, and answer all the Objections that can be brought against the
Taking away the Tests.

But to return; It Is my part to enquire more particularly, Whether the Damning,
or Establishing the Tests, be most agreeable to what I have declared the
Ancient Constitution of our Government to be? And the Solution is easy; for
from the Contexture of the foregoing Discourse, we must conclude for the Taking
them off, because they twist the Religion of one part of the People so closely
with the Government, as to deprive the Body of the Nation of their Civil
Rights, Liberty and Property, for the sake of an Opinion that hurts no Body but
its Owner. There are three or four Tests, which do twist Religion and the Civil
Government so unluckily together, that whoever scruples the Religious part of
the Test, is immediately esteemed an Enemy to the Government.

The First requires, that they who take it do declare, that they will never
endeavor any Alteration of Government in the Church. The Second obliges all in
Office to Receive the Lord's Supper according to the Church of England, and
declare in these Words, [ I A. B. do declare, 25 Car. 2. cap. 2.
That I do believe that there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, or in the Elements of Bread and Wine, at, or after the
Consecration thereof by any Person whatsoever]. The Last, imposed both on the
Nobility and Commons chosen to Sit in Parliament, runs thus, [ I A. B. do
solemnly and sincerely in the Presence of God profess, testify, and declare;
That I do believe that in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper there is not any
Transubstantiation of the Elements of Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of
Christ, at, or after the Consecration thereof by any Person whatsoever; And
that the Invocation or Adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint, and
the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now used in the Church of Rome, are
Superstitious and Idolatrous.]

These being the several Tests imposed on the Subjects of this Realm, there are
these several Arguments which occur to my Thoughts against their continued
Establishment.

I. It Is contrary to the Liberty of the Subject, who without just cause is
hereby deprived of his Rights as an Englishman. It is the Right of a Freeholder
in the County, My Lord Chief Justice Coke positively affirms, That the Barons
ought to have a Writ of Summons ex debito Justitiae, to Sit in Parliament; and
its most manifest, that their Summons must be either of Grace, or ex debito: If
the former, it lies in the Breast of the King to call whom of the Lords he
will, and so never want an House of Lords for his Purpose; If the latter, then
my Argument abides in its strength, and it is the Barons Right to be Called and
Sit in Parliament.
and of a Freeman of any City or Town Corporate, to choose his Representative
in Parliament, and the Right of those freely chosen, if good Subjects, which
they may be, though of a Religion different from that of the State, to Sit in
Parliament; and it is the Birthright of our Ancient Nobility, and the most
undoubted Right of every Peer of the Land, tho created a Peer but yesterday, to
Sit in the Higher House of Parliament, and Advise and Consent to the Enacting
Laws. And it is a known Case, that though a Man be Excommunicate, yet he is not
thereby divested of his Right to choose his Representative; and why, but
because a Man may remain a good Subject and a good Englishman, although thrown
out of the Church, and therefore ought to enjoy the Privilege of an
Englishman. And why shall not the Persons chosen, and the Nobility, so long as
they sufficiently demonstrate to the World, that they are true Englishmen, and
good Subjects, enjoy their undoubted Rights and Privileges? What belongs to a
good Subject as such, belongs to every good Subject, and it is a Wrong to rob
him of it. Let there then be such a Test imposed, I mean a CIVIL TEST, which
Characterizes a good Subject, and which a good Subject cannot refuse to take,
and let that be all; for that surely may be made sufficient and unscrupulous,
to secure the just Prerogatives of the King, and the Liberty and Property of
the Subject, which is the whole Concern in it, that a true Englishman, as such,
is bound to look after.

II. The Imposition of a Religious Test on the Subject, excluding the Refusers
from having any Advancement in Places of Trust, is a Branch of that Doctrine on
which all Penal Laws for Religion are grounded; for the excluding a Man from
entering on, and a turning him out of any Place of Trust and Advantage, for the
sake of his Religion, is as Penal as the taking from him his Liberty and
Property for Religion.

There is no difference in the general Nature of the Penalness of these Laws,
the difference lies in the particular Kinds of the Penalty; the one is merely
Privative, and the other Positive; the one a Casting 'em out of Heaven, the
other a Casting 'em into Hell. The Nonconformists therefore judge, that the
turning 'em out of their Places, was a Punishing 'em for their Consciences, and
they reckon it a great part of their Sufferings for Religion as well as they do
their Imprisonments. Whoever then is against the continuance of the Penal Laws,
if he will be consistent with himself, must be for the taking away all
Religious Tests, seeing otherwise some good Subjects may suffer for Conscience
sake, which is the thing they decry. They may suffer the loss of their Civil
Rights, as most certainly those Lords do, who are excluded the House in
Parliament-time. And how then shall we imagine that any Dissenter that is truly
and considerately such, can be for the Establishing the Tests? For thereby,
whilst they desire Liberty for themselves, they cry for Vengeance on others;
and whilst they desire a Prince of a Religion different from themselves, to
ease them, they must have Men of the King's Religion continued under
Persecution, than which nothing can be more unreasonable; seeing, in good
earnest, if they are for the Persecuting others, it is a thousand to one, but
that they may tempt the Government to give themselves the worst of it.

III. This blending and twisting Matters Religious with the State so closely
(as to make a Mistake in Religion to be enough to demonstrate the Man an Enemy
to the Government) seems to be a Result grounded on that pernicious Notion,
[That Dominion is founded in Grace]: For why else must a Man be of the
Religion, that he may have a Share in, or Countenance from the Government? If
Government be not founded in Grace, then Grace, or the being Religious, is no
necessary Step to get up into the Government. Besides, according to the present
Practice of the violent Asserters of Tests, be their Principle what it will,
all the Consequences of that Doctrine [Dominion is founded in Grace] do
naturally issue from their Practice, seeing by the same Reason a Church-of-
England Parliament excludes from the Favor of the Government all but Church-of-
England Men; a Popish, Presbyterian, Anabaptistical, Independent, or Quaking
Parliament, may exclude all from the same, but Men of their own Persuasion. And
what is more considerable, the Church of England, so long as she is for this
Practice, that she may defend it, must insist either on her being in
Possession, or on a Right only upon this account, because she is of the true
Religion. If on the former, then whoever is in possession, may have the same
Plea; and this is no other than what every Usurper may make: But if the later,
it cannot hold good, unless the Government be appropriated to True Religion,
and that none have a Right to Govern but those of the True Religion, and all
others be Usurpers, and to be Deposed. And let this be once granted, it will
follow, That, Men of every different Religion judging themselves in the Right,
there is, and can be no Sect among us, but they may hereby be equally
encouraged to lay a Claim to to the Government: And what would be the
Consequence hereof, but a turning the whole Nation into a Flame, a fostering
Sedition, and all manner of Traitorous Practices against the Government (be it
either Roman-Catholic, Presbyterian, or Episcopal); for there will be still
some, who are of a different Religion from it, who must esteem themselves
oppressed while kept out, and judge it their Duty to be ever Contriving,
Conspiring, and Consulting how they may be possessed of their fancied Right.

IV. The joining Religious Tests with Civil Government, has occasioned much
Mischief in the Land these last hundred Years, to the impoverishing thousands
of Families. All the Miseries which the Nonconformists have endured in this
last Age, had their Rise and Continuance from this Practice, the mingling
Religious Tests with the Civil: For of the Three Articles, unto which all the
Clergy were required to Subscribe (and for not Subscribing which the
Nonconformists were called Factious, Seditious, and Rebellious) when the First
touches the Just Power of the King; the other Two are about the Ceremonies and
Government of the Church. Subscription now to the Three was strictly enjoined;
and though the Nonconformists declared their good liking of the First, yet not
Subscribing to the Two last, they were Censured for refusing to Subscribe the
Three Articles, and so for disowning the King's Just Power. And that the Laity
might also be ensnared into the same Calamity, if Prosecuted in the Spiritual
Courts, though if grieved thereby they might Enter their Appeal, yet unless they
did first Personally Promise and Avow, that they would faithfully keep and
observe all the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, and also the
Prescript Form of Common Prayer, and likewise Subscribe to the Three Articles
formerly specified and declared, no Judge ad Quem was to admit or allow of his
or their Appeals, and all that thus refused to Subscribe, were called Factious
Appellants. Vide Can. 36. and 98.

The like method being observed in one of the present Tests, wherein the Takers
are to promise, That they will not endeavor any alteration of Government in
Church and State: And although they could heartily declare they will not endeavor
any alteration in the Government of the State, yet because they could not say
the same with Church Government, they have been represented as Enemies to the
State, as well as to the Hierarchy, and as such exposed to all manner of Odium,
Reproach and Ruin. Methinks the Protestant Dissenter should take warning, and
have a care they be not in the present conjuncture cajoled by their perfect
Enemies to plead for a continuance of this Usage.

I will in the next place propose what may be urged against the several Tests
distinctly; and so show what reasons there are for the taking away all of them.

The first Test that I shall consider, is the Declaration, That they will not
endeavor any alteration of the Government in Church or State.

By this Test, besides the abovementioned Inconvenience, all that take it are
as much obliged to the Ecclesiastical, as they are to the Civil Government;
which brings to my remembrance a passage I have met with in the Writings of a
Church of England Divine, who speaking of the Power of Parliaments; as, Whether
a Parliament might not change the Government of the Church? His Reply was, That
they might, if they could change an Essential of our Constitution: As if an
Alteration of the Hierarchy had been a Subverting the government of the State;
whereas nothing can be more clear, than that this particular sort of
Ecclesiastical Government, under which we now are, is but an accidental and a
movable Appendage to the Civil Constitution. Thus much is known, not only to
our great Lawyers, but to the Nobility and Gentry. The Bishops, as such, who
are a constituent part of the Ecclesiastical Government, are not God's, but the
King's Creatures; and all their Power, as distinguished from their dealings
with men's consciences by the Word of God, is derived from the King. The words
of 37 Hen. 8. c. 17. are, That the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, have no manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but BY,
UNDER, and FROM the King's Royal Majesty. Thus it was in the Judgment of King
James I. Queen Eliz. Edward VI. Hen VIII. and upward, amongst all the Princes
of the Roman Communion, so far as I can observe. But the supposing it so
essential to the Government, that a Parliament cannot Alter it, as this
Clergyman insinuates, and to oblige the Subject (as this Test does) solemnly
to declare he will never endeavor an Alteration of it, as if the Prelatic Power
had its Origin from Heaven, and not from the King only; does, as I humbly
apprehend, make it necessary for the Government to take off the Test, and
assert their Power, by an exercise of it in this great Instance; which, I am
assured, is a thing the Nobility and Gentry desire to be at, and therefore I
need not dwell on it any longer.

The Second, which is imposed on all that bear Office in the Kingdom, viz. [
The taking the SACRAMENT of the LORD's SVPPER, according to the Usage of the
Church of ENGLAND.] Be the man ever so Ignorant or Debauched, if called to
Office he must receive the Sacrament. Although Almighty God has ordained it only
for the Worthy, and most look upon it as the most Solemn and Sacred Ordinance
of the Gospel; yet must this Pearl be prostitute to Swine, this Holy thing
profusely given to the vilest of men, such as common Drunkards, Whoremongers,
Adulterers, and Blasphemers of God, and that without scruple; for that there
are many such amongst the common Soldiers, and also in Civil Offices, is beyond
Controversy. Besides, let a man be a knowing and pious Christian, eminent for
Loyalty to his Prince, and acknowledged by all to be a good Subject; yet if he
cannot take it according to the Usage of the Church of England, himself must be
deprived of a Place of Advantage, and the Government of his Service. So that I
take this Test to be directly contrary to the Laws of God, and the good of the
Government; and I cannot imagine how any man that has the awe of God upon his
Soul, and a love to the Government, can consent to the establishing of it.
Especially considering, that the Usage of the Church of England is to receive
the Elements kneeling, which is a gesture of Adoration, and ordained to avoid
Profanation, even before that Bread which is denied to be God, and esteemed
only his Image, which some think (and therefore refuse to take it) to be
Superstitious and Idolatrous. But how fond soever the Church of England may be
for the settling this Test; yet sure the Protestant Dissenter, unless he will
offer violence to his avowed Principles, cannot be for it.

To this there is added the following Declaration, which all in any Office,
Civil or Military, must take in these words; [ I A. B. do declare, That I do
believe that there is not any Transtantiation in the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, or in the Elements of Bread and Wine, at or after the Consecration
thereof by any person whatsoever.]

This TEST being a part of that which the Peers and those who sit in Parliament
must take, I will only observe in this place how unhappily it is worded; for,
unless there be some Errata's in my Statute-book, a man must declare, That in
the Elements of Bread and Wine there is no Transubstantiation after the
Consecration: It Is not said, [No Transubstantiation into the Body and Blood of
Christ] but more indefinitely, No Transubstantiation at all; whereas, after the
Consecration, they are eaten and drunken, and after the eating and drinking
them there is a Transubstantiation of them into his own Flesh and Blood, in
like manner as any other thing he eats or drinks is: So that this Test being a
solemn Declaration which a man is to make of his Faith, he ought to be more
explicit in the wording of it. I presume farther, That had it been matter of
doubt in Physics, whether the Bread be turned into the Flesh of him that eats
it; yet it is not so clear, that the contrary should be made a matter of Faith,
and that such, as whoever believes it not, must be made incapable of any Office
in the State.

But this defect being supplied in the Parliamentary Test, I will go on to
that, which is in these words; [ I A. B. do solemnly and sincerely, in the
presence of God, profess, testify, and declare, That I do believe that in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper there is not any Transubstantiation of the
Elements of Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, at or after the
Consecration thereof, by any person whatsoever; And that the Invocation or
Adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the
Mass, as they are now used in the Church of Rome, are Superstitious and
Idolatrous, etc.]

The first part of this TEST, I confess, is well worded, and what a Protestant
Dissenter, according to his own Principles, may safely take, though not impose;
but how it can be exacted from every Church of England man to take it, or how
they can urge the continued Imposition of it on others, is beyond me to
comprehend. My reason, in short, lies here: The Church of England, in her first
framing after Queen Mary's Death, did, in Obedience to Queen Elizabeth's
Command, take special care to open her doors so wide, that no one for his
believing Transubstantiation should be excluded her Communion: And if not
deprived thereby of the Privileges of the Church, why of those of the State?

The very drift of the Church of England has been to twist the two Interests of
Church and State so closely together, that none should have any Advantages from
the State, but those who were of the Communion of their Church; and whoever was
of the Communion of their Church, was the person qualified for the entire
enjoyment of all the Privileges of the State; and what was not a bar to
Church Communion, was none to the being possessed of State-Privileges. Though
they would deprive men of their Civil Liberties for not being of their
Communion, yet they never denied them to those whom they thought meet to admit
to her Communion; and indeed, unless she will acknowledge that the Terms of her
Communion, as a Church, are too wide, I cannot see how she can deny those whom
she admits to her Communion an Interest in the Advantages of the Government of
the Land. So that if it has been her care to open the way, that those who
believe Transubstantiation may, notwithstanding that belief, be admitted to her
Communion, the making this Test to the excluding all such Believers of
Transubstantiation from their Civil Rights, must needs be unjustifiable in the
Church of England.

But, in Obedience to Queen Elizabeth, it has been the endeavor of the Church
of England to explain the Doctrine of the Real Presence in the Holy Eucharist,
in such a Latitude of Expression as might indeed take in under it the Notion of
Transubstantiation.

Thus much the Queen commanded, as Dr. Burnet in his History of Reformation
reports in these words: [The Queen, who inclined to keep up Images in the
Churches, was resolved to have the Manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament
left in some general words, that those who believe the Corporal Presence might
not be driven away from the Church by too nice an Explication of it.] And, as
Dr. Heylin assures us, the Church obeyed this Injunction; For, says he, in his
Hist. of Q. Eliz. In the first year of K. Edward, the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper being delivered with this Benediction, that is to say, [The Body of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for the Preservation of thy Body and Soul to
Life everlasting; The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.] This was thought by
Calvin and his Disciples to give some countenance to the gross and carnal
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which passes by the name of
Transubstantiation in the School of Rome. This was altered into this Form in
the second Liturgy, that is to say, [Take, eat this, in remembrance that Christ
died for thee, and feed on him in thy heart by Faith with Thanksgiving. Take
and drink this, etc.] But the Revisers of the Book in Queen Elizabeth 's time
joined both Forms together, [that so, according to the Queen's Injunctions, the
Corporal Presence, by the Addition of the old Form, might receive countenance.]
Upon this ground they expunged also a whole Rubric at the end of the Communion
Service, in which 'twas declared, that Kneeling was not in Regard of any Real
and Essential Presence of Christ's Body and Blood. And, to come up closer to
the Church of Rome, it was ordered by the Queen's Injunctions, That the
Sacramental Bread should be made round, in fashion of the Wafers as in Queen
Mary 's Days. She also ordered, That the Lord's Table should be placed where
the Altar stood. So far Heylin.

Besides, in pursuance of the Queens Orders, in the Communion, in the
Catechism, and Book of Homilies, there are several Expressions countenancing
the Real and Corporal Presence, which has been the occasion of Dr. Moor's brief
Discourse on the Real Presence; in which it must be observed, that the Doctor
putting us in mind of the Bishop of Meaux's Judgment, which was, That the
Opinion of the Real Presence is the Doctrine of all the Churches, as well
Reformed as Unreform'd; The Doctor adds, That he must confess he has been of
this Persuasion (ever since he wrote his Mystery of Godliness) viz. That it is
the Doctrine of the Church of England, and that the Doctrine is true; And he
further assures us in these Words, I remember (says he) this I have heard from
a near Relation of mine, when I was a Youth, a Dignitary of the Church of
England, and that often, viz. That our Church was for the Real Presence; but
for the manner thereof, if asked, he would answer, Rem scimus, modum nescimus;
We know the Thing, but the Mode, or Manner thereof we know not. And the
Assurance we have of the Thing is from the common Suffrage of the Ancient
Fathers, and from the Scripture it self, which impressed that Notion on the
Minds of our pious Predecessors in the Church of God. -- Nor can we, as I
humbly conceive, relinquish this Doctrine of the Real Presence, without
declining the most easy and natural Sense of the Holy Scripture, as it stands
written in the Sixth Chapter of John. Page 42.
Of which this Doctor says, It is plain, that our Savior's Discourse in this
Chapter has for its Object or Subject, not the Manner, or Way of receiving his
Body and Blood, as if it were meant of that very Flesh and Blood on the Cross,
but that it was to be received in a Spiritual manner, which Interpreters
several of them drive at, but the Object of his Discourse is his very Flesh and
Blood it self, to be taken ( as the Fish and Loaves were, wherewith he lately
fed them) or it is Himself in reference to his Flesh and Blood, which belongs
to him as he is the Eternal Word.

Thus far Dr. Moor of Cambridge, if he be the Author of the Mystery of
Godliness, from whom I observe the Doctrine of the Church of England to be this,
viz. That the very Flesh and Blood of Christ is present in the Celebration of
the Holy Eucharist in the same Sense as the Fish and Loaves were present to the
multitude miraculously fed by them. Of this Thing, with them there is no doubt,
though as to the Manner, how it should be so, they are in the dark. And were not
the Fish and the Loaves Corporally present? How then can the Flesh and Blood of
Christ be present in the Eucharist as the Fish and Loaves were, unless
Corporally present? And if Corporally present, there must be either a
Transubstantiation or a Consubstantiation. And I have heard some Learned
Protestants say, that of the two, Consubstantiation is the most difficult and
perplexing. And this Doctor himself, unless he lays a violence on the very
Words of the Text, as understood by all Men throughout Christendom, whether
Papist or Protestant, and moreover falls into one of the greatest Extravagances
of Plato, cannot escape a closure with Transubstantiation. For he offers
nothing toward the solving this great Phainomenon but this, That though the Body
of Christ is present, yet not the Body Broken on the Cross (though the Holy Ghost
expressly affirms it); but a Body made of Divine and Spiritual Flesh and Blood
every where present, a Vehicle for the Eternal Logos to inhabit: So that he is
necessitated, contrary to express Scripture, not to make a Coat for the Moon,
but (God Almighty knows, with horror I mention it) a Coat for the Godhead of
Christ, a Body composed of Flesh and Blood, of equal extent with and for the
Clothing of Divine Nature; For the countenancing which, he brings Gratian a
Popish Canonist (whom he quotes out of Morney) distinguishing between the Body
of Christ's Soul, which was Broken on the Cross, and the Body of the Eternal
Word or Logos, and affirms, That the Body in the Eucharist is the Omnipresent
Body of the Eternal Word, which is there Corporally present.

From the whole then I would humbly propose to the Reader's Thoughts these few
Considerations.

1. That the Doctrine of the Church of England, as framed by its first
Queen-Elizabeth-Reformers, is so generally expressed, as to admit of a Sense
owning Transubstantiation. 2. That in favor of the Papists there are so many
Expressions in their Liturgy, Catechism, and Homilies, that very lately a great
Church-of- England Doctor, The Doctor's Book lately Licensed by the Archishop's
Chaplain.
the Head of a College, with the Countenance of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
is constrained to hold that the Church of England is for a Real Presence in the
same Sense the Fish and Loaves were present to those that fed on them; that is,
they are for a Corporal Presence. 3. They cannot escape a falling in with
Transubstantiation any other way, than by closing with a Notion manifestly
false and Platonic. All which carefully weighed, I advance to this Conclusion,
That the Church of England has hitherto had such favorable thoughts of a
Corporal Presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist, and so much compassion for
the Believers of Transubstantiation, and have so far given up the Cause to the
Papist, that they cannot oppose Transubstantiation, without embracing as false,
and a more absurd Notion; and that therefore its now become most unreasonable
for them to make the believing of NO TRANSVBSTANTIATION to be a Condition of
our Nobilities enjoying those Civil Privileges which are theirs by Inheritance.
And I doubt not, but when our Protestant Lords shall in their great Wisdom have
consulted the Sense of the first Reformers in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the
Countenance our Liturgy, Catechism, and Homilies give a Corporal Presence, on
purpose to encourage the Believers of Transubstantiation to come to their
Communion, they will see cause to conclude, That it is very hard (were it their
own Case) to be justled out of the Rights of Peerage for an Opinion that must
lie in their Judgment so doubtful. And that, whilst our Clergy are so zealous
for the Name of Priests, and for the Erecting and Railing in their Altars,
there is cause also, why a Son of the Church of England should not be for the
Continuation of this part of the Test.

The last Clause of the Test runs thus, [ And that the Invocation or Adoration
of the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they
are now used in the Church of Rome, are Superstitious and Idolatrous.]

And that the Church of England has no reason to urge the Continuation of this
other part of the Test, will appear, I humbly conceive, pretty manifest to
those, who will cast off old Prejudices, and impartially weigh the following
Considerations.

I. That seeing the Church of England has taken more than Ordinary care to give
such a general Explanation of the Real Presence as may admit of a Corporal
Presence, and thus much she has done with a Design to encourage the Believers
of Transubstantiation to join with them in the Sacrament, she cannot esteem the
Adoration of the Sacrifice of the Mass to be Idolatry; for it is well known, she
would be thought to abhor the holding Communion with Idolaters; and to this she
must stick, or give up the Cause to the Protestant Dissenters, who say, that
they dare not hold Communion with that Church that will admit known Idolaters
into their Communion. But such does the Church of England admit, in admitting
the Believers of Transubstantiation. That the Church of England is for
admitting the Believers of Transubstantiation, who adore the Sacrifice of the
Mass, has been abundantly proved; whence it follows, That the Church of England
must either give up the Cause to the Dissenter, or declare that the Believers
of Transubstantiation, though they adore the Sacrifice of the Mass, are not
Idolaters, and that the Adoration of the Sacrifice is not Idolatrous; and if
not Idolatrous, how can they oblige all to declare it to be Idolatrous, or part
with their Civil Rights and Privileges, for not making such a Declaration? But

II. There are some great Doctors in the Church of England, who affirm, That
the Worshipping what is believed to be God, though it be not God, wants the Formal
Nature of Idolatry; and it is not to be doubted, but that the Believers of
Transubstantiation do verily believe, that what they worship is God, how can
they then insist on their Idolatry? For although these Doctors are in a Mistake,
yet before it be so positively determined as in the Test, the Matter should be
fully debated amongst themselves; for it is not agreeable to the Rules of
Wisdom, for any Church to impose what is matter of doubt to some of her own
Sons, who are Men of great Learning and Virtue.

III. As to the Invocation, or Adoration of the Virgin Mary, and other Saints,
it must be observed, that Protestants themselves have different Apprehensions
about the Nature of the Sin; and though all judge it an Error, yet all don't
esteem it Idolatry; and seeing here is not a word of Images in the Test, the
Church of England will be hard put to it to prove it Idolatry; for if it be
Idolatry, it must, in the Sense of a Protestant, be either Idolatry against the
First, or against the Second Commandment: Not against the First; for who are
there of the Church of England that make the Invocation of Saints to exceed the
Idolatry of the Heathen? The Author of Julian paralleled it with Heathenish
Idolatry, but who makes it more absurd and gross? And if it be an Idolatry only
against the Second Commandment, seeing Images are not mentioned, how can it be
made out, unless they fall in with the Protestant Dissenter, and say, that as
the First Command forbids all False Objects, so the Second all false Authors
and Means of Worship, though directed Ultimately to the True God; and so grant,
that what part of Worship soever has not God for its Author, is Idolatrous
Worship, and thereby for the same Reason they make Invocation of Saints
Idolatrous, they make a great part of their own Worship to be so too. And
seeing they are so hard put to it to prove it Idolatrous, they should not
impose the Belief on it with so much Severity, as they have done it in this
Case. But

IV. Although there were Reasons for the making those Tests when under a
Church-of-England Prince, yet there can be none for the continuance of 'em
under a King who is for the Invocation of Saints; for it is a putting all those
Nobles, who enjoy their Birthrights, and the Representatives of the Nation, to
pronounce his Majesty an Idolater, which is not according to the Duty of a
Subject, nor indeed Civil. But if the Sons of the Church, who are for the
fixing this Test, should be treated by this present Government, as the Clergy
treated some Brownists in Queen Elizabeth's Days, it would be made a Crime no
less than Capital; The Brownists condemned the Church of England for no Church,
ensnared many in the Nets of their new Schism. Neither could they be
restrained, though their Books were prohibited, and two of the Ringleaders
Executed at St. Edmundsbury. Baker's Chron.
for the Brownists asserting, That the Church of England was no true Church,
and that their Ministry was no true Ministry, the Clergy immediately made use
of their Inferring Faculty, and Argued thus, to the destruction of some Men's
Lives: If the Church of England be no true Church (as you affirm) then the
Queen, the Head of it, is no true Christian, but must be ranked among the
Infidel and Heathen; that is, you do your utmost to expose her Majesty to the
Odium, and at last to the Rage of the People, and do what in you lies, to
depose her Majesty from the Throne; And thus it was made a Capital Crime, and
some were Executed on this Account.

But we need not Reason it thus with the Church of England; for without such
far-fetcht Consequences, the very Principles and Practices of his Majesty are
called Superstitious and Idolatrous, and his Majesty by a most immediate
Inference publicly declared to be an Idolater: And therefore I think it the
Wisdom of the Sons of the Church now to call to mind what they have done to
their own Brethren in the Case above, and take heed that they continue not in a
worse Crime by a zealous sticking to those Tests: For unless she will give up
the Cause to the Dissenter in some momentous Instances, and be moreover guilty
of that Brownistical Practice, which she has so severely condemned in Queen
Elizabeth's Days, she cannot be for the Establishing the Tests. And this I would
leave with the Sons of the Church of England, that they may fix it on their
Minds, and take heed, that above all Men they be not too eager in pressing for
a Continued publishing to the World that his Majesty is an Idolater. It Is
requisite, that they remember, how tender they have been of the Honor of those
Princes, that were of their own Religion; and if they will be as Loyal, as they
profess, they must show as great a regard to their Prince now, though of another
Religion.

When they had a Prince of their own Religion, not only the Brownists were
condemned for exposing the Queen to the rage of the Mobile, by their affirming
the Church of England to be no true Church, and thereby making their Prince
worse than an Atheist; but at last they began to draw the same conclusions from
Non-subscribing, as Mr. Nichols, Vide Nichol's Plea for the Innocent.
an humble Servant of the English Church, declares: I have (says he) heard it
objected in a Sermon by a Reverend man, who now is a Bishop, that by refusing
to subscribe we make the Queen's Majesty to be an Atheist, worse than Papists,
and namely of No Religion. For (says he) you refuse to subscribe to the Book
of Orders, then do you make that we have no good Ministry; you refuse to
subscribe to the Book of Common Prayer, then make you that we have no good
Liturgy and Service of God; you refuse to subscribe to the Book of Articles,
which contain the sum of our Faith and Doctrine, then do you make that we have
no sound Doctrine. But these be the Books which her Majesty by her Authority
does set forth, and by them shows what Reliligion she is of, and what she
holds and maintains; therefore, if there be no good Liturgy, no good
Doctrine, no good Ministry, then it follows, that you make the Queen to be of no
Religion.

And thus much was urged to prove the Old Nonconformists to be Seditious,
Rebellious, and implacable Enemies to the Queen's Majesty; and I would fain
know, whether it be not as mischievous to represent any other Prince under the
most odious Characters, as it is to expose one of the Church of England's
Communion. If it be not, then there can be no Security in England while our
Churchmen prevail; for that Prince, whose Right it is to reign over us, is of
a Religion different from theirs; that is, in plain English, our Churchmen are
resolved to be Loyal no longer than the King is for the Church of England's
Religion. But if it be as pernicious to represent our Prince, of what Religion
soever he be, under an ill Character to the People, then do all those of the
English Church, who are for a continuing this Test, outdo the old Brownists;
for what they did was by a remote Consequence: They denied the Government of
the Church of England to be good, but granted that there were many good
Christians of their Communion; and seeing the Government of the Church is
considered distinctly from their Doctrins, and is not of the same Necessity to
Salvation with their Doctrins, the saying, that an asserting the Government of
their Church, and consequently their Ministry, to be naught, is a Damning their
Doctrins, must be by a very remote Consequence. But in this Test, though it be
the known Practice of a Roman Catholic to invocate the Saints, and adore the
Sacrifice of the Mass; yet it is not only affirmed by a few more privately, but
must be publicly declared by all that will have any Interest in the Government,
that this is Superstitious and Idolatrous, and consequently whoever is for this
Practice is guilty of that Idolatry that is to be abhorred of all men.

Thus you may see the tendency of Establishing the Tests, how much it exposes
His Majesty to the contempt of the Mobile, and consequently how much it
endangers his Person and Government; and therefore how necessary it is to take
all off. However,

To add one thing more; I humbly think that I may be bold in asserting, That
such is the present case of England, through the multiplication of Tests, that a
great part of our Gentry must be necessarily involved in the Guilt of Swearing
one thing, and Declaring another; or it must be recognized, that His Majesty,
without the Aid of Parliament, may alter Oaths and Tests, and so vacate them;
or, to prevent the King's doing it, 'twill be necessary that a Parliament
concur with His Majesty in taking off all Tests.

My reason is this; Those Sheriffs, that have been Parliament Men, must take an
Oath contradictory to the Parliamentary Test: For by the One he must declare,
That he believes that there is no Transubstantiation, and that the Invocation
of Saints is Superstitious, etc. and by the Other he must swear, That he will
endeavor the Extermination of all those who do thus believe as just before he
professed to do. For the Sheriff's Oath runs thus: Ye shall do all your pain
and diligence to destroy and make to cease all manner of Heresies and Errors,
commonly called LOLLARS, within your Bailiwic from time to time, to all your
power.

Now, Tritem. chron. Her. Saug. vit. Sigism. an. 5.
whatever may be the reason of the name Lollardy, as whether it had its Rise
from one Walter Lollard, who was burnt at Cologn for an obstinate Adherence
unto his Opinions, as Tritemius in his Chronicle reports; or from Lolium, a
Tare or Weed, Lollardiae sic dictae a Lolio, quia sicut Lolium inficit segetes,
sic Lollardi multot^es inficiunt fideles simplices inter quos conversantur.
Lindwood. Provinc. de haeret. c. finaliter. ver. Lollardiae.
that proves prejudicial to the Wheat, as our Lindwood has it; it is past doubt
that the Doctrins of Wickliff were called LOLLARDY, and whoever embraced them
were called Lollars; that is, whoever held, That Images ought not to be
worshipped; that the Relics of Saints ought not to be adored; that after the
Consecration in the Mass there remained Bread; and that the Natural Body of
Christ is not there; whoever held these Propositions were LOLLARS. Here then
lies the Opposition between the Parliamentary Test and the Sheriff's Oath; by
the former you declare to believe, That there is no Transubstantiation, and
that Invocation of Saints is Superstitious; by the other you swear, That to the
utmost of your power you will endeavor to exterminate all such as do not
believe Transubstantiation, or do hold that Invocation of Saints, or Adoration
of the Sacrifice of the Mass, is Superstitious. So that, as the matter is thus
stated, the Protestant Gentry who carefully consider these things must needs be
marvelously perplexed in their thoughts about it, and afraid lest they contract
on them the odious Guilt of swearing they will do what they declare they ought
not to do.

There are, I confess, two ways taken by some to solve this difficult
appearance; but whoever insists on either, will find himself still more and
more involved.

Nostro aevoac. cipiunt Lollardos pro Institutae Religionis adversantibus, eoq.
vetus Sacramentum Vicecomitum ad prosequendos Lollardos juratorum, hodie
attrahunt. verb. Lollardiae.
The first is what Sir Henry Spelman in his Glossary suggests, who tells us,
That some by LOLLARDY understand any Religion contrary to what is by Law
established; and consequently the Popish Religion, whereby the difficulty is
removed; for by this Interpretation the Sheriffs do swear they will extirpate the
Religion of those who believe Transubstantiation, and are for the Adoration of
the Blessed Virgin: But then it must be added, that besides the ill tendency
the Oath, thus interpreted, may have on the Government, especially with
reference to the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, within whose Bailiwic His
Majesty resides, this way of altering the genuine sense of words necessarily
introduces and justifies the grossest Equivocations: For Lollardy did never in
any other Writings heretofore, nor at this day, signify any such thing as is
here pretended, and this sense of the Oath is quite contrary to the natural and
genuine import of the words. And if Church-of-England-men may take an Oath in a
sense so contrary to the true intent and meaning of it, why may not the
Papists, and whilst they are taking Church of England Tests intend a Popish
sense? For thus it is with our Sheriffs; they take a Popish Oath in a Church of
England sense, and whilst they swear to endeavor the Extirpation of Church of
England Doctrins, they mean Popery. Methinks it is past doubt, that if our
Popish Gentry had been so profligate as some represent 'em, they need not be so
much concerned for the Taking off the Tests; were it not sufficient that they
could write after this Church of England Copy? And as Protestants by Lollardy
understand Popery, so by [Transubstantiation] might not our Gentry mean
[Consubstantiation,] and by [Superstitious and Idolatrous] mean [what is
agreeable to the mind and will of God?] and then take the Parliamentary Test in
the following sense, thus: [ I A. B. do declare, That I do believe that there
is no Consubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, at or after the
Consecration thereof by any person whatsoever; and that the Invocation or
Adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the
Mass, as they are now used in the Church of Rome, are agreeable to the mind and
will of God.] For by the same Rule that [Lollardy] signifies [Popery,]
[Transubstantiation] may signify [Consubstantiation;] and the words
[Superstitions and Idolatrous] may signify [what is agreeable to the mind and
will of God.] And if the one may be without an Equivocation, so may the other;
so that this Hypothesis solves not the Phainomenon; it only opens the way to
make all TESTS of no use, and then no matter whether they continue, or are
taken away.

We will therefore, in the next place, consider the other attempt, which is
made by some to remove this difficulty, and it is this; That some time after
Sir Edward Coke, when pricked for Sheriff, scrupled this part of the Oath, care
was taken to reform it, and this passage about Lollardy has been ever since
left out; and that therefore now there is no inconsistency between the Sheriffs
Oath and other Tests. And in Answer unto this, I must acknowledge, That in the
year 1625. this Oath was altered, and this Clause left out. But by whose
Authority? Did any Parliament take this thing into consideration, and make this
amendment? No, it was done by the direction of the King's Council. How, by the
King's Council? Then by the Regal Power sure; which once granted, what need we
trouble our heads any longer about the Parliaments taking off the Tests? For
if, according to the Constitution of our Government, it belongs to the
Prerogative to ALTER an Oath, by expunging any momentous part of it; no doubt
it is as much within the Circle of Prerogative to make an Alteration on Tests
too.

Whence then I thus argue; The expunging this part of the Sheriffs Oath is
Valid, or not: If not, then it must be restored, and all Sheriffs stand bound
to swear, That they will endeavor the Extirpation of those Doctrins they
professed to be for, when they took the Parliamentary Tests, and so must, as
but now I proved, be either involved in the Guilt of Swearing one thing, and
Declaring another, or must countenance the worst of Equivocations; but if
Valid, then the Regal Power can make alterations on Oaths, and so far change
the controverted Tests, as to divest them of all their supposed strength: And
if the Subjects will not concur with His Majesty, who most graciously designs
the settling the Peace and Quiet of the people in a Parliamentary way, do they
not provoke him to the exercise of his Prerogative? And would it not be more
agreeable to the Prudence of the Asserters of our Liberty and Property, to
assure the King, That they will endeavor their utmost to choose such to sit in
Parliaments as will be for the Establishing Liberty of Conscience on a sure
Foundation, and secure the Civil Rights and Privileges of the Subject in such a
manner, that they may not be touched for the sake of Religion?

Thus I have laid down a Scheme of those Reasonings which, in my Opinion, are
strong for the Taking off the Tests, and have, I hope, with some Clearness
evinced, that the Continuation of Penal Laws, by which, good Subjects are
deprived of their Civil Rights for the sake of their Religion, (and such are
the Test-Laws) is contrary to the Ancient Constitution of our Government, which
secures our Civil Rights, Liberties and Properties, from the Assaults of those
who would for Religion divest us of them; and that therefore it is his Majesty's
Interest, which very much consists in the Ease and Quiet of his Subjects, to be
for the removal of all those Laws: And such are the Principles of Protestant
Dissenters, sufficiently discovered by their many Complaints against
Persecution for Conscience sake, that they cannot be for Penal Laws, nor for
the Test Laws, which are of the same kind with them; and indeed, such is their
Interest, that unless they improve the present Overture, they may never have
the like Opportunity more, and so be exposed to the Curse of their Posterity,
for entaling on them a lasting Persecution. And as for the Church of England,
if she does not hold, that Dominion is founded on Grace, and desire to be
delivered from the Odium of abetting so pernicious a Principle, or of doing the
very thing for which they condemned the old Brownists as Traitors, she must be
for the Taking off those Tests.

And now there remains nothing but the Objections against the Contents of this
Discourse, which are to be set down with fairness and faithfulness, that is,
with that openness and ingenuity which becomes an English Heart, and to be
Answered accordingly. These Objections may be drawn together in a little room,
as they are very happily by the Hand of a Learned and worthy Person, that has
sent them me, (unto whom these Papers have been shown); and because I cannot
draw them up more short and full, I will give them as I have them.

In all Laws (says the Gentleman) the great or chief Thing which is to be
attended, is the End of their making, or the Intention of the Lawgiver. If the
End of these Tests were to get all, who are concerned to take them, they were
the most wicked Laws that could be made; for what could be more openly profane,
than for a Man to renounce the Religion he thinks true? But this is not the End
of the Law; the End is, that by the refusing the Test, such and such Men may be
hindered from such and such Offices and Employments, which they could not
possess without Danger to the Public: And there can be no Complaint here, but
of their Grievance in being kept out of those Advantages, which else they might
enjoy. But as for that, an Answer is in every Month, that this is the Nature of
Laws in general, to restrain Particular Persons from some Conveniences (which
were else their Right) for the sake of the Community, that the Public
Emolument be promoted, or Detriment prevented. There is no Government could
stand but on this Foundation. That which is not profitable to the Bee-hive, is
not good for the Be, as Antoninus has it. Now if the Test be Repealed, it is
supposed we shall in due time have a Parliament trumpt up that may be most
Papists, and the Popish Religion, consisting in the Decrees of General
Councils, confirmed by the Pope: The Council of Lateran (we know) has decreed
the Extermination of all Heretics, by which Means, the Nation being generally
Protestants, may come to Destruction. Popery under Toleration may Strengthen,
but Popery in Dominion Ruins this Nation. And what can be now said to this with
any satisfaction, I see not; seeing really there is but one thing could secure
us, which is, if the King would lodge so much of his Power in the Hands of some
Great Men (whom He and his People both durst Trust), as when an Act for
Accommodation shall Pass, might capacitate them to be effectual Guardians of
it. In the mean time this being a thing not likely, I apprehend the Condition
of the Dissenter to be much at one with that of the Lepers at Samaria. If the
Penal Laws continue of Force, they perish; if the Test be Repealed, they may
perish too upon the Account mentioned. If they stay in the City, the
Episcopalian will Famish them; if they go out, the Papist may knock them on the
Head. What they will do, God knows, it is but being Persecuted to Death,
whether it be by the one, or the other.

This is the Objection thus set down, wherein are these Things to be
considered. Here is one Argument against the Taking off the Tests, drawn from
the Nature of Human Laws; another from the State, and Constitution of the
Popish Religion, with an Insinuation, that nothing, but one unlikely Expedient,
can be found out for the securing us against our Fears, and in the close, a
forced Acknowledgment, that such are the Circumstances of the Dissenters, that
whose Interest soever it may be to Resolve on the Establishing the Test Act,
yet it is theirs to be for the Repealing it.

To begin then with what is said in regard to the Nature of Human Laws; I
grant, that in the composing all Laws, the good of Private Men is to give place
to the good of the Public; for it is a Principle at the root of all Politics,
that Vniversi praesunt singulis, and singuli universis subduntur. But I deny
that to be good here, which is supposed. Here is certainly a Mistake, and a
dangerous one in the Case. The Good supposed is, that the King must be thought
to intend the Ruin of all his Subjects, but they that are, or will turn
Papists; and to prevent this Ruin, the Rights of the Lords and Commons, which
depends on the very Constitution of the Realm, must be subverted. I will answer
therefore, that such a Thought of the King, as this, is a wicked Thought, for
it is against Charity. It is an Injurious Thought, for it is against the King's
constant Profession, both in his Declaration, and to every body, that he will
not have Conscience to be constrained; and to say he is not of that Principle
which he avouches, is to make the most steadfast and faithful Prince, to be the
deepest Dissembler in the World. It is also a Foolish Thought, as if the King
had a Purpose like to that in the Apologue of the Sea, determining with it is
Waves to invade the Trees upon the Hills. If the main Body of the Nation were
Papists, there were some Sense in these Fears; but when it is so exceeding
contrary, in that regard there is no reason for them. On the other side, it is
to be thought rather, and verily to be believed, that there are many worthy
Gentlemen and Lords, that are Roman Catholics in the Land; and as they are
English Subjects, they have English Hearts, and English Estates, who being
sensible of the Frailty of Human Life, are willing to provide for themselves
and their Posterity, by doing that to their Fellow-Dissenters now under the
Reign of a Catholic King, as they would have done to them under the Reign of a
Successor, who is like to be a Protestant; And an Act for Universal Liberty of
Conscience, in Repealing all the Penal Statutes about Religion, being their
Interest in common with other Dissenters, and Interest being a thing that will
not lie, they may be trusted in this Matter.

But it is added by the Objector, That the Popish Religion consisting in the
Decrees of General Councils, confirmed by the Pope, and the Council of Lateran
having decreed the Extermination of all Heretics, we shall soon after the
Taking off the Tests have a Popish Parliament trumpt up, who, to escape
Damnation in the next World, will be necessitated to destroy all Heretics
within their Compass in this.

And here lies the strength of the Objection, which I shall endeavor with all
the clearness I can to enervate; and to this end must beseech the Reader in the
first place, to observe the great Difference there is between the English
Papist, and those of other Countries; for the English would never pay that
Respect unto Foreign Councils, nor that Homage to the Roman Pontiffs, which
other Nations have done, and consequently, that our Countrymen of the Romish
Communion are not under the like Obligations of submitting unto the Decrees of
General Councils, which other Papists are.

Our Histories and Law Books do furnish us with Instances innumerable, that our
Forefathers of the Romish Communion, boldly asserted the Kingdom of England to
be an Absolute Empire and Monarchy, consisting of one Head, which is the King;
and of a Body Politic, Compact and Compounded of almost Infinite several, yet
well agreeing Members, viz. the Clergy and Laity, both of them next, and
immediately under God, Subject and Obedient to the King their Head.

And amongst the Laws of St. Edward the Confessor, Spelman Conc. p. 622. Rex
autem qui Vica^^us summi Regis st.
it is declared, That the King, who is the Vicar of the highest King [not of
the Pope] is ordained to this End, that he should Govern and Rule the Kingdom
and People of the Land, and above all things the Holy Church. And when the Pope
would have William the Conqueror recognize his Supremacy, the King's Reply was,
That he could not find that any of his Predecessors did ever part with that
Jewel of the Crown, and he was therefore resolved to keep it. And William
Rufus, his Son and Successor in this Kingdom, declared, That he would rather
part with half his Kingdom, than with the Supremacy. Nor would Henry the First,
as William Warlestwast, elect Bishop of Exeter, told the Pope, lose the
Authority of Investing his Prelates for the Crown of the Realm.

King Stephen had the Courage to seize into his Hands the Bishop of Salisbury's
Castles and Goods; and although a Synod was called by the Bishop of Winchester,
the Pope's Legate, and Complaint made to the Synod, yet the Clergy were at last
compelled to a Submission to the King. Henry the Third would by no means yield,
that his Clergy were so much under the Pope's Conduct, as not to be Prosecuted
by the Secular Powers for Matters Criminal. King John also, till forsaken by
his Nobles, was a valiant opposer of the Pope's Power. And the several
succeeding Princes maintained their Supremacy with a like Courage, especially
Edward the Third, and Richard the Second; And, what is worthy of Observation,
the severest Laws against Suing unto the Court of Rome without the King's
leave, were Enacted in the time of Rich. the Second, even the Statute of
Provisors and Praemunire. And that the Statutes made in the Reigns of Henry the
Eighth, Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth, were not Introductory of any New
Law, but Declaratory of the Ancient Law of the Land, viz. That this Kingdom is
Imperial, is too plain to admit of the least doubt.

And, as our Kings were ever tender in the point of the Supremacy, and would
never part with it, nor pay that regard to Foreign Laws that other Nations have
done; in like manner it has been adjudged by a Popish Parliament, 25 Hen. 8.
cap. 23.
That no Laws of any Foreign Powers are of force in this Realm, unless they
have been devised and obtained within it, or unless by sufferance of our Kings
the People have taken them up at their free liberty, and by their own consent
let them be used amongst them. The words of the Statute run thus: Whereas these
your Grace's Realms, recognizing no Superior under God, but only your Grace,
have been, and are, free from Subjection to any man's Laws, but only to such as
have been devised and obtained within this Realm, for the Wealth of the same;
or to such others as, by sufferance of your Grace, and your Progenitors, the
People of this your Realm have taken at their free liberty by their own consent
to be used amongst them, and have bound themselves by long Use and Custom to
the Observance of the same; not as to the Observance of the Laws of any Foreign
Prince, Potentate, or Prelate, but as to the Customed and Ancient Laws of this
Realm, originally established as Laws of the same, by the said Sufferance,
Consents and Custom, and none otherwise.

So far the Statute, declaring the Judgment of Roman Catholics, in Henry VIII's
days; whence I thus argue, That no Decrees of any Foreign Powers, whether those
of a General Council, or of the Pope, are of force here antecedently to our
receiving them; And that the saying this is a Decree of Rome, or of any General
Council, confirmed by the Pope, is not sufficient to oblige us to conclude that
therefore an English Papist must submit unto, and act in pursuance of it; for
until that Canon, or Decree, be by the Authority of the Land placed amongst our
Laws, it does not oblige the Roman Catholic of this Kingdom.

And that this has been the sense of the English Roman Catholic before Henry
VIII. is easily evinced out of Sir Edward Coke, Part 5. Cawdrey' s Case.
who, in his Reports, declares, That by the ancient Canons and Decrees of the
Church of Rome, the Issue born before the Solemnization of Marriage, is as
lawfully inheritable (Marriage following) as the Issue born after Marriage. But
this was never allowed or appointed in England, and therefore was never of any
force here. And this appears by the Statute of Merton, made in the 20th year
of King Henry III. where all the Earls and Barons with one voice declare, That
they will not change the Laws of England, which hitherto have been used and
approved. Besides, it is further to be observed, that in Henry VIII's time it
was by the King, the Lord's Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament
assembled, who were all of the Roman Catholic Religion, declared, That the Body
Spiritual, (namely the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Officers,
resiant within this Kingdom, and) called the English Church, has always been
reputed, and also found, of that sort, that both for Knowledge, Integrity, and
sufficiency of Number, it has been always thought, and is also at this hour,
sufficient, and meet of it self, without the intermedling of any Exterior
Person or Persons, to declare and determine all such Doubts, and to administer
all such Offices and Duties as to their Rooms Spiritual does appertain.

So far the Statute 24. Hen. 8. c. 12. From which I infer, That as the English
Papists differ from Foreign Papists, so the reason they give for what they hold
in contradistinction to Foreign Papists is very cogent and powerful. They need
not apply themselves to any Foreign Power, because they have always had at home
persons every way qualified to determine all their Doubts.

And this was not only the Judgment of the Papists at this time, but, as they
declare, this has been the sense of their Forefathers; for, say they, it has
been always reputed, it has been always found, it has been always thought,
heretofore as well as at this hour: and whoever will look back to the first
words of the Statute, may see cause to conclude, that thus much they gathered
out of the diverse Authentic Histories and Chronicles, which they consulted. And
that this must be esteemed, especially by the Church of England, to be the
sense of the English Papist, is manifest from the whole scope of Archbishop
Bramhall's arguing against the Papists in Vindication of the Church of England,
when he charges the Papists for making the first Separation from Rome. The
first Separation (says he) was not made by Protestants, but by Papists; and he
endeavors to justify the Separation, by proving, that always the English
Papists esteemed themselves a Church that did ever renounce the Pope's
Supremacy, and that what Henry VIII. did, was no more than an acting in
pursuance of the ancient Law of the Land.

To this of the Archbishop's I add, That if the first Separation from the
Church of Rome was made by Papists, then it is the Judgment of English Papists
that they do not stand obliged to any Foreign Councils; it is their Judgment,
that though they grant the Pope a Primacy of Order, yet that he ought not to have
a Supremacy of Jurisdiction; for the Crown of England is Imperial, and the
English Bishops are sufficiently qualified to determine all matters of doubt
within themselves: And this has been always their Judgment, and is so at this
time; for our King, by a continued Exercise of his Ecclesiastical Supremacy,
asserts it to be a Jewel inherent in his Crown, and not to be parted with.

This then being the avowed Principle of the English Papists, the mentioning
the Decree of the Council of Lateran as what obliges them, before it is proved
to have been received amongst our Laws, cannot affect us; for until it be taken
in amongst our Laws, it obliges not an English Papist, nor are they bound to
take in this Decree amongst our Laws, any more than they were anciently obliged
to receive the Canon about Bastardy.

Furthermore, whoever will look into this Objection, he must needs see it to be
ill, as well as weak in the Foundation: For to give strength to their Argument,
it must be presumed, That either the Body of the People will turn Papist as
soon as the Tests are taken off, and choose none but Papists to sit in the
following Parliament, (for to say some few may, for Preferment, does not reach
the Case;) or a Parliament contrary to all Laws shall be imposed upon us. To
presume the former, is to insinuate, without the least color of Reason, that
the Body of the Kingdom have nothing to say for their being Protestants, but
this, That their Religion is uppermost, and established by Law; and that there
are such Tests imposed on those who sit in Parliament, that Popery is like
never to be established. But whatever may be said of the Church of England (of
whom yet I have better thoughts) the world knows, that a great part of the
Nation, notwithstanding the severity of the Penal Laws, could not be persuaded
to close with the Church of England, because there was so much Popery in it;
and it is to be supposed they will abide so firm to the Protestant Religion, when
they are in no danger of Sufferings, as they did when they suffered so very
much: And it must be further considered, That these Dissenters, when Penal Laws
hung over their heads, and they were in constant danger of being immediately
destroyed by them, did even then appear so vigorously in the choosing their
Representatives, as to carry it for three Parliaments successively, against the
Papist and Church of England too; and it is not to be doubted but that when the
Penal Laws are taken off, they will not be less Able, nor less Industrious, to
choose such to sit in Parliament, as shall be far from introducing the Lateran
Decree into their Laws for extirpating the Protestant Religion.

If, on the other hand, it shall be urged, That a Parliament contrary to the
Fundamentals of our Constitution shall be imposed on us by Regal Authority,
(which is a thing, the thoughts whereof should be abhorred by every good
Subject); it cannot be apprehended to be more Legal hereafter, than such a
Parliament presently chosen, and made up of whomsoever He pleases without
taking the Test: And, considering that our King is aged, if such a thing were
designed, would it not be the Papists Interest to take that course immediately?
And seeing they take it not now, may we not conclude rationally, that they will
not do it hereafter? And yet farther, if this were supposed as to the House of
Commons, the House of Lords, for all that, are so many of 'em Protestant, and
out-ballancing the Papists, that, unless we will reflect on our Nobility as
well as on His Majesty, and the Body of the Nation, and say, That as soon as
the Tests are taken off they will be all Papists also, there is no fear of such a
matter.

Again, the Papists also must be presumed to be all fallen under the most
strange deliration and madness imaginable; seeing otherwise they must know,
that if they declare themselves to be for violent Methods, or make any such
attempt, it must be with the greatest disadvantages to themselves; for it is as
if Five men would encounter a Thousand: And they must consider how much such an
Attempt would enrage the whole Kingdom, and how uncertain they are of
compassing their end in this King's Reign; and how easy is it for the
Protestants, under a Successor of their Religion, to destroy the Papists? So
that the very Attempt would but prepare their Families and Posterity for a
Sacrifice under a Protestant Successor.

If then there be any wise men of Estates among them, that can influence,
they will see it their Interest, and make it their Endeavor, if possible, to
Establish Liberty of Conscience on a Rock that can never be moved. And although
some may say, that the Priests and Jesuits are a Fiery-spirited People, who are
for pushing on to violence; yet it is manifest that our Popish Gentry heretofore
were never so Priest-ridden as to regard the Priests Humor more than their own
Safety, and on all occasions have demonstrated so much: For, even in Richard
Il's Reign, when Braybrook the Bishop of London (being then Lord Chancellor)
sent out, among the Statutes then to be published by the Sheriffs of Counties,
a Statute for the persecuting the Lollars, the Commons, being the year
following called to sit in Parliament, preferred a Bill, reciting the said
supposed Act; and, to use Sir Edward Coke's words, constantly affirmed, That
they never assented thereunto, and therefore desired that the supposed Statute
might be aniented, and declared void; for they protested that it was never
their intent to bind themselves and their Successors to the Prelates, more than
their Ancestors had done in times past; and hereunto the King gave his Royal
Assent in these words, Ypleist au Roy. And as the Commons would not then
consent to the making Laws against the Lollards, so they endeavored, both in
the Reigns of Richard II. and Henry IV. the dispossessing the Clergy of
Church Lands; and in Henry V. prevailed so far, as to suppress the Friars
Aliants, whose Lands were united to the Crown; and, had it not been for their
War with France, and the Contention between the two Houses of York and
Lancaster, it is probable, that before Henry VIII's time, the insolence of the
Clergy had been so severely checked, as it was done by that Great Prince. We
must not therefore judge of our King and Popish Gentry by Foreign Papists, nor
by hot headed Priests at home; but must remember, as a little before I noted,
that English Blood runs in their Veins, and that they will labor to excel all
their Progenitors in those Virtues that have raised them to an Honor and Glory
Immortal; especially considering it is His Majesty's Principle to be for Liberty
of Conscience.

But if the English Papists had been so Bloody as the Objection suggests, I
cannot see how the continuing the present Tests can indubitably prevent the
seared mischief; for in the Tests there is not one word against Persecution,
and a man that takes these Tests may, notwithstanding any thing in them, be as
severe in fetching Blood from Dissenters in Religion, as ever any of the
Heathen Persecutors have been: And the whole that can be said is this, That the
Church of England would engross all Persecuting Power into her own hands; for
all her care is to keep all others out of the Government, but no care taken to
prevent the making Laws for the extremest Persecution. And if, as a Book,
lately published by one of the Church of England, affirms, An Historic Treatise
touching Transubstantiation, by a Roman Catholic.
there be an innumerable Company amongst the Papists, who believe not
Transubstantiation; why may it not be supposed possible for our English Papists
to fall in with them in this point, The Author of the Answer to the two
Discourses of the Real Presence, etc. primed at Oxford, does in his Preface
mention many Roman Catholics, Men of great Learning, who did not believe
Transubstantiation, viz. Pichereliu^, Da Perron, Father Barns the Benecict ne,
De Marca Archbishop of Paris, Father Sirmond the Jesuit, De Marolles Abbot of
Ville-Loyn.
and with some others of that Communion, who judge the Invocation and Adoration
of the Virgin Mary, as generally used in the Church of Rome, to be
Superstitious and Idolatrous, and so take these Tests, and leap into the
Government, and enact Bloody Laws against all those who will not submit unto the
Pope, and receive the other controverted parts of Popery? It Is manifest that
our English Papists are for the sweetning methods in most points of Doctrine;
and though I think that this is not very probable, yet it being as probable as
what the Objection intimates, it may be as fairly urged. And we have the
greatest reason to say, that if it be only exterminating Laws that the Church
of England are afraid of, another Test against all such Bloody Principles and
Practices will more effectually secure us.

This is enough to give Satisfaction to the Objection; however, I will ex
abundanti add somewhat more, and consider what may be said to it with reference
to an Expedient to prevent the Mischiess that are invented, and supposed to
follow from the taking away the Tests, and then feared, unless One only Way be
taken, which is so high a One, as cannot be hoped, and I must answer, that I
doubt not but there are many Ways to be found out by the Wisdom of a
Parliament, to anticipate any Design of getting a future Parliament of Papists
that shall set up Popery by a Law. For what if it were offered to His Majesty,
that they will comply to have all the Laws against Papists and Dissenters to be
totally repealed, reserving the Test only upon the Two Houses during the King's
Reign, and that then the Test shall cease also? If the King would consent to
this, which is a great deal less than what this Gentleman has hinted, might we
not be sure that the Papists shall never be in a capacity to make Laws for the
Extirpation of Protestants? If the King would not be pleased with this, but
propose something himself in exchange of the Test, which should be a better
Defense against this supposed Danger than that is, should we not be willing to
have the Mud-wall thrown down, so long as we may have a Brick-wall for it about
our House? Nay, what if upon such an Act once passed, as gives Quiet to the
Land, the King should afterward see no need of another Parliament, and resolve
to have none till he saw need, would not this Objection be then solved and
confounded alone by that? Besides, who is there certain, let him be what
Contriver he will, that he shall live to see another Parliament after the next?
Are not the Lives of Princes in God's hand, as well as those of the meanest
men; and are there not a thousand Accidents that may intervene, and prevent the
deepest Machinations of such as think themselves most wife? Is there nothing to
be allowed to the Volubility of Human Affairs, and the Providence of God? Let
an Indulgence be enacted; and is it not good that there be Peace and Truth in
our days? (as Hezekiah said.) Again, if another Parliament be called, let but
free Election be secured, and false Returns prevented, and that alone will go
far to do the Business.

But the great thing I insist on, is the King's solemn and often repeated
Declaration, that it is not only the giving us Ease during his Majesty's Reign,
that he designs, but that a Parliament, in Concurrence with him, may Settle
Liberty of Conscience on such a Bottom, as may never be moved. For let any
thing be invented by the Wisdom of Parliament, that may be but equitably
offered for the securing such an Act never to be infringed, we may be sure he
will grant it. The King would fain leave with his Subjects such a Magna Charia
for the securing them the Liberty of their Consciences, as they have for their
Civil Liberties, and Property. His Majesty has observed the doleful Effects of
Persecution for Conscience sake, and the Mischiefs of Penal Laws for Mere
Religion, and finds no way so likely to Establish an Universal Peace and
Tranquillity amongst his Subjects, as the taking off all Penal Laws for
Religion. But there are a sort of Men in the Nation, I mean some of the English
Clergy, who think they can live no longer than they have leave to Persecute
others; and they insinuate into the Minds of Men all that is bad of his
Majesty, and make dismal Outcries, as if Persecution was the only Bulwark of
the Protestant Religion. And that the Protestant Dissenters (to their own hurt)
may be ensnared to an Agreement with them in this Point, they tell 'em, Take
off the Tests, and Popery will break in as a Flood. And although the Church of
England can more easily destroy the Protestant Dissenter in one Year, and
probably will, if ever a Church-of- England Successor enters the Throne before
the Penal Laws be vacated, than the Papists can in twenty Years: Yet this Noise
of a Popish Persecution is made use of to frighten the Dissenter into so fatal
an Infatuation, as to be content with the bearing on of a certain and
grievously-complain'd of Burden, for fear of one uncertain and improbable.

And if this cannot be helped, so that neither the Church of England men, nor
Protestant Dissenters will exercise any Patience in giving the King Credit,
when he expresses the Sense of his Soul, and his Desires of such a Parliament,
and such an Expedient, that may answer the great Ends both of himself and all
good Subjects; If merely, I say, to escape a fancied Danger, our Nobility and
Gentry will be Resolute in their Adherence to the Penal Laws and Tests, and
will not attend to any Offers to be made for an Accommodation, unless such a
one of this Gentleman's, as perhaps cannot be granted, I would humbly propose to
their Consideration, what have been the fatal Mischiefs of such a prevailing
Obstinacy amongst the Subjects, with regard to our two late Kings, Charles the
First, and Charles the Second, and do pray Almighty God to prevent the like
amongst us, who are under the Government of so Excellent a Prince. It cannot be
yet forgotten, that in Charles the First's Reign, after a Cruel Bloody-Civil
War, Propositions were sent the King, to which his Majesty of Blessed Memory,
gave an Answer so full, as could not but give Satisfaction to the most
unreasonable Men of the Parliament Party; yet those who designed the Death of
that Great Prince, blew off all with this Reply, It Is true, the King has
granted all we can desire, but as soon as he is settled again in the Government,
he will recall all, and all that he has granted will be to little purpose. And
thus they brake off all Treaties, and brought the King to the Block, and the
whole Kingdom into Confusion. But because many are yet alive, who have drunk
deep of the Miseries our Nobles and Gentry were then exposed unto, I need not
stay on a particular rehearsal of these things.

Again, in the Reign of his late Majesty, there was a Party most Resolute in
their Adherence to the Bill of Exclusion, which the late King saw cause to be
as firmly against: But to prevent their Fears and Jealousies, he would grant
'em any thing they should Present unto him for the securing the Protestant
Religion, and the easing the Protestant Dissenter. And what was the issue of
the Adherence unto that Bill, but Ruin to the whole Kingdom? For from this Bill
all the Confusions, Conspiracies, and Rebellions, to the Destruction of
Thousands in the Nation, had their Rise.

His present Majesty sees as much reason to be for the taking off all the Penal
Laws, and so the very Tests themselves; and I cannot but be of Opinion, that
the Nobility and Wise Men of the Nation, will therefore weigh the Matter in all
it is Circumstances, and learn from the Two last Reigns, not to fall into the
same obstinate Opposition to his Majesty. But considering his Majesty gives us
the strongest Assurances to settle LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE on a Rock that cannot
be shaken, that so not Papist, nor Church of England, nor any other, may
Persecute the rest of the People for their Consciences, will wisely Consult on
an Expedient that may compass so Noble a Design of Good to the whole Kingdom,
and fully demonstrate to the whole World, that there is nothing of Argument in
the Objection; That there is nothing but Groundless Jealousy and Ill-design in
those that stick so very much on it. For if there be any Truth in the King, and
Prudence in the Nation, there can be nothing in all this Noise. And because his
Majesty is known to the whole World to be most Resolved in Keeping his Word,
and the Nobles and Gentry of the Nation are Renowned for their Wisdom, how
comes it to pass that our Jealousies don't cease? Surely the Gentleman that has
sent me the Objections, cannot but reflect on it, who having compared the Case
of the Protestant Dissenter to the Lepers of Samaria, must be also supposed to
prefer their Wisdom, who shall be ready to venture upon Present Relief from a
Parliament concurring with his Majesty, though of the Roman-Catholic Communion,
rather than expose themselves to the assured Misery that mast attend the
Continuance of the Penal Laws and Tests. Especially if we consider the
Advantages this is like to bring to all Parties: in the Peace and Flourishing
of our Country, wherein every one is equally concerned, and which therefore
made the King deliver that Saying (with which I shall conclude my whole
Argument) thus, That Person cannot be a true Englishman in his Heart, who is
not for Liberty of Conscience.

FINIS.

