A DISCOURSE OF The Lawfulness of Compliance With all the CEREMONIES OF THE
CHURCH of ENGLAND.
HERE it may be demanded in the first place, how indifferent actions, or
actions of a middle nature betwixt moral good and evil, which are neither
necessary, nor unlawful, neither commanded nor forbidden by the Word of God,
and in the performance of which we can show neither obedience nor disobedience,
but are left to our discretion, can lay any obligation upon the Consciences of
men.

Answer. They may oblige the Conscience upon a fourfold account; As first. When
we bind our selves with a Vow to God to do such things, to which we were not
before obliged. If the thing be lawful and indifferent in it self, we are
bound to perform it, not for the things sake, but for the Vows sake. For
whenso^ver (...) is not unlawful, the bond or tie of Religion is contained in
it; and therefore that which before was free, is now by reason of the Vow made
due worship to God, or at least for us necessary to be done. Although the
subject matter, or the thing it self vowed, be indifferent, yet the observation
of that Vow, does directly belong to that honor, which by our Religion we owe
to God. Of this nature were the Vows and Laws of the Nazarites, of which we
read Numb. 6. And by such a Vow Jephthah was entangled; having rashly made a
vow to offer unto God, whatsoever thing came out first to meet him, after his
return from battle and victory, for a Burnt-offering; which proved to be his
own Daughter: and therefore was necessitated by his Vow, though not to offer
her up for a Burnt-sacrifice, which was an abomination in the sight of God; yet
to do to her so much, as he thought the Law of God would permit, to shut her
up, and to keep her in perpetual virginity, which the Daughters of Israel
bewailed, Judges 11.

Secondly, Indifferent Rites and Ceremonies, are then to be observed, and
oblige the Conscience, when any for want of sufficient information, and
instruction is fully persuaded in his Conscience that they are not things
indifferent, but ne^essary duties: this was the case of the Jews, when St. Paul
wrote his Epistles: The Ceremonies commanded by Moses were abolished by the
death of Christ; and therefore no man was any longer bound to conform to them:
yet they being otherwise strongly persuaded, it was sinful to act against the
dictates of their Conscience. So Romans 14.5. Let every one be fully persuaded in
his own mind: It was lawful for a Christian to esteem the Jewish Festivals all
one with other days; but unlawful to profane those days which he thought holy.
v. 14. I know and am ^^^suaded by the Lord Jesus that, etc. It was an
indifferent thing to eat Swines flesh, or not to eat it; yet if any man was
persuaded in his Conscience the eating to be unlawful, he ought to forbear. v.
23. For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Where by Faith we are to understand
a particular persuasion concerning things about which we are exercised; as that
it was lawful to eat, or unlawful to eat such or such meats; not true saving
Faith, by which we become Christians, and lay hold on our Savior for life and
salvation, and which also the believing Jews, mispersuaded in some such
particulars, as I have already mentioned, were endued with.

Thirdly, The third case is of evident and manifest Scandal; that is, when the
observation, or not observation of things indifferent, does manifestly endanger
the Faith of weak Christians, and harden others in their unbelief. See 1 Cor.
10.27, 28. 1 Cor. 8.8, 9, 10. And indeed one great design of the Apostle St.
Paul was to persuade the strong Christians, not to put a stumbling block before
the weak Jews, who still adhered to Mosaical Ceremonies. So also Romans 14.15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. such was the condition of the believing Jews, that
though they embraced the Christian Faith, yet they supposed that our Savior
came not to abolish Ceremonies, but only to reveal a farther light; and that
the Gospel was not to terminate, or give a period to the Law of Moses, but
only that it was a superstructure upon the foundation of Moses and the
Prophets: and therefore they thought, that they might as well part with their
Christianity, as with their ancient Rites and Customs. So that the total
neglect of them by the faithful among the Gentiles, deterred the unbelieving
Jews from embracing the Gospel; and tempted almost those who already believed
to renounce their Faith. And therefore the Apostle does exhort the believing
Gentiles, to abate their Liberty, and not to endanger the Faith, and Salvation
of so many Souls.

Fourthly, Although indifferent Rites do not oblige us to their observation
directly of themselves, or of their own account, yet our Consciences are
obliged to the observation of them indirectly and by consequence when they are
commanded and enjoined by the Supreme Civil Magistrate, and our Sovereign Lord.
And this is by virtue of that Divine Precept, Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, which binds the Conscience directly. The command of God to
obey the King, as Supreme in all lawful things (and such all indifferent
things are) does oblige the Conscience directly, and of it self, as all the
Commands of God do; And therefore all things commanded by him, if not
unlawful, do likewise bind the Conscience indirectly by virtue of the Command
of God. So when Parents employ their Children, and Masters their Servants about
any business, the business it self does not oblige the Conscience directly,
because not commanded by God; but it does indirectly and by consequence, by
virtue of the Command of God to honor Parents, and obey our Masters in all
things.

And that the Magistrate may impose in Religion things lawful in themselves
will appear; because if he think the imposition of them expedient some ways or
other, as for the peace, and quietness, or the uniformity, and the settlement
of the People, whom he governs, and the keeping of them from distractions, and
innovations, etc. he may certainly impose them, because he does it as a good
and expedient thing. And what a private man may do by himself in things
lawful, if he think the use of them to be expedient for his better service of
God; that also may the Magistrate impose for uniformity on his Subjects.
Otherwise I suppose that no Prince would impose Ceremonies on his People
against their will, merely because they are indifferent things, unless he
thought them also some way fit and expedient. Now although Ecclesiastical
Persons may be thought the fittest judges, of what Ceremonies are most
convenient for the Church, yet in imposing them they ought to have regard to
the Supreme Magistrate, and not to act without, much less against his consent.
Under the Old Testament the Legal Ministry, which consisted in Ceremonies, and
Sacrifices, was not ordered by the hand of Aaron the High Priest, but by the
hand of Moses who was King in Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 33.5. And after him David,
Solomon, Asa, Jehosaphat, Ezekiah, Josiah Kings of Israel, and Judah,
instituted the Tabernacle and Temple Service, ordered and regulated several
things in which they varied from the Law of Moses, 2 Chronicles. 29.34. Lev. 1.6, 7.
erected Altars, and dedicated them to the Lord, destroyed Idolatry, reformed
abuses in the Worship of God; settled both the standing Worship of God, with
occasional Thanksgivings, and Humiliations.

The like power have Christian Kings and Emperors had since Christ, as might
be made evident and apparent by History. And therefore it is an Article of the
Church of England, which likewise all do acknowledge in the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, that the King's Majesty within his Dominions and Countries is in
all causes, and over all persons, as well ecclesiastical as civil, next under
God supreme Moderatour, and Governor. And therefore it is by his authority
that Ecclesiastical Canons are made, and enacted Laws of the Nation; without
which men of differing judgments might excommunicate each other but to little
purpose.

I shall now in the next place briefly compare these Obligations together,
which many times cross and contradict each other. The obligation then to
observe indifferent Ceremonies which arises from the command of Superior
Powers is generally greater than any which arises upon other accounts. And
here first as to Vows and Covenants, we have the case stated between Father and
Child, Husband and Wife, Numb. 30. and the same is the reason between Princes
and Subjects: for no man ought to bind himself with a vow, unless in such cases
which God and his Superiors have left to his liberty. Otherwise Children,
Servants and Subjects might by making vows shake off all obedience to Parents,
Masters and Princes. Whenever therefore he knows the Will of the Prince, or
the Laws of the Land to be contrary to the intention of the Vow, the Vow is
unlawful; and if his Will be unknown, it ought to be made conditionally, and
be of no longer force than it is permitted by the Superiors. For as if there
should be a contrary command of God, it would immediately take off the
obligation to the Vow, and make it null and void; so also a contradictory
command of Parents, Masters, Princes, to which last we ought to be obedient,
and not to resist upon pain of damnation, does also, though not immediately,
yet consequentially by virtue of the Divine Precept concerning subjection,
cause it to cease. It being not to be supposed in lawful Vows and Oaths, that
they are against the Will of God or of Superior powers, whom by our Oaths we
are bound to obey.

Secondly, As to an erring and doubtful Conscience; it is true that if a man
through an erroneous judgment, which is by reason of education or otherways
invincibly such, be fully persuaded that to be unlawful which is in it self
lawful, although the commands of Superiors lay an obligation, yet the greater
sin is to act against Conscience. So Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of faith is
sin; and the Apostle adds, that he that eats and doubts is damned; though
not always in the World to come, yet he is condemned in his own Conscience;
which how great a punishment it is we may know by diverse Examples.

But if there be only small inconsiderable Scruples, or Arguments, which draw
the mind equally, so that the judgment is rendered uncertain, but cannot
peremptorily determine the thing to be absolutely unlawful, the safest way is
to obey the command, and the duty we owe to the Superior Powers ought to turn
the scales: Disobedience being one of the greatest sins, and Obedience a
necessary duty; and therefore ought not to be neglected, for trivial Scruples
and Objections, but upon very considerable and weighty reasons.

Thirdly, As for case of Scandal; we must first discharge our duty to our
Sovereign, and prefer obedience to the King before satisfaction of
Fellow Subjects. And to let pass that usual argument which is brought, that
obedience to Higher Powers is an act of Justice, it being their due right given
to them from God the King of Kings; But the condescension to the infirmities of
a weak Brother is an act only of Charity, and acts of charity must give place
to acts of justice only; charity supposes that we rob not others of their
dues: But in this case of obedience there is a concurrence both of justice and
charity, which surely should be of more prevalent obligation than a single one,
and that the weaker too; to let this pass; I say that the case is far different
from what it was when the Apostle St. Paul wrote his Epistls, for then their
Faith was so much endangered, that they could not tell well which sooner to
part with, their Faith in Christ, or Mosaical Ceremonies. But the Dissenters
Faith nowadays is not so much endangered, but they seem to be the more
confirmed and obstinate in their resolutions, and affirm themselves almost to
be the only Christians.

But forasmuch as this Point has been vehemently insisted on, by several
Separatists, who having first made others to be scandalized at the Ceremonies
and Orders of our Church; and then pretend they cannot conform for fear of
destroying the Souls of their weak brethren, whose ruin they accuse our Church
to endeavor; I shall retort the argument on themselves, and affirm in the next
place, that disobedience to the Higher Powers is it self the greatest scandal
to Christian Religion, and endangereth the Salvation of most Souls.

It was by this Jealousy, rashly and without ground taken up; viz. That Christ
and Christian Religion, were an enemy to government, that the Devil has in all
ages, stirred up men to persecute the Church; upon this pretense our Blessed
Savior, the most innocent person, who lived upon Earth, who paid Tribute to
Caesar with the expense of a Miracle, was yet condemned and executed: If thou
let him go, thou art not Caesar's friend, said the Jews to Pilate. It was on
this account that the Apostles endured bonds, and imprisonments, as men that
would turn the World upside down. It was upon this pretense that the Primi^ive
Christians for above 300 years together, were oppressed with the rage of
heathen Emperors, because thought disturbers of the public peace. So we see
how the very pretense of indisposing men for subjection, which notwithstanding
the Apostles by their doctrine, and the Primitive Christians by their example
clearly refuted, is apt to bring Religion into disesteem, and render it odious.
But these disobeyed only where God's Law was contrary to the Emperor's, and
when they could not obey they patiently suffered. But if we will stand out
against our King in those things, which God requires not of us, if we will
disobey our Sovereign, and be never the more obedient to God, if every scruple
be an excuse from subjection and obedience; these pretenses will be turned into
realities, and we shall be left without excuse, if we will have no regard to
the Laws of Men, which are the bond of humane Society, though no ways hindered
by the fear of the Laws of God. If tumults and insurrections shall be the
appendixes of every command we find not expressly and in so many words contained
in the word of God; we may fear that the frequent calamities which will attend
men on this account, may cause, to say no worse, a great decay of Christian
Religion. Let us a little consider what the effects of men's contumacy and
opposition of decent Ceremonies established by Law, by which our late Wars were
begun, maintained and carried on in England, has been in our own Nation. How
much Religion has been established and propagated, by stumbling at straws and
leaping over blocks, by loathing indifferent Geremonies, when the great duties
of holiness and righteousness required conformity? Has not this been the
introduction of Atheism and irreligion, the greatest distemper among us? has
not this been the original of all Sects and Schisms? has it not nourished
those manifold Errors and Heresies, which caused profane Persons to sit down
in the seat of the Scorners? and therefore as we tender the honor of our
Religion, and would vindicate it from being an enemy to government, and
destructive to humane Society preserved by government, unless we would drive
the same design with the Devil, the common enemy of mankind, and especially of
Christians, to bring an universal scandal on our Profession, and render it
odious to mankind; we must not be refractary or disobedient to humane Laws,
when the Laws of God permit us to obey them, and give an eedless occasion of
offense to those, whom God has placed in authority over us. And therefore in
this case, though ecclesiastical Persons are the best judges of what ought to
be introduced into the Church, yet if there should arise a dissension, for the
avoiding Scandal, the Fathers of the Church ought to give place to the Father
of their Country.

St. Paul teaches us, 1 Cor. 9.20, 21. that unto the Jews he became as a Jew,
that he might gain the Jews; to them under the law, as under the law; to them
without the law, as, etc. to the weak, as weak, to all men all things, that he
might by all means save some. What think you he would have done, nay, what
would he not have done, if the Emperors by his condescensions should have
become Christians, by which means a free passage to the Gospel would be laid
open throughout the whole World? would he that so severely injoined obedience
to the higher Powers on pain of damnation, and that so readily and willingly
complied with all sorts of men for the salvation of their Souls, have scrupled
a few indifferent Ceremonies, whereby Governors and Magistrates might be
alienated from the love of Christianity? he had the same reason to comply with
these, as with all other sorts of people for their good.

And thus these things being premised, I shall come to show the lawfulness of
compliance with all the Ceremonies of the Church of England; and this I shall
do by one general and comprehensive argument.

If the the Jewish Ceremonies commanded in the Levitical Law, were indifferent,
and might lawfully be observed, after the Death, Resurrection and Ascension of
our Savior, who put a period unto them, even by those who knew the Levitical
Law abolished at that time; much more are the Ceremonies of the Church of
England indifferent, and may be lawfully used; But the Jewish Ceremonies, etc.
and therefore, etc.

Of these Propositions in order; now the sequel or consequence will evidently
appear, if w^ compare theirs and ours together. It Is true indeed, the Jewish
Ceremonies had their institution, and signification given unto them at first
immediately from God himself. And the Jews still thought that this obligation
from God remained on them. But however, they were instituted only for a
certain time, till Christ should come in the flesh, and by oblation of himself
once, purchase the remission of our sins. And then their signification together
with the obligation to observe and perform them utterly perished, so far forth
as it was from God. For this was the end of the institution of the Sacrifices,
and most of the Ceremonies, to signify Christ to come, and the offering him up
as a Sacrifice for us all, Heb. 9.23, 24. And therefore the continuation of
them afterward was not from Divine Authority, but depended on the ignorance of
the Jews, and prudence of the Apostles; the Jews were zealous of the Law, and
the Apostles were willing to permit it, as long as they embraced Christianity.
But God's institution and injunction being then expired, they were for the time
they were afterward used, as much humane and depending on the will of man, as
our Ceremonies are now; and so in this case there is an equality; And it is all
one to think that to be appointed by God, which is not appointed by him, and to
know it to be appointed by God's Vicegerent.

But if we will consider other circumstances, we shall find, that those which
attended the Jewish Ceremonies, were very dangerous, and had such tendency to
evil, which ours are exempted from.

For first, They might well be accounted vain, and as the Passover Sacrifices
for sin unreasonable, Christ being already offered.

Secondly, It might seem to be a mocking of God, and abusing his Institution,
to use Ceremonies signifying Christ to come, who was then ascended into Heaven,
and which represented his merits as future, when they were already consummated.

Thirdly, The use of them was joined in most Jews, with this erroneous opinion,
that they were necessary parts of God's worship. See Romans 14.

Fourthly, Our Ceremonies signify only ex part hominis, or on the part of
man; they either signify our duty, and what we are, or serve to put us in mind
of what we should be; but the Jewish Ceremonies did signify not only ex part
hominis, but ex part Dei too; they were used, not only as signs to put us in
mind of our obedience to God, but as means of conveying divine benediction upon
us; they were used not only as mere Ceremonies, but as Sacraments too, and as
proper parts of Divine Worship, and as seals of the Covenant, as Circumcision
and the Passover.

Fifthly, The observing of them among the Jews by the allowance of the Apostles
might endanger, as indeed it did, the intrusion of them on the Gentiles. And it
being impossible for the Gentiles to observe all the Ceremonial Law of Moses,
and come up all of them to Jerusalem, to keep the Passover, and offer
sacrifice, it might cause them utterly to reject the Gospel, which was
encumbered with such impossible observations. And here, by the way, I suppose
that Christ came not only to abolish the Jewish Ceremonies, but also to leave
all people to the indifferent use of such Ceremonies, which were consistent
with the service of God, and agreeable to their own Country and temper; which
is a true kind of liberty.

Sixthly, It might stir up the Jews to seek righteousness, and justification by
them. Of how dangerous consequence the observation of these Ceremonies was, may
be gathered out of the Epistle to the Galatians. The main design of the Apostle
in that whole Epistle is to reclaim the Galatians from adhering to Mosaical
Ceremonies, by putting them in mind of the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 4.10, 11. He
blames them for observing the Jewish Festivals, to which the Jews living among
them persuaded them; which were however the most inconsiderable Ceremonies. And
in Gal. 5.2, 3. Behold I Paul testify unto you, etc. that is, if those who were
circumcised looked on Circumcision, as that to which they were bound by the Law
of Moses; then they must observe the whole Law, for a quatenus ad de omni valet
consequentia. And also if they stood upon that, as a work of the Law by which
they should be justified, then Christ would profit them nothing, they being
debtours to do the whole Law, and therefore would have no benefit by the death
of Christ.

So that you see, that though these Ceremonies, considered absolutely in
themselves, were indifferent, yet by reason of some circumstances, which might
be annexed to them, they were very perilous, and of dangerous consequence.
Wherefore as some indifferent actions (though absolutely in their own nature
all may be said to be equally indifferent) by reason of good circumstances
usually attending them, are of good report, as tilling the ground, and the
like; and some, by reason of evil circumstances usually annexed to them, are of
ill report, as performing the office of an Hangman, or an Executioner, which
though lawful, is yet accounted infamous: so if we compare the Ceremonies of
the Church of England with the Levitical Ceremonies, as used after the
Ascension of our Savior, and promulgation of the Gospel by the Apostles, we
may say that ours are as the former, theirs as the latter.

Some indeed excuse the Jewish Ceremonies in that they being instituted by God
at first, ought to have a decent Sepulture; that the Jews being persuaded of
their necessity, must be tolerated, and born with in their opinion. But these
excuses are nothing pertinent to the business in hand; God's Institution when
expired was extrinsecal, and they were no longer to be observed by his
appointment, being abolished by the death of Christ, Col. 2.14. Now, if a
Master appoint business for so long time, and no longer, if his Servant
continue in it afterward, what he does, is of his own will, and he may be
punished for it. And that the Jews must be born with, I do not deny; but
however, this proves not but that the observation of the Mosaical Ceremonies
for that time was of very dangerous consequence. And though ignorance might
excuse the generality of the converted Jews, yet it could not excuse the
Apostles and Elders, who know them to be abolished by the death of Christ.
Neither is the question whether the Jewish Ceremonies ought to have a decent
Sepulture, or no, but whether such Ceremonies of so dangerous consequence, and
so nighly bordering on unlawfulness, might not however be born with upon other
more important causes?

So much of the first Proposition, or demonstration of the Sequel; by which it
is manifest, that if the Jewish Ceremonies, which signified Christ to come, who
was already come, and did abolish them by his death, which were vain
repetitions of Sacrifices for sin, Christ being already offered up for all,
which were used as Sacraments, looked on as necessary parts of Divine Worship,
were thought significant not only on our part, but God's too; whose
observation among the Jews did endanger their intrusion upon the Gentiles; for
whom it was utterly impossible to observe them all; nay, whose observation did
tend to confirm the Jews in seeking righteousness by the works of the Law; did
infect many Gentiles, as the Galatians with the same error, insomuch that
Christ was like to profit them nothing, and their faith to be in vain; if these
Ceremonies might at any time under such circumstances be lawfully used;
certainly much more the Ceremonies of the Church of England, which are not
liable to such inconveniences, and many of which have been derived down unto us
from the Primitive Christians.

So I come now to prove the second Proposition or Assumption; but these Jewish
Ceremonies were sometimes lawfully used even by those who assuredly knew them
to be abolished by the death of Christ, I shall not here instance in the
generality of the converted Jews, especially those who lived in Judea, who
observed them all, because they might not at that time, and so soon, be fully
instructed, nor yet till the Temple it self was destroyed; nor yet understand
the extent of Christian Liberty. But I shall prove my assertion, as by the
other Apostles, so also by the doctrine of St. Paul and his example,
conformable to his Precepts, who knew the obligation to all these things to be
abolished by the death of Christ, and did among the Gentiles, to whom their
observation must needs prove an intolerable yoke and burden, most oppose them.

As for the Apostles, we see their conformity, Acts 3.1. And St. Paul tells us
how he reproved St. Peter for being carried away with dissimulation among the
Gentiles, as we read, Gal. 2.

And as for St. Paul himself, we may see his Precepts, Romans 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
14, 15. wherein he exhorts the strong among the Gentiles, not to offend their
Brethren the Jews by their overmuch freedom.

Secondly, Let us take notice of his glorying as it were in his compliance and
conformity with all sorts of men for their Salvation in these indifferent
Ceremonies, 1 Cor. 19.9, 20, 21, 22, 23. where we may note, that as long as the
Gospel is propagated, we need not stand upon indifferences; the Apostle did in
these matters observe that rule,

Dum fueris Romae Romano vivito more,
Si fueris alibi vivito sicut ibi.
Now how the Apostle did put his doctrine of compliance and conformity in
practice, will be seen by these particular instances.

First, by his circumcising Timothy, Acts 16.1, 2, 3. where we find that
Ceremony which the Apostle declared so much against in his Epistle to the
Galatians, telling them, that if they were circumcised Christ should profit
them nothing; Gal. 5.2. was now by him applied to Timothy notwithstanding. That
he might not give offense to the Jews, he took and circumcised him. The fault
was not then in the materiality of the action, which was lawful enough in it
self, but in the formality of the application among the Galatians. And
therefore Circumcision certainly was not unlawful in it self, though it was
unlawful to put any confidence in it, as a work of the Law, which the
Galatians did. For otherwise Paul would never have circumcised Timothy. And so
in like manner, if any one should put any trust and confidence, or think there
is any merit, or efficacy in the sign of the Cross, if he should adore and
worship it, as his God, he might well be counted an Idolater; but as long as it
is used, as an indifferent Ceremony, according to the directions of the Church
of England, none ought to be offended. For it was borrowed from the Primitive
Christians, who gloried in the sign of the Cross.

But we have yet an higher example of conformity and compliance in the Apostle,
which he did not out of his single judgment, but with the advice of an assembly
of Apostles and Elders. As in the Acts, 21.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
where we see, that though the Elders received with much joy the news concerning
the conversion of the Gentiles to the Faith, yet considering how many Jews
there were who believed, and yet were also zealous for the Law of Moses, and
that they were offended with Paul for preaching among the Gentiles against
Moses and his Ceremonial Law, and that therefore his person would not be
acceptable to them; they advised him by all means to show his compliance with
them in his conformity to their Rites and Ceremonies, as does there appear. Now
v. 26. we find the Apostle following and obeying their counsel; he did not
only comply with them in showing reverence to the Temple, observing Rites
about Vows and Purification; but likewise in their Offerings and typical
Oblations. Certainly, should any men do half so much now, as St. Paul did
then, some furious Zealots, who place their Religion as much in opposing
Ceremonies, as the Jews did in observing them, would cry out against him as
they did against St. Paul on another occasion, Acts 22.22. Away with such a
fellow from the earth; for it is not fit he should live. And here, farther, we
cannot imagine that this was ill done by the Apople, because he was never
guilty of sinful compliance in the greatest danger, and because it was
agreeable to his Precepts, and course of life all along, and because this
counsel proceeded from the joint consent of the Apostles and Elders, in whose
assemblies the Holy Ghost was always present. Wherefore it follows that the
Jewish Ceremonies, liable to so many exceptions, were not however so odious and
sinful absolutely considered, but that, as occasion required, they might be
observed, and lawfully used, even by those who knew them abolished by the death
of Christ. And therefore surely the Ceremonies of the Church of England, which
are harmless and innocent, if not pious; which are as no-ways burdensome in
themselves, so instituted only for decency and uniformity, ought to be
observed. For by thus doing Faction and Schism will be avoided, brotherly love
maintaintained, peace and unity, the glory of our Profession, preserved.

OF THE NECESSITY Of the USE of COMMON PRAYER IN PUBLIC.
THE Apostle St. Paul lays down two Rules to guide our Prayers by; 1 Cor.
14.15. What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the
understanding also; I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the
understanding also. And in the 16. and 17. verses presses the praying with the
understanding also; because otherwise, he that occupies the place of the
unlearned could not say Amen at his giving of thanks, seeing he understood not
what was said; and was not at all edified thereby. And v. 19. he tells us, that
he had rather spoke five words with understanding, that the Church might be
edified, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. It seems the Corinthians
did much affect praying with the Spirit, as they thought it to be; though they
regarded not the understandings and edification of their hearers. I wish the
like may not be said of many among our selves, who cry up extemporary praying
for the only praying with the Spirit, and condemning Common Prayer as carnal
and formal; but if we will examine these two sorts of Prayers, with the Rules
laid down by the Apostle, we shall find that Common Prayer, or Forms of Prayer,
are every way as consistent with praying by the spirit, and are best for
edification, and the understanding of the hearers. It Is true, our
understandings and inventions too, both of Speaker and People, ought to be
under the guidance, directions, and assistence of the Spirit; as well as our
Affections; the former being the nobler, and the latter the more ignoble, and
lower faculties of the Soul. And therefore as to praying with the Spirit, it is
requisite that these too be sanctified, that we may clearly discern,
apprehend, and find out those truths which God has revealed, and those sins
which are apt to beset us, and those mercies we stand in need of. But however,
it is not to be expected that in all our Prayers the Spirit should help our
inventions in finding out new matter, much less new words. For the
sanctification of the understanding does not consist in these. We ought to
judge the quite contrary; for the same judgments we pray against, the same
mercies we pray for in one prayer, we must pray for often; and though God's
Spirit may discover more and more our sinfulness to us, yet the same sinfulness
on one hand, and grace on the other, which afford matter for prayer now, may
afford us matter to our lives end. As for particular occasions, they have their
particular Prayers. But he is in a very sad and strange condition, that when he
comes to pray to Almighty God, knows nothing at all beforehand what he should
pray for, nor what he should pray aagainst, but expects that the Spirit should
furnish him with new matter for his Prayer, or else he will be at a loss. For
it is to be supposed, that we are acquainted with our own wants beforehand; and
the sense of our misery and wretchedness in our selves, is usually the first
motive and inducement to prayer. And therefore the assistence of the Spirit,
and operation on the understanding, and invention, is not to furnish us with
new matter, and words at prayers; but in keeping alive a serious and constant
apprehension of our condition, which should remain with us, not only in times
of our devotion, but also be a continual g^ide throughout the course of our
life. He is to be accounted rather an infidel, heathen or unbeliever, than a
true Christian, a man altogether unacquainted with his spiritual estate, and
condition, that knows no Attributes of God to be celebrated, no sins he is
guilty of, no judgments he is afraid of, no graces in which he is deficient, no
mercies he stands in need of; but all of these are the matter of Prayer, and
all of these, every one that knows any thing of Christianity, must be in some
measure acquainted with before he performs the duty of Prayer. The knowledge of
them being not only requisite to that duty, but necessary to constitute, and
denominate him a Christian. And though some may think they have new discoveries
in time of Prayer, which I shall not now dispute of what nature they are, yet
the general ground and foundation of their Prayer, is no new-invented matter,
but such which beforehand they must be acquainted with: and so invention of
new matter, is not requisite to the spiritual performance of the duty. And as
for new words, to think the change of these so needful, would be to place the
excellency of this divine duty in a tone; and to turn this spiritual into
formal and lip-service; besides, if the Spirit should dictate every new word to
us, all these Prayers might pass for canonical, and be accounted the word of
God indeed. And yet most people through their ignorance have placed the
spiritual performance of this duty in invention of new matter and words; which
is quite otherwise, and consists in the sanctification of the whole man, as to
body, soul, and spirit: in the sanctification of the understanding, memory,
will, and affections by the Spirit of God.

And yet farther, that we may pray with the Spirit, using a form of words, may
appear from that Prayer which Christ taught his Disciples, Luke 11.2. When ye
pray, say thus: which was spoken in answer to the desire of one of Christ's
Disciples to teach them to pray.

Secondly, That in singing of Psalms, we sing with the Spirit; and yet almost
all the Psalms are Petitions or Thanksgivings to God; that is also, Prayers
which comprehend both Petitions and Thanksgivings. And the Apostle joineth both
together, praying with the Spirit, and singing with the Spirit. No Sect yet
however have been so distracted as to venture on singing extempore. And it is
the practice of those who condemn Forms of Prayer, to use notwithstanding
Psalms, which although they owe their matter to divine inspiration, yet their
composition afterward to the art of man. And very good reason, for if they
undertook to sing extempore, every body would presently perceive that they were
out of tune, or rather never in it; and that their songs were as void of rhyme
as reason. And therefore, if verses and meter, though composed forms by humane
invention, are fit for, and consistent with the spiritual elevation of our
hearts to God by way of thanksgiving, why is not prose in elevation of our
hearts by way of petition; not to say, that some Psalms are perfect petitions;
as the 51 Psalm.

Thirdly, I would willingly be resolved by those who are altogether for
extempore-praying Ministers, because those Ministers pray by the Spirit,
whether they themselves, when they hear them, pray with the Spirit or no. And I
suppose that they have a better esteem of themselves than to think otherwise,
or to deny that they pray with the Spirit. Praying by, or with the Spirit, as
it respects the spiritual performance of the duty, is actually incumbent on the
people, as well as the Minister. But yet they themselves have no extemporary
expressions, nor will be allowed to have extemporary enlargements of heart.
Their Spirits are bound up by the Spirit of their Minister, who, if they should
not diligently heed his words, and give their full assent and consent, and go
along with him in every sentence, would doubtless accuse them of negligence,
profaneness, or hypocrisy; because they do not mind the ordinances of the
Lord, that is, that Prayer which he dictates to them, and tieth up their
spirits and thoughts, that they keep close to it without wandering. Should any
of his Congregation pretend that God had put holy thoughts into his heart, that
he could not attend to all that he said, this pretense would be so far from
being made a note of the Spirit, that it would be thought some diabolical
suggestion, which withdrew his heart from giving attention to his Prayer. So
this people by the same breath they cry up their Minister, condemn themselves.
For if it be legal and carnal to be tied to a form of sound works, which others
have composed for us, without enlargements of our own; if it be carnal, not to
make use of our own parts and inventions, in offering up our petitions; if it
be carnal to have our Spirits bound up, limited, and confined by words which
others have dictated to us, then are all the Congregation carnal, no spiritual
person, not only in respect of office, but also of real qualifications, beside
the Minister, who is their mouth and spokesman; for, dare any of his hearers
pretend to other revelations? are not their spirits confined to his spirit,
words, and sentences? for enlargement of matter is denied, only that of
affections in admiration of his matter allowed. Deviations from it, or
digressions, would be a note of profaneness and irreligion, the sowing of tares
among the wheat. But if their Ministers were not partial, they should, by their
own Principle, allow every member of their Congregation, that liberty at the
same time, which they challenge to themselves; leave every man to his
particular enlargement, and not confine them to his own Prayer, lest the Spirit
be stinted in his Brethren, who may have at the same time several motions,
raptures, and illuminations: much like the Corinthian Church: 1 Cor. 14.26. How
is it, brethren? when ye come together, every man has a psalm, has a tongue,
has a doctrine, has a revelation, has an interpretation. But seeing we must
join in Prayer, or else the Congregation be left distracted, it follows even
hence, that praying with the Spirit consists not in new invention of matter and
words.

I now come to consider the second qualification of Public Prayer, by which
all our spiritual gifts in their use and exercise ought to be directed and
regulated, that is, The good and edification of the hearers. This is that which
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.15, etc. and throughout the whole chapter aims at; that
let men's pretenses to the Spirit be what they will, yet neither they, n^^ their
pretenses are to be regarded, if they intend not edification. The great care of
the Minister should be, that the people may understand him, and be profited by
him. This is also farther evident from the 16 verse, which does explain the
former; Else when thou shall bless with the spirit, how shall he that occupies
the room of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say. This is also evident from the protestation
of St. Paul in the 19. v. to speak five intelligible words in the Church, than
a multitude unintelligible. This is also evident out of the precedent verses;
the design of the Apostle being, that by plain preaching and praying, they
should edify the Church of God. So v. 9. So likewise ye, except ye utter by
the tongue, words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken?
for ye shall speak into the air. Now that forms of Prayer, as they are
composed, may best be understood, by all sorts of people, is so evident, that
it needs no demonstration. It Is true, men may, if they please, compose such
forms, which are unintelligible, as the Popish Prayers, which are in an unknown
Tongue, and not understood by the generality; or we may compose such intricate
forms in our own Tongue, which few can understand. But whatsoever qualification
is desired for clearness of understanding, may better be done in a set form,
which is made upon mature deliberation, than in extempore Prayers, which are
composed on a sudden, whether we respect the propriety of words, the easiness
and significancy of the phrases, the plainness of the style, the distinction of
the sentences, and the methodical disposition of the whole. And besides, set
forms publicly and constantly read in the Church, have this advantage, that
though some expressions should not be very clear in themselves, yet long use,
whereby people become acquainted with them, will render them intelligible. But
there are but few that can speak on a sudden so pertinently and clearly to any
business, as they can upon mature deliberation. And in this case, as set forms
are likely to go beyond unstudied Prayers, so those allowed and composed by the
Fathers of the Church, are likely to excel the compositions of any single
person. And if we seriously consider the composition of our own public
Prayers, there cannot well be any better framed for perspicuity and information
of the judgment, or moving the affections. The words are plain, familiar, and
easy to be understood, the method is distinct and perspicuous. The Prayers
being digested into several Collects, so that we know when we are to confess
our sins, when to give thanks, when to pray for grace, and when for peace, and
when for the King and State, etc.

And, qui been distinguit, been docet. In the Litany we have a brief and
pathetical enumeration of those sins and judgments we should pray against, of
those mercies spiritual and temporal we should pray for, and this in plain
terms, not obscure to those who understand their Mother Tongue. In the second
Service, we have the Commands of God, the sum of what we have to do, and
throughout, a frequent intermixture of the Creed, Epistles, and Gospels, by
which in all points we may be sufficiently instructed.

But now, for other Prayers, which men make without premeditation, although
this should be granted, that every Prayer be coherent, and that every word and
sentence in the Prayer, might be understood by judicious auditors; yet if we
consider how hard it is, to make the generality of people to understand those
truths necessary to salvation, what can we expect from them, when, besides the
things themselves, their memories must be burdened with variety of
expressions, and they must be more perplexed to understand variety of words,
than variety of matter; every new Prayer more and more amazing their thoughts,
and confounding their apprehensions, in which, notwithstanding, its requisite
that every member of the Congregation should join. Whereas one comprehensive
Prayer, which should be used in all our solemn assemblies significantly
expressed, might by care and study in time be understood of all. Nay, though
variety may delight the fancy, and draw the affections the more to the speaker,
yet it will be apt to distract the thoughts, and a little disturb the
affections, as to the matter, even in those who are understanding. For it is not
in hearing Prayers as in hearing Sermons, when we come to learn and be
instructed in the will of God, where, if any thing be not truly and clearly
delivered, we may leisurely consider of it, without offense to God, or ill
performance of the duty; but in Prayer we are to offer up our petitions, which
if not clearly expressed, and our apprehensions are not easy, so that the things
delivered be no sooner heard, but understood and assented to, and pass
immediately to the affections, we shall be at a loss for joining. Now these
things cannot be so well attained to even by those of competent understanding
in extempore Prayers, as in set forms: for in these latter we may understand
things beforehand, and so have nothing to do, but to join in putting up our
petitions, which is the proper work of Prayer. But extempore Prayers are
obnoxious to several impediments, which arise from the nature of the Prayers
themselves. For here is a necessity of an instantaneous weighing and judging
the several expressions, continually following each other; together with the
application of them to the will, for the stirring up the affections to embrace
them, which is not easily done, unless by those who have their faculties well
exercised: as the greatest part of the auditors usually have not. For whilst
the understanding is considering and estimating the truth of things, the
goodness is not represented to the will, as desirable. And besides, the due
understanding of a Prayer, depending on the connection of one part, and one
sentence with another, there will be need of ready animadversion to take notice
of it, and a competency of memory to retain it; which qualifications, many
persons, otherwise godly and intelligent, may be destitute of. And yet farther,
the errors to which such Prayers may be liable and obnoxious, from the defects
of the person praying, are manifold; but I shall not now instance in any. And
therefore I conclude, that set forms are such which the best may join heartily
with, and without which the generality cannot come to knowledge very well, and
that they are the surest ground for the understanding to proceed upon.

But yet there remains an objection to be resolved, which must be, if they
understand themselves, the foundation both of their Ministers plea, and of the
Peoples admiration of them; which is thus:

Though the using of set forms may consist with praying with the Spirit,
formaliter, yet it does not effective so much as extempore Prayers. It Is
according to the known rules of Oratory, that Speeches read out of a Book, are
not apt to affect so much, as when retained memoriter, and delivered with a
lively and grateful pronunciation. That which seems to flow from the heart of
the Speaker, works the more effectually on the hearts of the Hearers. Now,
forasmuch as God works by means, in our conversion and edification, which are
suited and accommodated to our capacities and natures, we ought to make use of
those which are most apt to excite our devotion. Our inferior faculties have
need of assistence, and a meet help, as well as our superior. And who would
not condemn on this account a careless and supine reading of Common Prayer it
self, as a thing tending to alienate men's affections from it, and to quench
their devotions. And therefore such Ministers, who suppose themselves thus
gifted, as to be able to excite men's affections by their Rhetorical Prayers,
and lively pronunciation and actions, conclude it necessary, that they should
make use of their Talent, and not lay it up in a Napkin.

This argument or objection at first sight may seem specious and plausible, but
if thoroughly examined, will appear as a rotten Fabric, built on a sandy
foundation; or, as a painted Sepulcher, which, though beautiful to look on,
yet within is full of dead-mens bones. I confess, if we compare reading
Prayers, and a delivery of an eloquent Prayer without-book, abstractedly and
absolutely, only in order to the exciting of the affections, the latter may
take place; but if we consider them with those circumstances, which in general
and public use must attend them, set forms will challenge the pre-eminence.

But for answer, in the first place; I have already showed, that the use of
forms is best for the instruction of the generality, and settled information of
the judgment, and therefore on that account may at least be laid in equal
balance with exciting the sensitive affections with present heats and sudden
commotions, which are not durable. Good affections are but one requisite to
praying with the Spirit, and according to those who place all almost in new
inventions, should be the least; and must be directed by the illumination of
the understanding.

Secondly, Because set forms are best for instruction, and fixing the judgment;
they are best also for a due excitation of the affections, so that they may be
acceptable and well-pleasing to God. For here is to be observed, that there is
a great difference between divine and heathen Oratory. A Roman Orator cared
not so much for information of the judgment, all his designs were to engage
men's affections to his cause, though by blinding their understanding and
reason. Such arts as these the Apostle declares against in the beginning of the
First Epistle to the Corinthians, and elsewhere, calling them the wisdom of
words, and of the flesh. But in offering up our Petitions to God, our
affections ought not to be led by tones and gestures, but proceed from the
sense and apprehension of God's Majesty, and our own wants. If we will pray
acceptably to God, we must have our hearts and minds beforehand enflamed with
a due consideration of his glory, and our own misery. This ought to be had in
the first place; and then for quickening the outward man, a lively, serious, and
decent pronunciation of public Prayers will be sufficient, which every
Minister should endeavor after. But when men's affections rise and fall
according to the variation of the Speaker's tone, it must needs be their
measure and foundation. Now these affections, moved after this manner, being
only turbulent commotions of the blood and spirits, and not real longings of
the soul after God, are little more of themselves regarded by him, than mere
bodily service; being but the next step higher. Nay, many times they may become
prejudicial to spiritual service; for, as it has been observed, perit omne
judicium cum abit in affectus, so in this case, when the tide of men's
affections is up, and they carried by external action and pronunciation,
without due understanding of the matter, they will have but little room for the
true sense of want and misery. And common people being unable to pass a ready
judgment on the things delivered, and unacquainted with new expressions, must
be led wholly by the gesture, tone, and pronunciation; and if they be
prejudiced for the man, and the delivery be good, all goes down, all passes
with them for gold that glisters. But God is in those affections which are more
settled and composed, (as in the still small voice we read of, 1 Kings 19.11,
12.) though they do not flame, consume, and break down so much; as those more
violent affections did indeed in our last Wars, by miserably destroying both
Church and State; and of such we may say, that God is not in them. I do not
deny, but that our affections ought to be sometimes fervent, and vehement, but
so as they subvert not, but are regulated by our judgments; and when the height
of them depends on the depth of the sense, and apprehension of God's Majesty,
and our own misery by nature, and not kindled by the loudness of an
enthusiastic voice, or tone.

Thirdly, Hence also it will appear, that the whole ease is clearly mistaken;
for Prayer is by its essential definition a representation, or a religious
representation of our wills and desires to God. And then certainly, if it be a
representation of our wills to God, we must have some desires in our wills to
represent to God, when we come to pray to him. And therefore every one that
prays, should either pray to God, by putting up his own Petitions by himself,
or should be acquainted with the matter beforehand which another puts up for
him, that he may say, he represents his own will to God; so far forth as it is
conformable to the will of God. As it has been the custom, when any one is to
be particularly prayed for, not only the Minister is acquainted with his
desire, but he also gives notice to the People of the same. Prayer is the
action of the Church; not the declaration of the mind of God to us, but the
representation of ours to him; and therefore does suppose our affections
already engaged. There is none who needs excite a Beggars affections, who is
sensible of his wants; these will make him pathetical. And therefore all the
compositions in our Prayers should be rather to express, and not to incite our
affections so much, because we come to put up our desires to God. I confess,
that in preaching, the case is quite otherwise, and a greater latitude may be
allowed as to these things, because it is ordained, not only for the
edification of the Church, but conversion of unbelievers, who may be drawn by
the love of the expressions, to the love of the things themselves. And herein
every one that is endued with the gift, may exercise his Rhetoric, and not
bury his Talent in a Napkin. And likewise, because hereby the will of God is
declared to us, spiritual things, by sensible representations, may become
familiar to us; and make the better impression upon us; yet the Apostle used
all plainness of speech in preaching, and therefore certainly likewise in
praying.

The Apostle tells us, Romans 8.26. Likewise the spirit also helps our
infirmities; for we know not what we should pray for, as we ought; but the
spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings, which cannot be
uttered. Where, I suppose, the Apostle speaks in the person of weak
Christians, or new Converts, who could not well express their minds to God; but
yet they knew in general what was to be prayed for, though they could not
particularly express themselves; for we know not, etc. which does suppose, that
they knew however in general, though not in particular, beforehand, what they
should pray for. And therefore to the due performance of this duty, there is
requisite in the first place a scala descensoria from the superior faculties
to the inferior, and not a scala ascensoria from the inferior faculties to
the superior. And hence the inventive faculty of the Minister, or those gifts
and abilities which God has given him, whereby he is able to express his mind
in more f^ll and significant phrases, than ordinary people, should not be
employed in praying extempore, so much as in composing ^et forms before hand,
both private, wherein those who would speak out of the abundance of the heart,
but by reason of ignorance to express themselves cannot, may be furnished with
apt and meet sentences; and public, that those whose affections are engaged
might, knowing and understanding the Prayer beforehand, with more freedom, and
without ^^^sitancy join with mutual conspiration of thoughts, spirits, and
affections.

And hence Liturgies were in use early in the Church, as soon as they could
well be composed; as is also done in the other part of worship, in praising
God, where Psalms and Hymns are composed and accented for the sweeter melody,
harmony, and consent. And when this is done, he that prays should endeavor
after the best pronunciation, and most decent delivery; that though these
should not be the first motives, yet that hereby the outward man, and lower
faculties may be so far quickened, as not to be an impediment to the sup^riour.
But to begin, and lay the foundation upon these, would he like the affections
of a person raised by the noise of Org^ns and Singing-men, who yet knows not a
word of the Hymns composed.

But, if any pretend that the very use of a form is apt to dull the affections,
and produce formality and lip-service, it is a sign that words and phrases lead
their affections, and are not expressive of them: for otherwise, the words
being significant, and their hearts seriously engaged, they would be no more
wearied with the using the same good form, than the Abderites were, when, after
a play written in their own Language, they heard, O Cupido, Prince of gods and
men! cried out incessantly, O Cupido, Prince of gods and men, till it cast them
all almost into violent fevers. Or than the Ephesians were, Acts 19.34. who
cried out, for the space of two hours, great is Diana of the Ephesians.

Certainly, had those, who condemn our saying, Good Lord deliver us; We beseech
thee to hear us good Lord; Lord have mercy upon us; Christ have mercy upon us;
Lord have mercy upon us, often in our Prayers, had they but half so much zeal
for God and Christ, as these men for Cupid and Diana, they might easily be of a
better mind, and join with us in our Litany, which has had the approbation,
even of some Presbyterian Ministers, for an affectionate Prayer. So far is the
reiterating or repeating of the same expressions, suitable to our affections,
from dulling and quenching them, that it does rather kindle them anew, and
cause them to burn with the greater flame. The sum then, and result of these
answers is this; that forasmuch as clearness of understanding and judgment is
annexed for the most part to forms, which we may know beforehand, ordinary
people being not able to pass a ready judgment on new inventions; that forms
are necessary for the due excitation and regulation of our affections, because
best understood; that the exciting the sensitive affections merely by elocution
and pronunciation, may be sometimes rather an impediment than a furtherance of
the spiritual performance of the duty; that Prayers are the representation of
our wills to God; and the intent of vocal Prayer is rather to express, than
raise our affections; and as far as may be, those unutterable groans of the
spirit, which by forms may be done most significantly, and most for the
understanding: And yet the use of them does nothing tend to abate the
affections, but to unfold distinctly those desires of the Soul, which we^^ laid
before, wrapped up, as it were, in a Napkin; it therefore follows, that
nothing is more necessary, than a comprehensive form of Prayer to be used in
all p^^^ick Assemblies; which all being acquainted with, (...) understand, and
may the more freely, knowingly, and cordially join with. And so I have given a
sufficient Answer to the Objection, but yet I shall, ex abundanti, add another
argument or two, to confirm this Discourse.

Fourthly, It may be considered, that in order to the exciting this affections
themselves, tho an excellent delivery and invention may go beyond bare reading,
yet these gifts are to be considered in the use of them, not only in
abstracto, but in concreto, as to the persons themselves, who are endowed with
them. Now tho we may grant that some of them are able to pray for a long time
significantly, methodically, and comprehensively, yet, have all of them, have
most of them, these abilities? Can they always have ready a new Prayer
comprehensive of matter, and yet clothed with new phrases and expressions, and
brought forth pertinently without hesitancy or confusion? Have all of them at
their fingers or tongues end, Erasmus de copia rerum and verborum? No* surely
we shall find most of them destitute of these ^^^^^ies, and that the efficacy
of their Prayers depends on the peoples fancy, and their own consident delivery.

Fifthly, Forasmuch as people may be as duly affected, and as much edified by
forms, as by extempore Prayers, we must not forget in the last place, the peace
of the Church and State, which is by far more exposed by the use of the latter
than the former. The effect of the one is unity and uniformity, brotherly love,
and joining together in mutual building of our selves up in our most holy
faith: of the other, for the most part, divisions in Church, and rebellions in
State; when it is left to every one to do what is right and good in his own
eyes, as our late times have sufficiently demonstrated. The Presbyterians
themselves would not leave us without a ^irectory. But, if private Men and
Ministers be les^ to themselves, to pray as they please, both Church and State
had need of very good security for their integrity, as well as their ability.
An heretical, factious, and schismatical Minister, the more eloquent Orator he
is, the more dangerous Impostour and Firebrand he may prove. And so it is
incumbent, both on the Prince, in regard of the State, and on the Bishop, in
regard of the Church, to have an eye to such persons. And were not our
Common Prayer sufficient in it self, yet being free from all just exceptions,
the very command of King and Parliament should commend it to our use. And
therefore let us not imitate, by giddiness and wantonness, the Israelites in
the Wilderness, who loathed heavenly Manna, Angels food, because it was common;
wherefore, though God sent them Qua^^^ ^^ ^^tisfie their lusts, yet he
destroyed many of (...) whilst the meat was in their mouths. We may all know
what ensued the abolishing Common Prayer among us; Let us sin no more, lest a
worse thing come upon us.

THE END.

