THE Disloyal Forty and Forty One, AND The Loyal Eighty, Presented to Public
View In a PROSPECT and SCHEME; Showing The Difference of the years Forty, and
Forty one, from the year Eighty.
Drawn up, and Published to Answer the Clamours of the Malicious, and to Inform
the Ignorant.
IT has been all the Clamor of late, Forty one, Forty one, is now coming to
be acted over again, we are running in the very same Steps, in the same Path,
and Road, to undo the Nation, and to ruin Kingly Government, as our
Predecessors did in Forty, and Forty one. We run the same Courses, we take the
same Measures, latet Anguis in Herba; beware of the Presbyterian Serpent, who
lurks in the Affairs of Eighty, being of the very same Complexion, Form and
Shape, as that of Forty and Forty one. These are the daily and weekly Cries of
several Pamphleteers, to amuse the Loyal Subjects of His Majesty, who dread and
abhor the Evil and Fatal Consequences of Transactions begun about those times,
or not long before; and no doubt but that they are also whispered into the ears
of His Sacred Majesty, with no little advantage, of raising Fears and
Jealousies in his Royal Breast. And truly no man can blame His Majesty, for
being fearful of such an Evil, under which his Royal Father lost his Life, and
by which himself for so long a time, was debarred of his Crown, and so severely
suffered. But who are these who thus continually alarm the Breast of their
Prince, and daily endeavor to conjure up many sad and troublesome Thoughts,
many jealous and distrustful Cogitations, and several suspicions, doubts and
scruples, concerning the Faith, Loyalty, and Allegiance of His Majes^ies
Subjects? I will suppose them (as well as those who trumpet the same into the
ears of the People, to beget in them also the same passions) to be two sorts of
men: Either they are such as are really Papists, and by this way, designingly
do endeavor the Ruin both of the King and his People, and the Subversion of
the Protestant Religion, and the bringing in and setting up the Popish
Religion; or else they are such who really lying under mistakes, do speak
according to their Consciences, being true Protestants. Lovers of their King,
and there established Religion, and through the prospect of what has past by
reason of the evil and detestable Contrivances of some wicked and Rebellious
men, have such an Aversion to all Dissenters, that they have not only
contracted an hatred against them, but they are grown highly jealous of all
things that come from them, and through this very abhorrency of the former evil
Consequences, are almost ready, not only to disbelieve the Plots of the
Jesuits, and the Papists, by to think them to be cunning Contrivances of the
old Presbyterians, to bring again both the King and the Nation into new Snares
and Troubles, according to the old President of Forty and Forty One. As the
former may be said to endeavor our Ruin out of Malice and Design, so these
may be said to do it out of blind Zeal. It were happy for the Nation, if the
great heats and souls of Scribbling Pamphleteers were laid aside, and that both
parties would seriously weigh things in the Balance of Equity and Judgment; for
whilst passion and heat bears sway on either side, we cannot judge rightly of
things; for our fears and jealousies on both sides increase upon every
Occasion, and Suspicion is apt to pervert the most innocent intentions: So that
whilst these troublesome passions, stand as a vail between King and People, the
one dares not trust or confide in the other, and both are apt to loose that
mutual Obligation or Knot of Unity (that makes happy a Kingdom and) which ought
to be inseparably between them.

I shall not go about to make known the many Pressures and Grievances, the
people of England have suffered in these late years, nor the several
miscarriages of the Counselors and Instruments belonging to the State, which
have in great measure been publicly attested and noted by the late Parliament,
in their Votes and Addresses to His Majesty. Nor will this sheet give way to
show the very many Causes of just Complaint, the people may have for all those
fears and jealousies, they seem to lie under, and with which they are
upbraided, as if they had no real Cause, but were afraid of their own shadows;
but certainly if we believe that there has been a detestable Plot, to take
away the Life of His Majesty, and to subvert the Protestant Religion, and to
bring in Popery, the mention of that horrid Conspiracy, for which so many have
suffered, might be enough to justify the fears of the People of England, who
dread nothing more, than the Change of their Religion, on which both their
Lives and Property depend.

I beseech you consider how rashly these men judge the face of Affairs, after
the fancied Image of Forty One: and cry out with so much heat on all that offer
to (...) or appear in the behalf of the People, or stand up for their
Properties and Privileges, or that complain of Grievances and miscarriages.
What Age can you note, that evil and corrupt Members got not into the sway of
the State? What times so pure, that have begot no Grievances and Miscarriages?
What Prince read you of so Godlike, as not sometimes to give the Reins to his
Passions; even David a man after God's own heart, and Solomon the wisest of
Princes, by many foul slips showed that frailty is not altogether eloinged from
Royalty. If then in Forty One Grievances were complained against, Miscarriages
noted, evil Counselors impeached, Petitions promoted; and if now the same
causes happening, the people run so far the same King's Highway for Redress,
must therefore the fatal Consequences of Forty One be needs the Effect of
Prayers and Petitions, of humble Supplications, and of regular and justificable
Means by Parliament? and must therefore all that appear with Petitions and
Complain against Popery, and such as would endeavor to bring in Arbitrary
Government, be branded for Designers, Factious, Seditious, and Rebellious, as
those of Forty one?

But alas! 'twas not Forty One which ruined the Kingdom, and pulled down
Monarchy, 'twas the after spawn, that got life through War and Blood; for most
of those persons, that at first were active against evil Councillours, and for
the Redress of the peoples Grievances, when they saw things carried to
extremity, and beyond the Intention of their Loyalty, either left them of
themselves, or were secluded by those Traitors, that run to the Achme of
Treason, not to be named; and which all true Englishmen hope may never be
acted on the English Stage, to contract Guilt and Odium on the Nation.

I dare say, amongst those now branded by these sort of men for factious, and
runners of the Race of Forty One, to obtain the Goal of Rebellion, there are
many thousands who really, and from their hearts love the King, and would
venture their Lives and Fortunes in his Service: And indeed, what prospect of
safety can the Nation have, after the Life of his Majesty? whom God long
preserve.

But that we may the better compair this Bugbear Forty, and Forty One, with our
Eighty, I have drawn a brief Scheme, of the similitude and disparity of either,
in the matters of Affairs, then and now; and so let the World judge, and all
sober men judge, how like they are one to another, that all this mighty Cry is
made.

Forty, Forty One. Eighty, Similitude. The Disparity. Popery complained
against, no Plot appearing. Popery feared, and complained against. The Growth
of Popery being notorious, and a most horrid Popish Plot appearing. The Scots
raise an Army and invade England: are dissolved by a Treaty at Rippon, owned by
the English, and called Brethren. A few Rebel Scots up in Arms. Defeated,
routed, and some hanged as Rebels, and disowned by the English. A Parliament
called, and a Bill granted for its continuance. A Parliament called. Soon
dissolved. Earl of Strafford impeached by the Parliament, and condemned by the
Bill of Attainder, for services done his King, and suffered on Tower Hill,
being a Protestant. A Lord Stafford impeached by the Parliament, and suffered
on Tower Hill. Had a fair Trial by his Peers, and condemned justly for an
horrid Conspiracy, against his King's Life, being a Papist. The City present a
Petition against Church Ceremonies, and the Government by Bishops. The City
Petition. For the safety of the Church of England from Popery, and for the
sitting of Parliament. Objections against the Bishops sitting in Parliament.
Objections against the Bishops voting in Parliament. Only in cases of Life and
Death. Petitions for the Redress of Grievances, with the Insurrection of the
Apprentices and Tumults. Petitions for Redress of Grievances. By a few
peaceably, and humbly presented. The Irish bloody Massacre and Rebellion
projected and effected. An Irish bloody Massacre and Rebellion projected.
Discovered and Prevented. Several Tumults and Insolences offered to the Lords,
for slighting the Bill against the Bishops. No Tumults upon the Lords slighting
the Bill against a Popish Successor. Endeavors for the abolishing Episcopacy.
Endeavors to establish Episcopacy, and to secure it against Popery. The King
forced by Tumults and Insolences to leave the City -- The King desired and
entreated to stay, and not to go to Oxford. An Earl of Monmouth impeached by
the Commons. A Duke of Monmouth. Beloved by the Commons. Fears and Jealousies
fomented by the Jesuits and Papists. Fears and Jealousies fomented by the
Papists and Jesuits. Fomented also by the Latitudinarian Masqueraders.

By these few heads, as they occurred to memory, you may see how like and
unlike the Portraitures of the Monster Forty one, and the Loyal Eighty, are one
to the other, and it may be concluded, because men then eat, drunk, slept, and
talked, and because they now also do the same, that these are the very same
men, and are taking the same Courses they did in Forty One; as these men
endeavor to make the World believe, the Presbyterians are new minting their
old Coin of 41. But we trust, that the Mercy of God, the Wisdom of his Majesty,
and the Loyalty of the People, will be security enough against those dreadful
Consequences, so much threatened to scare both King and People, as if they had a
desire to set them together by the Ears; Which God in Heaven avert, and let all
good People say AMEN.

London, Printed for T. B. 1680.


