Dr. Sherlock Vindicated, OR, COGENT REASONS, Why that Worthy Person has
complied with the Necessity of the Times, and why he at first refused it.
MEN of that Learning and Sense, as the Gentleman we speak of, are not supposed
to act without Ground, nor without more than ordinary Reason, for things of so
extraordinary a Nature; some of which Reasons, among others, may be assigned
for his refusing to Comply with the Act of Parliament, and Swearing to the
Present Government as follows: I. The Clergy had a great Interest, and no
small hopes in the Parliament, that they should be excused in the Act, and
after, that their Credit and Word might be taken for their fidelity to the
King, only on the Reputation of their Sanctity and Zeal for the Protestant
Religion: Though at the same time, they would not take the King and Queens
Word, without an Oath to uphold all their Pontifical Splendour. II. They thought
to possess the People with such an opinion of their Constancy and Courage, in a
matter of Conscience, as to gain the Reputation of the Martyrs of the Church,
and so make themselves Popular, as a ^ing might be very useful to them in Case
of another Revolution. III. They were working to possess the King too, with the
Considerableness of their Number and Interest in the Nation, that he should not
venture to deprive them according to the Act, for fear of disobliging the
People. IV. They had a great many Cards to play yet for a new turn, and that
Luster of Reward for an untainted Zeal to the Interest of a Popish King, made
it necessary to stand Neuter as long as possible. V. They were very loath to
Manacle their Endeavors with the Fetters of an Oath, that they might act for a
Restoration, without the Clog of Perjury. VI. They had yet great Reason to
think, their Interest strong enough at worst, to gain the Grant of their
Sallaries to them, though they were deprived, which would render their great
Suffering a little comfortable. VII. At last, if all their Expectations were
frustrate, there was no Incapacitating Clause in the Act, it was but swearing
at last, and all would be well; again, the Readmission was the least act of
Lenity they could receive. -- Cum multis aliis, etc.


These Reasons Considered, what strange Considerations does the Present
Juncture offer for the present Compliance?
Why, I. The Parliament, notwithstanding all the Interest made, has not thought
fit to Excuse them, That wise Assembly, finding the bounds of an Oath every jot
as needful to secure the Allegiance of the Clergy, as of other People. II. The
People who are oftener convinced by Demonstration than Pretenses, saw through the
Mask sooner than was expected, and could not believe them to be Martyrs for the
Church, who refused to pray for a Protestant King, but esteemed them Hypocrites
and Jacobites; so one great end of their Suffering, Applause, and Popular Pity
was lost. III. As a Consequence of this, their Figure became so despicable,
that they lost all their Influence on the Court, and were rather scorned than
feared; and they have found the King not to be awed from suffering the Saw to
have its Course, and Justice to proceed without Distinction. IV. They have not
found that Success on their Prayers and Fastings as was expected, their Church
still groaning under, what they have had the Impudence to call, The Fetters of
a cruel Usurpation. V. Their great Refuge, the Divine, Invincible, Most
Christian Grand Seignior, Lewis le Grand, has not been able to complete the
Endeavors he has made toward their Rescue, though they were not at all wanting
in their most Christian Endeavor, to call in a Barbarous and Foreign Nation,
into the Bowels of their Native Country. VI. The Fleet more by the providence
of God than otherwise, has escaped betraying, as they had most nobly contrived,
and is now put into better hands we hope, that we may not be liable to another
French Invasion: So that Hope is perished. VII. King James, the other Prop of
their Hopes, with all his French Succor, and Irish Thousands, with which he
was to Land in England every Week, is most courageously run away; and that
Kingdom, no more the Center of their defeated expectation. VIII. Scotch hopes
are also become like Jonas's Goard, that perished in the Morning: And the
Thousands of Hardy Highlanders, are dwindl'd to a few Troops of Banditty, that
pray God bless King James, and God bless King William, and send they may never
agree, that we may get good Booty by robbing our Neighbors. IX. And which is
worst of all, King William whom they well hoped they had seen the last of, and
whom they earnestly pusht on to go in Person into Ireland, (with the same
honest intent that David sent Vrias into the Battle) is come safe home again;
Danger has not prevailed, nor Difficulties overcome, but the Kingdom is in a
likely way of recovery. X. Things look on them generally with a bad aspect as
to future hopes, the House of Saul waxes weaker and weaker, and the House of
David stronger and stronger: Poor Abdication is gone, the Lord knows whither,
and will return the Lord knows when, and be King again the Lord knows how;
Hopes decline, and Endeavors fail, and what can one Tribe do whose fingers
were never taught to fight, though there Priest-ridden Hearers have been so often
set together by the Ears, by their Function? XI. The attempt to preach with a
Non Obstante, to their Sovereign and an Act of Parliament, is but making the
Archbishop Master of the Revels, to license what the La^ prohibits, and has
met but with cold Entertainment in the present Subject, and wit^ very much
misfortune in some of the Inferiors of the Tribe. XII. To relinquish a great
Revenue to the weakening the Party, as well as the Individua^ Person, is a piece
of very grievous Self-denial and 500 l. per annum has a great deal of Divinity
in it; it will buy Books enough to convert a Nation, and Arms enough to fix
(...) lusty Batalion for the late King. If occasion serve, there are forty nine
Reasons in a goo^ Revenue, besides that prevailing one, that (...) cannot live
without it; and its a strange piece of Mortification, rather to vow Allegiance
to necessity, who is already voted a Heretic, than to swear Allegiance to a
Protestant King. XIII. At last here is a good Salve found which perhaps will
not so soon be exploded in England, as it was in Scotland; we can swear to him
King de facto, and so long as he is so, we will obey, because we cannot help
it. XIV. Because if we take the Oath, we shall again wind into Favor, and
perhap^ have more opportunity, to do our Cause Service than we had before.


These its hoped may vindicate Dr. Sherlock in particular, and any other Person
that shall think fit to comply, from the Accusation of rash and inconsiderate
Men, being I dare say, Men of great Reason, and solid Understanding, that do
things with Judgment and Forecast. If any are yet dissatisfied, they perhaps
may have further endeavor used for their Conviction, and many more Arguments
laid down to justify the Reasonableness of the Act.

Tempora mutantur, etc.
London, Printed in the Year, 1690.


