A DISCOURSE UPON USURY: OR, Lending MONEY for INCREASE. (Occassioned by Mr.
David Jones's late Farewell SERMON) PROVING By undeniable Arguments the
Lawfulness thereof, and Answering the Plausible Objections from Scripture,
Councils, and Fathers againsst it.

PUBLISHED At the Request of sever^l Judicious and Sober Christians, for the
Information and Sa^^^^action of all such as have or may be concerned in this
Matter of so General and Weighty Importance.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Crouch at the Corner of Pope's-Head-Alley
over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1692.

TO THE READER.
MR. Jones's Farewell Sermon has been the occassion of much Disscourse in City
and Country, especially that part relating to Usury, a Subject which of late
years has not been (as I know) much controverted on one side or another; but
now being so zealously opposed by Mr. Jones (who is deservedly respected for
his Courage and Fidelity in preaching down the Vices of the Times) it has
occasioned a more than ordinary Concernment of Spirit in many (I hope I may say
good Christians, who have a hearty respect for Mr. Jones, and have been or are
concerned in the business of Usury) to examine this matter a little more
closely than they have hitherto done, and the dealings of Usury are become
universal, reaching Nobility and Gentry as well as Merchants and Tradesmen, so
that all have need to be satisfied, whether it be lawful or not? The Writer
hereof owns that upon reading that Sermon, and the hard things that are there
spoken against all Usury by Councils and Fathers, he began to doubt whether
Usury were now lawful to Christians: This put him upon the serious search of
the Point, as well from Scripture, as from those Persons of note in our Country
that have wrote against it, and some others that have written for it. Upon the
whole, he declares he is fully satisfied of the Lawfulness of it; and that it
may be managed with as much Justice and Charity as Buying and Selling, Letting
or Setting of Houses or Land, which are subject to as great Abuses as Lending
for Interest. The Reasons of his Satisfaction are set down in this Writing, to
which he could have added many more, had it been needful: He has communicated
these to several Ministers, and other understanding and serious Christians, who
do acknowledge their full Satisfaction in the Arguments and Reasons here
produced, and have requested the Writer to publish them to the World, that
Satisfaction may he given to others, especially such who may have received
Impressions to their Damage from that part of Mr. Jones's Sermon which relates
to this matter. The Writer has studied Verity and Brevity, and as much
plainness as he could, to render his Arguments Convincing and Evident even to
an ordinary Capacity, having (he hopes) satisfactorily and clearly answered all
those Pleas against Usury from Scripture, Councils and Fathers, or from the
Nature of the thing it self which has been urged by Mr. Jones or others.

A DISCOURSE UPON USURY: OR, Lending Money for Increase, etc.
THE Jews by God's own appointment were obliged to several sorts of Laws, as
first Ceremonial or Typical, such as Circumcision, the Passover, Sacrifices,
etc. They that are against all Usury will own that Christians are not obliged
to these. Secondly, To Laws which in their very Nature are Moral and Perpetual,
and therefore bind us as much as them. And that the Law against Usury is not of
this sort, I think is plain, because God did permit even the Jews to lend upon
Usury to Strangers, which he would not have done, had it been a Sin in its own
Nature, and as obligatory to all as the other Moral Laws are: For God did not
give them leave to Rob, or to commit Adultery, (...) Drunk with Strangers,
provided they did not do so among themselves: Nay, God commanded the Jews that
they should not oppress even Strangers, because they themselves were Strangers
in the Land of Egypt. From whence it is plain, That Usury in its own Nature is
not unlawful or unjust, nor can be reckoned Oppression, as they that plead
against it affirm it is. For had it been so, then God would not have allowed
the Jews to lend to Strangers upon Usury as he did; Nay, God made it one of the
Blessings that should attend their ^bedience, that They should lend to many
N^tions, and not borrow; (this could never be meant of Free Loan.) So that for
ought I can see, an Ability to lend upon Usury to many, was one of the
Blessings of Canaan. Thirdly, God obliged the Jews to certain Politic Laws,
which were, First, Either such as respected Common Justice (of which there are
abundance of Instances) or Secondly, Laws of Charity and Kindness one to
another, and that not only in general, but in particular Instances (among which
that of lending freely was one) and which otherwise they had not been bound
perpetually to observe from the nature of the things themselves; and which
Precepts (respecting both Justice and Charity) were part of that Theocracy or
Divine Government that was peculiar to them as Jews, I shall here set down some
of these Laws of Charity.

Exodus XXII. 25, 26. If thou lend Money to any of my People that is poor by
thee, thou shall not be to him as an Usurer, neither shall thou lay upon him
Usury. If thou take at all thy Neighbors Raiment to Pledge, thou shall
deliver it to him by that the Sun goes down. Levit. XXV. 35, 36, 37. And if
thy Brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with thee, then thou shall
relieve him, yea though he be a Stranger or a Sojourner, that he may live with
thee, take thou no Usury of him or Increase: Thou shall not give him thy Money
for Usury, nor lend him thy Victuals for Increase. Deuteronomy. XXIII. 19, 20. Thou
shall not lend upon Usury to thy Brother; Usury of Money, Usury of Victuals,
Usury of any thing that is lent upon Usury. Unto a Stranger thou may lend
upon Usury. Deuteronomy. XXIV. 19, 20, 21. When thou cuttest down thy Harvest in the
Field, and have forgot a Sheaf in the Field, thou shall not go again to fetch
it; It shall be for the Stranger, for the Fatherless, and for the Widow. When
thou beatest thine Olive Tree, thou shall not go over the Boughs again, it
shall be for the Stranger, etc. When thou gatherest the Grapes of thy Vineyard,
thou shall not glean it afterward, it shall be for the Stranger, etc. Deuteronomy. XV.
1, 2, 3. At the end of every Seven Years thou shall make a Release, and this is
the manner of the Release; Every Creditor that lends ought unto his Neighbor
shall Release it, he shall not exact it of his Neighbor, or of his Brother. Of
a Forreigner thou may exact it. Now I humbly conceive it may be reasonably
questioned, Whether these Scriptures do totally forbid lending upon Usury, even
to all sorts of Jews. You see there is two places in Exodus and Levitious that
plainly limit it to poor Neighbour-Jews. Now all the Fundamental Laws which God
gave the People of the Jews, as a Nation, whether Moral, Ceremonial, or
Judicial, are set down in the Four Books of Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and
Deuteronomy; only here is the difference between Deuteronomy and the other
Three Books, that Deuteronomy does mostly contain a Repetition of Laws already
established in the other Three Books, or in some of them. And though these
Laws, or any of them, be afterward mentioned in any of the rest of the Books
of the Of Testament, yet it is but in a way of Repetition or Inforcement of the
Old Laws already given forth, without any Alteration or Addition, as to the
Substance of them: And therefore when in the other Books mention is made of any
of those Laws in general, (as some times there is) and any Dispute should arise
about the meaning of these Laws, must we not have recouse to the Original
Sanction or Establishment, set down in some of the said Four Books. Thus ought
we to proceed in the Case of Usury in those Books where the Law about Usury is
established, namely in Exodus and Levitious; there is no Obligation to lend
freely to any but the Poor: And though in Deuteronomy the Law of Usury is
repeated in general, without mention of Poor or Rich, and the like we have in
some other Books of the Old Testament, yet I think it is very plain, that all
these Places (as well in Deuteronomy as in the other Books) must have a
Reference to, and be expounded by those two express Original Laws established
concerning Usury in Exodus and Leviticus, and not the contrary, as some would
have it; and these Laws twice mention poor Jews, and once poor Strangers, and
give no Rule for Lending or not Lending the Rich of one sort or of another:
Therefore seeing in Deuteronomy there is no new Law added about Usury, but only
the former Law in general repeated; and since neither here, nor in other places
of the Old Testament, there is any Law forbidding to lend to rich Jews, Why may
we not (without putting any force upon those places) say we must understanding
by them such Usury as in the Original Law was forbidden (that is to say) the
taking it of poor Jews and poor Strangers. And if they might take Increase of
none that were Jews, though never so Rich, why should the Holy Ghost twice
mention these Expressions, If thy Brother be poor, thou shall lend without
Usury. Surely he would never have repeated these If's twice over, if Rich as
well as Poor were concerned in the Prohibition; but in all the places where
Usury is forbidden, he would have forbid it absolutely without any Limitation:
And for the same Reasons we must not so construe any places in the Prophets, as
to take away any Liberty or Privilege given (either expressly, or by a plain,
natural, and necessary Consequence) in the Original Fundamental Laws: this
would be to pervert (not interpret) Scripture, and would make the Prophets
Lawgivers, not Law Interpreters. But not to insist upon this any further;
suppose the Case had been that no Usury was to be required of any Jews, Poor of
Rich, which is the Opinion of those that oppose all Usury or Increase for
Lending of Money.

Now here is the great Question I would be resolved in by those that would have
all kinds of Usury, or Increase for lending Money, unlawful to Christians,
Whether if Christians are obliged to this Jewish Law against Usury (which is a
Law of Charity) they are not as well obliged to all the other Laws or Instances
of Charity I have named before, and the rest, enjoined to the Jews in the Old
Law?

That Christians are obliged to Charity in general, by many Precepts in the New
Testament, is not to be questioned; but whether they are obliged to show it
always in those particular Instances that the Jews were, I not only question,
but positively deny. Nor do I believe the Opposers of all Usury do think
themselves obliged to those other Instances I have named, which are as great,
or rather greater Acts of Charity than lending Money freely. And I would fain
know why they are so strict for this one Instance, and yet at the same time can
pass over the others, although both are equally Commanded by God in the Old
Testament. I do not think it unlawful for a Christian to show his Charity in
any of the aforementioned Instances of Charity, any more than in this of
lending freely: Nay, I wish Christians were more plentiful in such Acts of
Kindness as lending freely, forgiving poor Debtors once in Seven years, in
leaving at Harvest time some of the Fruits of the Earth for the Poor, and the
like: But the Question in Debate is, Whether Christians are obliged upon
account of these Jewish Precepts, under the Penalty of Sin, always to show
their Charity in these particular Instances; Has not a Christian in Harvest
time the choice either to cause all his Fruits to be brought home, and leave
hone for the Poor, and in lieu thereof show his Charity in another way or
manner? Whether if a Christian forget a Sheaf in his Field in Harvest time, he
may not send for it without sinning? Whether such as take Garments in Pledge
for Money lent, may not forbear to restore them again by that the Sun goes
down? I think none will deny this Liberty to Christians; but the very Letter of
the Law denied it to the Jews; for though they might be Charitable in other
Instances, as well as these, yet these must not be omitted, being expressly
Commanded. Now if a Christian is not bound to such particular Instances of
Charity, but is left free as to the Kinds and Methods of Charity; and if
lending Money freely be an Act of Charity or Kindness (as certainly it is) why
is a Christian perpetually obliged to this Instance, any more than to the
former Instances of Charity? If they that oppose all Usury say, Though the
other Instances of Charity are Commanded of God, yet they peculiarly belonged
to the Jews, and were some of their Judicial or Political Laws that are not
obligatory to Christians now, but the Law against Usury is; Then let them show
me their Warrant for making this Difference and Distinction between one and
another. It is plain all the other Instances of Charity I have named are
practicable in their own Nature in a Christian Country, as much as the Law
against Usury; nor are they any where prohibited in the Gospel. A Man may be a
very good Christian, and yet at the end of every Seven years release all that
shall then owe l^m any Money if he please. Again, I desire those that are
against all Usury, or Increase for lending Money, as wicked and sinful,
seriously to consider that the very same Jewish Law that forbids to lend for
Usury, commands to lend without it to those that are waxen poor. Now by this,
they that are against against all Usury, are obliged to be as careful to lend
their poor Neighbors when they want, as they are conscientious not to do it
upon Usury; or otherwise they perform but the least part of that Law; for
lending Money freely in such a case, is a greater kindness than the mere
scrupling to take Use: Therefore it will do well for such to take care, while
they show their Zeal in shunning all Usury, they do not fall into the greater
Sin of Hypocrisy in being so uncharitable as not to lend at all when the Case
requires it; for it is a greater deed of Charity to lend upon moderate Usury,
even to the Poor, than not to lend to them at all in their Wants. Now if the
Law to lend Money freely were a particular Law of Charity, and not of Common
Justice, and peculiarly relating to the Jews as such, and not universally
obliging them neither, (for they might lend to all the World at Usury, except
to one another, and to poor Strangers that were with them, and the Jews were
but a handful in comparison of the rest of the World) If the Gentile Christians
are no more perpetually obliged to this Instance of Charity than the others
beforementioned; (as I am fully satisfied they are not.) If to lend upon
moderate Increase be not in its own nature unjust (as I hope I have in part
already proved, and shall presently further manifest by answering the most
material Objections against it) If it be not forbidden in the Gospel (as I am
satisfied it is not) then I humbly conceive that those Arguments against all
Usury, or Increase upon Loan of Money, taken not only from the Old Testament,
but from Councils, Fathers, and other Doctors and Writers in former Ages (that
are so cried up as Enemies of all Usury) will fall to the Ground; unless
Christians must be compelled so far to Judaize as perpetually to observe those
other Laws of Charity imposed upon the Jews, which I doubt they will not, nor
indeed are they obliged to do so; though they who oppose all Usury as unlawful,
are bound so to do from their own Principles or Arguments, or must confess
themselves guilty of unaccountable partiality in their zealous asserting of,
and stickling for the perpetuity of one Jewish Law of Charity or Kindness, and
disobeying and rejecting all the rest.

Object. But it is objected, It Is strange so many Fathers, Councils, and other
holy Men in all Ages have so condemned Usury, if it were not unlawful; and who
shall be believed, they, or those that would have it lawful?

Answ. I answer, neither the one nor the other without due proof: If this be a
good Argument against all Increase for Loan of Money, it would be so against
the Protestant Religion it self; and that Question of the Papists (I think)
would be unanswerable, Where was your Religion before Luther? The Question is
nor whether is best, to lend Money freely, or upon Increase; for I grant it
most Christian for them that are able to lend Money freely when the reason of
the Case requires it: So if poor People come to buy of a rich Tradesman
necessary Provision or Apparel, it is better and more pleasing to God, to give
away his Profit to such than to take it; yea, and it may be a Sin in some Cases
of Extreme Necessity to exact of the Poor what is due from them: But is buying
and selling for profit, in a way of Common Justice therefore unlawful in its
own Nature. It may be a Sin (in some Circumstances a Borrower may be in) not
only to force him to pay Usury, but the very Principal, or at least the whole
of it: But must this be therefore observed of all as a general Rule, and in all
Cases and Circumstances.

And as to the Objection that so many Holy Men and Councils are against all
Usury, I answer, I doubt not I shall presently make it out, that all these
Councils and Fathers were not against all Usury or Increase in the Sense of
those that now plead against it: But put the Case they, or some of them were, I
say we are not to pin our Faith upon such, no more in this than in any other
Cases or Instances, wherein many (if not most) of these Fathers and Councils
have erred, and that in many Ages of the Church. It is well known that the
indiscreet Zeal of many Holy Men and Councils has been the Original, as well as
a Means of the Continuance of Abundance of Superstition and Idolatry that has
been practiced in many Ages of the Church, such as the Mass, Praying to or for
the Dead, and many Errors about the Sacraments, besides several other
Doctrinal Errors from the Primitive Age of the Church down to this time, which
are all now discarded and disowned by Protestants: And why are we bound to
think them any more infallible in their Judgments about Usury, wherein they
might more easily mistake it (being expressly forbidden to the Jews in the Old
Testament in some Cases;) I will not pretend to have my self read either the
Councils or Fathers, but I have read those who have given some account of them
relating to the Matters in Debate; I doubt not those Councils and Fathers
(whole Opinions and Judgments we have most reason to value, though none to
build on) are ignorantly or carelessly misrepresented by those that are against
all Increase upon Loan of Money.

The first Nicene Council is supposed to be the best, as well as the first
General Council, after that of the Apostles, and they did indeed forbid all
Usury; but to whom? to all the Clergy, not to the Laity; the Words of the
Council, in effect amount to no more than this, Whoever of the Clergy, for
filthy Lucres sake exercises Usury, let him be Deposed. And this by the way
seems to imply, That Usury in its own Nature was not unlawful, (for then it
should have been Censured in the Laity also) but they thought it did not look
well in the Clergy to receive Usury. Now it the first and best General Council
that ever was in the World, did not deem it in their Province to Judge or
Censure the Practice of Usury in the Laity, but left that matter to the Civil
Magistrate, it is sure a sign of too great Boldness and Rashness in any
particular Clergyman, upon less Authority to Censure and Damn all that deal in
Usury or Interest, as several have ignorantly or uncharitably done. And if
there were a Law now in England forbidding the Clergy to take Usury, how would
this affect the Laity, or those who follow Trades and Merchandise. We read, the
Antichristian Apostasy had so prevailed in the Christian Would, at the time
even of this first General Council (which is said to Consist of Three hundred
and eighteen Fathers) that even the generality of these Fathers were within an
Ace of Establishing that which the Apostle calls the Doctrine of Devils, I mean
Forbidding the Clergy to Marry; and the there was only one Bishop that opposed
the rest, and turned the Scale on the right side: If they were so ready to bind
all the Clergy to abstain from Marriage, against the express Doctrine and
Determinations of the New Testament, no wonder if they prohibit the Clergy all
Usury, having a Color or Pretense so to do from some old Testament Precepts,
which do not oblige Christians.

Now suppose, after this Nicene Council, a Man finds Usury condemned in the
Works or Writing of several Fathers or Doctors of the Church, so called; yet (I
doubt not but) a great many of them may be fairly interpreted to mean, either
such Usury as was forbidden in the Law to be taken of the Poor, or such as was
forbidden by this Nicene Council to be taken by the Clergy; neither of which
will make at all against that Usury I defend.

If it be still objected, That after this first Council there were afterward
other Councils and Doctors of the Church which did condemn Usury in all Cases
and Persons. I grant it to be true; but then pray consider their Grounds and
Reasons for it, and then you will not have a jot the worse thought of Usury
upon the account of their Opinion. For from the time of this Nicene Council,
the Church was continually growing more and more into that Antichristian
Apostasy that did at last totally Eclipse the Glory of it. And the Pope and
Clergy by degrees began to encroach upon the Office and Laws of the Civil
Magistrate, and so assumed to meddle and determine in Civil Matters, which did
not belong to them. And since the Clergy were all forbidden to take Usury by
this first Nicene Council, many of them afterward (partly through Envy, and
partly through Interest, as may rationally be supposed by their other Worldly
and Ambitious Designs and Proceedings) made it their work to condemn all Usury
in the Laity; for had they been as much at liberty, as the Nicene Council left
the Laity, I do not question but the Clergy after the Council would have taken
Usury as much as the Clergy before the Council did, (which was the occasion of
that Councils Decree;) for we have no reason to believe, the Clergy that rose
up in successive Ages after that Council, were better Men (or so good as) those
that lived at the time of that Council, or before it: Therefore seeing these
Clergymen were totally forbid Usury themselves, they (not minding or regarding
the vast difference between the Case of those whose business it is to win
Souls, and that of those who are to drive Trades and follow Merchandise in the
World) did afterward condemn all Usury in the Laity too; that by this means,
as they could not lend to the Laity upon Usury, they themselves would not be
bound to pay any usury to the Laity, when they had occasion to borrow of them:
So that we have reason to believe it was Self-interest was the greatest Cause
of many of the Clergy's stickling against usury.

Again, I would desire any Man seriously to tell me, Whether the Censures or
Opinions of any of the Fathers or Councils, after the first Nicene Council, are
to be preferred to, or equalled with the Opinions or Censures of those Nicene
Fathers? If the Clergy at that time did exercise usury (as the words of the
Cannon do expressly declare) no doubt but the Laity did practice it as much or
more; and if it were so sinful and damnable in its own Nature, as some have
affirmed it is, no doubt but those Fathers (though they would not assume to
themselves a Power to prohibit usury to the Laity, yet they) would at least
have earnestly recommended it to the pious Emperor Constantine the Great, that
he would make a general Law to prohibit it in all places of his Dominions,
which I cannot learn that ever he did, but only by his Edict confirmed the
Decree of this Council against the Clergies taking of usury. But suppose the
Emperor then, or any Civil Magistrate since, had by Civil Laws totally
forbidden all usury in their Dominions, both Clergy* and Laity, unless it be in
all cases and curcumstances a Moral Evil (which can never be proved) how are we
in this Nation obliged by any such Laws? Are we of this Nation bound by the
Laws of any other Country as such, besides and different from the Laws of our
own?

Again, Let us consider, though many good Men in former times (whether before
or since the Reformation) were indeed against all sorts of Increase or Usury
upon lending Money, yet there are now, for ought I know, as many holy and good
Men that hold it lawful: And why are we bound to the Judgment of the other more
than of these. And by the way, this Consideration, I humbly conceive, should
have moved Mr. Jones to have been less positive in declaring his Opinion upon
this Point.

His zealous, but rash Censures of all Usury or Increase upon Loan of Money,
has given (I doubt) a needless occasion to many to have less regard (than
otherwise they might have had) to his zealous Exhortations against those other
known Sins he justly condemns in his Sermon: I believe he would have done much
better to have spoken against the Abuses in Usury, than the thing it self.
There are Sins enough (God knows) in the Nation, that are confessed by all to
be such, which will find Preachers work enough, so that they will not need to
be so peremptory against a thing which so many wise and good Men approve as
lawful. That there are a great many abuses in many cases and circumstances
about lending Money upon use, I easily grant, (and am as heartily sorry for, as
they that are against Usury) but the abuse of a thing by some, yea by many,
will not infer the unlawfulness of it: If so, then Buying, and Selling, and all
sorts of Tranding must be unlawful, because abused by many, and practiced
against the strict Laws of Justice and Charity; yea, and the Office of
preaching it self, would then be unlawful, because it is possible many (as I
suppose Mr. Jones will not deny) may regard the Flock only, or chiefly for the
Fleece sake, or for filthy Lucre sake.

I shall in the next place consider and refute some of the most material
Arguments (that I have met with) whereby the Opposers of all Usury would
pretend to prove it unlawful in its own Nature, and to differ from other ways
of disposing Money upon Increase or Profit, (which all grant to be lawful) and
one is this; They say, If a Man lends Money, it is unreasonable to take
Increase, besides the Principal again; forasmuch as Money naturally yields no
Increase, but what is got by the pains of the Borrower, and not of the Lender:
Whereas if a Man lets Land for profit, it naturally yields Fruit; and if one
lets a House, it will grow worse by time and wearing, in consideration whereof
a Man receives Rent.

To which I answer, and grant there is a difference between lending of Money
and these other Instances, in some circumstances; but for the most part, little
or nothing in the substance: For though Land naturally yields Increase, yet it
will not do so proportionably to the full Rent required, without the great
Pains and Labor of the Tenant; (in which the Landlord does not concern
himself, any more than a Man that lends Money does in the Improvement of it)
And if Tenants by Lease are bound to Repair Houses (and to leave them repaired
at the End of the Term) besides paying their Rents, then there is very little
difference in the reason of the Case between letting for Rent, and letting at
Interest; and especially where a Man lets a piece of Ground to build on,
reserving a certain Ground-Rent during the Lease; for this Ground (it may be)
is not worth five shillings a year unbuilt, (for what will grow upon it
naturally) when yet a Ground-Rent of five pounds a year may be made of it; and
nevertheless all the Improvement is purely at the charge, and by the Pains and
Industry of the Tenant, and nothing by the Owner of the Ground; and when he has
built his House, though he cannot get a Tenant for it a great while, or though
he looses Rent by bad Tenants; yet the Ground Landlord expects his Ground-Rent,
and thinks he may do it honestly and lawfully. And when the Term of the Lease
is expired, this Ground (that naturally of it self could have yielded so very
little in comparison, without the Tenants Charge and Pains) is left up to the
Landlord in as good a plight as any Money upon Usury when it is repaid, besides
all the Buildings upon it, which may be worth much more than the Ground it
self: And I suppose no Pleader against Usury would think it unlawful to be such
a Landlord. There is but one Circumstance wherein this Instance differs
considerably in reference to the matter in quesion, from that of lending Money
on Usury, and that it, Principal Money in the Borrowers hand is liable to
Providential loss in Trading, or otherwise, but Ground is not; which I grant to
be true: But a House built on Ground is liable to be burnt or demolished, and a
Tenant in that Case is bound to build it again, and yet the Ground Landlord
will look for all his Rent; and the same is agreed and expected where a House
is let by Lease upon a Rack-Rent.

Another great Argument why Usury is unlawful, say some, is this, It is hurtful
not only to the Borrower, but to the Commonwealth in general: For when People
borrow upon Usury to carry on their Trades, they will set their Goods at higher
Prices, to enable them to pay Use-money, which otherwise they could afford
cheaper.

But if this Argument be an Argument against Usury, it will much more be so
also against House-rents, for were it not for Rents, all Tradesmen might
afford their Goods Cheaper; and some have as much need to hire Money, as
Houses, to carry on their Trades. But I conceive this Argument is more in
conceit than in reality. It Is true, if all Tradesmen of one and the same Trade
did borrow Money upon Interest, it might occasion some Increase of Prices; but
if only some do, it is plain they must sell as cheap as the rest that do not
borrow Money are willing to do, unless they will lose their Customers. To me it
is very plain, That were there a Law made and truly observed, that no Money
should be lent at Interest, (unless at the same time a Law could be made that
men who have spare Money should be obliged to lend without Usury, which is
never like to be) this would be far more prejudicial to the Commonwealth, and
more occasion the dearness of Prices than the Law to lend upon Interest would;
for in case of a general Restraint of taking Interest, I think it is very
plain, few would lend Money, because they would not only be sure of receiving
no profit by it, but must run the risque of losing it for nothing: Now in this
case, only the great and rich men and Traders, that have Money enough of their
own, would engross the most useful Commodities to themselves, and make their
own Prices; and inferior Traders for want of Moneys to buy at the same Market,
must be forced to buy of them at their price, which might make Commodities as
dear again to common Buyers, as they would have been, in case a general biberty
of lending upon moderate Increase were permitted; when by paying 5 or 6 per
Cent. they may get or save 10 or 20 per Cent. or more. And therefore I am fully
persuaded, were a Law against all Usury put in Execution, the prices of all
sorts of Goods would immediately rise very considerably. And then what must
those many Widows and Orphans, and several others do, that have nothing but
Money to live on, and are not in a capacity to manage Trades, they must not
lend it for profit, they cannot trade with it; why the next thing they must
pitch upon is, to buy Houses or Land with it; this will immediately raise
Houses and Lands to excessive prices as to Purchase, and by consequence to such
low Rents as will not answer the value of the Money, nor give perhaps so much
as 2 or 3 per Cent. improvement: Whether this would be an Advantage to the
Public, I leave to the considering Reader to judge.

And if those who are against all Usury, would have Christians perpetually
obliged to particular Precepts that were given to the Jews in their Laws,
should they not be much more positive from Gospel Precepts to maintain it
unlawful for Christians to swear in any case, or to eat Puddings made with
blood, or any thing that dies by strangling, than out of the Jewish Law to
maintain it unlawful for Christians to lend Money for Increase.

The sum of all is, If moderate Usury or Increase (rightly circumstantiated) be
not in its own nature unlawful, as against Justice, though to require it in
some cases may be against Charity; and if those Precepts the Jews were under,
in this Particular, do not perpetually oblige Christians, any more than those
other Instances of Charity to which they were obliged, then I conclude, It is
the Law of every Christian Country, and the Judgment of a Conscientious Man,
that must state this Matter, what degrees of Interest upon Lending shall be
lawful or unlawful, both in general and in particular Circumstances; and this
Law, we of this Country must have recourse to in this Matter; and (as in Civil
Matters the Gospel commands us to be Subject to every Ordinance of Man for the
Lord's sake, so) we must herein be subject to that which the Wisdom of the
Nation (in the Legislative Power thereof) has determined. And by this Law a
Christian is left at Liberty to lend, either in a way of common Justice for
Increase, or of Kindness or Charity freely, as the Nature and Circumstances of
the Case may require.

Object. I know some object again, The Law of the Land does not allow Usury,
only forbids taking more than so much in the Hundred; therefore there is no
pleading the lawfulness of Usury from the Law.

Now supposing the taking of Increase for lending Money be lawful in its own
Nature to Christians, (which I hope has been sufficiently proved) the next
thing to be considered is, Whether it be convenient, that is, whether the
allowance of a moderate Increase be good for the Nation in general, or not; or
whether it would be better for the Nation that no such Increase were allowed to
be given or taken. I have hinted something already of the Benefit to the
Commonwealth that comes by allowance of Interest, in making Goods cheaper. I
shall now in a few Particulars show some further Advantages thereof to the
Kingdom, which are never like to be obtained by a Prohibition of all Interest:
As,

First, Were it not for the Allowance of a moderate Increase for lending Money,
thousands that want would never be accommodated, which now are.

Secondly, Though most that lend should do it freely, yet they that borrow of
them would in this way be liable to several Inconveniences which may be as
prejudicial to them, if not more than paying Interest; as thus, Suppose a Man
wants a Sum of Money, his Friend tells him he will lend him freely for such a
time perhaps 3 or 6 Months, but if he does not repay it again by that time, he
shall be much injured for the want of it; the Borrower promises to repay it
accordingly; but so it happens, when the time comes, he cannot do it: This
occasions a Quarrel, it may be a Suit between the Lender and him; the Lender
says he is damnified, and ought to have Damage-money given him (for I find
some Anti-usurers themselves do allow that Damage-money ought to be given the
Lender in such Cases) Now who shall be Judge of the Quantity of Damage-money,
and whether the Damage-money (and Charges about it) in many Cases, if not in
most, may not exceed a moderate Interest for the Money during the whole time it
was lent: Especially considering that the Controversy in adjusting the
Proportion of Damage-money, may also it self occasion a Lawsuit, though the
Principal should not.

Thirdly, This is another Inconveniency, People that lend freely for the most
part will not lend their Money for so long a time as the generality of
Borrowers need it; and the Calling in of Money exactly at the times of Payment,
may prove to their greater prejudice in some Circumstances, than paying
Interest for all the time: But now when Money is lent upon moderate Increase,
the Interest-Money goes on though the Day of Payment be past; this is a great
Motive to the Lender to continue the Money as the Borrowers Occasions require.

Fourthly, By borrowing freely, I lay a needless Obligation upon my self to
lend as much Money to the Lender, or to be Surety for him another time; either
of which (in some Circumstances which he or I may be then in) may be very
ensnaring and dangerous to me. Again, how many Children are sent up out of the
Countries every day to be Apprentices in Cities and Towns; and the Parents and
Friends of most of them it may be with difficulty find Money to put them out to
Apprentice, but can give them no Stock to set up their Trades; yet many of
these having been observed to be diligent and careful during their
Apprenticeship, have been Encouraged to set up when out of their Times, and
Moneys offered them (upon paying moderate Interest) to enable them so to do;
and this has been the raising of many Persons, I may say multitudes, which
otherwise must have lived Journey-men or Servants. Again, How many Gentlemen
are there, who have Estates in Land, and but little Money, that have Daughters
to dispose in Marriage, whose Advancements are successfully promoted by
borrowing Money at Interest upon their Father's Estates, which otherwise could
not be effected. Again, what more promotes the Trade and Merchandise of the
Nation than the frequent Lending and Borrowing of Money; for Money is as
requisite to be passed too and fro for the maintaining of Trade, as the
Circulation of the Blood and Spirits is for the preserving of Health in the
Body, as all that have Judgment and Experience in those Affairs know very well.
Now what either equal or probable way is there to furnish such Sums as the
Cases of greater Dealers require, without paying Interest for it. And
therefore, by the way, I see not but that the Trade or Employment of Banking it
self is very Convenient, if not necessary for the present accommodation of
Merchants and other considerable Traders upon several Important Occasions: And
therefore, I think, that upbraiding Reflection which Mr. Jones has quoted from
Bishop Sanderson, namely, That a Man should be born for nothing else but to
tell out Money, and to take in Paper, is but weakly grounded, for those are but
the Instrumental and Subservient part of their main Business, which is or may
be the convenient helping and supplying of other Men's Affairs, and getting
reasonable Advantage to themselves. And if this be a necessary and useful
Calling to a Trading Nation, why is it not as lawful to be telling Money for
that purpose, as to be buying, selling, and turning over Goods for as long a
time.

It is true, Christ drove the Exchangers out of the Temple, so he did the
Sellers of Doves; but he condemned neither of the Callings as unlawful in
themselves, but because of the unsuitableness of the Place: For it seems there
were Bankers of Exchangers in Christ's Time, which he himself alludes to, when
he Censures the slothful Servant for not putting his Talent to such, that so
Christ might have had his own again with Usury: What need I say more, It is
Increase for Money that Encourages to lend for Supplying the present
Necessities of the Government, and will the better enable to furnish Moneys for
the further Supplies of it when they shall be called for.

Now let any man prove, if he can, that so many good Effects would proceed from
a total Prohibition of all Increase for Lending, and whether any suppose
Prejudice or Mischief that may come to a Borrower by paying Interest, can or
ought to be an Argument never to lend at Interest, I am very well satisfied
there are few Instances to be produced of any that have been ruined by
borrowing at Interest, but who would have been ruined also had they borrowed
without Interest, and that there are more Instances of such who have been
ruined by buying of Goods, or paying Rents for Houses or Lands.

I would here also show that Lending Money at such Interest as our Laws allow,
is liable to fewer Deceits or Frauds than selling most sorts of Goods: As
suppose one sells 20 l. worth of Goods for ready Money, the Buyer may be
deceived (and often is) as to the goodness of the Commodity, and for the most
part he is Ignorant of the Sellers profit, neither of which Lending at Increase
is liable to. Again, If the Buyer keeps his Goods a while by him, the Market
may fall (which frequently happens) and then the Goods which cost 20 l. may not
be worth 15 l. but the keeping Money by me never so long does not diminish the
value. Again, In selling Goods a man may return his Money so many times a year,
as to get 20, 30, 40, 50, per Cent. per Annum, or more; whereas in lending
Money I am limited to that moderate Increase per Annum which the Law allows;
nor can I take or exact any more without endangering the loss or forfeiture of
my Principal Money: So that on the Lender's part, though he were a Knave, there
can be no deceit at all (which is the commonest Abuse in Dealing) imposed upon
the Borrower by Lending to him at Interest.

I hope the World will not interpret my Attempt in this Nature, as if I
designed or intended only to show my self an Enemy to Mr. Jones; I am so far
from that, That I bless God for him, and for his Diligence and Faithfulness in
preaching against the Corruptions of the Times: Nor do I think much the worse
of him, for his Mistake or Error in this matter about Usury, (supposing it not
a wilful one) only I think he should have taken more time and consideration
about a Point of so great weight and concernment to many thousands, and well
weighed the Arguments of those many living Saints that are for it, as well as
those dead ones that have been against it: Nor would I be deemed an Enemy to
any truly holy Men or Fathers, that in former Ages have been of his Judgment;
whose great Love to Charity and good Works, (together with their Ignorance of
the Nature of Traffic and Commerce, not considering that more Moneys are
needed for the carrying of it on, that can be obtained by free Loan) in a
Concern of this Nature might easily incline their Judgments to determine in
favor of that Opinion, which they thought would most advance Well-doing,
namely, That the Lending of Money should be always in a way of Charity* and
never in a way of Common Justice; which I doubt not (by what has been said)
will appear to be a Mistake, though it may be called a right hand Error.

But if any Person yet remains unsatisfied with what I have proved and alleged
in Vindication of this Subject of Interest, and thinks fit to make a Reply
thereto, I desire he would distinctly make out and prove, if he can, what
unavoidable Moral Evil or Damage redounds to any Person, or to the Public, by
Giving and Taking Interest for Money; and from which the Practice of it cannot
be freed or separated by any Circumstances.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Ingenious and Diverting Letters of the Lady -- Travels into Spain.
Describing the Devotions, Nunneries, Humors, Customs, Laws, Militia, Trade,
Diet, and Recreations of that People. Intermixed with great variety of Modern
Adventures, and surprising Accidents: being the truest and best Remarks extant
on that Court and Country. In 3 Parts complete. Printed for S. Crouch at the
Corner of Pope's- Head-Alley, Cornhill. 1692.


