A Discourse Of the DUKEDOM of MODENA. CONTAINING The Origin, Antiquity,
Government, Manners, and Qualities
Of the People. As also, The Temperature of the CLIMATE, WITH The Nature and
Fertility of the SOIL.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar. 1674.

A DISCOURSE Of the Dukedom of Modena.
ANTIquITY was so ignorant, as to divide the whole World into two parts only,
viz. ASIA and EVROPE; comprehending Africa under ASIA, as Eratosthenes an
Author of as great esteem as antiquity; some under EVROPE, as Isocrates in his
Panegyrique, and others mentioned in Salust, Lucan, and S. Austin de civitate
Dei: but the most celebrated Division was into three parts; EVROPE, ASIA, and
AFRICA or Libya; and this was approved both by ancient and modern Authors. So
that it appears, Cosmography was unacquainted with any other Division of the
Universe, till that the knowing Genouese, about two Centuries ago, did furnish
it with a Fourth, by his discovery of AMERICA, the most usual, but improper
name: for Columbus, after his ineffectual addresses to the States of Genoua,
Anno 1486, and to Henry the 7th of England, and their absolute refusal; he spun
out six years in patient attendance at the Court of Castile, where at last he
was furnished out with three Vessels more proper for Discovery than Conquest.
And thus he first found it out, and led the way to the rest. But Americus
Vesputius the Florentine, a man old in years, but young in courage, employed
therein by Emanuel King of Portugal, surveyed a great part of the Continent by
the light he had from Columbus the first Discoverer; yet the Florentine proved
the Godfather, and called it AMERICA, to perpetuate his own Name, and eternize
his Memory. John Cabot a Venetian, in behalf of Henry the 7th, discovered all
the North-east coast thereof, and touched many places Americus never saw. And
although these three Italians were by three several Monarchs employed to find
out this Fourth part of the World, it is so vast a Continent, that the Southern
part is to this day altogether unknown; and usually in our Planispheres and
Maps called Terra Australis incognita.

EVROPE as to its Magnitude, (in the opinion of Cosmographers, who run all in
the same current or stream) is inferior to the other three; though to none of
them, if you consider the moderate and wholesome Temperature of the Air,
together with the prodigious fertility of its Soil; the two once-famous Roman
and Greek Monarchies; the Study and Improvement of Arts both Liberal and
Mechanical; the Affluence of all things that conduce either to the Support or
Pleasure of Man; or above all, the Purity and Sincerity of the Christian
Religion universally professed in all the Dominions thereof; besides the
well-regulated Government of their Realms, their Kings being Absolute Monarchs,
but not Arbitrary Tyrants; and the men happy Subjects, not miserable Slaves;
which keeps us from that Tyranny, Slavery, Injustice, frequent Bribery, Beggary
and Barbarism, which like an Inundation has overflown all the Asiatick,
African, and American parts, when they groaned under the Yoke of their
Idolatrous and Sanguinary Princes and Governors. Par nihil Europe, nihil est
secundum.

ITALY is is a Region, that, among many other advantageous Elogies, is on all
hands held to be the Eden of Europe, the Garden or Paradise of this North-west
part of the World. This Peninsula or Demi-Island, formerly the absolute and
redoubted Empress of the major part of the then-known habitable World, yet may
compare, as now it is, nay exceed the most of the other Kingdoms of Asia,
Africa, or America. It Is situate in a most Temperate Clime; and for the
amoenity of its Cities, the commodiousness for Commerce and Negotiations, the
deliciousness of its Fountains and Aqueducts, the fertility of its
well-cultivated Fields, insomuch that in some places they have three Harvests
in one year; the Uniformity and Stateliness of Fabriques, and the rare
Architecture and rich Furniture and Ornaments of its Temples, and many other
Delicacies to gratify the gusto as to Fruits and rare Wines, with other
Varieties too numerous to be crowded into the narrow confines of our intended
Discourse.

And in this Paradise or Garden of Europe there is a small Terroir, or pleasant
spot of ground, known by the name of MODENA; where we will take the fresco for
some time, and give you our Sentiments upon a strict Survey of what shall occur
as observable during this our Promenade; and thereupon make some Remarques,
which will prove the most useful Materials, and most conducive to the
compliment of this our present Essay.

MODENA is the Modern appellation; but it is better known to the Ancients by
the name of Mutina; as Livie, Cicero, Pliny, etc. Some read it Motina; as
Antoninus and Dio: Strabo and Ptolemy (...) commonly Modena, a movendo (says
Merula in his Cosmography) ut quidam insulse conjiciunt, eo quod Diluvio
quondam tota fuerit submersa, qua de re dignus Autore suo Versiculus.

Mutina submersa fuit olim gurgitis unda. Called Modena (a foolish conceit)
because it was once drowned with a Deluge. The more probable Conjecture is,
that it was named a movendo, because it is at this day somewhat removed from
the situation of the ancient City, which the Longobards did totally ruinate
and demolish.

The City of Mutina, The Dukedom of Modena at present contains the City of
Modena and Reggio, with the Lands and Territories thereunto adjoining. They are
both pleasantly situated in that part of Lombardy called Cispadana, or as in
their own Dialect vulgarly. Diqua del Po, on this side of the river Po.
now MODENA, was first erected by the Etrurians or Tusci, now called Toscans a
people of Italy; and they waging War with the Galli Boii, were expelled thence
by them, who after that possessed it; and they being profligate by the
Victorious Arm of the Roman Conquerors, it was by them made a Colony, together
with Parma, in the 570 or 571 year after the Building of Rome, as Livie and
other Historians affirm, ( Quintus Fabius Labio and Marcus Claudius being at
that time Consuls) who in several places make very honorable mention of it; an
infallible testimony that it was both rich and potent: which truth is more at
large confirmed by the various Inscriptions and ancient Marbles that are yet
everywhere extant, and exposed to the view of all Travelers.

This City was sufficiently illustrated and made famous in those times, for
the first Battle between Antonie and C. Octavianus Caesar, who was then but a
Stripling or Tyro in War, and not above Eighteen years, and yet made Head of a
new League against Antonius, whom the Senate looked upon with an ill eye, as a
common and dangerous Enemy. This happened in the year 711, when Antonius
besieged C. Brutus in this City; but by the assistance of Caesar Octavianus he
gained the Victory. The managing of the whole War was left to Hirtius and
Pansa, at that time Consuls. The fortune of the day was so well managed on both
sides, that Antonie lost the Field, and the Consuls their Lives; Caesar
Octavianus remaining absolute Commander of a puissant and numerous Army, into
whose favor he by his dexterity so cunningly insinuated himself, and made so
good improvement of his Talent, and such advantage of the opportunity, that
this proved the Basis and Foundation of his future Grandeur. But afterward,
when the said C. Octavianus, M. Antonius, and M. Aemilius Lepidus entered into
the Society of the Triumvirate, thereupon the City had very course usage, and
was exposed to very great Slaughter, by Constantine the Great, because that it
favored Maxentius: but the Victory being once obtained, it was restored, and
the Christians became possessed of it; it was dignified with an Episcopal Seat,
and Geminianus a Learned man made Bishop thereof. After this, it was reduced to
ashes by the Inundation of the Goths and Lombards, a furious and barbarous
people, as S. Ambrose relates the Story, affirming that he saw Modena with the
rest of the adjacent places upon the Via Aemilia, suffer a total devastation.
But these Barbarians were afterward expulsed by the Emperor Charles the
Great, who established his son Pepin King of Italy; and then the Citizens of
Modena, whose names were engraven on the gates, quitting their sad but secure
Retirements, whither they confined themselves during the distractions and
turmoils that Italy then labored under, took counsel how to rebuild this
City: and in process of time they erected it in that form as now it appears
in. They being now their own Masters, free from the Vassalage of an insulting
Enemy, and solely at their own disposal, and having the Jurisdiction within
themselves, they only retained the Roman name; but yet were not so much at
rest, but they had several Skirmishes with their Neighbors, especially the
people of Bologna, about the Limits and Bounds of their Country.

During the Distractions and Troubles of Italy between the Emperor and the
Popes, Guido the Popes Legate, and then Bishop thereof, consigned it over to
Azo one of the House of Este, Lord of Ferrara, Anno 1304, the Pope consenting
to it, upon the annual payment of the Tribute of 10000 Crowns. Since which time
it has been for the most part in the power of that House; Bersius Marquess of
Ferrara being created Duke of Mutina by the Emperor Frederick the third. Anno
1312, she had the Family of the Mirandulae her Masters, by the Authority of the
Emperor, anno 1319. the Bonacelsii Tyrants of Mantua being compelled thereunto
by the help and assistance of the Guelphi. Anno 1331, the Pii governed her, at
first under the name of Captains, afterward of Princes. Furthermore, anno
1336, the Atestini or Family d'Estee succeeded them, who were Marquesses of
Ferrara, by the Popes leave and permission; and they governed it till the year
1510, when Pope Julius 11 took the City, and gave it to Maximilian 1,
Emperor, by whom it was afterward, anno 1514, hypothequ'd to Pope Leo the
tenth, for 10000 Crowns. Lastly, in the year 1527, when Clement the Pope was
besieged by the lmperialists, it was retaken by the Victorious Arms of the
Atestini, or Family of Este, by whom it was increased with Buildings, Walls,
and fenced with Ditches; and grew up by degrees to the present splendor, state
and grandeur.

Thus far the ancient Authors, particularly Livy; and the modern also, as
Blondus Corius, Platina, Sabellicus, Volaterranus, and Leandro; besides what we
find in the Annals of the City, and Bologna likewise.

MODENA is marshalled by Pliny in the eighth Region of Italy, and called by
Ptolemy a City of Gallia Togata; being washed by the Rivulet or Brook Formigo.
It was heretofore situated somewhat higher toward the Mountains than now it is
at present, as appears by the ruins of some antiquated edifices standing
somewhat distant from the ancient Modena, as Leandro intimates more at large.

The City is noble and splendid, of an orbicular form, seated in a Plain not
far from the Apennines, which are called the Back, or rather Backbone of
Italy, because, like the Spina in the body, they divide Italy into two parts or
sides, West or North. It is beautified with a Cathedral Church, the doors
whereof are worthy admiration for many things, but particularly for the famous
Marble-statues of Adam and Eve. It flourishes with the dignity of an
Episcopacie, which is subject to the Archbishop of Bologna; and is also adorned
with an Academy, in which Azo the Civilian taught the Imperial Law. It is a
pleasant Soil, abounding with Fruits and Grains of all sorts, and the best
Wine, called Vinum Tribianum. This City was greatly amplified by Alphonso the
second, Duke of Este. It Is populous, and the inhabitants are noble and
ingenuous, and better natured than most of Italy; they being quick in their
resolutions, easy to be pacified when injured, debonnair and courteous in
their entertainment and treating of strangers. Though they are ill and
foolishly treated by some overcensorious Italians, when injuriously nickname it
Modena lapazza, Foolish Modena; it being a malicious and undeserved reflection
upon that people. The females are of a meek and patient temper, neither too
amorous, nor too coy; too courtly, nor too peevish; as they are in other
places, for the generality: They are very much applauded also by Mr. Warcup, in
his History of Venice, where he enumerates the several Cities of Italy in
Verse, translated out of the Italian; and concludes thus:

Foligno's candi'd streets most pleasant are,
The Ladies in Fano so smoothe and fair,
That said they are from heaven sent to be:
But Modena more happy is than she.
Modena has been the Nursery of many famous and learned men; some whereof are
taken notice of by Nicolaus Leorinus Silesius, a learned and elegant Poet, in
his Catalogue of Learned men that flourished in his Age.

Vrbs Venetum Bembos loquitur Balbosque Poetas,
Naugeriosque suos;
Mantua Virgilii, Capilupos numine plenos
Castiliosque Duces;
At Molsas Mutina and Sadoletos jactat alumnos,
Cortesiosque suas, etc.
Modena has produced these eminent persons:

Hercules Rangonus. James Sadolet a man of exquisite Learning, Gregory
Cortesius of the Order of Benedictines, Thomas Badias of the Fraternity of
Praedicants, who were elected Cardinals by Pope Paul the third. She is also
ennobled by Charles Sigonius a most learned man, and an eminent Historian. She
is the Mistress of Vgo Rangonus Praesul of Reggio, of Francis Maria Molza, John
Franciscus Furnius. It has bred up some that were very much renowned in War;
as Nicolas and Gerard Rangonus, Hannibal and Guido both sons of Nicolas. There
are many Noble Families in the Dominions of the Duke; as the Pii, the
Mirandulani, Bonacelsii, etc. of which we shall speak more at large in the
conclusion. But above all, the Family d'Este who are now Lords of it; the City
being very much ennobled and enriched by the constant residence of the Duke.
Nor is she without her Citadel, wherein according to credible report there are
stored up Arms for Forty thousand men at least: a very considerable business!

The next thing that falls under our consideration and description, is the
City of Reggio in this Dukedom of Modena. Aemilia dein via pergenti, dextra
Seciae ripa omissa Regium Lepidi occurrit, ripae Crustuli laevae adpositum,
says Merula in his Cosmography. As to its name, it is called by Tully in his
Epistle to Cassius and others Regium Lepidi: by Tacitus, Regium Lepidum: by
Strabo, l. 5. (...). by Ptolemy, (...). by Antoninus, Regium only, and at this
day, it is commonly known by the name of Reggio. In this place heretofore there
was Forum Lepidi, as Festus observes. The inhabitants are called Regienses,
from Lepidus in Pliny; as also Regini, a Regio Julio.

Nor has Heaven been more propitious to this City, or Fortune more favorable
than to Modena: for it has run almost the same risque and tasted of the same
misery and misfortune. It was at first made a Roman Colony, as well as Modena;
M. Aemilius Lepidus who gave it a name, T. Ebusius Carus, and L. Quinctius
Crispinus, being then Triumviri. It was destroyed by the Goths, when they made
incursions into, and embarassed all Italy, under Alarico their King: the
Citizens were constrained, by reason of the fury of an enraged and barbarous
enemy, to abandon it, and flee to more secure retirements and places, till the
Lombards were conquered and beaten out of Italy by Charles the Great, about the
year 800; at what time by degrees the Citizens returned to their desolate
City, and began to restore, repair, and immure it with a strong Wall. It was
governed by it self for some time in liberty, after the manner of the other
Cities in Italy; and this freedom and liberty continued till the year 1286, and
then it came under the Dominion of Earls and Princes; and 'twas first under the
command of the Earls of Canosse, then those of Este, the Caesar's, the Kings of
France; then it was subject to the Papal Sea, and had also the Foliani,
Scaligers, Gonzagae, and Ottobuoni for its Lords. So Blondus, Antoninus,
Platina, and Sabellicus. So far Morula. Heylin says, When they were under the
command of the Earls of Canosse, they grew weary of that Yoke, and recovered
their Liberty; which being unable to maintain in those bustling times, they
gave themselves to Obizo the father of Azo, anno 1292. and after that, in the
year 1326, to the Sea of Rome. Passing through many hands, it was at last sold
for 60000 Ducats to the Visconti Lords of Milain, an. 1370; and in the end
recovered by the House of Este, anno 1409, and gave the Title of a Duke to
Borsius Marquess of Ferrara, whom Frederick the 3. made Duke of Modena and
Reggio, anno 1452. The Successors of Borsius held the Estate together, till
the death of Alphonso the first Duke, who dying without lawful issue, anno
1592, left his Estate to Caesar d'Este his Nephew by a natural son, called
Alphonso also; between whom and Pope Clement the 8, a War was threatened for the
whole; but at last comprimised upon these Conditions: That the Church of Rome
should have Ferrara, with all the Lands and Territories appertaining to it, as
an Estate anciently held of that Sea: And that Modena and Reggio being Imperial
Feifs, should remain to Caesar, but to be held in Fee of the Papal Throne: Duke
Caesar to have leave to carry away all his movables, to sell such of his Lands
as were not of the ancient Demain of the Dukedom; and to have one half of the
Ordnance and Artillery. By which Agreement, the Cities of Modena and Reggio
became a new-erected State, distinct and independent of any other, each City
being well Fortified, Garisoned, and furnished with Ordnance for defense
thereof. But what they yield unto the Prince in the way of Revenue, and what
Force he is able to raise out of his Estate, I cannot positively determine: but
by the Tribute formerly paid unto the Popes for the City of Mutina, (now
Modena) and the rich Territories of both Towns, and the great Revenues of the
Dukes of Ferrara; I conceive they cannot yield less than 100000 Crowns of
yearly Income. Thus far Heylin in his Cosmography.

Reggio (says Merula) Vrbs est lauta, nobilis, frequens; solo sita valde
fertili; loco pulchro, amoeno, planeque regio, unde illi quorundam judicio
nomen. This City is built on the Via Aemilia, and named Regium Lepidi by
Strabo, Cicero, Cornelius Tacitus, and other Authors. By whom it was built, is
not certainly known; though it is reported by some to be erected by the Toscans,
who being expulsed, as Livy and Polybius affirm, the Gauls or French possessed
it; and afterward it was made a Colony by M. Aemilius Lepidus, one of the
Triumviri; T. Ebutius Carus, and L. Quinctius Crispinus, being the other two,
as is before mentioned. Some contend that Marius Lepidus one of the said
Triumvirate, who divided the Roman Empire, was its Founder; others that it was
built long before his time, but by him made a Colony.

It Is a noble, splendid, and well-peopled City, abounding with all things: it
has fair and spacious streets, with sumptuous structures; as the magnificent
Church of S. Prospero Bishop of this City, where his corpse is devoutly kept;
having a very plentiful Revenue, and being adorned with excellent
Portraictures, but particularly with some Pieces drawn by the famous Correggio,
worthy of eternal Fame. In the walls of the Orchard of the R. R. P. P. de
Servi, was not long since discovered an Image of the holy Virgin, held in great
esteem there for its Miracles, with uncommon and superstitious (I had almost
said idolatrous) veneration.

Reggio abounds with all necessaries for the use of man; the Soil is
extraordinary fertile of all manner of Grain, and all sorts of Fruits. White
Wines it has good store, and a sort of Wine called Vinum Helvolum, of its
color, being between a red and white. It Is very much famed and taken notice
of, for the rare art of making Spurs, the best in Italy; and other Mechanical
pieces in Ivory, politely and exactly done according to art.

The Reggians are a people very courteous and affable, of a good mein and
presence, of present wit, and quick apprehension, vivacious and sprightly, and
to be molded and brought to any great or august employment. The Women, as
those of Modena, are very mild, and the finest in all Italy.

It is adorn d with a Bishopric subject to the same Archbishop as Modena; and
has brought forth many famous men, who have rendered it very illustrious; as D.
Maximus one of its Bishops, Guido Sagaranus, Philip Casolus, James Columbus,
Charles Ruinus, Francis Belius, Julius Scarlatinus, famous Lawyers: Sebastianus
Carradus, profoundly learned in the Greek and Latin Tongues; and Bartholomew
Crottus, a great Poet of his time. It contains many noble Families; as the
Signori Canossae, Manfredi, Fogliani, and Sessi, who possess great Lordships
there, and have very noble and large Castles for their Apartments or
Mannor-houses.

Now I have given you an account-of these two capital Cities of the great
Dukedom of Modena: I will cast my eye with a retrospect upon some other famous
Castles, Towns and Places within their Territories, and acquaint you with some
passages and rarities that may merit the observation, and gratify the
curiosity of the diligent and industrious Enquirer, that will make it his
business to pry into them.

On the left side of the River Po, says my Author, there stands the Arx
Stellata, a Castle fabriqued by Nicolas 3. of the House of Este, who was
Marquess of Ferrara: but the greatest part of it was in process of time
overthrown by the Legions of Pope Julius the 11, and the Venetians. And upon
the Bank of the River Po is seen a new-built Town called Rovero, a neat and
large place.

Toward the South of Modena, under the Apennines, stand Formagine, Spezzano;
and ten miles off, Sassulo, a Noble and civil place, with a sumptuous Castle of
the Family of the Pii, watered by the River Secchia, where is also a fair Church
dedicated to the blessed Virgin.

About half a mile short of Sassulo, is the Temple of the Saint Maria
Sassutina, so called from the Castle Sassulo situated at the very foot of the
Apennine hills or mountains on the left side of the banks of Secchia.

Upon these Mountains stand many other Villages and Hamlets, and are plainly
visible in the Eastern part of Modena.

These Castles were formerly subject to several Lords, and particularly to them
of Monte, who were very powerful at that time in these Countries, and possessed
all the Places in the Graffignana, which confines on Bologna; and among the
rest, Sestola and Fanano. Westward, the Alps of San Pellegrine appear to the
view; and the Castle Acquario, famous for its Baths, and their Medicinal
waters; and from thence it is probably conjectured it takes its denomination.
Then turning to the South, runs the Tyrrhene Sea, somewhat near Bologna. On the
banks of the River Panaro stand Vetro and Spilimberto, formerly called Spinum
Lamberti, two Castles belonging to the Signori Rangoni. Four miles distant from
thence you find Vignola, a Town dignified with a Marquisate, subject to the
Signori Buoncompagni, which borders upon the Bolognian Territories.

Toward the North is situated the most Noble Castle, or rather Imperial City,
called Carpi; which may deservedly come in competition with many Cities, if you
consider the populousness or ingenuity of the People, and the superfluity of
all necessaries. It is honored with the title of a Principality, and was for
many years enjoyed by the Signori Pii; but at this day it is under the Duke of
Modena.

Then there is to be seen the ample, noble, and opulent Monastery of S.
Benedict Podolironus, built by Boniface the father of Countess Mathilde, and
enlarged by the said Countess, whose Sepulcher is there likewise. And
Guardistallo, famous for two Councils held there, one under Pope Urban the 8,
and the other under Paschal the 11: witness Platina in the History of their
Lives, and Blondus in his fourteenth Book of Historical Relations.

On the Banks of the River Po, somewhat farther, Brescello fronts you, called
Brixillum by Pliny, in his third Book; and Plutarch, in the Life of Otho the
Emperor: by Ptolemy, (...) and by Tacitus, Suetonius, Antoninus, and Paulus
Diaconus. It was formerly a City, says Leander, and taken by Anthare King of
the Lombards, who dismantled and levelled the walls with the ground, according
to Paulus Diaconus in his Continuation of Eutropius, l. 28. and Blondus in the
8 Book of his History.

On the left hand of the banks of the River Lenza stands Tanedo, named by Livy
in many places, and Pliny (who affirms that there was a man there 120 years
old) Tannetum; by Polybius, Tanetus; by Ptolemy, (...) and hence it is that
Pliny calls the people Tanetani. It was subverted by Cese King of the Lombards,
says Paulus Diaconus; was restored, and reduced to the form that now it
appears in, being at present a Village or Hamlet.

In the Eastern part of Modena is a Chanel, upon which you may pass by Boat 8
miles at length, till you arrive at Finale: then going on the River Panaro,
where the Chanel disembarques it self into that River, is seen Buon Porto, and
San Felice, much commended for generous Wines. Along the Aemilian way, three
miles from Modena, runs the River Panaro, near which are the confines of the
Modonesi and Bolognesi, where Claudius the Consul coping with his enemies, took
15000 Prisoners, and 700 Ligurians. Nay farther, in this very place Rotari King
of the Lombards routed the Roman Army, with the slaughter of 7000 Soldiers.
Here also the Forces of the Modonesi being discomfited by the Bolognesi, Euzo
King of Sardegna, the son of Erderick the second, was taken Prisoner. On the
other side of Panaro is Novantola, with a Monastery famous both for its
antiquity as well as stateliness, founded by Anselmo, nearly related to Astolfo
King of the Lombards, who was a redoubted Captain in their Army.

Near the Aemilian way, between Bologna and Novantola, stands Santa Agata, a
Castle erected by Barbarossa the Emperor; and Crevalcuore, formerly known by
the name of Allegracuore, where the Army of Bernabo Visconte Lord of Milain was
defeated and put to the Rout.

Next you go to San Giovanni, a Country very plentiful of Wheat and other
Grain. On the left side of Via Aemilia stand Castiglione and Castelfranco, 15
miles off of Bologna; where some few years past there was raised a most
impregnable Fort by Pope Urban the 8, and from him called Vrbano. Near this
Fort is the Foro di Galli, where Hirsius and Pansa, two Roman Consuls, were
engaged with M. Antonius; who obtained a glorious Victory, but withal their
mortal wounds, whereof they both died upon the place, as is prementioned. Then
there appear Purmanio, Bazanio, and Crepellano, three pleasant Castles seated
on those hillocks that are at the foot of the Apennines.

On the left hand of the Aemilian way, five miles from Bologna, are the Rivers
Lavinio and Ghirondon, which meeting together with mutual embraces, jointly
environ Forcelli in a triangular form, being distant from Via Aemilia one mile;
where Octavianus, M. Antonius, and Marius Lepidus, shared the Monarchy between
them. This Forcelli is now a Peninsula, though it may be perceived to have been
an Islet formerly. Afterward these two Rivers disgorge themselves into the Po.

Near Bologna there is seen a Stone Bridge of great length, which bestrides the
River from one side to the other; from whence it is but a small and easy mile
to Bologna.

Now we come to the places contiguous and adjacent to Reggio; near which there
appear certain Hills that erect their lofty crest so pleasantly, as does create
delight in all Passengers; no less beautified and adorned with several fair
Towns and Villages, than delicious Wines and Fruit Trees. Toward Parma you may
take a view of a Castle (strengthened by its site) where Mathilde the Countess
preserved Pope Gregory the seventh from the snares and ambushes prepared for
him by the Emperor Henry the fourth, an enemy to the Church of Rome; but
afterward he (being a tender-conscienc'd Religioso) repented of this imaginary
and supposititious Crime, and was led a Royal dance by his Confessor barefoot
and bare-headed in the midst of Winter, through Ice and Snow, from this place
to the said Pope, to implore a Pardon for this his Peccadillo, and obtained it
with a courteous reception. A remarkable Instance, and notorious Precedent of
the Tyranny, Haughtiness, and Vainglory of his Ironical, nick-nam'd Holiness,
who dares presume so proudly and imperiously to insult over, nay buffoon a
puissant Potentate, making him foot it bare in the depth of a hard Winter; to
the Idolatrous City of his residence; and thereby run the risque of losing his
life, to gain a fruitless and insignificant Pardon. But this he must do, or
forfeit all his Regalia, and be daily menaced with that silly Scar-crow, the
Thunder of Excommunication. Thus Monarchy grows consumptive, hangs the head,
droops, and dwindles away to nothing, and so expires; King is a mere empty
name, or the more glorious synonyma of Vassals, and Prince the more splendid
name of Slave. Thus the Scepter warps to the Crosier, the Emperors Hat vails
to the Bishops Mitre, and the single does obeisance to the triple Crown. Thus
Regal Authority, whose tender neck was ever unaccustomed to the burden of a
tame condescension, puts on the heavy Yoke of Pontifical rigorous imposition.
Thus here you see the great most Christian Ring crouch to Antichrist, or being
Crown-fallen as well as Crest-fallen. Thus Majesty it self inclines the
reverend head, stoops low with a reverential bow to kiss that vulgarly-ador'd
Pantofle, which frequently proves but the gaudy covering of a Gowty toe.

At this day, the most Noble Family of the Canossae are Lords of this Castle,
and the rest that encircle it; and a small distance from this, stand the
Castles and other places that belong to the Signori Manfredi.

Keeping the way on the Mountains, you come to Graffignana, where Castelnuovo
is to be seen, which in times of yore was the Birthplace of many Illustrious
persons; and in this our modern age, of Giulio Vrbano; Doctor and Apostolic
Prothonotary, who lived in great repute and esteem among Princes Popishly
inclined, and was highly applauded by the Fry of the Septuagint of Cardinals,
that pay homage to, and revere the pretended and triple-Crown'd Successor of
the Fisherman; who did a long time officiate as Vicar General, in lieu of the
Miter'd Cardinal Linga Carnaro Bishop of Padua; and in that quality died, anno
1592. (May the same mortality and good fortune, in God's due time, attend the
whole Conclave, that is my Litany.) His brother Urban was Captain of the
Venetian Militia, and Filippo Vrbano their Nephew.

In your return to the Aemilian way, occurs the Castle of Scandiano, dignified
with the Title of a Marquisate, subject to the Signori Feni, noble and renowned
Vicentines. On the left hand lies the Castle Roldo, belonging to the House of
the Sessi, a Feudatory of the Emperor; with San Martino, Gonzaga the most
splendid Village belonging to the Gonzagae Princes of Mantua, and Muvilara.

Between Modena and Reggio, Correggio appears, not far from the River Lenza; a
noble Castle, well governed, and as well peopled: it was called a city of the
Empire, and appertains to the most Illustrious Family of the Correggii: and
where the River Lecchia dichotomizeth the Via Aemilia, stands a very strong
Castle called Ruberia, or Rubiera, by the Learned Herberia, erected as some
conjecture by the Boiardi, and as others imagine by the Rubrii of Parma; which
had serveral Masters till the year 1523, and then it fell into the hands of the
Dukes of Ferrara, and was made famous by the birth of Antonius Codrus, a most
polite Grecian, and expert Latinist, being a man of great Learning and vast
Parts. This Castle is strongly fortified with a well-made Bulwark or Rampart,
and surrounded with many Hills, which add much grace and beauty to its
situation, and renders the prospect very delightful. From hence you pass into a
spacious and good Road, very commodious for all Travelers that steer their
course that way, and design to arrive at the capital City Modena, of which we
have already given you a large and exact description.

In this Tract there are four Apennine hills, and as many Cities which are
indebted to the Countess Mathilde for their foundation, viz. Bibianello,
Castelvitreo, Monte Zano, and Monte Luzco; all under the command and
jurisdiction of the Earls of Canossae.

Having given you a court and true account of the Government, Riches, Force,
Religion, Manners and Qualifications of the People of this ancient and
illustrious Dukedom, as also the nature and quality of the Soil and Climate; I
shall by way of Corollary close all with a short relation of the Original,
Antiquity, and Genealogy of the Dukes of the House of Este, and bring them
down by descent to the most Illustrious person who at present is the undoubted
and lawful Prince of the Dukedom of Modena.

The Princes of the House of Este have been so considerable, and so much taken
notice of both in Peace and War, that John Baptista Pigna has with much
industry and learning composed eight Books of the original, noble exploits and
transactions of this Princely Family in Italy and other countries.

As to their original he says, that Ateste, Commander of the Heneti (now
Venetians) after the sacking and destruction of Troy, was driven into these
parts with a considerable Navy, and built the City Atestia or Ateste, of his
own name; and he called the whole Tract of ground Venetia: but the Latin
degenerating by degrees from its purity, the City lost the primitive e name of
Atestia, and sensibly shrunk into that of Este. This Atestes descended from the
Atii, of the Poblilian Tribe in Rome, who because they did espouse the Quarrel
of the Caesar's, did obtain so much grace and favor as to be Lords not only of
their own Country, but also of all the Territories of Venice. And here the
Atestini (for so they were called of old) began to b e in reputation: and these
Princes do produce their Chronology of 1200 years, to manifest and testify
their Grandeur in a continued Series down to this present Age.

Thus the Atii became Masters of a great part of Venice when Ateste was their
capital City of Residence: and the Roman Caesar's being then accustomed to
create a Magistracy consisting of eleven of the chief Citizens, and sometimes
a greater number, (who were also called Decuriones, because at the first
institution ten only were required) Atius the son of C. of the last Race, and
the first Author of the Family of the Atestini, did exercise this Magistracy
there. And this the Inscription of an old Stone does sufficiently prove, which
to this day is preserved by these Princes. This C. Atius had two sons;
Aurelius, and Flavius.

Ateste being thus built, and the Metropolis of Venetia, was called afterward
Este, and had four Gates opposed to the four quarters of the heaven; the Black,
the White, the Triumphal, and the Capitoline Gate, in the Romilian Tribe, says
the Author. It was founded by the Atii, ruined by Acarinus, and restored by
Aldoardus; and then 'twas made an Earldome, afterward created a Marquisate,
and enlarged; besieged by the Paduans, taken by Ezelinus, recovered by Azo,
burnt by Ezelinus, possessed by those of Padoa, and then restored to Azo, and
afterward to Albertus.

Thus you have in short a brief Narrative of the ancient Atii, the original of
the Atestini, or Estenses, as our Modern Authors write them; which is the most
known name; and they are usually called the Dukes of Este.

The Family d'Este, at present Dukes of Modena, which are accounted in the
number of the 7 Great Princes of Italy, according to the ancient Division,
which are, the Pope, King of Spain, Duke of Savoy, Toscany, Modena, Parma and
Montoa; they derive their Pedigree from Allo Marquess of Este who took upon him
the Surname (which the Family is known by to this day) of the City Este; and
still appertains to them de jure. He married Alda daughter to the Emperor Otho
the first; which happened an. 1000. and he had with her for Dower Modena and
Reggio. Theobaldo d'Este, Otho's Grandchilde, was seized of Ferrara in the year
1055, from Pope John the 12: but they were disseiz'd and absolutely dispossessed
of it by Clement the 8, anno 1598, after the decease of Alfonso the second, for
want of lawful Issue male: yet Caesar d'Este was then in being, who was son of
Alfonso by Laura Ferraress; and he offered to clear it by manifest proof, that
his father was lawfully married to his mother, and he the legitimate Heir. But
the Pope was too hard for him, being surely possessed of that which he so
greedily thirsted after. And that Family still lays claim to it by a legal
pretension. B ut the holy Father (and he you know is infallible) will prove him
to be a natural son.

Yet maugre all this opposition, the Duke is still in possession of the
Dukedoms of Modena and Reggio, the Principalities of Carpi and Correggio, the
Earldom of Roli, and the Lordships of Sassevil, Garfagna, and Frignano, by the
late Treaty of Pisa. Here was indeed a dispute between him and the Papal Crown
about the Valleys of Comachio; but this was not so hot, b ut it cooled at
length, and was decided upon these Conditions: The Prince being to receive
400000 Crowns for them; which were accordingly paid, and 40000 more for
damages, and some other advantageous terms. These Lands which we have before
specified, together with those which he possesses in the Dukedom of Ferrara,
yield him annually full 500000 Crowns. All his Dominions are contiguous, and
joining close one to the other; which renders him more considerable; and his
strength and force consists in the number of his people. Carfagnana alone
(being a Province belonging to him) is reported to have fourscore and odd
places well walled about, besides several other Strongholds. He is able upon
urgent occasions to lead into the Field 20000 of the Infantry, and 1000 of the
Cavalry well armed and accoutred. And farther, he can without any
inconveniencie whatsoever maintain and keep half of that number. His His
Country, it is true, and cannot be denied, lies open to several bordering
Princes; not for want of good places and well-fortified Castles, for he has
many seated at a very convenient distance; but the reason is, because his
Terroir or Land lies level, and upon even ground.

The Princes of Modena follow the general Maxims of their Neighbors, viz. to
keep a good correspondence with Venice, which was always reputed the
Protectress of Italian Liberty: but since the loss of Ferrara, they kept close
to the Spaniard, till their Interest of late wrought a change upon their
inclinations. For Duke Francis was in the late Italian Wars made General of the
French; and Mazarine's Niece married to Prince Almerigo his son, who has left
a young son to succeed him. All things at present are managed by the advice of
Cardinal d'Este, Protector of the French Interest at Rome, and the sole
Promoter of the late Union of his House to the French Crown. He is Uncle to the
now Duke of Modena; a very active and stirring person, and has made the world
speak honorably of him, for his actions both in Peace and War. He is
extraordinarily well skilled in the art of concealing his resentments, and
understands the old Motto: Qui nescit dissimulare, etc. At Rome he keeps his
Palace with more pomp and splendor than any of the Cardinalate: and though
it is very much frequented by the Nobility, and a numerous train of people, yet
they are all constantly and well paid. He is a Zealot in the French Cause; by
whose friendship his Family is enriched and well moneyed, by reason of the late
Generalship, as also the Country: for the Soldiers took up their
Winter Quarters in Modena; which occasioned a great resort of the chief
Officers, as well as inferior persons; and this did help the poor Populace to
pay the Gabels, with which they are heavily burdened. At present there is one
of the Name and Relation, Carlo d'Este; a Knight of the Order of the Fleece,
who attended on the Empress.

The Duke of Modena has this advantage beyond most Italian Princes, that some
of his Subjects have Feifs of the Empire. There are many great Families; as,
the rich Earls di San Paolo, the Bentivogli, Rangoni, Buoncompagni; the
Marquesses Spilimberto, Peppoli, Gualengo, di Vignola, and Gualteri; the Earls
Caprari, San Martino, di Molsa, di Malvisia, Montecuculi, Tassoni, Ferrareze,
di Conoscia, and some others. But all Princes and Republics in Italy, the
Venetian solely excepted, do homage, or pay Tribute to the Pope or Emperor;
and the Duke of Modena among the rest does Homage to the Emperor for his whole
State. Ranuccio the Duke of Parma was married to the sister of the late Duke,
she being his second Wife, his former dying without Issue.

The present Duke of Modena, Francis the second, is very young; so that we have
nothing to mention of his Person: and if he were of years, we must say of him,
as of other Princes of Italy, They are extremely reserved, live very retiredly,
cautiously receiving Foreigners; so that strangers rarely have admission into
their Courts, or free access to their Persons for any continuance. They live a
kind of recluse and private life, affording no matter of observation to the
inquisitive that visit foreign Countries.

JOSEPHA-MARIA d'Este (at present the Illustrious Duchess of York) is Sister
to the abovementioned Francis Duke of Modena, and daughter of Laura Martinozza
the now Duchess Dowager, by whom she was accompanied to Dover, where her
Nuptials were solemnly celebrated, being Married by the Reverend Dr. Crew,
Bishop of Oxford, to the most Illustrious Prince, his Royal Highness JAMES Duke
of York, whom God preserve.

To conclude all: The Arms of the House of Este, (the present Duke of Modena
being of that Noble and Illustrious Family) is a Coat for its strangeness much
taken notice of, and is thus Blazoned.

The Arms are Palewise, of three Pieces. First, Party per Fess in the Chief,
Or: an Eagle displayed, Sables; membred, langued, and crowned, Gules; and in
base Azure, three Flowers de Lis within a Bordure indented, Or, and Gules.
Secondly, Gules two Keys in Saltier, the one Or, the other Argent, charged in
Fess with an Escutcheon of pretense, Azure, supporting an Eagle of the third
membred, and crowned of the second: over all, in Chief, a Papal Crown Or,
garnished with sundry Gems Azure and Purple. Thirdly: The third as the first,
counterplaced.

Now this Coat, upon the failer of the House of Ferrara, belongs to the Family
d'Este, since Dukes of Modena and Reggio.

FINIS.

