Dr. B -- t's Farewell, CONFESSOR To the late King of Poland, Upon his
Translation to the Sey of Hungary.
SInce the fall of our late King Tapsky of famous Memory, our Affairs in Poland
have gone down the Wind, and very much against the Stream. The Conspiracy being
detected has turned the Current against us, for where Rebellion does not
thrive, there is no Sanctuary for the Rebel. Then farewell Poland, and hey for
the Coast of Hungary, there is the Seat of Rebellion, and therefore the
Prosperous Refuge for Rebels. Thither Prince Perkinaski, Grayaski,
Armsringcaski, the Chief Princes and Magstrates of Tapskys Kingdom of Poland
are sled before, and thither will I their Spiritual Guide and Confessor follow.
I Prophecy a Mortallyty of the Saints, and that some whining Fool will betray
all at last with a pitiful Confession in my Absence, or if I should stay, it
is Ten to one whither I gain another Proselyte upon the Gibbet.

Now for the Disserting Poland to come over to Hungary, is for the likeness of
our Humors, Doctrine and Dispositions, there being a kind of Congeniallity
between us, the Hungarians being naturally Inclinable to Rebellion, Assertors
of the Doctrine of Resistance, and justifying the Lawfulness of taking Arms
against their Lawful Prince, and Rebels affect the Persons of Rebels as
naturally as they do their Principles. They are Protestants, so are we; they
are for Reformation in Church and Government, so are we; they are for
Tolleration, and Liberty of Conscience, so are we; they are for Routs and
Riots, Confusion and Disorder, so are we; they are for maintaining their
Factions with their Sword against the Church and Monarchy, so are we, Now our
Principles and Interesis being the same, where can I better look for a New
Living to vent my old Doctrine of Sedition than among Rebels, they are the
Lambs of my own Folds and the Sheep of my Pasture.

These are the True Israelites who wade through the Red Sea to the Canaan of
their Conquests, to root the Jebusite out of the Land, who for Christ and the
Gospel's sake, dare join with Mahomet the professed Enemy of Christ against their
Christian Sovereign. What tho he has vowed the Destruction of Christianity, and
sworn to root out its very Foundation from off the Face of the Earth, we are
free, the spirits are exempted from this Persecution which only extends to the
Christian Churches, for how can we who justify Rebellion, and Preach the
Doctrine of Resistance, pretend to Christianity, that have neither Law,
Loyalty, Order nor Conformity, which are the Measures of it? so that it is
Evident we are Excepted, our Doctrine as well as Principles being wholly
oppugnant to all the precepts of Christianity,

Had Tapsky been now alive, how willingly could he join with the Turk against
the Emperor, nay his own Lawful King under pretense of pulling down Antichrist
to set up his own Kingdom of Schism and Faction? This was the Cause of all that
Heat and Contention in the late Diet of Poland, who did all they could to cut
off the Succession to make their Kings Elective, under pretense of Religion to
lessen Monarchy, and putting the power of choosing their Kings into the hands
of the people, which by this means would soon convert to its first Babel of a
Commonwealth, but we were Discovered in our design, and yet who could manage
it with more Secrecy.

Of this great Diet there were several Committes which others called Cabals, or
more properly Councils of War, all their Consultations and Debates tending
directly to an Insurrection, yet all would not do.

To this end several Votes were made which stand in Judgment against us, and
others Repealed.

Amongst the rest, the Act for crying Milk and Mackarel on Sundays was Voted a
Nuisance as a Violation of the Sabbath; Milk, because the Children at that time
were to be bred up to the Tap from whence they sucked their first Rudiments of
Rebellion. And Mackarel, because the Rebbels had other Fish to Fry. In place of
these there were two other Cries, Work for a Cooper, and a Waller, a Waller,
Oh! there was the Voice of Farrenden in the Field, and of Baxter in the Pulpit,
and was not I my self the Canting Mouth of all the Seditious Members, and said
Grace before Meat, for which I was Voted Thanks and a Reward, when all the
Orthodox and Learned Prelates of the Kingdom were Voted Useless, and threatened
to be kick't out of the House. I profess I cannot tell what Virtue Predominant
in me (besides a Religious Cant) could Recommend me to the Cognizance of such
Discerning Heads, unless it be Treachery or Letchery for betraying Duke
Lotherdaski my Master, or getting my Maid with Child. Hold Doctor, where do you
go? Let not thy own Mouth betray thee by a needless Confession of thy faults
which thou will not allow to others, that is unpardonable in a Cargalite, where
Treason is but a Venial Crime, and Confession a deadly Sin. For that Cause when
the Brethren were Condemned to suffer in the outward Man I have followed them
upon the Sledg, and upon the Scaffold, I have put Words into their Mouths, and
Speeches into their Pockets. I have taught them that the Highest Treason is but
Mispriston at most, and that Resistance in case of Religion is to fight the
Battle of the Lord. That Confession, like a public Malefactor, is abomination
in the Saints where there can be no guilt, and to stand in a Lie at the
Gallows, is to Persevere to the end. Thus a Noble Peer of Poland held it out
upon the Scaffold to the last gasp, till he went off like the Groaning Board,
with a hum on the one side and a his on the other. Sure this Martyrd Board had
a sense of our sufferings to come, and groaned so exceedingly for the downfall
of the Saints. It Is well says Towzer it had no Soul, or the Doctor had Damned
it. It is a hard case I should be so censured, and yet let 'em say what they
will, I had still rather hazard the Ruin of a Man by advising him to perish in
an obstinate Denial, than by an ultimat Confession he should betray the Cause.

Nor is it only Zeal to the Cause, but self preservation and my own interest to
keep them so, for should they Discover it at last, I fear the Doctor would be
found as deep in the Conspiracy as Lobb or Ferguson.

But they are fled, and it is high time for me to follow, I will be no longer
Father Confessor in Poland, lest it be not safe for me to stand the Test of
another Execution. I will go to Hungary, there I will Plant the Gospel, Preach
Sedition to the People, and teach even Rebels to Rebel. Oh! there is your true
Protestant, who under the Cloak of Religion dare take up Arms against their
Sovereign, Justify Faction by open Rebellion, and assert their Liberties on the
point of their Sword. Thither Oh! thither will I fly, where Resistance is a
Virtue, and Rebellion Justifiable. This is the Life and Death of a Saint to
live a Teckelite in Arms against his Prince, and die a Cargalite glorying in
his Treasons. Thither will I go, here is no Promotion here for one of my
Principles now but the Gallows. Amongst the Hungarian Rebels a Man may find
preferment, perhaps be made Cardinal of Sereni, or Bishop of Munster, in place
of Coloigne lately instituted, and from a Seditions Lecturer become an Orthodox
Elector. On this score would I put up with the Great Turk for the Alcharon, or
with the Pope for Prelacy, and Preech Conformity according to the Letter.

FINIS.

