HAving seen and considered this Alphabetical Dictionary of the Greek and Latin
Antiquities, we cannot but approve of the same, and recommend it to all those
who desire perfectly to understand the Classic Authors, and the Ancient
Historians.

AUGUST 1. 1700. Matt. Shortyng, D. D. Master of Merchant-Taylors-School,
London. Rob. Uvedale, L. L. D. Tho. Walker, L. L. D. Master of the
Charter-House-School, London. Sam. Mountfort, A. M. Master of the
Grammar School, in Christ-Hospital, Land.


A COMPLETE DICTIONARY OF THE Greek and Roman Antiquities; Explaining the
Obscure PLACES in Classic Authors, and Ancient Historians, Relating to the
Religion, Mythology, History, Geography and Chronology OF THE Ancient GREEKS
and ROMANS; Their SACRED and PROFANE Rites and Customs; Laws, Polity, Arts and
Engines of WAR: Also an ACCOUNT of Their Navigations, Arts and Sciences, AND
The INVENTORS of them; WITH THE Lives and Opinions of their Philosophers.

Compiled Originally in FRENCH, at the Command of the French KING, for the Use
of the DAUPHIN, the Dukes of BURGUNDY, ANJOU and BERRY: By Monsieur DANET.

Made ENGLISH, with the Addition of very Useful MAPPS.

LONDON: Printed for John Nicholson, at the King's-Arms, in Little-Britain;
Tho. Newborough, at the Golden-Ball, in St. Paul's Churchyard; and John
Bullord: And Sold by R. Parker, under the Royal Exchange; and B. Took, at the
Temple-Gate, in Fleet Street: MD CC.

THE PREFACE.
THE Greek and Roman ANTIQUITIES lying dispersed in so many large and
chargeable Volumes, are almost lost to those who have not either Money to
procure, or Leisure to peruse them; and the few Compendium's which have been
made, being either very imperfect, or so immethodical, that it required a great
deal of Time to be tolerably informed concerning any particular Antiquity: Our
AUTHOR thought it very necessary to digest that sort of Learning
Alphabetically, that by that means it might be more readily consulted, and the
Authors in both Languages better understood.

His Design is very extensive, and comprehends both the Ancient Greek and Roman
Religion, Mythology, History, Chronology and Geography; Sacred and Profane
Rites and Customs; their Laws, the Opinions of their most famous Philosophers;
their Polity, Architecture, Art of War, Warlike Engines and Navigation; the
Lives of Men Illustrious for Arms and Arts, etc. All which, with vast Industry
and Judgment, he has collected from the Ancients themselves, and the best of
the Moderns, well attested Medals, Inscriptions, Statues, Relievo's and
Basso-Relievo's.

The Necessity of a Work of this Nature will be very evident to those who
please to consider a few Instances, of a great many which might be produced.
Every Scholar knows that Volumen is derived from volvo, to roll up, and that
Volumen it self signifies a Book; but, perhaps, does not know, that before the
Use of Paper, Men wrote on the Skins of Beasts, or Bark of Trees lengthwise,
which they rolled up as fast as they finished their Lines; whence evolvere
Librum signified, to read a Book, because the Manuscript being rolled up, it
was impossible to read it without unrolling it.

Likewise how could that Expression of Horace, ad Umbilicum ducere Opus, be
understood to finish a Work, if we did not know that the Romans used to roll up
these Skins or Bark when written upon, and join them together at both Ends with
Two Bosses of Horn or Ivory, each like a Navel, which occasioned that of
Statius? Binis umbilicis decoratus Liber.


Also another of the same Author; Multaque pars mei,
Vitabit Libitinam.
is very much illucidated, when we know that Libitina was the Goddess which
presided over Funerals.

Who again can well apprehend that other of Horace, Sat. IX. Lib. I. Divina
mota anus Urna.
without being informed, that in this place Horace speaks of Divination, by the
Vrn and Lots, which was performed by throwing several Letters and entire Words
into the Vrn, which being well mixed, what Chance produced by the Ranging of
the Balots, composed the Divination and Answer?

Cicero calls the Letter A, litera salutaris, because the Judges used it in
public Sentences, causing it to be inscribed on the Balots, which they thren
into the Vrn, to express their Absolving the Person accused, for the single
Letter A signified Absolvo.

Thus it appears, of what Importance it is to be acquainted with the Mythology
and Antiquities of the Greeks and Romans, considering there are innumerable
Difficulties which cannot be conquered, and Beauties which may be passed over
and lost, without a competent Knowledge of them.

Our AUTHOR having gained a sufficient Reputation by his former Dictionary, and
being by the Illustrious Duke of Montausier, Governor to the Dauphin, thought
very capable of Compiling this WORK, for the Use of his Royal Pupil, and his
Sons the Dukes of Burgundy, Anjou and Berry: The TRANSLATOR had rather leave
his Performance to the Judgment of the Learned, than anticipate the Reader by
saying any thing in its Praise. He could have wished he had found the Original
illustrated with those Mapps, which were absolutely necessary to be added, and
has only this to say, that Care has been taken to have them performed after the
best Originals, and improved by the best Information that could be procured.

The TRANSLATOR is sensible, that some Faults have escaped Correction, but
since they are merely Typographical, it is hoped, they will not injure the Sense of
the AUTHOR.

Effigies ANTIQUAE ROMAE, ex vetustis Aedificiorum Ruinis, testi monio veterum
Authorum, Monumentis Aeneis, Plumbeis, Saxeis, Ligneisque collecta atque in
hanc Tabellam redacta et descripta secundum XIV Regiones in quas Urbem divisit
Imp. Caesar August.
Printed for Ino. Nicholson Tho: Newborough and John Bullord.

map of Ancient Rome

IMPERIUM ROMANUM
H. Moll Sculp.
Printed for Ino. Nicholson. Tho Newborough and John Bullord.

map of Roman Empire

GRAECIA ANTIQUA Sophiani.
H. Moll Sculp.
Printed for Ino. Nicholson. Tho. Newborough and John Bullord.

map of Ancient Greece

A DICTIONARY OF THE Greek and Roman ANTIQUITIES.
A,
Is the first Letter of the Alphabet in all Languages. The Hebrews call it
Aleph, and the Greeks Alpha, but our Nation as the Latins, call it simply A. Of
all the Vowels it is the most open and simple, and that which is most easily
pronounced, being the first articulate Sound which Nature puts forth at the
crying or smiling of Infants. It is often used to express the Passions of our
Mind, as in case of Admiration, Joy or Grief, and to render the Expression more
vehement, we sometimes prefix or subjoin the Letter h to it, and say ha or ah.
When this Letter makes a whole Syllable the Children call it A by it self A.

The Ancients distinguished exactly in their Pronunciation when this Syllable
or Letter A was long, and in their Writing they did often repeat this Vowel, to
signify that it was a long Syllable; which Usage, as Quintilian testifies,
continued till the time of Attius: sometimes they inserted the Letter h between
the double a, to render the Pronunciation more vehement, as in Ahala for Ala,
or Aala, and sometimes by striking out the first a, they made it Hala: But
afterward, for shortness sake, they only drew a small Line at the top of the
Vowel, to show that it was long, thus a^.

This Letter A does often signify an entire Word in the ancient Marbles, A.
Aulus, A. Augustus, A. Ager, A. Aiunt, etc. When it is doubled it denotes
Augusti: and when it is tripled it signifies Auro, Argento, Aere. When it
occurs after the word Miles, it denotes that he was Young, as Isidore affirms.

This Letter A was also used by the Ancients as a numeral Letter which
signified 500, as may be seen in Valerius Probus. There are some ancient Verses
related by Baronius and others, which describe the Letters signifying Numbers,
whereof this is the first,

Possidet A numeros quingentos ordine recto. When a straight Line was drawn
above the A, it signified 5000.

In the Trial of Criminal Causes at Rome, an A drawn upon the Balots which were
given to the Judges, and thrown into an Urn, signified the whole Word Absolve,
or, I absolve the Person accused; whence Cicero calls A a saving Letter, Litera
salutaris, because it was the sign of dismissing the Accused with Absolution.
This we learn from Asconius Pedianus in his Commentary upon Cicero's Orations.
The Judges (says that learned Interpreter) cast one Balot into the Urn, upon
which was engraven or drawn the Letter A, to signify, I absolve the Person
accused; another upon which was the Letter C, to denote Condemn; and a third
marked with the Letters N and L, Non Liquet, to order. That the Matter should
be further enquired into; for the Judges hereby testified that the Cause was
not sufficiently plain, and that they could not decide it while it remained so;
which they sometimes expressed, viva voce, by this word Amplius, as we may
plainly see from this Passage of Cicero, Causam pro Publicanis dixit Caelius;
Consules, re audita, amplius de Consilii sententia pronunciarunt; Caelius
pleaded for the Publicans, the Consuls, after they had heard him, by the Advice
of the Senate, pronounced, Let this Matter be further inquired into.

In the Assemblies of the Romans, where the People gave Suffrage upon Scrutiny,
by Balots marked with the Letter A, it signified Antique, and Abrogo, or I
reject the Law proposed, I abrogate that which is now in force.

ALPHA
is likewise the first Letter of the Greek Alphabet, which in Composition
denotes sometimes Privation, and comes from (...) without; sometimes
Augmentation, from (...), much; and sometimes Union, from (...), together. It
was used for the most part for a Letter of Order to denote the First, and of
Number to signify One; but when it was a Numeral Letter, a little Stroke or an
Acute Accent was drawn above it thus 'A, to distinguish it from the A which was
a Letter of Order.

Alpha and Omega in the Divine Writings signify the Beginning and the End, and
therefore the Hi^^oglyphic of God is marked with these two Letters, A and O, as
if you should say, that God is the Beginning and End of all things; and so God
himself says in the Revelations, I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the
End. Thus Virgil having a mind to bestow a singular Encomium upon Augustus, by
an Excess of Flattery, tells him, A te principium, tibi definet.


These three Characters were anciently engraven upon the Tombs of the
Catholics, to distinguish them from the Arrians: for the Name of JESUS CHRIST
was signified, as he himself says in the Gospel, by these two Letters, A which
is the first of the Greek Alphabet, and O which is the last of it; Ege sum
Alpha and Omega, principium and finis: and from hence he proves that he was
truly God as well as his Father, which the Arrians denied. They are also to be
met with in the Letters Patents of Christian Princes, and on the Collars of
Slaves.

Alpha marked with a spiritus asper, and an acute Accent A, is also used for
the Pronouns ea and sua, in Homer and others: but with a spiritus asper and a
circumflex Accent (...), it signifies the same with (...), ubi, as may be seen
in the Poet Theocritus. Alpha with a spiritus lenis and a circumflex Accent A^,
is an Interjection of one who is in some trouble, which moves him to complain
or admire; but when it is doubled with a spiritus lenis and a circumflex
Accent, it is an Interjection of one who is in a mighty Consternation, being
under some great Affliction; if it be doubled and marked with a spiritus lenis
and a grave Accent A^, it is an Interjection of one who is transported with
Joy, or the agreeable Surprise of something very pleasant.

ABA^, is a Greek Word, from whose Genitive (...), the Latins have formed their
Word Abacus, which has many Significations: for it signifies sometimes an ABC,
sometimes a Table of Numbers for casting up Accounts, which was of Brass, and
called by the Ancients The Table of Pythagoras. It signified also the Figures
of Numbers, and the Arithmetical Characters, which were drawn upon a Table
covered with Dust or small Sand, according to the Testimony of Martianus
Capella, and of Persius in Sat. 1. ver. 131. Nec qui Abac^ numeros and secto in
pulvere mot^^.
Scit resesse vnfer. --


It signifies also a Cupboard, which the Italians call Credenza, upon which
were placed in order the Pots, Glasses, and the Dessert of a Feast, viz. the
Salads and Sweetmeats, and on which the Carver cut out the several sorts of
Meat, and served up some part of them in Plates to each of the Guests. In
Vitruvius, and all those who have treated of Architecture, Abacus is nothing
else but the four-squar'd Table which makes the Capital at the top of a Column,
and which, in the Corinthian Order of work, represents that kind of Square Tile
which covers a Basket or Pannier when it seems encompassed with Leaves, but in
the Corinthian Composite, or the Modern Ionick Order, which was taken from the
Temple of Concord, and other ancient Temples, it was dug and cut inwards.

AB-ADDIR (a Term of Mythology) is the Name of a Stone which Saturn swallowed,
according to the Fable, instead of Jupiter: for he knowing that the Fates had
decreed he should be dethroned by one of his Children, eat them all up to
preserve himself from them, till such time as Ops his Wife put a trick upon
him, and made him swallow this Stone instead of Jupiter whom she had a mind to
save. Priscian and Isidore in their Glosses make mention of it, and Papias
testifies that this word does sometimes signify a God. And indeed, since that
Ab-addir is as much as to say Pater magnificas, Therefore,

AB-ADDIRES is the Name of certain Gods. St. Austin, writing to Maximas of
Medaura, says, that the Carthaginians had some Gods called Ab-addires, whose
Priests were named' E^ccaddires: In Sacerdotibus E^ccaddires, and in Numinibus
Ab-addires. Thus the Gods Ab-addires of the Carthaginians, were without doubt
those whom the Greeks and Latins sometimes called, Magnos, petentes, selectos
Deos.

ABALIENARE,
(a Term of Roman Law,) to make a pure and simple Sale to a Roman Citizen of
the Goods which were called Res mancupii or mancipli, which were Estates
situate in Rome or some place of Italy, and consisted in Lands of Inheritance,
in Slaves and Cattle. This Sale or Allenation was not valid but between Roman
Citizens, and for the Payment a certain Ceremony was observed, with a Balance
and Money in hand, or else the Seller was to transfer and renounce his Right
before a Judge, as we learn from Cicero in his Topics, Abalienatio ejus rei
quae mancipii erat, aut traditio alteri nexu, aut in jure cessis.

ABATON,
a Greek word which signifies a Building so very high that no Man can come at
it, and which is inaccessible. We have a fine piece of Antiquity concerning
this sort of Building in Vitruvlus l. 8. c. 2. The Rhodians being vanquished by
Queen Artemisia the Wife of Mausolus, the Story says, that she erected a Trophy
in the City of Rhodes with two Statues of Brass, whereof one represented
Rhodes, and the other was her own Image, which imprinted on the Front of that
which represented the City the Marks of Slavery. A long time after the
Rhodians, who scrupled the demolishing of these Statues, because it was not
lawful to destroy such Statues as were dedicated in any place, consulted how
they might hinder the View of them, by raising a very high Building round about
them, after the manner of the Greeks, who called it (...).

ABAZEA or ABAZEIA,
ancient Ceremonies instituted by Dionysius the Son of Caprius King of Asia; so
called from the Greek word (...), which signifies silent, because these Feasts
were observed with a profound Silence. Cicero speaks of them in his third Book
Of the Nature of the Gods.

ABDERA,
a City of Thrace, so called from one Abderus a Favorite of Hercules, who was
torn in pieces by the Horses of Diomedes. Hercules revenged the Death of his
Friend, causing his own Horses to eat him up, and then beating out their Brains
with his Club; he built also this City in his honor, which he called from his
Name. It was afterward called Claxomena, because the Claxomenians who came
from Asia into Thrace, enlaarged it very much. It is now called Pelistylo,
according to Sophian, and was the place where Pretageras the Sophist, and
Democritus the great Laugher were born. Near to this Place is a Lake called
Bistonis, in which nothing will swim, and the Pastures round about it, make the
Horses mad that feed in them.

ABDERITAE or ABDERITANI.
The Inhabitants of Abdera in Thrace, who were esteemed stupid and dull because
of the Grossness of the Air in which they breathed, from whence comes that
Expression of Martial, Abderitanae pectora plebis haber, i. e. You are a stupid
Fool: in which place he speaks to a certain Criminal, who was pardoned upon
condition, that in a full Theater he would represent upon himself the Action of
Mutius Scavola, who burned his Hand, with a Stoical Constancy, in the presence
of King Porsenua, to punish himself because he had not killed him, but missed
his Aim by striking one of his Courtiers instead of him. The Natives of Abdera,
says Lucian, were formerly tormented with a burning Fever, which ceased on the
seventh day, either by a Sweat or by Loss of Blood; and, which is very strange,
all that were seized with it repeated Tragedies, and particularly the Andro^eda
of Euripid^^, with a grave Air and a mournful Tone, and the whole City was full
of these Tragedians, who started up on a fudden, and running to and fro in
frightful and horrid Disguises, cried out, O Love, the Tyrant of the Gods and
Men, and in this mad Frolic acted the rest of Perseus's Part in a very
melancholy manner. The Original of this Mischief was the Actor Archelaus, who
being in mighty Vogue, had acted this Tragedy with much Applause in the hottest
time of Summer; for by this means it came to pass, that many upon their return
from the Theater went to bed, and the next day fell to imitating him, having
their Heads still full of those tragical and bombast Terms they had heard the
day before.

ABDICARE,
(a Term of the Roman Law) to Abdicate a Son is to abandon him, to turn him out
of your House, to refuse to own him for your Son; it is also a common Phrase,
abdicare Magistratum, or se Magistratu, to renounce the Office of a Magistrate,
to lay it down, to abandon it, either before the time prescribed, for some
private Reason, or for some Defect that happened in the Election, or at last
after the time is expired for the discharge of that Office. We read also in the
Law, Abdidicare se statu suo, to renounce his Condition, to become a Slave, and
be degraded from the Privileges of a Roman Citizen, when any one was abandoned
to his Creditors, not being able to make them Satisfaction.

ABDICERE,
(a Term of Roman Law) which signifies to debar any one of his Demands and
Pretensions, or not to allow them. And in this Sense it is said, Abdicere
vindiciam or vindicias, i. e. Not to allow one the possession of the thing
which is controverted; on the contrary, dicere and addicere vindicias, is to
grant and allow them the Possession of that which is contested.

Abdicere is also an Augural Term, and signifies to disapprove, to reject a
Design or Enterprise, not to favor it. For understanding this piece of
Antiquity, we must know, that the Romans never undertook any thing of
consequence, till they had first consulted the Will of the Gods by the
mediation of the Augurs; who, for this end, considered the flying and singing
of the Birds, their manner of eating and drinking, and according to the Rules
and Observations of this Augural Science they approved or disapproved of any
Design; and answered those who consulted them, Id aves abdicunt, the Gods
disapprove this Design, whose Will has been manifested to us by the Birds which
we have observed.

ABIGEI and ABACTORES,
(in the Law) are the Stealers of Cattle, who carry away whole Flocks, or at
least a great part of them. The Lawyers do put a great difference between the
words Fures and Abactores; for the former, say they, are those who steal only a
Sheep or two, whereas the Abactores are those who carry off a whole Flock, or
the greatest part of it.

ABIRE.
This Word, besides the Significations I have already given of it in my Latin
and French Dictionary, has also some other relating to the Roman Law, as Abire
ab emptione, to fall off from a Bargain, to break it, to refuse to hold it: so
in Cicero we find, Res abiit a Sempronio, Sempronius failed in this Affair, it
slipped out of his hands.

Abire, a Term of Imprecation, as may appear from these Passages of the Comic
Poets, Abi in malam rem, Abi in crucem, or in maximum magnum malum, Go in an
ill hour, Go hang your self, Go to the Devil. The Word Abire is also used in
the Form of granting Liberty to Slaves, as Abito quo voles, quo lubet, nihil te
moror, or, Liber esto atque abito quo voles, or, Tu vero abeas, neque te
quisquam moratur: I make you free, go now whither you will, no body detains
you, you may go where you please. It is also used in the Law after this manner,
Abiit dies actionis, the Time of Prosecution in this Cause is over, or,
according to the common Phrase of the Court, There Is an end of this Suit, it is
quite out of doors, and cannot be brought on again.

ABJUDICARE,
(a Term of Law) to take away something from a Person by a Sentence, to declare
that it does not belong to him.

ABJURARE
Creditum, or, Si quid creditum est, to deny a Depositum or Pledge in a Court
of Justice, to make oath that there was no such thing left with me. Plautus
says, Quique in jure abjurant pecuniam, who deny in Court that the Money was
left in their hands.

ABLUERE
se, (a Term of Religion used in the ancient Sacrifices) to wash and purify
our selves before we offer Sacrifice. The Romans looked upon it as a part of
Religious Worship, to wash their Hands and Feet, sometimes the Head, and
oftentimes the whole Body, when they were to sacrifice to their Gods. And
therefore Virgil brings in Aeneas telling Anchises, that he could not discharge
his Duty to his Houshold-Gods, till he was purified in some running Water,
because he was defiled with Blood and Slaughter, at the Sacking of Troy, Donec
me flumine vivo abluero. We read also in the same Poet, that Dido, having a
mind to sacrifice to the Infernal-Gods, told her Sister, that she must first
wash and purify her self in running Water, Dic corpus properet fluviali
spargere lympha.
The People and Assistants were also purified with a Water which was called
Lustral, according to the Practice of Aeneas at the Funerals of Misenus in
Virgil, for he tells us that he sprinkled Lustral Water three times upon his
Companions with an Olive Branch, Idem ter socios pura circumtulit unda
Spargens rore levi and ramo felicis oliva.
They used sometimes a sprinkling Instrument to throw that Lustral Water, which
they esteemed holy, because the Link or Torch which had been used at a
Sacrifice was extinguished in it. It was their Custom also to place, at the
Entrance into their Temples, Vessels made of Marble triumphant (as Du Choul
calls it) filled with Water, wherewith they washed themselves. A Custom which,
without doubt, they learned from the Jews, since we read in Scripture, that
Solomon placed at the Entry into the Temple, which he erected to the true God,
a great Laver, which the Holy Text calls a Sea of Brass, where the Priests
washed themselves before they offered Sacrifice, having beforehand sanctified
the Water by throwing into it the Ashes of the Victim that was slain in
Sacrifice.

ABOLERE,
(a Term of the Roman Law) to abolish, to annihilate, to reduce to nothing, to
destroy a thing after such a manner that nothing remains, not so much as the
Remembrance of it. And according to this Notion of the Word is the Phrase
Abolere crimen, to abolish a Crime, and Abolere nomina reorum, to raze or
expunge the Names of the accused out of the Table or Register, to strike them
out of the List of the Prisoners.

ABOLITIO,
Abolition, the Remission of a Crime. Amnesty is a general Abolition of all
that has been committed during a Civil War, or in any popular Commotion. This
Abolition was granted after three different manners: Either by the Prince on a
day of Triumph, and for some remarkable Victory obtained by the Commonwealth;
or else it was granted by the Magistrate, when the Accuser desisted from his
Prosecution before him; or lastly, it was granted to the Accused after the
Death of the Accuser.

ABOLLA,
a kind of Purple Garment doubled, which was very large, had many Plaits, and
was adorned with great Buttons, which the Romans wore to defend themselves from
Cold and the Injuries of the Weather. This Garment was used by Military Men,
Persons of Quality, and even by Philosophers, as the Verses of Martial and
Juvenal do plainly prove. We read in Suetonius, That the Emperor Caligula was
much offended with King Ptolomy for appearing at the Theater with this double
Garment of Purple, which attracted the Eyes of all the Spectators toward him.

ABOMINANTES,
(a Term of Execration) Those who abhor any bad Presage, and pray the Gods to
prevent its falling upon their Heads. They made use of certain Latin
Expressions frequent in the Comic-Poets and others, Quod Dii omen avertant;
quod ego abominor; procul omen abesto; procul sit omen; procul haec avertant
fata. Quod Dii prohibeant; Dii meliora; Dii melius: and Dii melius duint, for
dent. Which God forbid, which I pray the Gods to remove far from us, and to
turn away from falling upon our Heads; which Mischief may it never come upon
us; which may the Gods preserve us from.

ABORIGINES,
a very ancient People of Italy, about whose Original there are four principal
Opinions: the first is that of Aurelius Victor who calls them Aborigines, as
who should say Aberrigines, i. e. Vagabonds, wherein he disowns that Division
made by Berosus of Janigenes and Aborigines, and affirms on the contrary, that
these Aborigines were wandering and vagabond Scythians, who came and settled in
that part of Italy. Nevertheless, against this first Opinion it may be said,
that if these Aborigines had been Scythians, they would never have employed the
Greeks against the Scythians, but, on the contrary, would have made use of them
as safe Auxiliaries to aid them against the Natives of the Country, and against
the Greeks, who were lately come thither. S. Jerome and Denis of Halicarnassus
think, that they were called Aborigines, as who should say absque origin,
without beginning; or rather as being the first Natives of the Mountains, from
these Tuscan and Armenian words, according to the Talmuds; for Ab signifies a
Father, ori a Cavern or hollow place, and (...) signifies a Race or Posterity,
as who should say, Men born in Caverns. Some think that Chamasenus, alias Cham,
the Son of Noah, who was the Saturn of the Egyptians, having gathered together
diverse wandering and vagabond People, conducted them into that part of Italy
which at present is called Romania, and at that time was called Latium. Titus
Livius and Dionysius Halicarnasseus assert, that the first Aborigines came from
Arcadia into Italy, under the conduct of Oenotrus the Son of Lycam, and that
they learned the Letters of the Alphabet from Evander, who was then King of it.
Genebrard, one very well versed in Rabbinical Learning, thinks that the
Aborigines were a People driven by Joshua out of the Land of Canaan, who
crossed over the Mediterranean Sea, and came and dwelt in Italy, where they had
for King Sabatius or Saturn, who was set over them by Janus, and reigned there
Thirteen Years: They were banished beyond the Tyber, on account of the
corruption of their Manners: But as to Janus, he settled on this side of the
River, upon a Hill which he called Janiculum.

ABROGARE,
(in the Roman Law) to Abrogate, make void, annul, to bring into disuse any Law
or Custom. This word has reference to these other words, rogare, etc. when they
are spoken of Laws whose Confirmation was demanded of the People. First,
Rogabatur Lex, a Law was proposed to the People for their Approbation, which
they gave in these Terms; Vti rogas, I approve it, Be it so as is required;
2ly, Abrogabatur, it was abrogated. 3ly, Derogabatur, something was taken away
from it. Sometimes, Subrogabatur, some Clause was added to it. And lastly,
Obrogabatur, some Exception or Limitation was put to it. Lex aut rogatur, i. e.
fertur; aut abrogatur, i. e, prior lex tollitur; aut derogatur, i. e. pars
prima tollitur; aut subrogatur, i. e. adjicitur aliquid primae legi; aut
obrogatur, i. e. mutare aliquid ex prima lege. Vlp. in Leg. 1. D. ad Leg.
Aquil. And Cicero, l. 3. of Ep. to Atticus: Si quid in hac rogatione scriptum
est, quod per legem Claudiam promulgare, abrogare, derogare, obrogare, sine
fraud sua non llceat. And again, in lib. 3. of the Republic: Hinc legi nec
obrogari fas est, nec derogari ex hac aliquid licet, neque tota abrogari
potest, It was not lawful to change this Law, or take any thing from it,
neither could it be wholly abrogated.

ABSOLVERE,
(in the Roman Law) to absolve a Person accused, to acquit him of a Crime or
any Accusation laid against him, to dismiss him with Absolution. The ordinary
method in these Cases was this; After the Cause of the accused had been pleaded
on both sides, the Praetor used the word Dixerunt, i. e. the Advocates have
said; and then three Balots were distributed to each Judge, one marked with the
Letter A, to absolve the accused, another with the Letter C, to condemn him,
and a third with the Letters N and L, to respite Judgment till further
information. There was often also a fourth, which Suetonius calls Tabula
remissionis, which was a pardon for a Crime whereof the accused was found
guilty. In a Suit concerning a forged Will (says the same Historian) all the
Witnesses who had signed it, being declared guilty by the Lex Cornelia, not
only two Balots were given to the Judges for absolving or condemning the
accused, but a third also for pardoning the Crime in those who had been
surpised or drawn in to sign it by fraud or mistake. Cum de testamento falsi
ageretur, omnesque signatores Lege Cornelia tenerentur, non tantum duas
tabellas absolutoriam and condemnatoriam simul cognoscentibus dedit, sed
tertiam quoque qua ignosceretur iis, quosfraude ad signandum vel errore
inductos constitisset. The Judges having received these Balots, took an Oath,
that they would judge according to their Conscience, without Partiality to
either side, either for Love or Hatred: After which Oath, they threw one of the
Balots into the Urn, according as their Judgment was, either for absolving or
condemning the Party accused. If the accused was condemned, the Judge gave his
sentence in these words, Videtur facisse: The Crime is proved, he is attainted
and convicted of it; and concluded his Sentence in these Words, I lict^^, liga
ad palu^^, expedi virgas, when the Criminal was not condemned to death; But if
the Crime was capital, then he used these words, I Lictor, colliga manus, capus
^b^^bito, inselici arbari suspendito, lege age. Go Lis^^r, seize the Criminal,
cover his Face, and hang him up, by virtue of the Sentence now pronounced
against him: But if the Person accused happened to be Absolved, the Judge
pronounced Sentence upon him thus, Videtur (...) facisse, or Nihil in (...)
damnationis dignum invenio, or, Non invenio in eo causam; which Expression was
used by Pilate, being a Roman, in his Answer to the Jews, who had a mind to
force him to put Jesus to death, whom he had declared to be innocent.

ABSYRTUS,
otherwise called Egialus, (according to Pac^^^^s,) the Son of Etes^^s King of
Go^a^os. It Is said, that his Sister Mad^^, when she fled from her Father's
House with Jason, whom she loved, tore the Body of her Brother Absyrtus in
pieces, and scattered them up and down in the way, on purpose to hinder her
Father from pursuing after her, by meeting with those sad Remains of his Son,
which he was obliged to gather up, as Cicero tells us in his Oration pro Lege
Manilia, Ut Medea illa ex p^^to prof^gisse dicitur, quam praedicant in fuga
fratris sui membra, in iis locis qua se par^^s persequeretur diss^^^isse, ut
eorum collectia dispersa, marorque patrius celeritat^^ persequendi retardaret.
Valerius Flaccus, Lib. VIII. A^gona^. says, That it was not her Father Etesius
who went after her, but that he sent his Son A^syrtus with a Naval Force to
pursue her, and that coming up with her at the mouth of the Danube, when Jason
and she were upon the point of Marriage, he broke off the Match by threatening
to burn them both, together with their Ship, Qui novus incaeptos impediit
hymenaeos,
Turbavitque toros, and sacra calentia rupit.
Orpheus thinks that Etesius commanded Absyrtus to go after his Sister and
fetch her back again; but that he following after her, by a mischance fell into
the River Phasis, and was drowned, and that his Body was afterward cast by the
Waves upon the little Islands which are called from his Name Absyrtides: But
Pliny on the contrary tells us, that he was killed on the Coasts of Dalmatia,
where these little Islands are situate, which from his Name are called
Absyrtides. Absyrtides Graiis dicta a fratre Medeae ibi interfecto, (...)
Absyrto: lib. 3. cap. 2. Let us see how Myginus relates this Story: Etesius,
says he, being informed that his Daughter Medea and Jason had fled away from
him, he sent his Son Absyrtus in a Ship after them, who pursued them as far as
the Adriatic Sea along the Coasts of Se^^vonia, and found them out at the House
of King Alcinous. At their first meeting they were ready to go to blows, but
the King interposed his Authority, and offered them his Mediation, which they
accepted of. The King resolved to restore Medea to her Father, provided that
Jason had not yet enjoyed her: But Jason being informed of this by the Queen,
to whom the King had entrusted this Secret, enjoyed her that night, and by this
means obtained Medea for his Wife. Absyrtus fearing the Anger of his Father,
continued still to pursue after them, when they retired into the Country of
Argos; but Jason at last, by killing him, was delivered from any further
pursuit. There are some Authors who say, that it was his own Sister who cruelly
tore him in pieces.

ACADEMIA,
the Academy, a place built near to Athens, and planted with Trees by one
Academus, according to Diogenes Laertius, or according to others, by Cadmus a
Phoenitian, and the Restorer of Polite Learning among the Greeks. In this place
Plato taught his Disciples Philosophy, who from thence were called Academics,
Atque inter silvas Academi quarere verum.
id est, To enquire after Truth in the Academy, at the School of the Divine
Plato. Cicero called one of his Country-Houses by this Name, where he planted
Groves, and made very pleasant Walks, for entertainment of his Friends with
Discourses upon Philosophical Subjects, such as these, Concerning the Nature of
the Gods; Of Friendship; and the Offices of a civil Life, and particularly his
Academical Treatises, so called from the place where they were composed. In
process of time all places, where Youth were taught the Liberal Arts and
Sciences, or other Exercises, were called by this Name.

ACADINA,
a Fountain in Cilicia near the Lake of Delos consecrated to Castor and Pollux.
The truth and sincerity of an Oath was proved by the Water of this Fountain;
for the Oath was written upon a Table and cast into this Fountain, and if the
Table did swim above the Water, it was a sign that the Oath was true; but if it
sunk to the bottom, the Oath was judged false.

ACANTHUS,
(...), Bearsfoot, in Latin Brancha-ursina, so called, because its Leaves
resemble Bears Feet; and in Greek (...), because one kind of it is prickly like
a Thistle. There are two kinds of Acanthus, one which grows wild, and is full
of Prickles, and another which grows in Gardens, which Virgil calls mollis,
because it is soft, and without Prickles. The Greek Sculptors adorned their
Works with the Figure of the latter, as the Gothic did with that of the former,
which bears Prickles; which they represented not only in their Capitals, but
also in their other Ornaments. The occasion of their so doing, according to the
relation of Vitravins, was this, A young Woman in Corinth happening to dye when
she was just upon the point of Marriage, her Nurse laid upon her Tomb, in a
Casket, some Vessels which she had prized in her lifetime; and because they
lay open to the Weather, to preserve them from wasting too fast, she covered
the Casket with a Tile: But this happening by chance to lie upon the root of an
Acanthus, it so happened that in the Springtime, when the Leaves began to
shoot forth, the Casket which lay upon the middle of the root, was encompassed
with the Leaves of the Plant growing up about the sides of it, till meeting
with the Tile that covered it at top, their extremities were forcibly bent into
spiral Lines, like a Skrew. Callimachus, the Sculptor, passing by this Tomb,
observed how the growing Leaves encompassed this Casket, and represented the
manner of it in those Pillars which he afterward made at Corinth.

ACARON,
the God of Flies. See Accaron and Achor.

ACCA LAURENTIA,
the Wife of Faustulus, who was Shepherd to Numitor, and the Nurse of Remus and
Romulus: This latter in gratitude erected an Altar to her after her death, and
appointed a Feast, which he called Laurentalia, which was celebrated in the
Month of April, according to Varro, or in the Month of December, according to
Ovid, Lib. III. Fast. Plutarch attributes this Festival in the Month of
December to another Acca, who was a famous Courtezan, and had amassed great
Riches by her lewd Practices; for she at her death left the People of Rome her
Heirs, who in grateful acknowledgment of the Favor, consecrated Plays and a
Festival to her Memory. Macrobius tells us, that Acca Laurentia, who served as
Nurse to Romulus and Romus, was this same prostitute Whore, which gave occasion
to the Fable, That a Wolf nursed them the Latins using the word Lupa for a
debauched Woman. She married afterward a very rich Man, who gave her vast
heaps of Wealth, all which she left to the People of Rome, who therefore
bestowed great Honors upon her. This Relation appears to be true, which
Macrobius had extracted from some ancient Authors.

ACCARON,
the God of Flies, according to Pliny l: 10. c. 28. Pausanias relates in his
Elegiacks, That Hercules sacrificing one day to Olympius, was much annoyed with
Flies, but that having invoked Jupiter, (...), or the Fly-Chaser, he was
delivered from them, these Insects flying all away to the other side of the
River Alpheus. From that time the Eleuns continually offered the same Sacrifice
to Jupiter the Fly-Driver, to obtain of him the same Favou^. See Achor.

ACCEDERE and ACCESSIO,
(in the Roman Law) regard a thing which tho separated from the Bulk or Gross
of any Estate, Commodity, etc. yet of right belongs to it. The Tyles, for
instance, which are taken off a House to be laid on again, are an Accessory
when the House is to be sold. Tegulae quae detracta sunt ut reponerentur,
aedibus accedunt, Leg. 18. de Action. Empti and Venditi. The Cask which
contains the Wine that is left for a Legacy, is an Accessory to a Legacy, and
not a Legacy. Vasa, accessio legatae penus, non legata sunt, Leg. 4. de Pen.
Leg.

ACCENSUS,
an Officer of the Roman Magistrates, and of the Military Men.

ACCENSI
Formses, Officers of the Roman Magistrates, viz. of the Consuls, Decemvirs,
Praetors, or Proconsuls and Governors of the Provinces of the Republic, They
were taken out of the number of the Enfranchised, and their Function was rather
laborious than honorable, as Cicero testifies in a Letter to his Brother
Quintus, Proconsul of Asia, Accensus eo etium numero, quo eum Majores nostri
esse volaerunt, quod hoc non in beneficii loco, sed in laboris aut muneris, non
temere nisi libertis desereb^nt, quibus non multo secus quam servis imperab^nt.
They walked before the Magistrates, and received their Orders, which they
executed. Their chief Business was to call the People together to Assemblies;
and from this part of their Office, says Varro, they were called Accensi ab
acciendo. The Form used by the Magistrates for calling any to a Meeting, was
this, Voca ad concionem omnes Quirites huc ad me, Summon, call an Assembly of
the People, cause them to meet together immediately. The Accensus cried, Omnes
Quirites itc ad concionem, Go to the Assembly, Gentlemen Citizens. Their Office
was also to assist the Praetor, when he sat on the Bench, and to give him
notice with a loud Voice every three hours what a Clock it was, as, for
instance, that it was nine a Clock in the Morning, that it was Noon, and that
it was the ninth Hour or three a Clock after Noon. Accensus inc. amabat horam
esse tertiam, meridiem and nonam. For three a Clock, among the Romans was the
ninth hour, as nine a Clock was the third hour; because they did not begin to
reckon the first Hour of the day till ^^x a clock in the Morning; so that the
third hour was nine a Clock, according to us, and their ninth hour of the day
was our three a Clock in the Afternoon.

ACCENSI,
in the Roman Armies, according to the opinion of Festus, were the
supernumerary Soldiers, who served to fill the places of those who died, or
were disabled to fight by any Wound they had received. Accensi dicebantur, quia
in locum mortuorium militum subito subrogantur, ita dicti quia ad censum
adjiciebantur. Asconius Pedianus assigns them a Station in the Roman Militia,
like that of our Sergeants, Corporals, or Trumpeters. Accensus nomen est
ordinis in militia, ut nunc dicitur Princeps, aut Commentariensis, aut
Cornicularius. Titus Livius informs us, that Troops were made of these Accensi,
that they were placed at the Rear of the Army, because no great matter was
expected either from their Experience or their Courage. Tertium vexillum
ducebat minimae fiduciae manum.

ACCENTUS,
an Accent, signifies a certain Mark which is set over Syllables, to make them
be pronounced with a stronger or weaker Voice. The Greeks were more curious
Observers of the Accents than the Mederus. Cardinal Perron says, that the
Hebrews called the Accents Gustus, which is as much as to say, the Sauce of
Pronunciation. There are three sorts of Accents, the Acute, the Grave `, and
the Circumflex ^. The Jews have Accents of Grammar, Rhetoric and Music. The
Accent of Music is an Inflexion or Modification of the Voice or Word, to
express the Passions or Affections either naturally or artificially. Mr.
Christian Hennin, a Hollander, wrote a Dissertation to show, that the Greek
Tongue ought not to be pronounced according to the Accents; wherein he says,
that they were invented only to make some Distinction of Words; that Books were
formerly written without any such Distinction, as if they were only one Word,
that no Accents are to be seen in Manuscripts which are above 800 years old;
that none are found in the Pandects of Florence, which were written about the
time of Justinian; that they were not commonly used till about the tenth
Century, or in the time of Barbarism, and then they were taken to be the Rule
of Pronunciation; that there is no use of Accents in most Nations, neither in
Chaldaea nor Syria, nor among the Solavonians, Moscovites, or Bulgarians, nor
was among the ancient Danes, Germans or Dutch, and that they were unknown to
all Antiquity. He believes that they were an Invention of the Arabians, which
was perfected by Alchalit, about the Death of Mahomet. He adds, that the
Massoretes of Tiberias, about the middle of the sixth Century adopted this
Invention, and introduced it into the Bible with the Vowels, in the time of
Justinian; and that he who perfected the Accents, was Rabbi Juda Ben David
Ching, a Native of Fez, in the eleventh Century; and that they were first used
among the Greeks, only in favor of Strangers, and to facilitate the
Pronunciation of Verse.

ACCEPTILATIO,
(a Term of the Roman Law) Acceptilation. A Discharge which is given without
receiving of Money: a Declaration which is made in favor of the Debtor, that
no more shall be demanded of him, that the Debt is satisfied and forgiven, and
he is acquitted of it. The manner of doing this was by a certain Form of Words
used by both Parties, Quod ego promisi facisne, or habesne acceptum? said the
Debtor; Do you acknowledge that you have received that which I promised you? Are
you satisfied, do you acquit me of it? the Creditor answered, habeo or facio, I
confess I have received it, I discharge you of it. But this was anciently used
only in Obligations contracted by word of mouth.

ACCEPTUM,
a Receipt. Tabula accepti and expensi, a Book of Receipts and Disbursements.
Ratio accepti, an Account of Receipts.

ACCEPTO
far, (in the Law) to hold for received, to write Received upon the Book.
Accepto and acceptum far, accepto and acceptum facere, to confess that it is
received. Expensum far, to write down what is disbursed, to keep an Account
of what is laid out and expended.

ACCIA or ATTIA.
Accia the Mother of Caius Octavius Caesar, surnamed Augustus. Suetonius
relates, in the Life of this Prince, that Accia his Mother having gone one
night, with other Roman Dames, to solemnize a Feast of Apollo in his Temple,
she fell asleep there, and thought in her sleep, that she saw a Serpent creep
under her, which soon after disappeared: when she awoke, having a mind to wash
and purify her self, she perceived upon her Belly the Track of a Serpent,
which could never be obliterated, and upon the account of this Mark she was
obliged for ever after to forbear the public Baths. She became afterward big
with Child, and was brought to bed, at the end of ten Months, of Caesar
Augustus, making the World believe, that she had conceived by Apollo. Augustus
also gloried in it, that he was his Son; and Torrentius mentions a Silver Medal
of this Emperor, upon the Reverse whereof was seen the Figure of Apollo
holding a Harp in his hand, with these words, Caesar Divi Filius, Caesar the
Son of the God Apollo.

ACCIPIO,
(being spoken of a Law) to receive, approve and hold fit: as Rogationem
accipere, to accept a Law proposed. Accipio Omen, I take or hold this for a
good Omen.

ACCIPITER,
any Bird of Prey in general, as an Hawk, etc. Ovid informs us, that an Hawk
was a Bird of ill Omen, because it was very carnivorous, Odimus accipitrem quia
semper vivit in armis.
But the same Bird was a good Omen in Marriage, according to Pliny, because it
never eats the Hearts of other Birds, which gives us to understand, that no
Differences, in a married state, between Husband and Wife ought to go so far as
the Heart; and Care was also taken, in the Sacrifices for Marriages, that the
Gall of the Animals which were slain, should be taken out.

ACCIUS,
a Latin Poet, who wrote Tragedies in a very harsh style, according to Cicero.
He was of an illustrious Family, being descended of two Consuls, Macrinus and
Soranus. Decius Brutus held him in great esteem, took great pleasure in
adorning the Temples with this Poets Verses, and erected a Statue to him in the
Temple of the Muses. Suet. c. 4.

ACCIUS
Navius, one of the most celebrated Augurs, who lived in the time of Tarquinius
Priscus: He opposed the Design which that King had of adding new Centuries of
the Roman People, to those which were already established by Romulus,
representing to him, that he ought first to consult the Will of the Gods by the
Flight of Birds. Tarquin, in raillery, bid him consult them, to know whether
his present Design was feasible or no: Accius did it, and brought him back word
that it was. I would know, replied the King, whether you can cut that Stone
with this Razor which was whetted upon it: The Augur immediately took the Stone
and cut it in two with the Razor. This wonderful Action gained great Credit and
Authority to the Augurs in the following Times; and the King caused a Statue to
be erected to Accius in the place of their Assemblies, having his Head covered,
and holding in his Hand the Stone which he had cut, to perpetuate to Posterity
the Memory of this Action.

ACCLAMATIO,
Acclamation, a loud Expression of Joy, the Applause given to Persons and
Things, a practice used upon several Occasions. The Romans never failed to use
these Acclamations, which included their Prayers and Wishes for the Welfare of
their Emperors, when they bestowed upon them any Largesses for some Victory
obtained over the Enemies of the Empire.

These Acclamations were often expressed by one word, feliciter; or by many, Di
tibi dent quicquid, Princeps Trajane mereris,
Et rata perpetuo, quae tribuere, velint.
Or in these words, Augeat imperium nostri dutis, augeat annos.
Many other Forms to this purpose may be seen in Brissonius de Formulis.

The Senate in like manner made Acclamations to the Emperors, either at their
accession to the Throne, or in Acknowledgment of some Favors they had received
from them, which they very often inserted into their public Registers, or
caused to be engraven on Plates of Brass, or Tables of Marble. They frequently
deified their Emperors, and chose their Magistrates by sudden Acclamations, of
which I shall relate some Examples.

Aurelius Victor informs us, that Divine Honors were decreed to the Emperor
Pertinax, after his Death, and that the whole Senate raised great Acclamations
in his favor: Acclamatum est, Pertinace imperante, Securi viximus, neminem
timuimus, Patri pio, Patri Senatus, Patri bonorum omnium; We lived in perfect
Security under Pertinax, cried the Senate, we feared no People, Pertinax was to
us a Father full of Tenderness, the Father of the Senate, the Father of all
good Men. Trebellius Pollio relates the Acclamations which were made at the
Election of Valerianus to the Office of Censor: Acclamatum est, Valerianus in
tota vita sua fuit Censor, prudens Senator, modestus Senator, amicus bonorum,
inimicus tyrannorum, hostis criminum, hostis vitiorum. Hunc Censorem omnes,
hunc imitari volumus. Primus genere, nobilis sanguine, emendatus vita, doctrina
clarus, moribus singularis, exemplum antiquitatis; These Acclamations were
made, Valerianus was a just Censor during his whole Life, a prudent and a
modest Senator, a Friend to good Men, an Enemy to Tyrants, an Enemy to Crimes
and Vices. We have all chosen him to be our Censor, he is illustrious for his
Nobility, regular in his Life and Conversation, commendable for his
Instructions, and an Example of Antiquity. The same thing happened at the
Election of Tacitus to the Empire; for after the first, who gave sentence for
him, proclaimed him Emperor, the whole Senate cried with a loud Shout, Omnes,
Omnes: And this good old Man endeavoring to excuse himself upon the account of
his great Age, which rendered him unfit to bear the Weight of the Empire, they
shouted again and cried, Caput imperare, non pedes; Animum tuum, non corpus
eligimus, Tacit Auguste; Dii te servent; It belongs to the Head to rule and
not to the Feet; we choose your Mind and not your Body, O Tacitus Augustus, the
Gods preserve you long. In the Armies the Roman Soldiers did often choose the
Emperors and their Generals by sudden Acclamations, without waiting either for
the Order of the Senate or the Consent of the People; as happened at the
Election of the Emperor Probus: For the Colonels having exhorted the Soldiers
to choose for Emperor a Man of Probity, probum; all on a sudden they made a
great Noise with confused Voices, which proclaimed Probus to be Emperor, Probe
Imperator, Dii te servent. These Acclamations were also used at Shows in the
Theaters when they pleased the People's Humor, as it happened at the new
Comedy of Pacuvius, Qui clamores saepe tota cavea exauditi sunt in M. Pacuvii
nova fabu a; The like Acclamations were often heard over all the Pit, when the
new Play of Pacuvius was acted.

As the Romans were accustomed to make these Acclamations to testify their Joy
and signify their Satisfaction, so they were also sometimes used in
Imprecations, to express their Indignation, as they did after the Death of the
Emperor Commodus; Let this Enemy of his Country, cried they, be despoiled of
all Honor, let this Parricide, this Gladiator be cut in pieces in the place
where Gladiators are laid up, when slain or wounded: Hosti patriae honores
detrahantur, parricida, gladiator in spoliario lanietur, etc.

ACCO,
the Name of a foolish and ridiculous Woman, who pleased her self with speaking
to her own Image in a Looking-glass, and made a show of refusing that which she
most passionatly desired; from whence (...) is used for Pretending to refuse,
for Dissimulation and Disguise.

ACCUMBERE,
to lie upon Couches for eating, to sit down, to seat your self at Table, as
the Greeks did, and in imitation of them the Romans. For at the beginning the
Romans did eat sitting at a Table as we do, before the Grecian Luxury and
Softness had corrupted them, as may appear from this Verse,

Perpotuis soliti patres consistere mensis. But afterward they were wont to
eat after the fashion of the Greeks. For this end, in a lofty Hall a Table was
fixed, of a round or oval Figure, which the richer sort made of some precious
Wood, adorned with Plates of Gold and Silver, or rather inlaid with some pieces
resembling Mother of Pearl: this Table was supported with Feet of Ivory, or
some other matter, which represented the figures of diverse Animals: round about
it were placed two or three Couches, from whence it was called Biclinium and
Triclinium: these Conveniences for leaning at Table were covered with richer
or meaner Stuffs, according to the Quality of the Persons, and adorned with
Quilts and Pillows that they might lie more soft and easily upon them. They did
commonly place no more than three upon a Couch, and to lay a greater number
upon it, was accounted a sign of sordid Avarice, as Horace tells us, Saepe
tribus lectis, videas canare quaternos.
In eating they lay along on their sides, having their Heads raised up with
Pillows: He who filled the middle place was in that which is most honorable,
as we learn from Virgil, -- Aulaeis jam se regina superbis
Aurea composuit sponda, mediamque locavit.
He who was at the head held the second place, and the third was at the lower
end, or in the last place. They went into a Bath before they placed themselves
at Table, and changed their Cloths, putting on a Garment which they called
Vestis coenatoria, and putting off their Shoes that they might not dirty the
Beds. They bound about their Heads Fillets of Wool, to prevent the Distempers
of the Head, which the Fumes of Meat and Wine might cause; for which reason
they used afterward Garlands of Flowers. Their Women did not eat lying after
this manner, such a Posture being esteemed indecent and immodest in them,
except at a Debauch, where they appeared without any Shame or Modesty; yet in
an ancient Marble which is at Rome, we find the figure of a Woman lying at a
Table upon a Bed as her Husband does; and Virgil also seems to attest this,
when he represents Dido lying at Table at a Feast which she made upon the
Arrival of Aeneas, unless he means that she was already smitten with Love with
her new Guest.

ACCUSARE,
(in the Law) to Accuse, to draw up or lay an Accusation, or Process. The
ancient Lawyers put a difference between these three words Postulare, Deserre
and Accusare: for first leave was desired to lay an Action against one, and
this was called Postulare and Postulatio; after this he against whom the Action
was laid was brought before the Judge, which was called Deserre and nominis
Delatio; and lastly the Accusation was drawn up, accusabatur.

The Accuser was obliged by the Law to sign his Accusation, at the head of
which he placed the Name of the Consul, which signified the Year, when the
Romans reckoned Years by their Consuls; he set down also the Day, the Hour, and
the Judge before whom he intended to prosecute his Accusation. We learn from
Tacitus that the Accusers had two days given them to make their Complaint in,
and the Accused three days to make his Defense; and that six days were allowed
between them both to prepare themselves. From the very moment that any Person
was accused of a Capital Crime that deserved Death he was stripped of all his
Marks of Honor, and appeared in a careless Habit: he was obliged to give
Sureties that he would appear in Court when there was occasion, which if he did
not, he was laid up in Prison to secure his Person. The Libel being drawn, the
Accused was summoned to appear at three Market-days, in trinundinum; and he
always came attended with his Neighbors and Friends who were concerned for
him, and threw themselves at the feet of the Magistrates and People to beg
favor for him in case he were found guilty. If the Accused refused to appear,
he was summoned with the Sound of a Trumpet before his House or Castle, and
after the time allowed was expired, he was condemned for Contumacy. The Accuser
had two hours wherein to speak against the Accused, and three hours were
granted to the Accused to make his Defense, which was measured by an Hourglass
of Water, called Clepsydra, of which I shall give an account in its proper
place; which made a Greek Orator say to the Judge, when he had a mind to
signify to him the Goodness of his Cause, That he would bestow part of his
Water on his Adversary, i. e. of his Time, which the Lex Pompeia, made by
Pompey in his third Consulship, allowed him for his Defense. If the Accused was
found guilty, Sentence was pronounced against him in these words, Videtur
fecisse, i. e. he is attainted and convicted of having committed the Crime: If,
on the contrary, he was found not guilty, he was then declared innocent in
these terms, Videtur non fecisse, i. e. he is cleared from all Suspicion of
Guilt. All these Circumstances which were observed in Accusations, are related
by Cicero and Tacitus. But if it appeared by the Event, that the Accuser was a
Calumniator, i. e. that he had falsely accused the other Party; or that he was a
Prevaricator, i. e. that he had betrayed his Cause, to make way for the
Criminal to escape and obtain Absolution; or at least, that he had desisted
from and given over Prosecution without the Leave of the Magistrate or the
Prince, and without a lawful Cause, then he was sentenced by the Magistrate to
suffer the same Punishment which the guilty Person deserved.

ACERRA,
a little Pot which held the Incense and Perfumes for Sacrifices, such as are
now made in the form of a small Boat, and are used in the Church of Rome at
this day. An Incense-Box for burning Perfumes upon the Altars of the Gods, and
before the dead Bodies. The Rich, says Horace, offered Boxes full of the finest
Perfumes to their false Deities, Et plena supplex veneratur Acerra.
And the Poor, according to Lucian, were excused for making a Bow, and throwing
some grains of Incense into the Fire that burnt upon the Altars.

ACESSEUS,
the Name of a certain Seaman who was very careless, and always attributed the
bad Success of his Voyages to the Moon; from whence comes the Latin Proverb,
Accessei Luna, to signify a lazy and negligent sort of People, who always
throw off the Blame from themselves, in case of any bad Success, tho their own
Negligence was the only Cause of it.

ACETABULUM,
a small ancient Measure, which contained about the fourth part of an Hemine,
being about two ounces and an half of either liquid or dry things, as Pliny
explains it toward the end of his twelfth book. This Measure held a Cup and an
half, and answers to our Quartern; but is now more in use among Druggists and
Apothecaries than Victuallers, both for Liquids and Solids.

It was also a kind of Spice-Box, which contained all sorts of Spices, whereof
the Ancients used to make their Sauces, to season their Victuals together with
Vinegar and Verjuice: It was made in the form of a Pyramid, and had several
Drawers, wherein were put different sorts of Spices, as Pepper, Nutmegs, etc.

ACHELOUS,
a River whose Springhead rises on Mount Pindus in Thessaly, and from thence
crosses over Acarnania, which it separates from Etolia, and then dividing it
self into two Streams, it runs into the Gulf of Corinth. This River was called
Thoas, according to Stephanus, and afterward Achelous, from one Achelous who
came from Thessaly to inhabit in these parts, with Alcmeon the Son of
Amphiaraus, who killed his Mother Eryphile: (he is commonly called Aspri, and
according to others Catochi.) He was, according to the Poets, the Son of the
Ocean and the Earth, or of Thetis, as Servius would have it, who makes him the
Father of the Sirens. He wrestled with Hercules for the fair Deianira, whom her
Father OEnus King of Calydon would not bestow in marriage upon any Man but him
who was victorious in this kind of Exercise: Achelous, finding himself too
weak, was put to his shifts, and changed himself sometimes into a Serpent, and
sometimes into a Bull; but this availed him nothing, for Hercules overcame him
and plucked off one of his Horns, which the Naiades took up, and having filled
it with Fruits and Flowers they called it Cornutopia; the Horn of Plenty. He
therefore being confounded with this Defeat, for shame hid his Head, that had
lost a Horn, under the Waters of the River Thoas, which ever since bear his
Name.

Strabo, lib. 10. interprets this Fable allegorically, and says, That Achclous
is said to be changed into a Serpent, upon the account of the Course of that
River, which is winding like a Serpent; and into a Bull, because the Noise
which the Waters make resembles the Bellowing of a Bull. And because this River
destroyed all the Country round about by its frequent Inundations, Hercules
confined it within its Channel by cutting a Stream from it, which is the Horn
that he plucked off, and that became the Horn of Plenty, by reason of the
Fertility of that Earth which was enriched for a long time after by the fat
slime it left behind.

Virgil takes the Waters of the River Achelous for Water in general, in this
Verse in the first Book of his Georgicks,

Poculaque inventis Acheloia miscuit uvis.
Which gives sufficient ground to suppose, that Scaliger did not without reason
affirm, That the Latin word Aqua came from a word like it in the ancient Greek
Language, from which the River Achelous took its name, viz. Aqua and (...),
lavare. Maximus Tyrius the Philosopher mentions also a Contest between this
River and Hercules, who plucked off from it one Horn, whereof the Nymphs made
the Horn of Plenty, having filled it with Fruits and Flowers. Servius
explaining this Verse of Virgil,

Corniger Hesperidum fluvius regnator aquarum.
says, That the Floods were painted with Horns because of their winding Course,
which twines about the Land like a Serpent. Thus the River Achelous was
represented with Horns as well as the Po, whereof Virgil speaks. Diodorus
Siculus gives an account how this River falling down at first from Mount
Pindus, ran over the Rocks and made a great Devastation in the Country,
whereupon Hercules opened a more large and united Channel, and so well watered
one Field with it that it became very fruitful. This is the Meaning of the
Fable, and what Ovid has expressed in describing the Horn of Plenty,

Dum tenet, infregit: truncaque a front revellit.
Naiades hoc pomis and odore flore repletum
Sacrarunt, divesque meo bona copia cornu est.
Metamorph. lib. 9. ACHERON or ACHERUNS,
according to Plautus, a River of Hell, which Homer places in the Country of
the Cimmerians, thinking that Country to be Hell; being a day's Journey from
Circe, which is a Mountain in the Country of the Latins. Circe speaking to
Ulysses when he embarked in the Country of the Cimmerians, Navem quidem illic
sistito in Oceano profundorum vorticum. Ipse autem in Plutonis eas domum
obscuram, ubi in Acherontem fluunt, and Cocytus qui Stygiae aquae est emanatio.
Servius explaining these words of Virgil, Tenebrosa palus Acheronte refuso,
seems to confirm what Homer says, and to place these dark Cavities and Rivers
of Hell in the Country of Italy. All Geographers place the River Acheron in
Epirus, which joins to Arcadia. Diodorus Siculus shows, that the Hell of the
Greeks was nothing but an Imitation of the Funerals of the Egyptians: For thus
he discourses about them, Pratum vero and habitationem Defunctorum confictam,
esse locum juxta paludem Acherusiam: Plcrasque enim and maximas Aegyptiorum
funerationes istic peragi, dum cadavera per amnem Acherusiam paludem deportata
in cryptis illic siti^ deponunt; The Field which the Souls of the dead inhabit,
is a place joining to the Morass of Acherusa near the City of Memphis, whither
the Egyptians carry the Bodies of the dead to inter them. Which gave occasion
to the Fable, that the Souls of the dead passed the River Acheron in a Boat.
This River is encompassed on all sides with high Mountains, so that the Sun
never shines upon it; and this gave occasion to the Name of Acheron, which is
derived from the Greek words, (...), or from (...), i. e. the River of Auguish
and Pain, or at least (...), to be deprived to Joy and Pleasure, for as much as
the Sun, which is the Father of Nature, never shines there. The Poets make this
River the Son of Titan and the Earth, and say that he was banished to Hell by
Jupiter for furnishing the Titans with Water in the War against the Gods.

ACHILLES
the Son of Peleus and Thetis: he was a very magnanimous Grecian Prince, whom
his Mother dipped in the Waters of Styx while he was very young, and by this
means made him invulnerable in all parts of his Body but his Heel, by which she
held him when she dipped him. She caused him to be educated by Chiron the
Centaur, a Man very skilful in the Noble Arts, as in Medicine, Music and
Drawing the Bow, who instructed him in these Sciences and Exercises with great
Care, and fed him only with Honey and the Marrow of Lions and Boats, to make
him the more stout and formidable. Themis, whom his Mother consulted about the
Destiny of young Achilles, having foretold that he should be killed in the War
which the Greeks were to undertake against the Trojans, to revenge the Rape of
Helen by Paris the Son of King Priam, she addressed her self to Neptune,
conjuring him to sink the Boat that carried that Princess; but this being
denied, because the Decree of Destiny was inviolable, she resolved to send him,
under the Disguise of a Girl, into the Isle of Scyro, to the Court of King
Lycomedes, that he might there be educated with his Daughters, and by this
means be stolen away from the Greeks, and hindered from going to that Fatal War.
While he sojourned there he became very intimate with the young Deidama, the
King's Daughter, insomuch that she became big with child, and was brought to
bed of a Son, who was called Pyrrhus, from the disguised Name of Achilles who
was called Pyrrha by reason of his Hair, which was of a shining red color.
Nevertheless he was discovered by Ulysses and Diomedes, who landed on the Isle
of Scyro in the habit of Merchants, and having exposed the Merchandise they had
brought with them to Sale at the King's Court, which were nothing but Trinkets
for Women with some Arms; Achilles, tho under his Disguise, never concerned
himself about the Trinkets, but presently seized upon the Arms, and thereby
discovered himself, and followed Ulysses to the War of Troy. Thetis his Mother
seeing this fatal Necessity, obtained of Vulcan a Suit of Armor for him, so
excellently tempered that it was impenetrable. He signalized himself at the
Siege of Troy by many brave Exploits; but out of indignation against Agamemnon
for robbing him of his Mistress Briseis, he retired from the Grecian Camp, and
laid down his Arms, which he would never take up again till the Death of his
Friend Patroclus, who was killed by Hector, which did so sensibly touch him,
that he returned to the Camp, and revenged the death of his Friend upon Hector,
by killing him and dragging his dead Body about the Walls of Troy; but he,
falling in love with Polixine the Daughter of Priam, and having demanded her
for his Wife, was treacherously slain by Paris with an Arrow shot at his Heel,
which was the only place of his Body wherein he was mortal. Divine Honors were
decreed to him after his Death to be performed upon his Tomb, and in obedience
to the Oracle of Dodona, the Thessalians offered there every year a Sacrifice
of two Bulls, one white and the other black, which they brought from their own
Country, whither also they took care to bring Wood from Mount Pelion, and Water
from the River Specchius, together with Garlands made of Flowers, which were
called immortal because they never faded. Philostratus on the Picture of
Achilles, and Quintus Calaber in lib. 3 of his Paralipomena, do not agree to
all the Circumstances in the History of Achilles here related. The common
Opinion is, That he was educated in the Island of Scyro with the Daughters of
King Lycomedes, which is the Sentiment of Hyginus. But Philostratus thinks that
he was sent by his Father against the Island of Scyro, to revenge the Death of
Theseus, whom Lycomedes had cruelly put to death. Pausanias in his Attica is of
the same Opinion, for he tells us, That Scyro was taken by Achilles, as well as
the King Lycomedes. Quintus Calaber maintains that Apollo killed Achilles with
an Arrow; Apollo, says he, being angry at the insolent Answer which Achilles
gave him, drew a Bow and shot him in the Heel with an Arrow, of which Wound he
died: And Hyginus tells us, that Apollo, to give him this Wound, assumed the
shape of Paris.

ACHOR,
otherwise called Myagris or Myodes, the God of Flies, to whom the Greeks and
Cyrenians sacrificed, to drive away the Flies which annoyed them, and infected
their Country. S. Gregory Nazianzen in his first Invective against Julian,
calls him Accaron, because the Accaronites, a People of Judea, made an Idol of
him, whom they called Beelzebuth, i. e. the God of Flies. Pliny relates, that
Hercules had been very much annoyed by these Insects at Olympia, but after he
had sacrificed to Jupiter, under the Name of (...), or, the Fly-chasing God,
they flew all away over the River Alphaeus, and never annoyed him more, nor any
of those who sacrificed to him in the Temples built for him after he was placed
among the number of the Gods: For Solinus tells us, that no Flies nor Dogs
could ever enter into a Chapel built to Hercules at Rome by Octavius Herennius.

ACIDALIA,
an Epithet given to Venus, the Goddess of Love, because she was the cause of
great Uneasiness and Vexation to those who were in Love. Some think that she
was also so called from a Fountain of that Name, wherein the Three Graces,
which always attended her, used to bath themselves.

ACILIA,
the Name of a very illustrious Roman Family, from which was descended the
generous Consul Acilius Glabrio, to whom the People of Rome erected a Statue
covered with Leaves of Gold, for having defeated the Army of Antiochus in the
narrow passage of Tempe, and made a great slaughter of the Asiaticks. This
Consul erected a Statue on horseback of pure Gold, which he placed in the
Temple of Piety, and consecrated to the Memory of his Father, whose Effigies it
was. This was the first Statue of that precious Metal that was ever seen at
Rome, from the time of its first foundation.

ACINACES,
a kind of Cutlass or Scimetre used among the Persians.

ACNUA,
a sort of Measure for Land, among the ancient Measures called otherwise Actus
quadratus, which was a Square, whereof each side was 26 foot long, which
contained, as Authors tell us, the moiety of a Jugerum, or, of the Acre of the
Latins. Vossius says, that it is plainly read Acnua in the Manuscripts, yet he
would have it read Acna, to give credit to his own Etymology, which derives it
from the word (...) or (...), which is a Measure of twelve feet, as he himself
tells us; he adds afterward, that (...) signified also a Measure of 26 feet,
but this he does not prove.

ACONITUM,
Wolvesbane, an Herb very venomous, whereof there are many kinds; it is said
that its Name comes from Acona, a City of Bithynia, round about which it grows
in great abundance. The Poets feign, that this Herb sprung up from the Froth
which the Dog Cerberus cast forth when Hercules dragged him by force out of
Hell; for which reason, great quantities of it are found near to Heraclea of
Pontus, where is the Cavern by which Hercules descended thither. It Is said,
that all its Venom is in its Root; for there is no hurt in its Leaves or Fruit.
The Symptoms of this Poison are these, It makes the Eyes water very much,
oppresses the Stomach, causes frequent breaking of wind backwards. Nevertheless
the Ancients used it as a Medicin against the biting of a Scorpion, the burning
heat whereof, the bare touch of Wolvesbane did presently extinguish.

ACONTIUS,
a young Man of the Isle of Cea, who coming one day to Delos to the Sacrifice
of Diana, fell in love with the fair Cydippe; but fearing a Denial, if he
should desire her in Marriage, upon the account of the inequality of his Birth
and Fortune, he contrived this Stratagem to win her; he wrote these two Versues
upon an Apple,

Juro tibi sane per mystica sacra Dianae,
Me tibi venturam comitem sponsamque futuram.
and then threw the Apple at the Feet of Cydippe, who taking it up, read these
Verses, and bound herself to the Oath which was upon it. Whereupon every time
she had a mind to marry, she was presently taken dangerously sick, which she
interpreted to be a just Punishment for the Violation of her Faith, and
therefore to appease Diana, she married Acontius.

ACRATES,
the Genius or Demon of the Bacchantes, whose Mouth only was represented in
Figures, as Pausanias tell us.

ACRISIUS,
the last King of the Argives, and the Brother of Praetus, to whom he
succeeded, according to Eusebius. He understanding by the Oracle that he was to
be killed by a Son of his Daughter Danae, shut her up in a Tower of Brass, to
preserve himself from this Mischief. But Jupiter falling in love with this
unfortunate Princess, found a way to come at her; for he changing himself into
a shower of Gold, unaccountably passed through the Tiles of the House, and she
was found with child of a Son, who was called Perseus. Acrisius being informed
of this, caused his Daughter, with her Child, to be shut up in a Chest, and
commanded them both to be cast into the Sea: The Chest swimming for some time
upon the Water, was at last thrown up upon the Isle of S^riphe, where
Polydectes reigned, who received them graciously, and fell in love with Danae:
But she refusing to agree to his love, and yield herself up to his passion, he
resolved at last to force her; and the better to cover his Design, he removed
her Son Perseus a great way off, and sent him to the Garganes, with an Order to
bring back to him the Head of Medusa, that he might make a Present of it to his
Mistress Hippodamia, hoping that Perseus would be killed in this Enterprise,
and then he should be in a condition to prevail with his Mother to condescend
to his Desires. But things fell out quite otherwise than he imagined; for
Perseus by good luck returned safe from this Expedition, brought back the Head
of Medusa, and was married in his Voyage to Andromeda, whom he delivered from
the Sea Monster, which was just ready to devour her. He returning to Argos with
his new-married Spouse, to present her before Acrisius, his Grandfather, found
him celebrating Funeral-Games; whereupon he having a mind to exercise himself
with throwing a Bar of Iron, it happened unluckily that the Bar hit against
Acrisius's his Leg, and gave him a Wound, whereof he died in some days after;
and thus the Oracle was fulfilled.

ACROBATES,
a sort of Dancers upon the Rope. We learn from Boulanger, in his Treatise of
Dancers on the Rope, that there were Four sorts of 'em: The First were those
who vaulted about a Rope, as a Wheel turns about its Axeltree, and hanged upon
it by the Feet or the Neck. Nicephorus Gregora says, that in his time these
Dancers vaulting about a Rope were to be seen at Constantinople. The Second
sort of them were those who flew from a high place down to the ground upon a
Rope, which supported their Breast, their Arms and Legs being extended. Of
these Manilius Nicetas, and Vopiscus speak in the Life of Carinus. The Third
sort were those who are mentioned by the same Manilius, who run upon a sloping
Rope, or came down it, from a higher to a lower place. The Fourth sort were
those who not only walked upon a distended Rope, but jumped high, and cut
Capers upon it as a Dancer would do upon the ground at the sound of a Flute:
And of this kind Symposius is to be understood.

ACROSTOLIUM,
a kind of Ornament for a Ship, made in the form of a Hook, which was placed at
the end of the Stem or Stern: To these may be compared those polished and sharp
pieces of Iron resembling the Neck of a Duck, which the Venetians use at the
Stem of their Gondoles. It may also be that Ornament of a Stern, which they
called Anserculus, a little Goose, whereof Bayfius gives us the Figure like the
Head of a Goose.

ACROTERIA,
(...), the extremities of any thing: This word in Greek signifies generally
any extreme part; such as are in Animals, the Nose, the Ears, and the Fingers;
and in Buildings, the Turrets or Battlements of Houses, and the little
Pedestals on which Statues were placed, and which were situate at the middle,
and the two Extremities of a Frontispiece, or the Statues of Earth or Copper,
which were placed on the top of Temples to adorn 'em; in Ships, this word
signifies the Beaks, which are called Rostra; they are also Promontories, or
high places which are seen afar off at Sea.

ACTA,
which has in the Genitive Actae. Cicero and Virgil use this word, speaking of
a Meadow pleasant for its greenness; and Vossius thinks that it must only be
used in speaking of Sicily, as these two Authors did.

ACTA PUBLICA,
the Records or public Registers, wherein were written what concerned public
Affairs, to preserve the Memory of 'em.

ACTA DIURNA,
a Diurnal, wherein is set down what passes every day.

ACTA CONSISTORII,
the Edicts, the Declarations of the Council of State of the Emperors, which
were expressed in these Terms; IMPERAT. DIOCLESIANUS ET MAXIMIANUS A. A. IN
CONSISTORIO DIXERUNT; DECURIONUM FILII NON DEBENT BESTIIS OBJICI.

The August Emperors Dioclesian and Maximian, in Council declared; That the
Children of the Decurions ought not to be exposed to wild Beasts in the
Amphitheatre.

The Senate and Soldiers swore often, either through Flattery or by Compulsion
upon the Edicts of the Emperors. Tacitus tells us, that Nero razed the Name of
Apidius Meru'a out of the Register of the Senators, because he would not swear
upon the Acts of the Emperor Augustus.

ACTEIUS,
one of the six envious and malign Demons, whom the Greeks call Telchines, who
bewitch Men out of their sense, and of whom fabulous Antiquity would make us
believe, that they sprinkle the Earth with the infernal Stygian Water, from
whence arose Pestilence, Famine, and other public Calamities.

ACTAEON,
the Son of Aristeus, and Autonoe, the Daughter of Cadmus, who was brought up
in the School of Chiron the Centaur. He was a great lover of Hunting, and
continually followed this Sport One day as he was pursuing a Heart, he spied
Diana bathing her self with her Nymphs: But the Goddess enraged to be seen in
that condition, threw Water upon him, which changed him into a Heart, and
afterward he was torn in pieces by his own Dogs. Pausanias mentions a Fountain
of Acteon near Megara, on the side whereof the Hunter was wont often to repose
himself when he was tired with the Chase; and there it was that he saw Diana
bathing her self.

Plutarch mentions another Acteon, the Son of Mclistus, a Corinthian, who was
carried away by force, and whom his Friends tore in pieces while they
endeavored to recover him out of the hands of his Kidnappers.

ACTIACA VICTORIA,
the Actiat Victory which Augustus obtained over Mark Antony near the
Promontory and City of Actium. This Prince to perpetuate the Memory of that
Victory to Posterity, built the City Nicopolis, i. e. the City of Victory; he
adorned with great Magnificence the old Temple of Apollo, wherein he dedicated
the Beaks or Rostra of the Enemies Ships; he increased also the Pomp of the
solemn Games, called Ludi Actiaci, which were celebrated every fifth Year in
Honor of this God, after the manner of the Olympic Games: Stephans would have
'em observed every Third Year, and thinks they consisted of a Race by Sea and
Land, and Wrestling.

ACTIUM,
a City and Promontory of Epirus, a place famous for the Defeat of Antony and
all the Forces of the East, by Caesar-Augustus, who built there a new City,
called Nicopolis, i. e. the City of Victory.

ACTIO,
(in the Law) an Action in a Court of Justice, a Process entered either by the
Prosecutor or the Defendant. There were many Formalities observed in judicial
Actions that were commenced against any Person: First, A Petition must be
presented to the Judge, to have leave to bring the Person before him: The Judge
answered this Petition by writing at the bottom of it, Actionem do, I give
leave to bring him: On the contrary, he wrote Actionem non do, when he denied
the Petition. All Actions, especially Civil and Pecuniary, commenced after the
Petition was presented, by a Citation or summoning the Party, which is called
in Law Vocatio in jus, and in jus vocare. This was anciently done viva vote by
the Party himself, who meeting him against whom he intended to bring his
Action, declared his Intention to him, and commanded him immediately to go
before a Magistrate and make his Defense: if he would not go willingly, he
might force and drag him along against his will, unless he gave Security to
appear at a day agreed upon: but if he failed to appear at the day appointed,
then the Plaintiff, whenever he met him, might take him along with him by
force, calling any Bystanders to bear witness, by asking them, Vis antestari,
who presently turned their Ear toward him, in token of their Consent to do it.
This Horace expresses in these Verses in his Satyr against the Impertinent,
lib. 1. Satyr. 9.

-- Casu venit obvius illi
Adversarius. Et quo tu, turpissime? magna
Exclamat voce: Et licet antestari. Ego vero
Oppone auriculam: rapit in jus; clamer utrinque.
By chance, says Horace, he meets his Adversary, and cries to him with a loud
voice, Whither art thou flying, thou infamous Fellow? and then addressing
himself to me, he prays me to bear witness, whereupon I turn my Ear to him; and
then he seizes upon the Party, and drags him before a Court of Justice, with a
great Noise on both sides. The Verses preceding these discover that he had
failed to appear at the day and hour appointed by the Citation. But because
this kind of Proceeding was attended with some sort of Outrage and Violence,
therefore Persons of Honor who were advanced to any Dignity, were not thus to
be summoned into Court without desiring express leave of the Magistrate by a
Petition, as we have remarked before. Afterward this manner of proceeding was
changed, and that other introduced of summoning the Party by a Sergeant and a
Writ, per Libellum, which they call in Law Libellum Conventionis, a Writ of
Summons. This Writ was to contain the Pretensions of the Prosecutor, that the
other Party being made acquainted with them, might either resolve to satisfy
them, or else come prepared to defend himself. And so the Summons was to
express the Cause of Action, i. e. to contain the Complaint of the Prosecutor,
which they called edere Actionem.

ACTOR
(upon the Theater) an Actor; one who acts a Part, and represents some Person
in a Tragedy or Comedy. In former times many Regulations were made about their
Salary, and for punishing those who indulged themselves in too great a Liberty.
The chief of them, as Tacitus says, were these, That a Senator could not visit
them at their Houses, nor a Roman Knight walk with them in the Street; That
they could not act but upon a public Theater. The Senate had a mind to give
the Praetor a Power of chastising the Actors with Rods: But Haterius Agrippa,
the Tribune of the People, opposed it, and by his Opposition gained the point;
because Augustus had declared the Actors exempt from whipping, and Tibarius
would not violate his Orders.

ACTOR,
(in the Law) He who has an Action against another, he who prosecutes another
in a Court of Judicature.

ACTOR,
the Name of one of Hercules's Companions in the War against the Amazons. He
was married to the Nymph Aegina, the Mistress of Jupiter, by whom he had
Menetius, who was the Father of Patroclus, who from thence was called Actorides.

ACTUARIOLUM and ACTUARIUM NAVIGIUM,
a Brigantine, a little Vessel at Sea, very light for sailing or rowing.

ACTUARIUS,
a Notary or Scribe, who in former times wrote very swiftly at the Bar the
Pleadings of the Advocates, and for that end used Ciphers, or single Letters,
or certain Abbreviations to signify a whole word.

ACTUARII PALI,
Stakes, which were set up in a piece of Ground of twenty six feet, which was
the Length of one of the sides of the Measure for Land, which the Latins called
Actus quadratus.

ACTUMEST
(a Phrase anciently used in the Comic Poets) It Is done, there is no Remedy.

ACTUMNE AGAS,
It Is done withal, it cannot be helped.

ACTUM AGIS,
It Is lost labor, this is to begin a thing after it is done withal.

ACTUS,
a piece of Ground of 120 feet. There were three sorts of this Measure; Actus
minimus, the least, which contained 120 feet in Length, and four only in
Breadth; the second which they call Actus quadratus, a Square, had 120 feet
every way; and the third was a double Square, being 240 feet long, and 120
broad, which made an Acre of Ground, or as much as a Yoke of Oxen could plough
in a day.

ACTUS,
an Act; the name of certain Divisions which are made in Dramatic Poems, to
give some Respite to the Actors and Spectators. Comedies sometimes consisted of
three Acts, but generally of five.

ADAD,
the Worship which was given to Adad, i. e. to the Sun, was easily transferred
to Adad the King of Syria, and the Founder of many Temples dedicated to the Sun
in the City of Damas, as Josephus tells us. Some think that the Prophet Isaiah
speaks of this Worship of the Sun under the name of Achad: for the Hebrew word
Achad is the same with the Chaldee Adad, and it signifies unicus, i. e. One
only, which agrees to the Sun.

ADDICERE,
(a Term of the Roman Law) to adjudge a piece of Land, or an Inheritance to any
person. Licetur Aebutius, deterrentur emptores partim gratia, partim pretio,
fundus addicitur Aebutio; Aebutius bid money, the Buyers were hindered by Favor
and Money, whereupon the Land was adjudg'd to Aebutius for the Price he had
offered. The Custom was then, as it is at this day, not to adjudge a piece of
Land to any Person upon the first Offers that are made, but to prescribe a
certain time for admitting Buyers to come in, which being expired, the thing
was adjudg'd for the Price that was offered. And upon this account it is
commonly said at this day, It Is adjudg'd, saving the eighth or fifteenth day, i.
e. provided that in eight or fifteen days no more is offered. Ille fundus
centumque esto tibi emptus, si quis intra Calendas Januarias proximas meliorem
conditionem non fecerit, quo res a domino abeat; This Land shall be yours for
an hundred Crowns, provided another do not give more for it before the first
day of January.

ADDICERE,
(an Augural Term) to approve, to authorize an Enterprise. After the Augurs had
consulted the Will of the Gods by the Flying of Birds, if the Signs were
favorable, they answered thus, Id addicunt aves, the Gods favor this
Enterprise. Cum omnium Sacellorum exaugurationes admitterent aves, in Termini
fano non addixere; The Birds having approved the Profanation of all the other
Temples, did not approve of this Profanation in the Chapel of the God
Terminus.

ADDICTIO,
a Judgment for delivering the Goods of the Debtor into the hands of his
Creditor, when he had not satisfied him according to the Sentence of the
Praetor, who condemned him to pay the Debt: for then the Judge, by a second
Sentence, delivered over him and all his Family into the hands of his Creditor.

ADEONA,
an ancient Deity, worshipped by the Romans, as St. Austin tells us, she enabled
People to walk.

ADIGERE ARBITRUM,
or Arbitrium, or ad Arbitrum, and ad Arbitrium, (Forms of Speech which were
used by the ancient Lawyers) to constrain, to force, to oblige one to submit to
Arbitrators. They used also to say, Adigere aliquem in sua verba per
jusjurandum, to oblige a Person to take his Oath.

ADJICIALIS COENA and ADJICIALES EPULAE,
a solemn Banquet or Feast which the Romans made at the Consecration of their
Pontifices, or on a Day of Public Rejoicing.

ADDIR,
Pater Magnificus, this Word is often attributed to God: even the Philistines
themselves gave him this Name for smiting Egypt with many Plagues.

ADMETUS,
a King of Thessaly, who entertained Apollo, when he was driven out of Heaven
by Jupiter, to take care of his Flocks. In acknowledgment of this Favor, he
assisted Admetus in his Amors with Alcestis, Daughter to King Pelias, who
resolved never to bestow her in marriage but to one who should have a Chariot
drawn by two disproportioned Animals. Apollo therefore furnished him with a
Lion and a Bear to draw the Chariot wherein he was to carry off Alcestis. This
God obtained also of the Parcae, or three fatal Sisters, that he should die by
Proxy, and so, when he fell dangerously ill, his Wife died in his stead. But
Hercules, going down to Hell, brought her back again, and restored her to her
Husband: or Proserpina her self restored her to Life again, being moved by the
Complaints of Admetus for losing her.

ADMISSIVAE AVES,
Birds of a happy Omen, which approved of an Enterprise: on the contrary, they
were called Arculae Aves, when they discouraged and disapproved it.

ADOD,
Philo Biblos, explaining the Theology of Sanchoniathin, says, that Adod is the
King of Gods, (...). The Kings of Syria assumed this Name: for Josephus recites
the words of Nicolas of Damascus the Historian, when he mentions Adad King of
Syria and Damascus. Josephus also says, that Adad King of Syria, and Hazael his
Son, received Divine Honors for adorning the City of Damascus with magnificent
Temples. See Adad.

ADOLERE and ADOLERE THURA
(a Term belonging to Sacrifices) to burn Incense upon the Altars of the Gods,
to pay them Divine Honors.

ADOLESCENS, and ADULESCENS,
a young Man, who is not yet past the age of growing. They commonly reckoned
this Age from twelve years to twenty five for Boys, and to twenty one for
Girls. But if we consider the Use of this word among the Ancients, we shall
find that they used indifferently the word Adolescens and Juvenis, for such as
were not yet forty five years old. Cicero lib. 2. ep. 2. calls Curio
adolescens, who was more than thirty years old. In lib. 2. de Oratore, he says,
that there were some Works of Lucius Crassus which he wrote in his Youth, and
ea ipsa adolescentem scripta reliquisse. Sallust calls Caesar adolescentulum,
when he obtained the Pontificate, and he was then at least thirty five years of
age. Valerius Maximums calls Scipio Aemilianus admodum adolescentem, who was
more than thirty four years old. And lastly, Cicero calls Brutus and Cassius
adolescentes, in the year of their Praetorship, i. e. in the fortieth year of
their age. All which Passages plainly prove, that it was not only in Writing
that this word was used for one so far advanced in years.

ADONIS,
the Fair Adonis, born of the incestuous Conjunction of Cinarus King of Cyprus
and his own Daughter Myrrha. Venus and Proserpina fell both in love with
Adonis, and the former descended often upon Mount Libanus to see him, but
Proserpina transported him into Hell: but afterward, being moved by the Tears
of Venus, she gave him to her for one half of the Year, and the other half he
remained in Hell. The Worship of Adonis and Venus his Mother, says Macrobius,
was very ancient and famous among the Assyrians or Caldeans, who were the first
Astrologers in the World, and from them it passed to the Phaenicians. Adonis is
the Sun, who during the six superior Signs of the Summer is with Venus, i. e.
in that Hemisphere of the Earth which we inhabit; and, during the other six
inferior Signs of the Winter, is with Proserpina, i. e. in the inferior
Hemisphere of the Earth which is inhabited by our Antipodes. These are the
Physical Reasons of the Earth's alternative Sadness and Joy, according as the
Sun retires from it in Winter, as if it fell into the hands of Death or
Proserpina; or approaches nearer to it during the Summer, as if Proserpina had
restored it to Venus. When the Poets feigned that a wild Boar gave Adonis his
Deaths-wound, they designed by that to represent the Rigor of the Winter.
Ammianus Marcellinus says, that the Mysteries of Adonis represented the Corn,
which is hid six months under ground, before the time of Harvest approaches;
wherein he does only transfer the Mysteries of the Sun to the Corn, which is a
Symbol of it. St. Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria, relates at large, in his
Commentaries upon Isaiah, the History or Fable of the Greek Poets about Adonis;
That Ginarus being passionately enamored with the Charms of his Daughter
Myrrha, had a Son by her of extraordinary Beauty, called Adonis, with whom the
lascivious Venus fell in love; but Mars, being jealous of her, transformed
himself into a Boar, and killed Adonis at a Hunting Chaco. Whereupon Venus
descended into Hell to fetch him back again, but Proserpina would not release
him: Yet at last, being moved with Compassion for her Tears, they agreed
together, that each of them should enjoy him alternatively for one half of the
Year. This is the occasion of the Grief and Joy that appear at the Festivals of
Adonis. This Father adds, That it was this sort of Uncleanness which the Jews
imitated, of which Ezekiel speaks when he says, the Women lamented Thammus,
which is Adonis, Expouitur autem Thammus, Adonis; And that the Letters and
Messengers mentioned by Isaiah, are nothing else but the Letters and Messengers
which the Cities of Egypt sent interchangeably to one another, to give notice
that Adonis was found again: Quod ubi illae faminae Veneris amicae, una cum
Epistols vaganisse^, perinde ac si repertus fuisset a Venere Adonis, luctum
ponebant.

ADONIA SACRA,
the Mysteries and Sacrifices of Adonis, which were celebrated every year at
Byblis, in the great Temple of Venus: for in this Country, says Lucian, in his
Dea Syria, he was killed by a Boar, and in memory of this Misfortune every year
a public Mourning was observed, at which the People beat themselves, and
lamented, (and celebrate his Funerals as if he had been dead, tho on the next
day his Resurrection was solemnized, because, they say he flew into Heaven,)
they shave their Heads as the Egyptians do at the death of their Ox Apis. The
Women, who will not be shaved, are forced to prostitute themselves a whole day
to Strangers, and the Money they get by that Debauch is consecrated to the
Goddess. There is also another wonderful thing in this Country, a River, which
goes by the Name of Adonis and descends from Libanus into the Sea, changes its
color at certain times, and dies the Sea as red as Blood; which is looked upon
as a Miracle, this being the time which is dedicated to the Celebration of the
Mysteries of Adonis, because it is believed that then he was wounded in the
Forest of Libamus.

ADOPTARE,
to Adopt, to take a Stranger, and incorporate him into your Family, to take
him for your Son, to design him for your Heir. He who was adopted was entered
under the Paternal Power of the Adopter, and was taken from that of his own
Father. 'Twas a Custom to put the Children who were adopted under a Mantle or
Gown, says Furetiere in his Dictionary, as if they would thereby represent that
they were the proper Children of those who had adopted them. And from thence
came the Custom of putting Natural Children under an Umbrella when they are
legitimated at a Marriage.

ADOPTIO,
Adoption, an act by which any one is adopted. The Custom of Adopting was very
common among the Romans, yet it was not practiced, but for certain Causes
expressed in the Laws, and with certain Formalities usual in such Cases. He
that would adopt any Person, was to have no Children of his own, or to be past
the Age of getting any. In the Infancy of the Republic he was to address
himself to the Pontifices, that he might have leave according to Law. This
Right of the Highpriests lasted but a little while, and after that application
made to the People to obtain it, in the presence of his Father who was to be
adopted, to whom the Question was put, Whether he would abandon his Son,
together with the full extent of his paternal Authority, and surrender up the
power of Life and Death over him, which Question was called Adrogatio. The
usual Form upon such occasions was this; Velitis jubeatis, uti L. Valerius
Licio Titio tam lege jureque filius sibi siet, quam si ex eo patre matreque
familiar ejus natus esset, utique ei vitae necisque in eum potestas siet uti
pariundo filio est. Hoc ita, ut dixi, ita vos, quirites rego. In the last Age
of the Republic, when it was just expiring, Adoptions were made by the
Sovereign Authority of the Emperors, who granted that Privilege even to Women
who had no Children, by their Letters of Concession, the words whereof were
these; Quoniam in solatium amissorum tuorum filiorum cupis privignum tuum vicem
legitimae sobolis obtiuere, annuimus votis tuis, and eum perinde atque ex te
progenitum ad vicem naturalis legitimique filii habere permittimus, Imper.
Dioclesianus and Maximianus A. A. Since, for your comfort, under the Loss of
your Children, you desire to adopt your Son-in-Law, we grant your Request, and
permit you to take him for your natural and lawful Son. Adoptions also were
practiced in their last Wills, either as for Name or Goods; In ima cera C.
Octavium etiam in familiam nomenque adoptavit; He adopted into his Family, and
to bear his Name C. Octavius in the last page of his Will. Titus Livius, tells
us, that Caecilius adopted Atticus when he was dying by his last Will,
Gaecilius moriens testamento Atticum adoptavit. Those who were adopted assumed
the Name and Surname of him who adopted them, and to denote their Family and
Birth, they added only at the end the Name of the Family from which they were
descended; or the Surname of their private Family, with this difference
nevertheless, says Lipsius, that if they used this Surname, they made an
Adjective of it: As for instance, M. Junius Brutus being adopted by Q.
Servilius Caepio Agalo, he assumed all these Names, and retained only the
Surname of his own Family, calling himself Q. Servilius Caepio Agalo Brutus.
Octavius, on the contrary, retained the Name of his House, and changed it into
an Adjective, calling himself C. Julius Caesar Octavianus, which yet did not
hinder but they might retain the Surname which they had assumed, as Atticus
did, who being adopted by Q. Caecilius, was Sirnam'd Q. Caecilius Pomponianus
Atticus, or acquire a new one by their brave Exploits, as Octavius did, who was
afterward sirnam'd Augustus. It Is with reference to this Rule of Adoption,
that we must understand what Suetonius says of Tiberius, That be being adopted
by M. Gallius, a Senator, took possession of his Goods, but would not assume
his Name, because he was a contrary Party to Augustus. Tacitus, Lib. XV. Cap.
8. of his Annals, tells us of the feigned Adoptions which were condemned by the
Senate: A pernicious Custom, says he, was introduced, of making many feigned
Adoptions, when the time drew near of choosing Magistrates, and dividing the
Provinces among them by Lot; for when they had obtained their Offices and
Employments, they emancipated those whom they had adopted: Whereupon the
Persons aggrieved came and made their complaint to the Senate, alleging the
Law of Nature, and the trouble of Education against these short and fraudulent
Adoptions: And therefore it was ordained, That for the future no regard should
be had to these Adoptions, either in Offices or in Successions to an
Inheritance.

ADOR, or ADUS,
a kind of Corn which was usually offered to the Gods at their Sacrifices. The
word comes from (...), arista, changing the (...) into (...), as from (...),
comes Deus; or from the word edo, whence it came to pass, that they said
formerly Edor for Ador, according to Festus, or lastly from aduro, because it
was roasted.

ADOREA,
the Goods of this World, in Plautus and Varro; Glory, Honor, and Riches, in
Solinus and Apuleius; a Present which was made to Soldiers when they were
victorious, according to Pliny; and Victory it self and Triumph, according to
this Verse of Horace, Lib. 4. Od. 4.

Ille dies qui primus alma risit Adorea.
a Day celebrated upon the account of the first Victory obtained by the Romans
over Hannibal.

ADORARE,
to adore; a kind of Worship which the Romans gave to their Deities, by putting
their Hand to their Mouth and kissing it, as we learn from Pliny, Adorare,
manum ad os admovere. The Romans adored their Gods both standing and kneeling,
with their Heads covered; and after they had turned to the right hand and gone
round about their Statues and Altars, they prostrated themselves before them,
and lifted up their Hand to their Mouth and kissed it. Saturn was the only God
whom they adored with an uncovered Head, that being a Custom which they learned
from the Greeks; which gave occasion to Festus to say, Lucem facere Saturno
sacrificantes, i. e. capita detegere, to uncover the Head when they sacrifice
to him. And we are informed by Apuleius, in his Saturnalia, that it was
accounted a strange Custom to sacrifice to this God with a bare Head, Hinc est
quod ex instituto peregrino, huic deo sacrum aperto capite faciunt: For it is
certain that the Romans did never sacrifice to their Gods, but with their Head
covered, and their Face veiled, for fear lest in this principal Action of
Religion, they should either be diverted by the sight of an Enemy, or
distracted by some Objects, or interrupted by some sinister Omen. This we learn
from Virgil, Lib. 3. Aeneid. V. 403. For when your Ships are come into the
Harbor, says the Sibyl to him, and you have erected Altars by the River side
to sacrifice to the Gods, cover your Head and your Face with a purple Veil, for
fear lest in the time of sacrificing, you should be interrupted by the the
presence of some Enemy: Remember always to adore the Gods after this manner,
and command your Posterity to observe the same way.

Quin ubi transmissae steterint trans aequora classes,
Et positis aris jam vota in littore solves;
Purpureo velare comas adopertus amictu;
Ne qua inter sanctos ignes in honor Deorum.
Hostilis facies occurrat, and omnia turbet.
Hunc socii morem sacrorum, hunc ipse teneto,
Hac vestri maneant in religione nepotes.
Aurelius Victor also tells us the same in his Abridgment of the Roman History,
where speaking of Aeneas, he relates, That this Trojan Prince sacrificing by
the Seaside, perceived the Navy of the Grecians approaching, wherein was
Ulysses, and fearing lest the sight of his Enemy should disturb him in this
Action, he covered his Face, and so ended his Sacrifice, without one minutes
interruption.

In the Second place, The Romans turned to the Right Hand round about the
Statues of their Gods, and their Altars. Plautus, in his Curculio, makes
Phoedromus say, Quo me vertam nescio? I know not to which side to turn me.
Palimirus answered him, playing upon the word, Si deos salutas, dextro versum
censeo, If you mean to adore the Gods, I advise you to turn to the
Right;alluding to the Custom of the Romans, of turning to the Right when they
worship their Gods. Pliny confirms the same thing; When we adore the Gods, says
he, we carry our Hand to our Mouth, and we turn round about the Altar, In
adorando dextram ad osculum referimus, totumque corpus circumagimus. In the
following Times they prostrated themselves before their Gods, which is the most
humble manner of adoring them. Titus Livius, speaking of the Carthaginian
Ambassadors, tells us, That when they arrived at the Roman Camp, and came into
the General's Tent, they prostrated themselves at his Feet, in the posture of
those who adore the Gods, More adorantium procubuerunt; from whence come these
Latin Phrases, Advolvi aris, Procumbere ad aras, To prostrate themselves at the
feet of the Altars.The proud and haughty Emperors exacted the like Adorations
from those who came to make their Reverence to them; but the wise and modest
Emperors rejected this kind of Adoration, as did the Emperor Alexander, by the
relation of Lampridius as well as Maximianus, who said, God forbid that any one
should adore me, by prostrating himself before me; Dii prohibeant ut quisquam
ingenuorum pedibus meis osculum figat.

ADORATI IMBRES,
Sen. Distributions, The Largesses which the Emperor gave to the People of
Rome, which descended like a Shower of Gold, for which they returned Thanks, by
Adoration and very submissive bowing before them.

ADRIANUS,
surnamed Elius. Adrian whom Trajan adopted, and who was the Son of Elius
Adrian his Cousin-German. At his accession to the Empire, being willing to gain
the good Will of the Senate, took a solemn Oath, That he would not punish any
of that Body, but by a Sentence of their own. He remieted all the Arrears of
Taxes and Revenues which were due from private Persons either to himself or the
public Treasury of the Empire. He burnt publicly the Bonds of some private
Men to the value of Two Millions of Gold. He persecuted the Christians
outragiously, until Quadratus and Aristides, two Christian Philosophers,
allayed the Fierceness of his Rage, by their Apologies written in Favor of the
Christians, which prevailed so far with him, that he wrote to the Governors,
forbidding them to punish the Christians for their Religion. The Jews, in his
time, shook off the Yoke of the Romans, under the Conduct of a notable
Impostor, called Barchochebas, i. e. the Son of a Star, who called himself the
Star of Jacob, foretold in the Scriptures, who was to deliver their Nation. The
Cause of this Revolt was the Temple of Jupiter, which Adrian had caused to be
built overagainst the Ruins of the Temple of Jerusalem. Adrian having notice of
it, sent some Troops to Rufus the Governor of Syria, where with he defeated
the Rebels in many Battles: Those who remained after the Defeat, were sold as
Slaves at a very mean rate, and were never suffered to return again to
Jerusalem, whose Name Adrian changed, and called it Aelia Capitolina. He caused
also, says Eusebius, to be placed in bas relief, upon the Gate of Bethlehem,
the Figure of a Swine, which was an Animal that was most abhorred by that
Nation, either to signify the Impurity of this People, or to denote that they
were now subject to the Yoke of the Romans, who had a Swine for one of their
military Signs; or lastly, to show the Contempt he had for their Religion. The
Emperor being not yet satisfied with this mark of Slavery, built also a Temple
in Honor of Venus on Mount Calvary, and another to Jupiter in the place from
whence our Savior ascended, and a Third to Adonis in Bethlehem, where the Son
of God was born, which continued there until the time of the Emperor
Constantine. Adrian was seized with a Bloody Flux, whereof he dyed with
intolerable Pain, after he had reigned Twenty Years and Eleven Months. He was a
Prince endowed with excellent Qualities both of Mind and Body; he affected much
the Reputation of being learned, and Writing well. The Books of his Life which
he published under the Name of Phlegon his freed Man, do plainly prove this.
Photius says, that he had seen Declamations of his making, whose style was
easy and agreeable. A little before he gave up the Ghost, he composed some
Verses, wherein he addressed himself to his Soul, and speaks of its Departure:
He wrote also a long Letter against the Physicians, whom he accuses of having
hastened his Death. By the knowledge he had of Astrology, he has left us a
Journal of all things which were to happen unto him, being besides mightily
addicted to the Superstitions of Magic. The Senate were upon the point of
abrogating all that he had done, and hindering him to be ranked among the Gods;
but Antoninus, his Successor, prevented it, and built him a Temple at Puteoli,
founded a College of Priests to sacrifice to him, and appointed Games to be
observed every Fifth Year in Honor of him.

ADROGATIO, and ADROGARE,
(Terms of the Roman Law) Interrogation, a Demand made in the presence of the
People for Adoptions. It was asked of the Father of him who was to be adopted,
Whether he consented that his Son should pass under the Power of another to be
his Son, and of him who was to adopt him? Whether he consented to do it? An
vellet eum quem adoptaturus esset, justum sibi filium esse? And of the Son, An
id fieri pateretur? Whether he would submit to it? See Arrogatio and Arregare.

ADSERERE
aliquem manu, To set one at liberty, To give him his liberty. It was one of
the ancient ways of granting liberty to Slaves, To take him by the hand and
say, Hunc manu assero, or Liberali causa manu assere, and assero manu in
libertatem, I declare him free.

ADTESTATA
fulgura, Redoubled Thunder, which seems by the redoubling of the noise, to
confirm the good or bad Presages that were made from it.

ADVELITATIO,
(in a Fight) a Skirmish, the action of shooting off an Arrow, or throwing a
Javelin to begin a Battle.

ADVENTITIA
bona, Windfals, Goods that come to us besides our expectation, Fructus
praediorum adventitii, Fines, Leases, or two Fifths of an Estate paid by the
Tenants.

ADVERSARIA,
Papers, or Table-Books, in which a thing was hastily set down for a help to
the Memory, which was afterward to be written fairly. A Memorandum, or
Stone-Book, a Paper-Journal. This word was derived from adverto, because things
are noted down in it, to put us in mind of 'em; or rather, ab adversa pagina,
wherein were written the Disbursments, as the Receipts were written on the
backside. But if the Disbursments and Receipts were found to be equal, this was
called Utramque paginam facere, or perjure among the Romans; the contrary was
called Reliquari, to be behind-hand.

ADULTERIUM,
the Crime of Adultery, which was always detested by the generality of Mankind,
and even by those People that were most barbarous. The Greeks, as well as the
Romans, enacted severe Penalties against those who were guilty of it, as Horace
informs us in his Book De Art Poetica, v. 400.

-- fuit haec sapientia quondam
Concubitu prohibere vago, dare jura maritis,
Oppida moliri, leges incidere ligno,
Ne quis fur esset, neu latro, ne quis adulter.
Solon, the wise Lawgiver of the Lacedaemonians, would have a Woman taken in
Adultery to be punished, by stripping her of all the Ornaments that belong to
her Quality, by banishing her from all religious Assemblies, and from the
Society of Ladies of Honor. The Thurians ordained, by an express Law, That the
Persons who should be found guilty of this Vice, should be personated upon the
Theater, that so they might be exposed to public Infamy.

We have a famous Law among the Roman Laws, called the Lex Julia, which was
made by Augustus, and not by Julius Caesar, as some have imagined, being
deceived by the word Julia; since it is evident, that Octavius, who was surnamed
Augustus, having been adopted by the testament of his Great Uncle, was
afterward called Julius Caesar, according to the custom of Adoptions, to
assume the Name of the Families of the adoptive Fathers. This Law enacted very
severe Penalties against Adulterers, condemning 'em to be fined, and to be
banished into some desert Island; to be scourged, and to be made Eunuchs, as we
may perceive by these Verses of Horace, Sat. 2. lib. 1.

His se praecipitem tecto dedit: ille flagellis
Ad mortem caesus; fugiens hic decidit acrem
Praedonum in turbam: dedit hic pro corpore nummos;
Hunc perminxerunt Calenes: quin etiam illud
Accidit, ut cuidam testes, caudamque salacem
Demeteret ferrum. --
One, finding himself surpised in the Act of Adultery, threw himself headlong
from the Housetop; another was whipped to death; another bought his Pardon; the
other was pissed upon by the most ^bject Slaves; and lastly one was made an
Eunuch.

Lucian, in the Death of Peregrinus, tells us, That this Philosopher, being
taken in Adultery, was forced to throw himself from the Top of a House down to
the Ground, with a Radish at his back, after he had been severely beaten. The
Laws declare Adulterers infamous, and incapable of giving any Testimony in a
Court of Judicature. The Athenian Laws allowed the Father of the Woman, the
Husband, and even the Brother, to kill a Man taken in Adultery, with Impunity.
Upon this Subject we have a very eloquent Discourse of Lysias, which is extant.
Tacitus gives us an Account, that Aemilia Lepida, being accused of Adultery,
was condemned to the Punishment of being interdicted Fire and Water, which was
a kind of Banishment. The same Author informs us also, that Augustus called the
Adulteries of Princesses traiterous and sacrilegious Crimes. Tacitus further
tells us, that Adultery was very rare among the Germans, and when it was
discovered, it wasimmediately punished: The Husband shaved his Wife, and having
stripped her in presence of his Neighbors, he drove her out of his House,
beating her with a Stick, and thus led her about in Disgrace through the whole
City. By the Law of God, a Woman taken in Adultery was to be stoned to death,
as we learn from holy Writ. The Roman Laws did not grant any one Liberty to
kill an Adulterer, but only the Father of the Woman: But if the Husband was so
far transported by his just Resentment to revenge the Disgrace by killing him
who had debauched his Wife, or even his Wife her self, the Fault was pardoned,
and neither he nor his Slaves were punished as Murderers: Si Maritus in
adulterio deprehensam uxorem ocidat, quia ignoscitur ei, non tantum mariti, sed
etiam uxoris servos poena liberari, si justum dolorem exequenti domino non
resisterunt.

ADVOCATI,
those who in ancient times petitioned at Rome, that they might assist at
Trials with their Presence and Authority, and provide the Expenses of the Law
for those who were to plead a Cause, which were called Oratores.

ADVOCATI,
are also the Witnesses which are fetched to be Spectators of a thing. Ebutium
cum armatis fuisse pluribus, cum Advocatis perpaucis eo venisse Caecinnam, says
Cicero, Ebutius came thither with many armed Men, and Caecinna appeared with a
small number of Witnesses.

ADVOCATUS,
in Quintilian and Tacitus is an Advocate who pleads Causes, and defends the
Widow and Fatherless. Let us see what Tacitus says of Advocates, in the
eleventh Book of his Annals, Of all the Villainies which were committed with
Impunity, there was none more common than that of Advocates, who betray their
Clients for Money: for an illustrious Roman Knight named Samius, after he had
given ten thousand Crowns to Suillius to undertake his Defense, run himself
through the Body with a Sword, in his presence and at his House, after he
understood that he had betrayed him: which occasioned all the Senators
unanimously to demand, That the Lex Cynica might be restored, and that the
Advocates for the future should be forbidden to take Presents or Money. But
Suillius and others being concerned in point of Interest, opposed this Advice;
against whom Silius maintained it, and showed, by the Example of ancient
Orators, that they proposed to themselves no other end of their Labor and
Study but Honor and Reputation: He alleged, that we must not defile the most
noble of all Professions with filthy Lucre, nor make a Trade of Eloquence;
that, Fidelity was always to be suspected when it was bought; and that this
would foment Discord and prolong Suits, if they were made gainful to Advocates,
as Diseases are to Physicians; that they should set before themselves, for a
Pattern, Asinius and Messala, and these later Orators Arruntius and Eseruinus,
who arrived at the greatest Dignities without takiag any Fee for their
Eloquence. This Advice was unanimously received, and the Senators were just
ready to condemn all those of Bribery, who should be convicted of taking any
Money, when Suillius, Cossutianus, and others encompassed the Emperor to bag
his Pardon; and after he had signified the Grant of it, they prosecuted their
Defense after this manner; They represented, that there was no Advocate so vain
as to promise himself eternal Fame, as the Reward of his Labors; that they
sought by this means only to maintain their Credit and their Family; and that
it was the Interest of the Public, that Men should have some to defend them;
that, after all, their Eloquence had cost them something, and while they took
pains about the Affairs of another they could not mind their own; that no body
proposed to himself an unprofitable Employment, and a fruitless Profession;
that it was easy for Asinius and Messala, being enriched with the Spoils of the
Civil Wars, and for Eseruinus and Arruntius, being Heirs to great Families, to
make Honor and Glory the end of all their Pains and Study; but withal, there
wanted not Examples of Orators who had received Benefit by their Studies, and
that all the World knew that Curio and Claudius took great Sums for pleading;
that, after all, there was no other Gate but this by which the People could
enter into Dignities, and that by taking away the Reward of Learning, it would
in time be wholly neglected. The Emperor being moved by these Reasons, although
they were rather profitable than honorable, permitted Advocates to take Money
in a Cause, as far as the Sum of two hundred and fifty Crowns; and ordered that
those who took more should be punished as guilty of Bribery.

ADVOCARE,
(in the Law) to pray any one of his Kinfolks and Friends to assist him in his
Affairs with their Presence, Advice and Credit, and to furnish him with means
to defend himself. The Person thus requested waited upon the Judges at their
Houses, to solicit them, and was present at the Trial.

ADYTUM,
(...), a Secret Place, a Retirement in the Temples of the Pagans, where
Oracles were given, into which none but the Priests were admitted. It was the
Sanctuary of the Temples, Isque adytis haec Tristia dicta reportat.
Virgil. Aeneid. 11. v. 115.

Ae, was in old times written and pronounced as A and E separately, and
sometimes as A and D, and at this day is pronounced as a single E. It was also
written AI, and afterward Ae; Musai for Musae, Kaisar for Casar, Juliai for
Julia, and in other the like Instances: from whence it came to pass that in
some words the A remained alone; as Aqua ab Aequando, says St. Isidore. It
cannot be denied but upon the Corruption of the Language Ae was pronounced as a
single E, whence an E was often put for an Ae, as Eger for Aeger, Etas for
Aetas, Es alienum for Aes alienum: and sometimes, on the contrary, an Ae was
put for a single E, as Aevocatus for Evocatus, and the like, whereof the old
Glosses are full: and for this Reason Bid in his Orthography puts Aequor among
the Words that were written with a single E.

AEACUS,
the Son of Jupiter and Egina, the Daughter of the River Asopus. Jupiter
fearing lest Juno should discover his Passion for Egina, transported her into
the Isle of Delos, and had by her this Son called Aeacus: But Juno having
discovered the Intrigue, conveyed a Serpent into a Fountain of which the People
drank, which so poisoned it, that all who drank of it died instantly. Aeacus
seeing himself deprived of Inhabitants, prayed to Jupiter, that he would turn
an heap of Ants into so many Men; which Jupiter granted him, and these Men were
called Myrmidons, because (...) signifies an Ant; and the Isle was called
Egina, as we learn from Pausanias in his Corinthiaca. Aeacus had for his Sons
Peleus who was the Father of Achilles, and Telamon the Father of Ajax. Lucian,
in his Dialogue Of Mourning, speaking of Hell, At first after your Descent, you
meet with a Gate of Adamant, which is kept by Aeacus, the Cousin-german' of
Pluto. And in another place he brings him in saying, That he returned from
thence for fear lest some Death should escape him. This is certain, that he
makes him one of the Porters of Hell, in company with Cerberus, who was a Dog
with three Heads. Yet Ovid, lib. 13. Metamorph. makes him one of the Judges of
Hell, together with Minos and Rhadamanthus, upon the account of his Wisdom and
Integrity, Aeacus huic pater est, qui Jura silentibus illic
Reddit.


AEDEPOL,
See Aedes.

AEDES
in the singular, or AEDES in the plural number. Varro thinks that it was used
for Ades, quod eas plano pede adirent; but since it was formerly written Aides,
it seems rather to come from the Greek (...), an old Word, which is to be met
with in Pindar and Eustathius, and signifies the same with Aedes.

AEDES,
in the singular number, is commonly taken for an Holy Place, a Temple; and
Aedes, in the plural number, for an House, although this Rule is not without
Exception. When the word is used for an Holy Place, it is commonly joined with
some other word which determines it to that Sense, as Aedes Sacra, Aedes
Sacrae, Aedes Jovis, Aedes Pacis, Aedes Deorum, the Temple of Jupiter, the
Temple of Peace, the Temple of the Gods. If no such word be joined to it, it is
commonly to be understood of a Profane Place, although in strictness of Language,
Aedes Sacra and Templum were two different things, for Templum was a place
dedicated by the Augurs, and designed by them for some private Use, but not
consecrated; whereas Aedes Sacra was an Holy Place, and consecrated to some
Deity, but not founded by the Augurs. But if this Place was dedicated by the
Augurs, and consecrated to some Deity, it was called Templum and Aedes Sacra.
And for this Reason doubtless we find these words confounded by Cicero and
others, and used one for the other: for the Temple of Virtue and Honor, which
Cicero called Templum, was called by Aurelius Victor Aedicula, by Titus Livius
Aedes and Cella, and Pliny only Aedes; unless they meant hereby to show that
the Romans used these words indifferently. Another remarkable Difference
betwixt Aedes and Templum is this, that Templum was built upon an high Place to
which Men ascended by many Steps, having a large compass of Ground about it,
which afforded an unbounded Prospect; Aedes, on the contrary, was built in a
low Place, the Entrance was without any Ascent, and it was encompassed with
Houses.

AEDES,
in the singular number, is a House in general, whether public or private, in
the City or the Country: yet according to exact Propriety of Speech, Aedes was
used for Houses in the City, and Villa for those in the Country. Nevertheless,
in the Numbering of the People made by the Censors, Villae were called Aedes.

The Romans, till the time of Pyrrhus, i. e. for more than four hundred Years,
had their Houses built after a very plain fashion. They were made like a
Terras, covered with Slates and Straw, according to the Testimony of Varro,
scandulis robusteis and stramento tectae. But in after-ages the Magnificence of
their Buildings grew to such an Excess, that the Author of the Preface to
Vitruvius says, the House of a private Person was found to amount to near fifty
Millions; and an Aedile caused to be built, in less than a year's time, a
Theater, which had three hundred and sixty-Pillars, whereof the lowermost,
which were of Marble, were forty feet high; those in the middle were of Brass,
and those in the third rank were of Crystal: it is said also that this Theater
was adorned with three thousand Statues of Brass; and, after all, that this so
magnificent Building was to serve only for six Weeks.

We shall elsewhere give an account of the Magnificence of their public
Building.

The Pomp and Accommodations of the Roman Houses were remarkable for their
Height, the great number of Apartments they had for Summer and Winter, for
diverse Ornaments of Atchitecture used about them, as well as for the Beauty and
scarceness of the Materials of which the Bulk of the Building consisted. They
raised their Houses to such a monstrous Height, that to prevent the Ruin of
many Houses, Augustus confined their Height to seventy feet, and Nero to sixty
only. The Orator Aristides considering this excessive Height, says, That if one
should take asunder all the Rafters of their Houses, and range them in order
one beside another, they would cover all Italy from Tiber as far as the Ionian
Sea. These Houses had many Partitions consisting of several Apartments, which
made them to be taken for so many Towns. It Is a strange thing, says Valerius
Maximus upon this occasion, that the Grandees of Rome thought their Houses were
confined within too narrow bounds, tho they were of as large extent as the
Inheritance of Cincinnatus; Anguste se habitare credunt, quorum domus tantum
patet, quantum Cincinnati rura patuerunt. Seneca adds, That they built Courts
as large as Towns, and Houses as high as Mountains. Ovid informs us, That
Vedeius Pollio having left, as a Legacy by his Last Will, to Augustus, a very
magnificent and sumptuous House; this wise Prince, who then discharged the
Office of Censor, thought that the excessive Magnificence of this stately House
was a bad Example, and therefore caused it to be demolished. After this Livia
built in the same place a Temple, which she dedicated to Conjugal Concord. We
scarce read any thing else in the Historians and Poets but Invectives against
the Houses of the Grandees of Rome, which had cooped up the Country Farmers
within a very narrow compass, which took up whole Countries, and enclosed
Canals of Water, round and four-squared, of very large extent upon the great
Lakes of Italy; whereas in former times, the Houses of private Men were small,
and the Republic great, all sumptuous Buildings were reserved for the public
Conveniences of Cities, or the Adorning of Temples. This is what Horace tells
us in these Verses,

Iam pauca aratro jugera regia
Males relinquunt: undique latins
Extenta visentur Lucrino
Stagna lacu, platanusque coelebs
Evincet ulmos. -- Non it a Romuli
Praescriptum, and intensi Catonis
Auspiciis, veterumque norma.
Privatus illis census erat brevis:
Commune magnum -- oppida publico
Sumtu jubentes, and Deorum
Templa nove decorare saxo.
Od. 15. lib. 11. This Poet elsewhere blames one of his Friends, who had reason
to apprehend the approach of Death, and yet was still projecting to build Works
of Marble; The his whole Thoughts ought to be employed upon Death and the
Grave, yet the Earth was not large enough for his Designs, and he undertook to
turn back the Sea, to make may for his Buildings; he drove away his Neighbors,
whose Lands were added to his own, instead of thinking in how few days he
himself should be laid in a Grave, which would take up no more room than those
he had driven away from their Possessions. The same Complaints we may make at
this day, of the greatest part of the Grandees, who enlarge their own Lands at
the expense of private Men:

Non ebur, neque aureum
Mea renides in domo lacunar --
Tu secanda marmora
Lacas sub ipsum funus: and sepulcri
Immemor struis domos:
Marisque Baiis obstrepentis urges
Summovere littora,
Paruen locuples centinente ripa.
Quid quod usque proximos
Revellis agri terminos? and ultra
Limits clientium
Salis avarus? --
-- Quid ultra tendis? Aequa tellas
Pauperi recluditur,
Regumque pueris, etc.
Od. 18. lib. 11. AEDEPOL,
as if one should say, per Aedem Pollucis, By the Temple and Deity of Pollux:
an Oath of the ancient Romans, common both to Men and Women. This God was the
Protector of the Romans, who built him a Temple at Rome.

AEDICULA RIDICULI,
the Chapel of the God of Joy and Laughter, built at two miles distance from
Rome, without the Gate Capena. The Occasion of the Building of it was this;
Hannibal, after the Battle of Canna, came and besieged Rome, on that side where
was the Gate Capena; but being forced to raise the Siege with great Disgrace,
because of the Inundations and Storms which happened at that time; the Romans,
upon this Occasion, raised a very loud Laughter, and therefore they built a
little Oratory, under the Name of the God of Joy and Laughter. It Is true they
were not the first who built a Temple to him: for Plutarch tells us, in the
Life of Lycurgus, the Lacedaemonians reared up a Statue to this Deity, and the
Inhabitants of Hypata in Thessaly sacrificed to him every year. Pansanias also
makes mention of a God called (...), the God of Laughter. The Romans kept a
Feast to him every year, during which they did nothing but laugh and play
childish Tricks.

AEDILES,
Roman Magistrates, who had the over-seeing of Buildings, both holy and
profane, and of Baths and Aquaeducts. There were three sorts of Aediles; the
Aediles of the People, who were called Aediles Plebeii, or Minores Aediles; the
Aediles Curules, or Majores Aediles; and the Aediles of the Corn, called
Aediles Cereales.

The Aediles of the Commonalty, or such as were taken from among the People,
were two in number, and officiated the same time with the Tribunes of the
People: for these latter Magistrates foreseeing that they should be embarrass'd
with the multitude of Affairs, desired of the Senate that they would allow them
some Officers, with whom they might entrust matters of lesser moment, for which
they should be accountable to them. This the Senate was forced to grant them,
and they were chosen every year, in the same Assembly, with the Tribunes. This
Office of the Aediles included several Functions, which rendered it
considerable in process of time. Besides the Care of Buildings, both public
and private, sacred and profane, they took care also that they should be built
in due proportion, and in a straight Line, without suffering any of them to jet
forth beyond the work, into the Streets and public Places. And it was chiefly
upon the account of this part of their Office that they were called Aediles,
according to the Opinion of Varro, Aedilis qui sacras Aedes and privatas
procuraret, dictus. In the second place, they took care of the Streets, the
Highways and public places, of keeping up the Bridges and Banks, of cleansing
the Streets and Sinks, and lastly, of providing for Aquaeducts and public
Works, about which they made Edicts called Aeditiones, Aedilitia. Thirdly, the
taking care of Weights and Measures was part also of their Duty; they destroyed
false Weights and Measures, and laid great Fines on those that used them; they
confiscated Commodities which were found to be decayed, and threw such as were
naught into the River Tiber: which made Plautus say in his Rudens, It Is solet
Neptunus, quamvis fastidiosus Aedilis est,
Si quae improbae sunt merces, jactat omens.


Alluding, without doubt, to this part of the Aediles Office. In the fourth
place, they had the Oversight of the Victuals for the City and Provisions for
the Army: they set a price upon them, and took care that no Monopoly should be
made to burden the Public: they permitted no Usury in Commerce, and when they
discovered any Usurers, they summoned them to appear before the Tribunes, that
they might be punished, as Titus Livius informs us, They took cognizance of
Debauches that were usual in Taverns, and forbad the selling of any extravagant
Delicacies, according to the Testimony of Suetonius, in the Life of Tiberius,
l. 34. They punished debaucht Women, and such as played in Gaming Houses. They
kept the Orders of the People, which were locked up in the Temple of Ceres. And
Polybius relates, that the Treaty of Peace between the Carthaginias and the
Romans was entrusted with the Aediles, who placed it in the Temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus. It Was one part of their Office to review Comedies and other pieces
of Wit, they also were obliged to grant to the People, at their own Expense,
magnificent Sports, such as those of the Circus, and of the Goddess Flora; and
because they were once excused from doing it, this gave occasion to the
Creation of the Aediles Curules, of whom I shall next speak.

The Aediles of the People being arrived to so high a pitch of Honor, by so
many considerable Offices; the Patricians or Sons of the Senators, had a mind
to have a share in them, and to this purpose a favorable Occasion presented it
self: for the Tribunes having obtained a Consulship for the People, and the
Patricians a Praetor of their own Order, the Senate thought fit, for appeasing
all Differences on both sides, that public Thanks should be given to the Gods
by Sacrifices and magnificent Games, which they ordered the Aediles to grant:
But they excusing themselves upon the account of the great Expense they were
forced to be at; the Patricians said, they were ready, for the Honor and
Service of the Gods, to be at the Expense, if they would admit them to the
Office of the Aediles. Whereupon their Offers were received, and M. Furius
Camillus, being then Dictator, named to the People, by order of the Senate, two
Patricians who were created Aediles Curules, in the year 385, or 388 from the
Building of Rome. The two first Patrician Aediles were Cornelius Quintus
Capitolinus and P. Cornelius Scipio, according to the relation of Titus Livius,
in the beginning of his seventh Book. These Aediles were called Majores and
Curules, because they had the Privelege to be carried in a Chair of State which
was adorned with Ivory, and to sit upon it in a Chariot, when they gave
Audience; whereas the other Aediles sat only upon Benches, as the Tribunes and
Questors did. They had also the Privilege, according to Asconius Pediaenus, of
wearing the Garment called Praetexta adorned with Purple, and of having Lictors
walk before them with Bundles of Rods, as Apuleius says; but Aulus Gellius
seems to contradict him, when he remarks, that the Aediles never punished any
Person, nor beat him with Rods; which may be understood of the Aediles of the
People and not of these superior ones. The chief Office of the Aediles Curules
was to look after the Celebration of the great Roman Sports, to be at the
charge of Plays, and the Shows of Gladiators to the People; the public Farms
and Fines, which were allowed to defray the Expense of them, being but a small
matter, they chose many times to make no use of them, to the end they might the
more insinuate themselves into the Favor of the People by this
Disinterestedness and Liberality, and by that means be the more easily promoted
to other Offices of the Republic. They had a share in all the other Offices of
the Plebeian Aediles, whereof we have already spoken. Above all, they took care
that no new Religious Worship should be introduced either into public or
private Assemblies, nor any new Doctrine taught without the Order of the
Pontifices, and of this they were bound to inform the Senate. They were careful
also, at least under the Emperors, to prevent the publishing of any ill Book,
and when any such appeared, they ordered it to be burnt, after they had
examined it, and condemned it as pernicious to the State. Labienus published
some Books of this sort, according to the Relation of Seneca, Libros Labieni
per Aediles cremandos censuere Patres.

Aediles Cereales, the Aediles that presided over the Corn, were also appointed
and taken out of the Order of the Patricions by Julius Caesar, to supervise the
Corn. It Is probable that these two last were created only to ease the four
former, who were oppressed with a multitude of Business. There were also
Aediles in municipal Cities, like those at Rome.

AEDILITAS,
Aedility, the Magistracy of the Aediles, which lasted a year. It included many
Magistrates and their different Offices, such as these, of the Consul, the
Chief Justice, Surveyor of the Highways, and the High Treasurer. This Office
continued in the Empire, according to Justus Lipsius, till Constantines's time,
who suppressed it, together with other Magistracies of the Empire.

AEDITUUS or AEDITIMUS,
a Sacrist, or Sexton, a Treasurer to the Temples of the False Gods, who took
care of the Offerings and other Ornaments of the Gods.

AEDITUA,
a Sucrist of the Female Deities. with whom was entrusted the keeping of the
Treasures of the Temple.

AEDON,
the Wife of King Zethus, the Brother of Amphiron; she by mistake killed her
own Son Itylus, instead of the Son of her Brother-in-law, whom she hated. She
designed to have killed her self when she found her mistake; but the Gods in
compassion changed her into a Linnet, who is always complaining of this
Misfortune in her Song.

AEGEON,
a Giant. See Briarens.

AEGEUS,
the Son of Pandion King of Athens, who begot Theseus upon the Nymph Aethra.
Minos King of Candia declared War against him, to revenge the Death of his Son
Androgeus, whom some of the Athenians had killed. In this War the Athenians had
considerable Losses, which forced them to desire a Peace, and it was granted
them, on condition that they should send every year six young Men, of the
better sort of Families, to be exposed to the Minotaure, for appeasing the
Ghost of his Son. The Lot fell upon Theseus, the Son of King Aegeus, who
escaped the Fury of this Monster: But Aegeus seeing the Ship return, which had
carried this cruel Oblation, and not percieving the white Flag set up, (as had
been agreed between them) he supposed his Son was dead, which put him into such
a Fit of Despair, that he threw himself headlong into the Sea. The Athenians
instituted Feasts to his Honor, and sacrificed to him as a Sea-God, and an
Adopted Son of Neptune.

AEGEUM MARE,
the Aegean Sea, otherwise called Archipelago, or the White-Sea. It Is a part of
the Gulf of the Mediterranean Sea, which begins at the Eastern part of the
Isthmus of Corinth, or the Promontory Suniam, and reaches as far as the
Hellespont, dividing Greece and Europe from Asia. Suidas would have this Sea
called the Aegean, upon account of Aegeus, who threw himself headlong into it,
supposing his Son Theseus, who went to fight the Minotaure, had been slain.
Others give it this Name upon the account of a Rock, which lies between the two
Isles of Tenedos and Chio, having the shape of a Goat. The Isles of this Sea
were divided by the Ancients into Cyclades and Sporades: they reckoned fifty of
the Cyclades, which encompassed the Isle of Delos like a Circle; but the
Sporades were scattered here and there toward the Isle of Crete or Candia.

AEGERIA,
a Nymph, or Deity that was worshipped in the Forest Aricina, which Titus Livius
places seven miles from Rome, but Festus says it lay only a little way without
the Gate Collina. Numa Pompilius, the second King of Rome, feigned that he had
frequent Conversation with this Deity, that he might add greater Weight and
Authority to his Laws and Ordinances, and root them deeper in the Minds of the
Romans, making them believe that this Nymph Aegeria dictated them to him. Ovid
makes her the Wife of Numa, who was changed into a Fountain by Diana. Fast.
lib. 3. ver. 275. Aegeria est quae praebet aquas, Dea grata Camoenis:
Illa Numae conjux, consiliumque fuit.
She was reverenced by the Romans as a Deity; and the Women with child prayed
to her, in the time of their Travel, that by her Aid they might be safely
delivered of their Children, as we learn from Festus: Aegeria nymphae
sacrificabant praegnantes, quod eam putabant facile conceptum alvo egerere. She
was also called Fluonia, because she stopped the Bloody Flux in Women.

AEGIALA,
the Wife of Diomedes, whom Venus inspired with so brutish a Passion, that she
prostituted her self to all Comers, in revenge for the Wound she had received
from her Husband at the War of Troy. Diomedes not being able to endure the
Whoredoms of his Wife, abandoned her, and retired into Italy, where he agreed
with Danaus for one part of his Kingdom, which was called Graecia Magna: He
built there a City called Argos Hippium, and in after times Argyrippa, as
Servius says upon the eleventh of the Aeneids.

AEGINA,
an Island with a City of the same Name, near to Peloponnesus and Attica, which
was distant only four Leagues from the famous Port Pynaeum, in the lower part
of Athens. It was also so called from Aegina the Daughter of Asopus, King of
Baeotia, by whom Jupiter, in a Disguise of Fire, had two Sons called Aeacus and
Rhadamanthus.

AEGIOCHUS,
a Surname given to Jupiter, from a Goat, which the Greeks call (...), Genesis
(...), upon the account of the Milk with which he was nourished in his Infancy,
by the Nymphs Amalthaea and Melissa. The Poets tell us, that when this Goat
died Jupiter covered his Shield with its Skin; but afterward he brought it to
life again, and placed it among the Celestial Signs.

AEGIS,
the Goat-skin of Jupiter; a Buckler covered with the Skin of the Goat of
Amalthaea the Nurse of Jupiter. This Buckler he gave to Pallas, who painted the
Head of Medusa upon it, the bare Sight whereof petrifi'd both Men and Beasts.
Jupiter took upon him the Name of Aegiochus, i. e. the Goat-skin-Bearer.

AEGIS,
a frightful Monster, born of the Earth, which vomited Fire, wherewith all the
Forests of Phrygia were consumed, from Mount Taurus as far as the Indies. This
forced the Inhabitants to abandon the Country: But Minerva killed this Monster
and covered her Buckler with its Skin, that it might serve not only for
Defense, but also for a Mark of her Victory. Thus Natalis Comes relates the
Fable, lib. 4. cap. 5. and Aegidem feram vocam monstrum prope inexpugnahile
obtrunc^^it, etc.

AEGISTHUS,
born of the incestuous mixture of Thyestes with his own Daughter Pelopia. He
was exposed to Beasts by his Father, in order to conceal his Crime; but the
Shepherds saved him, and fed him with the Milk of a Goat, from whence he was
called Aegysthus. When he came to age, he killed his Uncle Atreus, the Father
of Agamemnon, and afterward Agamemnon also at a Feast, by the help of his own
Wife Clytemnestra whom he had abused. But Orestes the Son of Agamemnon revenged
the Death of his Father, by killing Aegysthus and the faithless Clytemnestra.

AEGIOCHUS,
(...), the Surname of Jupiter, the same with Aegiochus. There are several
Medals of the Emperors Philip and Valerian, upon the Reverse whereof is
represented a Goat, with this Inscription, Jovi Conservatori Augusti, and on
the other side a Goat carrying Jupiter an Infant on his back, with these Words,
Jovi crescenti.

AEGLE,
the Daughter of Hesporus King of Italy, and one of the Hasperides, who had a
Garden near to Lixa, a City of Mauritania toward the Frontiers of Aethiopia,
where there were Trees laden with Apples of Gold, which were guarded by a
Dragon; but Hercules killed it and carried off the Fruit. There is also another
Aegle, the Daughter of the Sun and Near^, mentioned by Virgil in his sixth
Eclogue. This is a Greek word, which signifies Light or Splendour.

AEGOBOLUS,
an Epither given to Bacchus, upon the account of a Goat which the Potnians
sacrificed to him instead of an Infant, to expiate the Murder they had
committed on one of the Priests of his Temple. For Pausonias relates, That one
day when the Potnians were sacrificing to him in his Temple, they got drunk,
and in that drunken Fit killed one of his Priests, who in revenge sent a Plague
among 'em, which made their Country desolate: To put a stop to this Mischief,
they had recourse to the Oracle, who ordered to sacrifice to him every year a
young Boy, to appease him; but some time after the God was contented with the
Sacrifice of a Goat instead of a Boy.

AEGYPTUS,
the Son of the ancient Belus. He had fifty Sons which he married to the fifty
Daughters of his Brother Danous, who all cut their Husbands Throats the first
Night of their Marriage, Hypermnestra only excepted, who followed not this
cruel and barbarous Direction, but preserved her Husband Lynceus alive, who
drove Danous away from the Kingdom of the Argives. Aegyptus, according to
Ensebius, gave name to Egypt, which was formerly called Oceana, Aerea and
Osirina.

AEGYPTUS,
Egypt, a large Country of Africa, watered by the River Nile, which renders it
very fruitful. It was at first inhabited by Misraim, the second Son of Cham,
which signifies Egypt. It Is divided into two parts, the Upper and the Lower.
The Upper contains Thebais, which the Prophets Esaias and Jeremy call Phetros:
The Greeks call the Lower Egypt, Delta, upon the account of the linkeness of
its figure to that of their Letter D. The Original of the founding a Kingdom in
this vast Country is uncertain and fabulous: only we know that it had Kings
from Abraham's time. Misraim was the Father of Ludim, from whom the Ethiopians
are descended, who dispute the Antiquity of their Original with the Egyptians;
but this they did out of vanity only, and upon very bad grounds. The first
Kings were called Pharaohs, and the latter Ptolemy's-Egypt was represented in
the ancient Medals by the Goddess Isis, the great Deity of the Egyptians; she
held in one hand a Sphere, as being the Mother of Arts and Sciences, and in the
other a Vessel or Amphora filled with Ears of Corn, to show its Fertility,
which proceeds from the Overflowing of the Nile that waters it, and fattens it
with the slim^ (...) behind when it retires into its (...) Egypt was reduced
into a Province by Aug^^^^^ Caesar, after the Defeat of Cleopatra, who was the
last Queen of it, in the year of the World 4015, according to Petavius, or in
3915, acccording to Calvisius, and in the year 717. from the Building of Rome.

AEGYPTII,
the Egyptians. Who were the first of all the Nations that we know of (says
Lucian in his Syrian Goddess) that had any knowledge in Divine matters, and who
founded Temples, and instituted Mysteries and Ceremonies; for the Assyrians
learned these things of them some time after, and added to the Worship of the
Gods, the Adoration of Idols, because there was none of them at first amongst
the Egyptians. These are they (says the same Lucian in his Judicial Astrology)
who have cultivated Astrology, measured the Course of each Star, and
distinguished the Year into Months and Seasons, regulating the Year by the
Course of the Sun, and the Months by that of the Moon: They divided then
Heavens into twelve parts, and represented each Constellation by the Figure of
some Animal, from whence comes the Diversity in their Religion; for all the
Egyptians did not make use of all the parts of the Heavens for their Gods:
Those who observed the Properties of Aries adored a Ram, and so of the rest.
It Is said also that they worshipped the Ox Apis, in memory of the celestial
Bull; and in the Oracle, which is consecrated to him, Predictions are taken
from the nature of this Sign; as the Africans do from Aries in memory of
Jupiter Hammon, whom they adored under that figure. The Egyptians worshipped
Water in public, but they had other Gods whom they adored in private: Some
worshipped a Bull or an Ape; others a Stork or a Crocodile; some worshipped
Onions, others a Cat, or a Monster with a Dog's Head; some adored the Right
Shoulder, others the Left, or half of the Head; and some an Earthen Platter or
a Cup. Lastly, Diodorus tells us, That they adored the Privy Parts; and even
the very Excrements, according to Clement, in his fifth Book of Recognitions.
Their Custom was to salute their Gods in the Morning, which they called
Adoration. They sang Hymns to their honor, which were described in
Hieroglyphic Characters upon sacred Parchments, and none but those who were
initiated into their Mysteries could read or decypher'em, as being Figures of
different Animals, whereof each had its proper Signification, which none else
could penetrate into, at least not till they were explained.

AELIUS,
a Name common to many illustrious Romans of the Aelian Family; as to Aelius
Gallus, a Roman Knight, who carried the Roman Arms into Arabia; to Aelius
Paetus, a Consul, who having a mind to raise the siege before Aretium in
Tuscany, lost there his Army and his Life in the view of the besieged; to
Aelius Pertinax, who succeeded the Emperor Commodus, and enjoyed the Empire
only Three Months, to Aelius Adrianus and Aelius Verus, who were likewise
Emperors. See Adrianus and Verus.

AELIA CAPITOLINA,
the City of Jerusalem was thus called by Aelius Adrianus, who caused it to be
rebuilt, after he drove all the Jews from thence who had rebelled against the
Romans.

AELIANUM JUS,
the Aelian Code, which contained a Treatise of Personal Actions: It was
composed by Sextus Aelius, a Lawyer and Philosopher.

AELLO,
one of the Harpies to whom this Name agrees, because it signifies One that
carries all away by force.

AEMILIUS,
the Name of a Roman Family, from which many great Men were descended, and
among the rest Paulus Aemilius the Consul. Tacitus relates of him this piece of
History; The dissolute Life of the Priests of Isis, who were called Galli,
obliged the Senate to order, That the Temple of this Goddess, and of Serapis,
should be razed to the ground. There was no person found so bold as to execute
this Order, because every one scrupled its Lawfulness in point of Religion.
Paulus Aemilius seeing this, put off his magistratical Robe, and was the first
who, with an Ax, begun to demolish this Temple, which had served for a Retreat
to the most infamous People, and by his own Example he encouraged the Workmen.
When he was Pro-Consul, finding himself besieged in his Camp by the Ligurians,
who had amused him in vain, he tried all ways possible to disintangle himself;
but being very much pressed, without any hopes of receiving Succors, he forced
his way through the Enemies, and then defeated 'em, reduced 'em to beg a Peace,
and to deliver him Hostages. Perseus, King of the Macedonians, having pitched
his Camp advantagiously upon Mount Olympus, Paul Aemilius endeavored by all
means to dislodg him from thence, and having discovered a Path which led to a
Hill, whereon was built the Temple of Apollo Pythius, he sent his Two adopted
Sons, Scipio Africanus, and Fabius Maximus, to seize upon it. Perseus having
notice of it, stopped up their Passage, but was forced to decamp, and give him
battle, which Paul Aemilius joyfully accepted: The Fight was well maintained on
both sides, but at last the Victory fell to the Romans, who left 20000
Macedonians dead upon the place. Perseus escaped with the Cavalry, but
distrusting their Fidelity, he came and surrendered himself to the Proconsul,
who led him in triumph to Rome, with Three of his Children; The youngest,
called Alexander, became very skilful in the Art of Turning, and Joyners Work.
Such was the Fate of the last Successor to Alexander the Great, and by his
Defeat, Macedonia was reduced into a Province, and made tributary to the
Romans, after it had been governed by Thirty Kings, during the space of 923
Years.

AENEAS,
a Phrygian by Nation, descendfrom the Kings of Troy in this order: Dardanus
was the Father of Erichtonius, and he was the Father of Tros, who had Three
Children, Ilus, Assaracus and Ganimedes. From Ilus descended Laomedon, and from
Laomedon, Priam, the last King of Troy. Assaracus married his Granddaughter
Clytidora, the Daughter of Laomedon, by whom he had Capys, and Capys had
Anchises, the Father of Aeneas by the Nymph Nais; and Anchises had Aeneas by
the Goddess Venus. Whether it were that the Perfections of the Mother of Aeneas
caused the Name of the Goddess of the Graces to be given unto her, or that
Anchises had a mind to conceal her true Name, and invented this Fable to render
his Son the more venerable, or that he thought thereby to raise the Value of
his own Merits; I say, whatever was the cause of it, this is certain, that no
other Name of the Mother of Aeneas is to be met with, but that of Venus. From
hence it appears, that Virgil had reason to call Aeneas a Dardanian; for
besides that he descended from Dardanus, there was also occasion to call him
so, because his Fathers ordinary abode was in Dardania. Upon the first noise of
the Descent upon the Greeks, Aeneas threw himself into Troy to defend it.
Dyctis Cretensis expressly accuses him of giving the Palladium to Diomedes, and
betraying the City. Titus Livius does not accu^se him of Treachery, but he is
of opinion, that the Greeks treated him favorably, as well as Antenor, because
these two Princes were for Peace, and for restoring Helena, who was the cause
of that War to her Husband Menelaus. Sabellicus having rejected the Opinion of
Dio, advances another of his own: Aeneas, says he, not being able to persuade
the Trojans to Peace, and being otherwise discontented, treated secretly with
the Greeks, and let them in by one of the Gates of the City, upon which was the
figure of a Horse. This gave occasion to the Fiction of a Wooden Horse, which
is mentioned by Homer, and after him by Virgil. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, on
the contrary, affirms, That Aeneas made extraordinary Efforts to defend Troy
and the Palace of King Priam; that he seeing himself abandoned, the Citadel
forced, and Priam killed, retired, with all his Family, and those who escaped
death at the sacking of the City, to Mount Ida, by the favor of the Night,
while the Enemy was busy in taking the Spoil; that then he built many Ships
with the Trees he found upon that Mountain, and after he had equipped 'em with
Necessaries, he embarked with the rest of the Trojans upon the Hellespont, and
made his first Descent into a Peninsula of Thracia, called Pellena, where he
built a City of his own Name. From thence he sailed to Delos, and from Delos to
Cythera, from Cythera to Zacintha, from Zacintha to Leucada, from Leucada to
Ictium, from Ictium to Ambracia. After this he coasted along the Seaside, and
cast Anchor at Buthrota, from whence he transported himself to Dodona, and
there having consulted the Oracle, he was confirmed in his design of going into
Italy; whereupon he reimbarqu'd, and steered his course toward Sicily, and
made a Descent upon Laurentum, after he had passed through many Dangers at Sea,
which proceeded from the Hatred of the implacable Juno. After he landed in the
Country, he discovered in it many Springs of Water, and perceived a Sow in a
Wood, with Thirty small Boar-Pigs, as the Oracle of Dodona had foretold to him:

Littoreis ingens inventa sub Ilicibus sus
Triginta capitum foetus enixa jacebit,
Alba solo recubant, albi circum ubera nati:
Is locus urbis erit. --
Aen. l. 3. v. 390. and seq. King Latinus and the Rutuli being alarmed at the
arrival of these new Guests, came forth to fight 'em, and drive 'em out of
their Country: But the Latins having suffered many Losses, and Turnus being
overcome by Aeneas in a Duel, at last a Peace was concluded, by the Marriage of
Lavinia to Aeneas, who built a City called Lavinium, from the Name of his Wife.
This for the present united the Aborigines and Trojans under the common Name of
Latins, in Honor of his Father-in-Law Latinus. (This has no relation at all
to the Etymology of Latium, a latendo, in which there is some reference to the
Prophecies of Numbers of Daniel, which are justified by the Event.) Aeneas was
killed in a Battle against the Rutuli, on the Banks of the River Numicus; and
because he did not appear again after this Fight, this gave occasion to the
common Report that he was carried up into Heaven, though it is much more probable,
that he fell into the River when he was fighting, and was detained at the
bottom by the weight of his Armor: Nevertheless, a little Temple was built to
him with this Inscription, Patri Dei indigeti, qui; Numici amnis undas
temperat. And here it may be observed, that the Kingdom of Latium seems rather
to have given Name to Latinus, than that this King should give his Name to this
Kingdom; for Latium was before Latinus, who reigned 43 Years over the Latins.
S. Austin has abridg'd the History of Aeneas, Lib. 8. De Civ. Dei, cap. 19.
After the sacking of Troy, Aeneas came into Italy with Twenty Ships, which
carried thither the surviving Trojans. Latinus was then King of it, but after
his death Aeneas reigned Three Years in Italy: Because his Body did not appear
after his death, the Latins made a God of him. Homer makes Aeneas appear very
glorious among the great Heroes of his Iliads, and says, That the Trojans
reverenced him as a God. The younger Philostratus, in his Heroicks, equals him
with Hector for his size and Mien, but says, that he surpassed him in Virtue
and good Sense; and that the Trojans called Hector their Arm, and Aeneas their
Head. It Is agreed among all these Authors, that Aeneas came into Italy under
the Reign of Latinus the Son of Faunus; but the difficulty is, to know what
Year he came, of which Titus Livius, and many others say nothing. Dionysius
Halicarnassaus thinks, that it was in the Forty Fifth Olympaid; Cassiodorus in
the Twenty Fifth; and Vigenere in the Twentieth; insomuch that it is difficult
to determine in a matter so much contested; yet there is some reason to believe,
that Aeneas landed in Italy in the Thirty Fourth Year of the Reign of Latinus.

AENEAS
Secundus, or Latinus Sylvius, as Sextus Victor calls him, or Silius and
Posthumous, as Messala calls him, was the posthumous Son of Aeneas and Lavinia.
The Name of Silvius was given him because he was brought up in the Woods,
whither his Mother retired for fear of Ascanius her Son-in-Law. He had a great
Contest with Julus, his Nephew, the Son of Ascanius; but the Aborigines
favored in his Person the Blood of their ancient Kings, and advanced him to
the Throne, and pacified Julus by promoting him to the chief Honors and
Employments of the State. The Caesar's glory in their descent from him. Silvius
reigned 29 Years.

AENEAS
Tertius Silvius reigned 31 Years.

AEOLUS,
the Son of Jupiter and Acesta, or Sergesta, the Daughter of Hippotas, a
Trajan, who is thought to have lived at the time of the Trajan War. He
commanded the little Isles, called Aeolionae, and was by the Poets made King of
the Winds. Virgil speaks of him as such, Aeneid. Lib. 1. v. 6.

-- Hic vasto rex Aeolus antro
Luctantes ventos, tempestotesque sooner as
Imperio premit, ac vinclis and carere frenat.
But the Worship of the Winds was more ancient than the Reign of Aealus. The
Persians and Scythians adored them, according to Strabo and Lucian, and yet
they never heard a word of the King of these little ^sles. All the Eastern
Idolaters gave Honor to the Winds, before ever the Fable of Aeolus was forged.
It Is probable that the Sicilians and Italians took occasion, from the nature of
these Isles, to make them the Dominion of the Winds, because they frequently
saw storms of Smoke, Wind, and Fire issued out of them. Diodorus Sicedus, and
Varro, supposed that the Poets attributed the Government of the Winds to
Aeolus, because he perfectly understood the Nature of them, and was the first
that invented Sails for Ships. Velorum usum docuit, nauticae rai studiosus:
(...) ignis quoque prodigiis diligenter observatis, qui ^anti ingruituri essent
indigenis certo praedixit. Unde ventorum praeses and disponsater a fabula
declaratus est. Servius said that there are Nine Isles in the Sicilian-Sea,
whereof Varro tells us Aeolus was King: And from hence came the Fiction, That
the Winds were under his Government, because he foretold Storms that should
happen, by observing the Vapors and Smoke which proceeded from these Isles, and
ehiefly from that which takes its Name from Vulcan. But this learned
Grammarian, after he has related this Fable, confesses it was founded upon
Reason. Pliny says, That the Isle Strongyle was one of these burning and
smoking Isles; that the Inhabitants, by its Smoke, foretold the Winds Three
Days before, and that upon this account it was feigned, that Aeolus was Lord of
the Winds. Btrabo remarks out of Polybius, concerning the Isle of Lippara,
which is the greatest of the Seven Aeolian Isles, that before the South Wind
blew, it was covered with so thick a Cloud, that it hindered the near Neighbors
of the sight of Sicily; but before the North Wind blew, that then this great
Isle vomited up clear Flame, and made an exceeding great noise and roaring;
upon which account, the King of these Isles was called the King of the Winds.

AEOLIAE INSULAE,
the Aeolian or Vulcanian Isles, near the Promontory of Pelorus in Sicily,
where Aeolus reigns. They are Seven, of which, the most considerable is that of
Lipara, from whence proceed Winds, and storms of Fire and Flames, together with
terrible Earthquakes, which occasioned the Poets to say, That it was the
Habitation of the Winds, and the Forge of Vulcans, who, with his Cyclops, were
the Smiths of the Gods.

AEQUIMELIUM,
a great place in Rome before the Temple of the Goddess Tellus, at one end of
the Street called Execrable. This place was so called from Saptimus Melius, a
Roman Knight, who had a House there which was razed to the ground by the
Sentence of the Dictator L. Quintius Cincinnatus, because he aimed at usurping
the Sovereign Power, by bestowing Largesses on the People. L. Minutius,
Commissary General of the Provisions, discovering the secret Intrigues of
Melius, gave notice of 'em to the Senate, who judged it an Affair of so great
consequence, that immediately they created a Dictator, called Cincinnatus. The
next day after Melius was cited to answer the Accusation, but he refused to
appear, and endeavored to make his escape, but was pursued and killed by
Servi^ius. The Dictator ordered that his House should be razed to the ground,
and that no person for the future should build-upon the place where it stood:
And to perpetuate the memory of this Perfidiousness of Melius and of his
Punishment, the place was called ever after Aequimelium, quasi ab aquata domo
Malii, pro domo sua. Cicero, in his Oration, relates the Story thus; Melii
regnu^^ appetentis domus est complanata, and quid aliud aquum accidisse Meli^
P. R. judicaret? Nomine ipso Aequtmelil stultitiae pirna comprobata est. Titus
Livius relates the Story at large, Book IV. Dec. 1.

AER,
See it after Aerarius.

ERA,
a Number stamped upon Money, to signify the current Value of it, according to
Lutilius; it signifies also the same with Epoch, i. e. A certain Time from
whence to compute or begin the new Year, or some particular way of reckoning
Time and Years. And in this last sense the word is thought to be corrupted, and
to come from the custom of the Spaniards, who reckoned their Years by the Reign
of Augustus, who, for shortness sake, they commonly set down thus, A. E. R. A.
to signify Annus erat regni Augusti. The Transcriber not understanding this
sufficiently, in process of time, made of these Letters the word Era; in the
first sense the word comes from Aes, and Era in the Plural Number, from whence
was made the Era of the Feminine Gender, either because in their Accounts to
every particular Sum, they prefixed the Word Era, as we do now Item, or
because the Number of Years was marked down in Tables with little Brass Nails.

ERA MILITUM,
in Suetonius, the Soldiers Pay, because that Money was anciently made of Brass.

AERARIUM,
the public Treasury, the Revenues of the Roman Commonwealth, for defraying
their necessary Expenses both in time of Peace and War.

AERARIUM MILITARE,
the Funds settled by Caesar-Augustus, for maintaining the Roman Armies, which
were managed by Three Treasurers.

AERARIUM VICESIMARUM,
a Treasury or Fund which arose from the Twentieth part, and was kept as a
Reserve for the extreme Necessities of the Commonwealth. As soon as the People
of Rome became powerful enough to enlarge the Bounds of their Empire, and
conquer almost all the World, they held it their utmost Policy to make
themselves absolute Masters of the Conquered and their Possessions; and
therefore all the Gold and Silver, and even the precious Movables which could
be carried away, after some part of 'em had been distributed among the
Soldiers, were carried away to Rome, where they served, first to make up the
Pomp of their Triumph, and then were locked up in the public Treasury, to be
kept as an eternal Monument to Posterity of the Glory of the Conquerors, and
the Shame of the Conquered. The Victors reserved to themselves the entire
Propriety of the Lands and Immoveables, permitting the Vanquished to be Usu
fructuarii, which was only to enjoy the Products of the Earth, on condition
that they cultivated it, and paid them annually a part of the Produce. These
Lands were called Agri vectigales, or Praedia tributaria and stipendiaria,
because they paid a sort of Tribute or annual Acknowledgment. The Inhabitants,
but especially those who refused to capitulate or surrender themselves, were
made Slaves, and sold; but because there was not always a quick Market for
them, and it was thought disadvantagious to the Republic to depopulate whole
Countries, they often left a part of them free in the enjoyment of their
Estates, charging them with a Tax and annual Acknowledgment, besides a Poll,
and Service and Homages, which they were obliged to render to the Romans as
their Masters: This Capitation was indifferently levied upon all sorts of
persons, without respect to Sex or Condition, the Males from Fourteen, the
Females from Twelve to Sixty Five Years; the Fathers were obliged to pay for
all their Children. The People of Rome, as Pliny informs us, were not delivered
from this Tribute till after Paulus Aemilius had conquered Macedonia, and led
Persius, its King, Captive to Rome, Ann. Romans 586. Paulus Aemilius Perseo rege
Macedonico devicto, etc. -- a quo tempore Pepulus Romanus tributum pendere
defiit. This Poll-Tax was only paid upon account of each particular Persons
Estate, and therefore, every Fourth Year, a strict account was taken of all the
Subjects of the Empire, and their Estate, by certain Officers, who were called
at first Censores, and afterward, under the change of the Government,
Censitores, Peraequitores, and Inspectores, because they numbered the Citizens,
and valued their Estates, in order to tax 'em the Hundredth part annually. Hence
it was, in the Roman Commonwealth, there were Two sorts of Taxes, one that was
paid for their Goods or Lands: Census five tributum aliud praedii, aliud
capitis. There was also another Tax paid for every Head of Cattle. It Is not
easy to tell exactly what these Five sorts of settled Taxes amounted to
yearly, which made up the Revenue of the Commonwealth; but we may easily judge,
that these Taxes amounted to vast Sums, since they contained the Eighth or
Tenth part of the whole Revenue of those vast Provinces, which reached from
Hercules Pillars as far as the River Euphrates, without reckoning the Money
they made of their Pastures. Many have endeavored to make a Calculation of it,
but they have not done it with any Exactness. To this common Revenue a Fourth
was added, which accru'd by the Impositions on the importing and exporting of
Commodities, not only on the Frontiers of the Empire, but at Havens, Seaports,
Gates of Cities, Bridges, Highways, and Rivers; but this was not so certain as
the former, being very uncertain on the account of the Diversity of places and
Alteration of Trade: Yet the most common way was to pay the Twentieth,
sometimes the Fortieth or the Fiftieth part, the least that ever was paid was
the Hundredth, and the highest was the Eighth part. Foreign Commodities, which
served only for Luxury and Delicacy, paid the greatest Tax: But we must
distinguish betwixt this Duty and what was paid as Tol-Money at Bridges and
Gates, since they were Two different things. The Officers and Magistrates of
the Commonwealth paid nothing for the Carriage of Goods which were for their
own use. There was also, another Revenue, which was no less considerable than
the former, which was raised from Mines of Gold and Silver, and other Metals,
as also from Marshes and Salt Pits.

All this may give us a general view, wherein the Revenues of the Roman
Commonwealth consisted, which served to maintain all public Offices and
Expenses under the popular State, and whereof a great part was returned into
the public Treasury: But when the Government was changed by Civil Wars, which
consumed the Revenues and exhausted the Treasury, and the Supreme Power was
vested in the Caesar's, this was the occasion of a new Expense for maintaining
the Princes Family and his Officers; and therefore Augustus made a Partition of
all the Revenues we have now mentioned, allowing one part of it to the People,
and reserving the other to himself: From whence there arose Two sorts of
Treasuries, one for the People, which was called Aerarium publicum, and another
for the Prince, which was called Fiscus, the Exchequer, whereof we shall speak
in its proper place. And so Authors do commonly put a difference between
Aerarium and Fiscus; as Suetonius, who in the Life of Vespasian, says of that
Prince, Necessitate compulsus, summa aerarii fiscique inopia: Yet there are
some who confound these two words, because the Prince did equally dispose of
'em both, although they were divided for preserving some Memory of their
ancient Liberty.

At the beginning of their Conquests under a popular State, there was no other
Method for raising them but this; the People of Rome having made both the
Persons and Estates of the Conquered tributary to 'em, after the manner we have
already declared, sent into each Province a Governor, who was called
Proconsul, Praetor, or Pro-Praetor, because he exercised in that Province the
Office und Authority of a Roman Consul and Praetor, with whom was joined
another Magistrate, who was a kind of Treasurer, whom they called Quaestor, who
levied the public Revenues: These Two Magistrates having under 'em a Company
of Archers and Guards, made use of 'em as Ministers for executing Justice and
levying of Taxes, which were laid up in a Chest, out of which they took what
was necessary for the Governors and military Men, and for all public Affairs,
and then sent the remainder to Rome, to be kept in the public Treasury, which
was in the Temple of Saturn under the Care of a Quaestor, whom they called
Praefectus aerarii, the Treasurer; and out of this Treasury was taken whatever
was necessary for the public Buildings, for Games and Shows, for the
Maintenance of their Armies by Sea and Land, and for the Reception of
Ambassadors from foreign Nations.

This first Custom of gathering Taxes by the Quaestors did not last always: for
a new way was introduced of Letting out all the public Revenues in each
Province to private Men, who farmed them commonly for five years at a certain
Sum, payable every four Months, for which they gave good and sufficient
Security. Nevertheless the Governors and Quaestors of Provinces were not
changed; they still gave Authority to these Farmers, had the Oversight of them
in levying the Taxes, and determined all Differences that arose about them;
they took care also that the Farmers should pay the full Value of their Leases,
notwithstanding any Deficiencies that might happen, which they run the risque
of. Of these Farmers Companies were made, whereof some were Farmers for one
kind of Tribute; and others for another; some were Farmers of the twentieth,
the tenth, the eighth, some of the hundredth part, and of the other Taxes
beforementioned, and were therefore called Octavarii, Decimarii, Vigesimarii,
etc. Those who farmed the Gathering of the Tribute were called Manicipes,
Redemptores vectigalium, and Publicani; this last Name, which at first was
honorable, according to the testimony of Cicero, in his Oration for Manlius,
became afterward very odious, for their Harshness and Injustice in exacting
upon the People; insomuch that Nero was fully resolved to abolish them, and had
done it, if he had not been hindered by the Remonstrances of the Senate; but he
obliged them to set up Writing-Tables in their Places of meeting, to specify
what Tribute was to be paid for each thing.

This way of Farming the Public Revenues lasted a long while under the
Emperors, and from hence it comes to pass, that in the Law Books and chiefly
in Pandects, there is a Title De Publicanis, or Of Men of Business. But after
the Seat of the Empire was translated to Constantinople, this Method of
collecting the Tribute was wholly changed for that which follows, viz. Every
year toward the End of Summer, those who had the supreme Administration of
Affairs under the Prince, drew up a general Account of all that was to be
imposed and levied upon the People, and after they had shared this among the
Praefectures or Provinces, and stated the particular Sum which each Province
was to pay, they sent Commissions, which they called Delegationes, to the four
Lieutenant-Generals of the Empire, who were called Praefecti Praetorio, among
whom it was divided; but they had under them many Provinces, and each Province
had its own peculiar Governor. These Lieutenant-Generals having received that
Account which belonged to their share of the Empire, sent particular
Commissions to each Governor of a Province, and he sent them to the Municipal
Magistrates in each City, called Decuriones, who in each City made a kind of
Corporation, or Municipal Senate, and took care of the Affairs of that City.
These Magistrates, whom we may after a sort compare to our Mayors, Sheriffs,
Aldermen, Common-councilmen and Judges of the City, were bound, upon receiving
the Tax which was to be imposed, to name some Persons of their Corporation, who
were to lay it equally upon each particular Person, upon which account they
were called Peraequatores or Discussores; and after this was done, the Public
Notary or Town Clerk entered down every Man's Name in a Roll, and the
particular Sum he was to pay; which was afterward's published, that every one
might know what he was rated at, and what he must pay to the Collectors, who
were called Susceptores. The Sums of Money which were raised by these Taxes,
were first employed to pay off those who bore any Office in the Province, and
the Remainder was sent to Rome, to be kept in the public Treasury, which was
under the Care of a Treasurer, who in the times of the first Emperors was
called Praefectus Aerarii, and after Constantine's time, Comes sacrarum
largitionum; or else it was put into the Prince's Privy-Purse, and entrusted in
his hands, who took care of it, and was called Comes Rei Privatae. The
Treasurer sent into the Provinces one of his Officers, who was to press the
sending of the Money, and a month after another Officer, who was called
Compulsor; and both of these were maintained at the Expense of the Governor.

These were the ordinary ways that were used in the Roman Empire for leavying
the Taxes which were laid upon Persons and Lands into conquered Provinces: But
as for the Customs upom Goods imported or exported, these were collected, by
those that farmed them, at the Sea Ports, or the Gates by which they entered
into or went out of a City, according to the Tax which was laid on them.

AERARIUS,
he who was liable to be taxed, from whence comes the Phrase Aerarium fieri, to
be made subject to Taxes, to want the Right of voting in his Tribe, to be
deprived of the Privileges and Immunities of a City, and forced to be obliged
to contribute to the public Expenses. Ex aerariis aliquem eximere, to restore
one to his Rights and the Privileges of a Citizen, to exempt one from Taxes.

AER,
the Air, which by the Ancients was taken for a Diety. Anaximenes the Milesian,
and Diogenes Apolloniates affirmed the Air to be their God; but Cicero and St.
Austin confute them by very strong Arguments. This Holy Doctor informs us, that
these two Philosophers did no otherwise attribute Divinity to the Air, but as
they believed it was filled with an Infinite Intelligence, and an infinite
number of particular Spirits who made their abode in it; and so their Opinion
is co-incident with that Idea of the Platonists, who thought that God was the
Soul of the World, and that all the Parts of the World were full of Spirits and
living Substances. The Assyrians and Africans gave the Air the Name of Juno, or
Venus Urania and Virgo, as we learn from Julius Firmicus, de Err. Prof. Rel.
The Egyptians gave the Air the Name and Worship of Minerva, as Eusebius
testifies, Era vero aiunt ab iis Minervam vocari. But Diodorus Sieulus has
better unveiled the Mystery of this Doctrine, speaking of the Egyptians, he
says, Aeri porro Athenae, seu Minervae nomen quadam voics interpretatione
tribuisse, Jovisque filiam hanc and virginem putari; eo quod Aer natura
corruptioni non obnoxious sit, and summum mundi locum obtineat. Unde etiam
fabula e Jovis vertice illam enatam. Vocari autem tritogeniam, quod ter in anno
naturam mutet, vere, aestate, hieme; and glaucam dici, non quod glaucos, id
est, caesios habet oculos, insulsum enim hoc esset; sed quod Aer glauco sit
color: To the Air was given the Name of Athena or Minerva, who was thought to
be the Daughter of Jupiter, and a Virgin, because the Air by its nature is not
liable to corruption, and it possesses the highest place of the World: from
whence arose the Fable, that Minerva came out of Jupiter' s Brain; and she is
said to be begotten thrice, because the Air changes three times in a year, viz.
at Spring, Summer and Winter; her Eyes were said to be blue, because the Air
appears to be of that color.

The Greeks and Romans did most readily call the Air by the Names of Jupiter
and Juno; and thus they distinguished two Virtues in the Air, the one Active
and Masculine, the other Passive and Feminine, as we learn from Seneca in his
Natural Questions; Era marem judicant, qud ventus est: feminam, qua nebulosus
and iners. Yet it must be confessed, that Juno was most commonly taken for the
Air; and so the Greek Name of Juno (...), is said to be nothing else but a
transposition of (...). After this manner Cicero explains the Fable of Juno;
Aer, ut Stoici disputant, interjectus inter mare and caelum, Junonis nomine
consecratur, quae est soror and conjux Jovis, quod ei similitudo est aetheris,
and cum eo summa conjunctio. From whence we may see the reason of the Affinity
and Marriage between Jupiter and Juno, i. e. between the Heaven and the Air,
and also plainly understand that other Fable of Homer, That Jupiter hanged Juno
in a Chain, having Two-Anvils which were fastened to his Feet, which signifies
nothing but the dependence that the Air has upon the Heaven, and which the Sea
and Land have upon the Air.

AES.
See after Aesculapius.

AESCULANUS,
the Aesculan God, who was the God of Riches, according to S. Austin in the
City of God, because Brass in former times was used for Money.

AESCULAPIUS,
the God of Physic, whom Sanchoniathon makes the Son of Jupiter, and Brother
of Mercury; and Clemens Alexandrinus affirms to have reigned at Memphis.
Lactantius, in his short History of the Greek Aesculapius, affirms, that he was
born at Messina of uncertain Parents, and nursed at Epidaurus by a Bitch, and
educated by Chiro, of whom he learned Medicine. Pausanius, upon the Picture of
the Phlegyans, relates, that a Shepherd having found the Infant Aesculapius,
when he was just born, nursed him by a Goat of his Flock, and guarded him by
his Dog. Festus contradicts him, and says that Aesculapius was nursed by a
Bitch, and that in Memory thereof, Dogs were kept in the Temple of Aesculapius.
Homer and Ovid following him, say, Apollo was his Father, and Coronis the
Daughter of King Phlegyas, his Mother, who, when she was big with Child with
this Aesculapius, of whom Apollo was Father, prostituted herself to a Fellow
called Ilchys, the Son of Elatus. But Diana, Apollo's Sister, resenting the
Affront put upon her Brother, killed Ceronis with an Arrow she shot at her; and
as she was ready to be laid upon the Funeral-Pile, Mercury came and took the
Child out of her Womb, who was called Aesculapius from the Egyptian word Esch,
which signifies a Goat, and Cheleph, which signifies a Dog, because he was
nursed by a Goat and guarded by a Dog. Pindar, in his Third Ode of his Pythiae,
says, That Apollo himself took the Child out of its Mothers Womb. There are
some Authors would have him to be the Son of Arsinoe, the Daughter of Leucippa
the Messinian: But that was contradicted by the Oracle of Delphos, which
Apollophanes of Arcadia consulted; for that Oracle answered him, That
Aesculapius was born at Epidaurus of the Nymph Coronis, the Daughter of
Phlegyas. Indeed the Epidaurians were the first who appointed a Festival to be
kept in Honor of him, wherein they were followed by the Athenians, who called
these Festivals Epidaureanae, and placed Aesculapius among the number of their
Gods, as did likewise the Inhabitants of Pergamus and Smyrna, who built him a
Temple by the Seaside. He had also a Temple at Cyrene, under the Name of the
Physician, by way of Excellency; and the same Worship was paid, and the same
Sacrifices offered to him there as at Epidaurus, except that Goats were offered
to him only in the Temple at Cyrene. The Statue of this God, which was placed
in the Temple of Epidaurus, was of Gold and Ivory, made by Thrasymedes the Son
of Arignotus of the Isle of Paros; it was seated upon a Throne of the same
matter, holding in one hand a knotted Battoon, and the other leaning on the
Head of a Serpent, with a Dog at his feet. There were many Pictures to be seen
in that Temple, on the Walls and Pillars of it, wherein diverse Diseases that
had been cured, were represented, and the Medicines that had been used for that
end.

Sanchoniathon asserts, that the first who was named Aesculapius was an
Egyptian, and he ranks him among the Gods, called Cabires, or The potent Gods,
together with Mercury; and therefore Pliny had reason to say, That the
Egyptians boasted themselves to be the first Inventors of Physic. There is no
doubt but there were many of that Name, and that the most ancient was he who
was the Egyptian; whence it came to pass, that Antoninus the Senator, built a
Temple at Epidaurus to Health, Apollo, and Aesculapius, Surnamed Egyptian. But
Aesculapius of Epidaurus was the most famous in all Greece. Cicero reckons up
Three Aesculapius's in Greece; the First was the Son of Apollo, worshipped by
the Arcadians, who first found out the Ligatures and Bandages of Wounds; the
Second was the Brother of the second Mercury, who was killed by Thunder, and
interred at Cynosura; the Third was the Son of Arsippus and Arsinoe, who taught
first how to purge and draw Teeth, whose Sepulcher is to be seen, with a little
Grove which was consecrated to him in Arcadia. Aesculapiorum primus, Apollinis,
quem Arcades colunt, qui specillum invenisse, primusque vulnus obligavisse
dicitur. Secundus, secundi Mercurii frater; is fu^^ine percussus, dicitur
humatus esse Cynosuris. Tertius, Arsippi and Arsinoae, qui primus purgationem
alvi, dentisque evulsionem, ut ferunt invenit; cujus in Arcadia sepulchrum and
lucus ostenditur. By which we may plainly observe, that when once the Name of
Aesculapius was brought from Egypt into Greece, it was given to many others who
invented any new way of Dressing Wounds or Curing Diseases. The most ancient
Aesculapius amongst the Greeks was not born till a thousand Years after him of
the Egyptians. S. Clemens Alexandrinus reckons his Apotheosis, as well as
Hercules's to be Fifty Three Years after the taking of Troy, which agrees very
well with Homer, who speaks of Machaon, the Son of Aesculapius, among those who
were at the Siege of Troy: And to him Diodorus Siculus refers what Cicero said,
That he was Thunderstruck. This Historian, to set forth the admirable Knowledge
of this excellent Physician, relates, as History what probably is nothing but
an ingenious Fable, viz. That he raised Hippolytus from the dead by his
Medicines. Pluto complained of this to Jupiter, who struck Aesculapius with a
Thunderbolt: Apollo revenged his Death upon the Cyclopes, who made his
Thunderbolts, and killed them with his Arrows: Jupiter punished Apollo by
condemning him to feed Admetus's Flocks. Pliny affirms, that there was no other
knowledge of Physic at the Siege of Troy, but only to cure Wounds, and after
that; it was neglected until the Peloponnesian War; for then it was that
Hippocrates, as it is said, composed his Treatises of Physic from the
Inscriptions in the Temple of Aesculapius, where Persons were obliged by a Law
to set down all the Remedies which the sick had used with success for their
Cure. He adds, That the ancient Romans rejected all Physicians, and therefore
the Temple of Aesculapius was placed without the City; tho it is more probable
to think, that it was rather done to signify, that the Country-Air is purer
and better for recovery of Health.

The reason why the Romans built a Temple to Aesculapius, in an Island of the
Tiber, near to Rome, as it is related by Aurelius Victor, in his Book of
Illustrious Men, was, The Romans, says he, at a time when the Plague raged at
Rome, and the places round about it, consulted the Oracle, which gave them this
Answer, That if they would be freed from it, they should fetch the God
Aesculapius from Epidaurus: Whereupon they sent thither Ten Deputies, the chief
whereof was Quintus Ogulnius, who arriving at the City, went immediately to pay
their Respects and Adorations to Aesculapius; but at the same time, while they
were admiring his Statue, which was of extraordinary bigness, they saw a great
Serpent come out of a Vault near the Idol, which imprinted upon the minds of
all Men a profound Veneration, rather than any Terror: It passed through the
midst of the City across the Streets, and went directly to the Ship that waited
for the Romans, where it posted it self in the Cabin of Ogulnius. The Romans
being astonished at this sudden and happy success of their Voyage, sailed away
presently to carry off the God, and arrived safe at the Port of Antium, where
they made some stay, during which time the Serpent crawled a-shoar, and went
into a neighboring Temple dedicated to Aesculapius: Some days after it
returned to the Ship again, and continued there till the Ship in its course
arrived at the Tiber: But when they were come overagainst Rome, this sacred
Serpent quitted the Ship, and retired into a neighboring Island, where the
Romans took care to build a Temple for it; and then immediately the Plague
ceased.

Pausanias relates a Story something like this in his Corinthiaca, where he
tells us, That Nicagora the Mother of Agasicles, and Wife of Echetion, brought
along with her from Epidaurus Aesculapius, under the figure of a living
Serpent, in a Litter drawn with two Mules, as far as the City of Sicyona, where
she was born. Philostratus adds, That he had read somewhere, that this Serpent
was formerly kept by Aesculapius, under Mount Pelion, when he was a young Man.

Lucian, in his Dialogue, entitled Alexander, or The false Prophet, discovers
to us what gave occasion to represent Aesculapius under the figure of a
Serpent. He says then, That the false Prophet Alexander, having associated
himself with a Byzantine Analist, called Cocconas, they went together into
Bithynia, where they observed that great Serpents were kept so tame, that they
sucked the Breasts of Women, and played with Children without doing them any
hurt: (from whence doubtless comes the Fable of Olympius, who is said to lie in
Bed with a Serpent.) They bought therefore one of the largest and fairest of
'em, (which is the Source and Original of the Serpent of Aesculapius,) and made
choice of Paphlagonia, where the Spirits of Men are more dull and
superstitious, as a fit place to set up for cheating the People, and venting
their Impostures. Alexander therefore having a long head of Hair well combed,
and clad in a Cloak of purple stripped with white, which was covered over with a
Surplice, holding in his hand a Faulchion, like Perseus, from whom he said he
was descended by the Mothers side, hid some Plates of Brass in an old Temple of
Apollo, which is at Calcedonia, and wrote upon them, That Aesculapius would
quickly come with his Father Apollo, to settle his abode in this place: But
withal, he so ordered the matter by his Tricks, that these Plates should be
found out, and presently the News of them was spread over all Pontus and
Bithynia; insomuch, that the Inhabitants decreed a Temple to be built for these
Gods, and begun to dig the Foundations of it. Our Prophet transported himself
in the Nightime to the place where they were digging the Foundations of the
Temple, and having found there some Spring, or at least some Rainwater, he hid
in it a Birds Egg, wherein he had enclosed a very little Serpent which was
newly hatched: The next day, very early in the morning, he came into the
Marketplace stark naked, having only a gilded Girdle about him to cover his
Nakedness; and holding his Faulchion in his hand, he mounted upon an Altar, and
began to hold forth to the People, saying, That this place was happy, for being
honored with the Birth of a God: At these words the whole City, which had
flocked together to see this Sight, became very attentive, and fell a-making
Vows, and saying Prayers, while he was pronouncing some barbarous words in the
Jewish or Phoenitian Language. After this, he ran to the place where he had hid
his Birds Egg, and going into the Water, he fell a-singing the Praises of
Apollo and Aesculapius, and invited the latter to descend, and show himself
visibly among Men: At the speaking of these words he dipped a Cup into the
Water, and drew out of it that mysterious Egg which held a God enclosed in it,
and while he had it in his hand, he told the People, That it contained
Aesculapius: The People being very attentive to behold this wonderful Mystery,
he broke the Egg, and out came the little Serpent that was lodged in it, which
twined round about his Fingers: And immediately the Air was filled with Shouts
of Joy, which were intermixed with Blessings and Praises; one desired Health of
the God, and another Honor and Riches. In the mean time our Impostor returned
to his Lodging very joyful, holding in his hand Aesculapius born of an Egg, and
not of a Crow, (as was said of him in former times, who was the Son of Coronis,
which signifies a Crow) and he shut himself up in the House with him, until the
God was become a great one; and one day when all Paphlagonia came flocking
about him, he sat upon a Bed in his Prophetic Habit, and holding that Serpent
in his Bosom which he had brought from Macedonia, he showed him to the People
folding about his Neck, and drawing after him a long Tail, so prodigious was
his bigness.

This Truth is also confirmed by many Medals coined by the Emperors and the
People, upon which Aesculapius is represented like a great Serpent. The First
is the Reverse of a Brass Medal of Antoninus Pius, coined by the Inhabitants of
Aboniteichos, whose Tail made many Foldings, and which without doubt was the
Figure of that of Alexander the Impostor, since these two words are added to
it, (...), the Glycon of the Aboniteichites, i. e. the Inhabitants of that City
of Paphlagonia which is called Aboniteichos, or the Castle of Abonus. By this
Medal we learn, that the true Name which Alexander gave to Aesculapius, when he
returned to the World under the form of a Serpent, was Glycon, which comes from
the Greek word (...) which is as much as to say, Sweet and beneficial to
Mankind.

We have seen also this God represented in the Medals of the Nicomedians,
having the Body of a Serpent and the Head of a Man, with this Inscription upon
a Marble CNEUS GNAVIUS. Philonimus consecrated this Marble in testimony of his
Thankfulness to Aesculapius the Conserver and Preserver of Mankind, and to
Health, which the Greeks call Hygia, and the Latins, Salus, which they say was
the Daughter of Aesculapius: She is there represented as giving him something
to eat or drink, and holding in her Left Hand a lighted Torch.

We have also a Medal of Antoninus Pius, whereon is engraven Two Serpents, with
the Name of Aboniteichites, whereof the one is biting the Head of the other, to
signify that Apollo, the God of Physic, communicated his Knowledge to his Son
Aesculapius; and also a Medal of the same Emperor, which represents the Arrival
of Aesculapius at Rome in an Island of the Tiber, under the shape of a Serpent,
as Aurelius Victor has informed us.

The first Inventer of Physic, according to the opinion of the Greeks and
Romans, was Apollo, the Father of Aesculapius, as we learn from Ovid, in these
Verses, wherein he brings in Apollo thus speaking,

Inventum Medicina meum est, opiferque per orbem.
Dicor, and herbarum est subjecta potentia nobis.
Metam. l. 1. v. 521. And thus the first God which Hippocrates taught his
Scholars to swear by, was Apollo the Physician; and then after that they swore
by Aesculapius, Hygia, and Panacaea. Yet Hyginus, the enfranchised Slave says,
that Apollo was only the Inventer of Medicines for the Eyes, and that Chiron
was the Author of Surgery, and Aesculapius of that sort of Physic which is
called the Clinica, i. e. which teaches how to visit and treat the sick which
are confined to their Bed; tho Lucian tells us, that he set up an Apothecaries
Shop at Pergamus; but this looks like a piece of Railery of this Satyrist.

There are also ancient Medals of Brass and Silver, done by the Family of the
Acilii, with the Head of Aesculapius crowned with a Laurel on one side, either
because he was the Son of Apollo, to whom that Tree was consecrated, or because
it supplies Medicines for the Cure of Wounds.

Albricius describes Aesculapius in the habit of a Physician, with a long Beard
of massy Gold, which Dionysius, the Tyrant of Syracuse, took away from him,
alleging in Railery, that it did not become the Son to be represented with a
Beard, since his Father Apollo, who was much older than he, had none. In this
figure Aesculapius holds his Beard with his right hand, as if he were in a
profound study, and in his left hand a Staff, about which a Serpent is twining;
the Serpent intimates to us that Diseases with respect to Physicians, are like
a Serpent which casts off its old Skin, because Physicians are to free the Sick
from Diseases and Infirmties, and make them healthful and vigorous: another
reason why this Animal is consecrated to the God of Physic, is, because the
Serpent being the Emblem of Prudence, it signifies, that this Virtue is more
especially requisite for a Physician. Pliny thinks that the Serpent was
dedicated to Aesculapius, because there are some Salts extracted from this
Animal, which are Ingredients in many Medicines that are necessary for the
Preservation of Life: the Staff was likewise given to him to signify that
those persons who are raised up from a sick Bed, had need manage themselves
well to prevent a Relapse, or rather because Physic is the Comfort and Staff
of Life; this Staff had Knots in it, to signify the Difficulty of this Art,
and that it was not easy to cure Diseases.

AES,
a Metal which was found in the Bowels of the Earth, whereof Money was
anciently made: which gives me occasion to speak of several kinds of Money and
their use.

It Is certain that at first People traffick'd one with another, by Exchanges of
Commodities which their own Country produced, for those of Foreign Countries:
But the Difficulty they found in ballancing these Exchange, put them upon the
Invention of Money, made of Metal or other Materials, according to the
Diversity of Countries. The Lacedaemonians had no other Money but little round
pieces or Ingots of red Iron, which had been quenched in Vinegar. Caesar, in
his Commentaries, lib. 7. says, that in England there was no other Money but
what was made of Copper and Lead, together with some Buttons and Rings of Iron,
which they weighed.

Authors are very much divided about the Invention and ancient Use of Money:
Some think that it is not very ancient; and these ground their Opinion upon the
Authority of Homer, who says, Iliad. lib. 7. the Greeks bought the Wine which
was brought to them in Ships from Lemnos, by giving in exchange for it Copper,
Iron, Skins of Beasts, Cattle, and sometimes Slaves. This Opinion is also
confirmed by another Passage in Iliad. lib. 6. where the Poet relates that
Glaucus exchanged his Armor of Gold, which was reckoned to be worth an hundred
Oxen, for that of Diomedes, which was only of Brass. But Pollux lib. 9. c. 7.
understands by these Oxen, not any living Animals, but pieces of Money on which
was stamped the figure of an Ox.; which is justified by the Authority of
Plutarch, in the Apothegms of Agesilus, who complains that he was driven out of
Asia by thirty thousand Men of the King of Persia's, which were armed with Bows
and Arrows; by which he meant so many pieces of Gold, called Daricks, which
were stamped with an Archer.

Others, on the contrary, will have it that Money made of Metal has been used
in all times, from the beginning of Mankind. This Opinion they build on a
passage in Josephus, in his tenth Book Of the Jewish Antiquities, where he
makes Cain the Inventor of it, and says that he increased his Riches by the
Money which he amassed from all parts. In the twentieth Chapter of Genesis, it is
observed, that Abimelech made a Present to Abraham of a thousand pieces of
Silver, Ecce mill argenteos dedi fratri tuo. And the Sons of Jacob carried
pieces of Silver into Egypt to buy Corn with during the Famine, for the
Scripture tells us that Joseph their Brother ordered the Silver to be put into
their Sacks together with the Corn.

We cannot therefore clearly discover, in these dark times of Antiquity, who
was the first Inventer or Coiner of Money. We read indeed in Genesis chapter 4. v.
22. that Tubal-Cain, the Son of Lamech and Sella, was a Worker in Brass and
Iron; but it is not said that he coined any Money: All the Certainty we can find
in this matter, is only the use of pieces of Gold and Silver in Commerce from
the beginning of the World, which may be proved by many places of Genesis and
Exodus, and by the 43 chapter of the Prophet Exekiel.

The Hebrews or Israelites used many pieces of money in their Traffic.

The Great Cicar, or the Talent of the Sanctuary, which weighed 100 Minae, or
250 Roman pounds.

The Manch or Mine, which weighed two pounds and a half, or 30 ounces.

The Shekel of the Sanctuary, which weighed half an ounce or 20 Oboli.

The Dram, which had an Harp on one side, and on the other a Bunch of Grapes.

The Little Shekel which weighed two drams.

The Gera or Obolus, which weighed from 14 to 15 grains

Herodotus says, that the Lydians were the first who coined pieces of Gold and
Silver: But there are some Authors who attribute the first Coining of Money to
Erichthonus the fourth King of Athens; and others who ascribe it to Jonos King
of Thessaly, of whom Lucan is one, in lib. 7. of his Pharsalia.

Plutarch, in the Life of Theseus the tenth King of Athens, says, He caused
pieces of Silver to be coined of the value of two drams, having on one side
an Ox, in favor of the Marathonian Bull, or the Captain Minotaurus; and on the
other Jupiter with an Owl. He caused also another piece to be coined, which was
stamped on one side with a Minerva, and on the other with two Owls, to show that
it was of double the value: they were called Staterae, (being worth two
shillings and four pence) and weighed four drams.

The Money of the Pelopounesians was stamped with a Snail, which gave occasion
to that Proverb, (...) The Snail surpasses Wisdom and Virtue, which is as much
as to say, All things are procured by Money.

Philip, the Father of Alexander the Great, caused pieces of Gold to be made,
which bore his own Image and Name. Plautus mentions them in his Bacchides;
Ducentos nummos auros Philippeos probos dabin'?

The Cyzicenians who lived in Bithynia caused pieces of Silver to be coined of
a very fine Metal, whereon was engraven the Goddess Cybele on one side, and on
the Reverse was a Lion.

But it does most clearly appear, That among the Romans, Servius Tullus their
King was the first who caused Brass-Money to be coined, for in former times
they used Brass in the Lump of a Pound-weight, which was called Aes grave, as
Pliny assures us, Servius rex primus signavit as, antea rudi uses Romae Timaeus
tradit. The first Money therefore that the Romans used was made of Brass, about
the year 180 from the Building of Rome: It was stamped with a Sheep, or,
according to Varro, with an Ox; from whence comes the word Pecunia to signify
Silver: tho some think that the word comes from the Leather-Money which Numa
caused to be made, ex assibus scorteis.

Nevertheless Plutarch mentions a Money more ancient, which Saturn caused to be
stamped, having on one side his own figure, and on the other a Ship; that he
might leave to Posterity a Monument of his Flight, and Arrival in Italy on
Shipboard.

Macrobius says, It was Janus who caused this Money to be stamped in honor of
Saturn, which Ovid confirms in these Verses,

At bona posteritus puppim formavit in aere
Hospitis adventum testificata Dei.
Whether it were Saturn or Janus that coined this Money signifies little;
nevertheless it makes it evident that Servius Tullus was not the first who
coined Brass-Money, unless they mean that he was the first who stamped Figures
of Animals on it, and gave it a Currency throughout Italy.

Aurelius Victor mentions a certain Game amongst the Romans, by tossing up a
piece of Janus's Money, saying Navi an Dii? which will you have, a God or a
Ship? because it had the Head of a God represented on one side, and a Ship on
the other, (like our Cross or Pile.)

Yet the pieces of Copper-Money, which were made in a Mass of a pound-weight,
were not used of a long time: for the first Pay that the Roman Legions
received, was of this Money, according to Titus Livius; also Pecuniary Mulcts
were paid in this sort of Coin.

But, according to the Fasti Capitolini, in the year 485, and five years before
the first Punick War, under the Consulship of Q. Fabius Maximus Pictor and L.
Quintius Gulo, certain Silver pieces were coined which were called Denarii,
because they were of the value of ten Asses; Argentum signatum, says Pliny,
anno Urbis quadringentesimo octogesimo qainto, quinque annis ante primum bellum
Panicum.

This is the Sum of what has been hitherto said of the Roman Money. In the
time of Numa the Romans used Leather-Money, Nummis scorteis; and for two
hundred years after, Copper always in a Mass of a pound-weight. Servius Tullus,
their sixth King coined pieces of a less value, which he called Trientes and
Quadrantes, these had the Figure of a Ship stamped upon them: He also coined
other kinds, which he called Sextantes, and Vnciales, or Vnciaria Stips. These
are all the sorts which were current among the Romans all this time.

There were also several small sorts of Leaden Money, according to Martial,
lib. 10. epigr. 74. Centum merebor plumbeos die teto.


Silver pieces were not coined till the year 485. viz. the Denarius, which was
ten Asses in value; the Semidenarius, called Quinarius, or five Asses; the
fourth part of the Denarius, called Sestertium; and lastly, the Teruncius. All
these sorts of Money were Silver, stamped on one side with a Woman's Head, which
represented Rome, and on the other with a X, or a V, or some other Letter to
signify the Value. Upon some of them was stamped the Images of Caster and
Pollux, two Roman Gods. There were other kinds also, on which was represented
Victory on foot crowning a Trophy with Garlands, seated on a Triumphal Chariot,
holding out Garlands, ready to crown the Victorious. Festus and Titus Livius
call them, Nummi Victorati, Bigati, Quadrigati.

In the latter Ages of the Commonwealth, the Masters of the Mint caused the
Heads of such Persons as were famous either in War or Peace, with a
Representation of their great Actions to be stamped on pieces of Money.

Pieces of Gold called Nummi aurei, were not used in Commerce, till the
Consulship of Claudius Nero and Livius Salinator, which was in the year 546,
after the Building of Rome, and sixty two years after these pieces of Silver
began to be current: they weighed two drams and an half.

Per as and libram, or Aere and libra, were Phrases used among the Romans in
selling by weight and balance.

Their Adoptions, Obligations, Exportations, Payments, Sales, and Purchases,
were made in Copper, by guess and weight, as we shall show under Denarii aperti.

AES,
this Word also signifies a Bell, with which the Romans used to give notice
that the Public Baths were open, or going to be shut; as we may learn from
that of Martial, lib. 14. epigr. 163. Read pilam, sonat ae^ thermarum.


AESO,
Aeson, the Father of Jason, whom Medea restored to his Youth again, by the
power of her Magic.

AESOPUS,
Aesop, who composed the Fables, so ingenious, and full of good Instructions,
there being not any one of them but contains excellent moral Advice, which may
make us just and prudent in the conduct of our Lives. We may with pleasure see
there most natural Representations of all mundane Transactions. The Pictures
are not drawn with dead Colors, but with living and sensitive Creatures, which
do not only represent to us the Faces and outward Shapes of Men, but also the
Dispositions of their Mind. Aesop was a Phrygian Slave, of small stature, very
deformed, being bunch'd behind and before. He obtained the Gift of making
Fables of Mercury, as we learn from Philostratus in his Description of Fables;
When I was a Child (says he) my Mother told me a story of Fables. Aesop
(continues he) being a Shepherd, commonly sed his Flock near a Temple belonging
to Mercury, into which he often went to pray that God to inspire him with
Knowledge, to which he had a great Inclination. Several Persons frequented the
Temple upon the same account; but the Offerings they made to that God were much
more valuable than Aesop' s, who had nothing to give him but a few Honey-combs,
and the Stroakings of the Milk of his Sheep, with a few Flowers with which he
covered his Altars. Mercury, as a bountiful and generous Deity, was willing to
reward their Devotions, and answered their Prayers; to some he gave Wisdom, to
others Eloquence; to some Astrology, and others Poetry: Aesop only was forgot
in the Distribution, and complained of it; Mercury not knowing what remained to
give him, called to mind a Fable which the Hours, his Nurses, had taught him in
his Childhood, of a Cow that spoke to a Man, and had made him desire the Oxen
of the Sun, whereupon he resolved to give Aesop a Faculty of making Fables, in
which he became very excellent.

There was another of that Name, who was a Comedian, and Cicero's intimate
Friend. Pliny says of him, That one day he made a Banquet of such an excessive
Expense, that one Ragou, made of the Tongues of those Birds that imitate Man's
voice, which thought to cost six hundred Sesterces, or fifteen thousand Crowns.
He had a Son as extravagant as himself, who at a Feast drank several Pearls of
extraordinary Value, beat to powder.

AESTAS,
Summer, the hottest Season of the Year, which is between Spring and Autumn.
The Summer heretofore contained six months, the Year being then divided into
two parts only, Winter and Summer: for the Summer was reckoned from the Equinox
of March to the Equinox of September, and the Winter from the Equinox of
September to the Equinox of March.

But the Astronomers have now divided the Year into four equal parts, or
Seasons, Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter: the Summer Solstice begins in the
Sign Cancer, June 12. when the Sun is nearest us, and makes the longest day in
the Year. Poets represent the Summer in the Form of a Goddess crowned with Ears
of Corn, holding a Sickle in one hand, and a Sheaf of Corn in the other.

AESTIMATIO,
Estimation, or Valuation, a Term of the Roman Law, used in buying and selling,
and is taken not only for an Appraisment, Value or Price, but also for the
things appraised. They say, aestimare litem, to signify, to tax the Costs of a
Suit.

AETAS,
an Age in general, contained no more at first than twenty five or thirty
years; but afterward it was counted an hundred years. Servius observes, that
an Age is taken sometimes for the space of thirty years, for an hundred and ten
years, and sometimes for a thousand.

It Is necessary to say something here of the four Ages of the World, according
to the Poets, both Greek and Latin, who have reduced them to two, the Golden
Age, or as we Christians speak, the State of Innocence and Happiness before the
Fall of Man; and the Iron Age, or that of Sins and Miseries, after the Fall.

What the Scripture informs us concerning that Innocence and Happiness in which
God created the first Man, seems to have given occasion for what the Poets have
said of the four Ages of the World, viz. the Golden, Silver, Brass, and Iron
Ages. Ovid in his Metamorph. lib. 1. ver. 80. has described the Golden Age,
which is the State of Innocence, thus,

Aurea prima sata est aetas, quae vindice nullo.
Sponte sua sine lege fidem rectumque colebat.
That is called the Silver-Age, in which the Spring was no longer the only
Season of the Year, but the Earth refused to produce its Fruits, unless forced
by the long Labor of Tillage. In fine, when Men had need of Cloths to defend
them from the Sharpness and Injuries of the Weather, and to apply themselves to
Arts and Sciences, to supply the Necessities of Life. -- Subiit argentea prolis
Auro deterior.


The two following Ages, viz. the Brass and Iron, degenerated yet more, and run
into all sorts of Crimes and Vices.

Tertia post illas successit ahenea proles
Saevior ingeniis, etc,
Victa jacet pietas, terras Astraea reliquit.
The Golden Age, or Age of Innocence, if we may believe the Poets, was common
to many Nations; for Ovid says, that in the times of Janus and Saturn the
Italians enjoyed the Company of the Gods, and lived in Innocence, Justice,
Peace, and all other Advantages of the Golden Age; this he speaks in lib. 1.
Fastorum. The Golden Age was then in Italy, when Saturn and Janus reigned there.

Virgil has taken notice but of two Ages, one before the Reign of Jupiter, the
other after: for it was in the Reign of Jupiter that Men began to divide and
till the ground. 'Twas then that Jupiter condemned Men to a hard and laborious
Life, and forced them to invent Arts.

Seneca follows the same Method, distinguishing the two Ages of Men into just
and happy, and unjust and unhappy, viz. the Golden and the Iron Age.

Hesiod lived many Ages before these Latin Poets, and made this Distinction of
Ages before them. He describes the three first much like those of Ovid. He also
calls them the Golden, Silver and Steel Ages; the fourth he makes an Age of
Justice and Valor. This fourth Age of Hesiod may be computed about the time of
Noah, when there was a Restoration of Justice. This is not the only Point in
which Hesiod hits upon the Truth; for he has plainly discovered that it was
Woman by whom all Evil entered into the World: Sed Mulier manibus magnum
operculum cum dimovisset, dispersit, hominibus autem immisit curas, v. 92. This
is the Description he gives of Pandora, who was the first Woman made by the
hand of God. This was that Pandora who opened the Fatal Box of Evils which
overspread the Earth, in which Hesiod is followed by the other Poets; as
Pausanias observes.

The Life of every Man is likewise divided into Four Ages, or Four different
Times of which it is made up, viz. Infancy, which continues till the Fourteenth
Year; Youth, to Twenty Four; Manhood, to Sixty; and Old Age, to the end of our
Life.

The Age or Term of Life at which a Man was qualified for Offices, war
differently appointed in the Commonwealth of Rome, and under the Emperors. A
Man ought to be at least Seventeen years old to be Soldier. None could obtain a
Quaestorship till the Age of Twenty Seven. They would not allow any to be
Tribunur Plebis till Thirty Years old. None could be an Aedile before he was
Thirty seven Years old. Nor a Praetor or Consul till Forty. These fixed Times
could not be dispensed with, especially under the Emperors.

Tacitus teaches us, that at first they had no respect to Age, even in
bestowing their greatest Dignities, and he mentions young Men who were
Dictators and Consuls. It does not appear that those Ages were settled till the
Year 373. under the Consulship of Posthumous Albinus and C. Calpurnius Piso,
when Julius the Tribune made a Law, as Titus Livius relates, which ascertained
the Age for all Offices.

AETERNITAS,
Eternity, was reckoned among the Gods worshipped at Rome. It is differently
represented to us upon Medals; her Statue was sometimes drawn in the Habit of a
Roman Lady, holding a Javelin in her Right Hand, and a Cornu-copia in her Left,
setting her Left-foot upon a Globe. The Emperor Adrian caused her to be graven
holding two Heads in her Hands. Upon some Medals of Philip, Eternity is also
represented sitting upon an Elephant; on a Chariot drawn by two Elephants or
two Lions, with this Motto, ETERNITAS.

ETHER,
Jupiter, or the more fine part of the Air, which is easily inflamed, and where
the Thunder and Lightning is formed out of the subtle Matter, which is set on
fire there: Hence it is that the Poets say, that Jupiter causes the Thunder,
and darts Lightning upon the Earth. This word comes from (...), to burn; and
it is likely that Jupiter is also named (...), because (...) comes from (...),
ferveo, to be hot.

AETHIOPIA,
a very large Country of Africa. It was first called Aetheria, after that
Atlantia, and since Aethiopia, from Aethiops the Son of Vulcan, according to
Pliny; or rather from the word (...), uro, to burn. The Hebrews call it Chus,
that is to say, Black. Geographers place Ethiopia under the Torrid Zone,
between Arabia and Egypt. The excessive Heat of that Climate has given Birth
to many monstrous Men and Beasts, of which the Historians Pliny, Strabo, and
others speak.

AETHIOPES,
The Ethiopians, or People of Ethiopia. Hesiod calls them (...), Black Men.
Homer gives 'em the Epithet of Blameless. They go to fight dancing, as Lucian
says, and before they draw out their Arrows, which are set round their Heads in
form of Rays, they leap and dance to affright their Enemies. They were the
first who found out Astrology; for it is a subtle Nation, which excels all
others in Ingenuity and Knowledge. Homer calls them Thrice happy. They treated
Jupiter, with all his Train of Gods, Twelve whole Days at their Sacrifices, as
we learn from the same Lucian.

AETHON,
the Name of one of the Four Horses of the Sun; the First is called Pyrois, i.
e. Red, because the Sun, when it ascends above our Horizon, being overspread
with Vapors from the Earth, appears red; the Second is Eous, i. e. Shining or
Bright, because the Sun being mounted up, and having dispersed the Vapors,
appears clear and bright; Aethon is the Third, which signifies Burning, as the
Sun is at Noon, when it is in the middle of its course, and when it scorches us
with its Heat and Fire; the Fourth is called Phlegon, Russetcolour'd, as the
Sun is when it sets.

AETHRA,
the Daughter of Oceanus and Thetis, and Wife of Atlas, by whom she had a Son
named Hyas, and Seven Daughters, who so lamented the Death of their Brother
Hyas, who was torn in pieces by a Lion, that they dyed of Grief: Jupiter
changed 'em into so many Stars, which the Astronomers called Hyades, or Rainy.

AETION,
the Father of Andromache the Wife of Hector, who was slain at Thebes by the
Greeks, with his Seven Sons. He was particularly honored at the
Olympick-Games, says Lucian.

AETION,
Aetion, a famous ancient Painter, who has left us a famous Piece of the Ameurs
of Roxana and Alexander, which he showed to the Public at the Olympick-Games;
he drew a magnificent Chamber, where Roxana sat upon her Bed shining in
glorious Apparel, but more glorious yet by her Beauty, although she looked down
for shame at the presence of Alexander, who stood before her: A Thousand little
Cupids flew about her, of whom some lifted up her Veil behind, to show her to
the Prince, others undrest her, others pulled Alexander by the Robe, as a young
Bridegroom full of Modesty, and presented him to his Mistress: He throws his
Crown at her Feet, accompanied by Ephestion, who holds a Torch in his Hand, and
learning upon a beautiful Boy, which represents Hymenaeus. On his side are
other little Cupids which wantonly play with his Arms. Some carry his Lance
bowing under so heavy a burden, others his Buckler, upon which there is one
sitting whom they carry in Triumph, while another lies in ambush in his
Breast Plate, who attends 'em in the passage to affright 'em. This Piece gained
Aetion so great Reputation, that he who presided over the Games, gave him his
Daughter in Marriage.

AETNA,
Aetna, a burning Mountain in Sicily, which was also called by some Mount
Gibel, which sends forth from time to time Whirlwinds of Fire and Smoke, and
Clouds of Ashes. This Fire is fed by Veins of Brimstone and Bitumen kindled by
the Winds, which are enclosed in these subterraneous Caverns. Fabulous
Antiquity would make us believe, that Jupiter having slain the rebellious
Giants with Thunder, shut them up in this Mountain; that the Bellowings, which
are heard to come out of it, are the Groans of those Giants, who are
overwhelmed with the excessive weight of that Mountain, and that these Fires
that issue out of it, are the Breath and Wind of these miserable Creatures:
This Virgil describes in these Verses of Lib. 3. of his Aeneids, v. 578. and
seq.

Fama est Enceladi semustum fulmine corpus
Urgeri mole hac, ingentemque insuper Aetnam
Impositam, ruptis flammam expirare caminis;
Et fessum quoties motat latus, intremere (...)
Murmr Trinacriam. --
AFFIXUM, or AFFIXA,
that which is fixed or joined to a Building. The things which are added to an
House, and are over and above the Building.

AGAMEMNON,
the Son of Atreus and Europa, and Brother of Menelaus, was King of Myeenae,
one of the Kingdoms of Peloponnesus. Going to the Siege of Troy to revenge the
Rape of his Sister-in-law Helena, he left with his Wife Clytemnestra, a musical
Poet who was faithful to him, to divert her in his absence, and so hinder her
from acting any thing contrary to the Fidelity she owed him. Aegistheus the Son
of Thyestes, who endeavored to debauch her, seeing that this Poet broke all
his Measures, and obstructed his Designs, carried him away into a desert Isle,
and left him there to die of Hunger, and returning to Mycaenae, debauched
Clytemnestra, and got possession of the Kingdom. Agamemneo, at his return from
the Trejan War, was slain by his own Wife at a Banquet which she had prepared
for him, having enclosed him in a Garment without a Bosom when he came out of
the Bath. Orestes revenged the Death of his Father upon his Mother, and
Aegistheus, who debauched her, for he killed 'em both. Agamemnon was changed
into an Eagle after his Death.

AGANIPPIDES,
an Epithete which the Poets give the Muses, from the Fountain Aganippe, or
Hippocrene, which was consecrated to them.

AGAVE,
the Daughter of Cadmus and Hermione, who in the shape of a Boar tore in pieces
her Son Pantheus, King of Thebes, because he abolished the Orgia or Feasts of
Bacchus in his Realm, upon account of Debauches committed in them.

AGE,
Quodagis, a Form of Speech used in the ancient Sacrifices, which was often
repeated to the Person that offered, to make him more careful and attentive; as
if it were said to him, Mind what you are about; Let not your Thoughts ramble.

AGENORA,
the Goddess Agenora, who makes us active, and to whom the Romans built a
Temple upon Mount Aventine.

AGGERES,
Heaps of Earth which were raised upon the Tombs of the Ancients; Virgil makes
mention of them in his Aeneids, Lib. XI. v. 850. -- Terrino ex aggere bustum.
as also in v. 6. of Lib. VII. Aggere composito tumuli. --
Sidonius writes to one of his Relations named Secundus, that coming from Lions
to Clermont in Auvergne, he observed that Time and Water had almost laid plain
an Heap or Bank of Earth, which covered the Tomb of Apollinaris his Kinsman,
who was Praefectus Praeterio, A. C. 409. Catulus speaks also of these Tombs,
and calls them, Coacervatum bustum excelso aggere.

Aggere Tarquinii, the Ramparts of Earth which Tarquinius raised between the
Mountains, Viminalis, and Esquilinus, from whence Suetonius says, they cast
down Criminals headlong: Verberatum per vicos agerent, qu^^d praecipitaretur
ex aggere.

AGLAIS,
One of the Three Graces, which the Greeks called Charites, the Companions of
Venus the Goddess of Beauty. They were the Daughterr of Jupiter and Eurynome.

AGLAURA,
the Daughter of Cecrops, and Sister of Hirsa, with whom Mercury fell in love:
This Messenger of the Gods, to gain the Favor of his Mistress, engaged her
Sister Aglaura, who promised to serve him, by giving her a Sum of Money. This
provoked Minerva so much, who could not endure such fordid Avarice, that she
commanded Envy to make her jealous of her Sister Hirsa; while she was
contriving to cross Mercury's Designs, he turned her into a Statue of Salt.

AGLIBOLUS,
some learned Men guess, that this word comes from (...) and (...), to cast a
light, to shine. Hesychius says, that Aiglitis, which signifies Shining, is a
Name of the Sun; and so Aglibolus is the Sun. Mr. Spon, in his CURIOUS
ENQUIRIES after Antiquities, says, that there was an ancient Marble at Rome, in
the Vineyard of Cardinal Carpegna, on which was the Portrait of two Syrian
Deities, with an Inscription in Greek thus englished,

To the Honor of Aglibolus and Malak-belus. The Gods of the Country, and he
affirms, that Aglibolus is the Sun, and Malak-belus the Moon. He says, that the
Habit of Aglibolus is not after the Roman Fashion, but, like the Syrians,
short, with a sort of Cloak uppermost, which ought not to seem strange, since
these Figures were drawn in Syria, and every Nation is clothed after their own
Fashion, as Theodoret says. The Habit of Malak-belus is something like that
which the Romans wore in their Wars, which they called Paludamentum, with a
Cloak over it. But the Crown is not like the Roman, no more than the Hair which
the Romans usually shaved; and this gave occasion to Vespasian, as Suetonius
relates, to tell the Romans, when they were frighted at the sight of a Comet
with a long Tail above their Horizon, that that Comet did not belong to their
Country, but the Kingdom of Persia, who wore long Hair, and had most reason to
fear the effects of it. Salmasius is of another opinion in his Commentaries
upon the Historia Augusta, for he will have Malak-belus to be the Sun, and
Aglibolus the Moon, but he gives no reason for the Conjecture, and it is likely
he never saw the Marble, which I have spoken of.

AGNATI,
are the Relations on the Fathers side, and who are of the same Race. In the
Civil-Law it is said, Ad agnatos deducere aliquem, To put any one under a
Guardian, To forbid him the Administration of his Goods, by the advice of his
Relations.

AGNO,
a Fountain of Arcadia, so called from a Nymph so named, the Nurse of Jupiter.
When the Water of it was used in sacred matters, it ascended in the form of a
Cloud, which after fell down in Rain.

AGNODICE,
a young Maid, who being desirous to learn Physic, concealed her Sex, and went
to be instructed by Herophy^us a Physician, she particularly acquired the Skill
of Midwisery. The Physicians much envied her, because she was preferred before
'em, summoned her before the Judges of the Arcopagus, accusing her of
debouching the Women she delivered. But having discovered her Sex, she
convicted them of a Calumny, which occasioned the Judges to make a Law,
allowing freeborn Women to profess Midwisery.

AGNOMEN,
is a Name added to the Sur-name which was given from some particular Action;
as one of the Sciplo's was named Africanus, and the other Asiaticus, from the
brave Achievments which the one did in Africa, and the other in Asia. Without
all doubt some Persons had heretofore a particular Sur-name, which was as it
were a Fourth Name. The Author to Herennius makes mention of this Agnemen, when
he says, Nomen autem cum dicimus, cognomen and agnomen intelligatur oportet.

AGONALIA,
was an immovable Feast appointed by King Numa, which was celebrated every
Year, on January 9. in Honor of the God Janus, as we learn from Ovid, Lib. I.
Fastorum, v. 317. Quatuor add dies ductis ex-ordine nonis
Janus agonali Lucepiandus erit,
The Rex Sacrorum at this Feast sacrificed a Wether to the God Janus. Authors
differ in their opinions about the Occasion of this Feast. Varro will have it
so called from a Ceremony used in all Sacrifices, where the Priest being ready
to offer Sacrifice, asks the Sacrificer, Agon' which was used then for Agamne?
Shall I strike? Festus derives this Word either from Agonia, which signifies a
Sacrifice, which they led to the Altar, ab agendo, from whence these sorts of
Ministers were called Agones; or from the God Agonius, the God of Action; or
from Agones, which signify Mountains, and so the Agonalia were Sacrifices
which were offered upon a Mountain. Indeed the Mount Quirinalis was called
Agonus, and the Colline-Gate which led thither Porta Agonensis, which the same
Festus will have so called from the Games which were celebrated without that
Gate in Honor of Apollo, near the Temple of Venus Erycina; where the Cirque of
Flaminius was overflowed by the Tiber.

But it is more probable, that this Feast was called Agonalia, from the Greek
word (...), which signifies Sports and Combats which were used in Greece, in
imitation of those which Hercules appointed at Elis first, and consecrated to
Jupiter, as these Verses of Ovid show, Lib. I. Fastorum, v. 359.

Fas etiam fieri selitis aetate priorum
Nomina de Ludis Graeca tulisse diem,
Et prius antiquus dicebat, Agonia, sermo
Veraque judicio est ultima causa meo.
There are Two Feasts celebrated at Rome of the same Name, one upon April 21.
which falls on the day of the Palilia, on which the Building of Rome is
commemorated; and the other on December 11. according to Festus.

AGONES,
the Salii, of whom Varro speaks, in his Fifth Book of the Latin Tongue. See
Salii.

AGONES CAPITOLINI,
Games which were celebrated every Five Years in the Capitol, instituted by the
Emperor Domitian in his Consulship, and that of Corn. Dolabella Sergius. All
sorts of Exercises both of Body and Mind were represented there, as at the
Olympick-Games, as Players on Instruments, Poets, Jack-Puddings and Mimics,
which strove, every one in his own Profession, who should gain the Prize.

The Poet Statius recited his Thebais there, which was not well liked, as he
complains in several places of his Silvae. This serves to explain a place in
Juvenal not well understood,

-- Sed cum fregit subsellia versu
Esurit intactam Paridi nisi vendat Agaven.
Sat. VII. v. 86. But his Thebais not having the Success he expected, and he
having procured no Patron by it, dyed of Hunger, and after being to subsist
himself by selling the Tragedy of Agave, the Mother of Pentheus, which was
never acted by Paris the Stage Player.

Some Commentators explain this place of Juvenal otherwise, and think the Poet
meant the contrary, that his Work was well received and universally applauded.
Although this Explication be allowable enough, yet it is evidently contrary to the
Complaints which Statius makes in several places of his Poems, unless we think
it better to say that Statius complains that after he had received Applause for
his Thebais, he was nevertheless ill requited for it afterward.

In these Exercises the chief Conqueror received a Laurel Crown adorned with
Ribbands, but the others received a plain One without any Ornament, as we may
see by these Verses of Ausonius,

Et quae jamdudum tibi palma Poetica pollet
Lemnisco ornata est, quo mea palma caret.
Poets thus crowned were called Laureati.

These Sports were so much esteemed by Domitian, that he changed the Account of
Years, and instead of reckoning by Lustra, which is the space of five years,
they counted by Agonalia and Agones Capitolini, from their Institution to the
time of Censorinus.

AGRARIA LEX,
the Agrarian Law, was made for the dividing Lands got by Conquest, which the
Tribuni Plebis would have to be shared among the People by Poll. Spurius
Cassius Vicellinus being Consul first propounded this Agrarian Law, Anno U. C.
267, which was the cause of a very great Quarrel betwixt the Senate and the
People; but it was rejected the first time. There are two Agragrian Laws
mentioned in the Digests, one made by Julius Caesar and the other by the
Emperor Nerva, but they had respect only to the Bounds of Lands, and had no
relation to that we now speak of.

Cassius perceiving the strong Opposition which some made that this Agrarian
Law might not be received, proposed to distribute among the People the Money
which arose from the Sale of the Corn brought from Sicily, but the People
refused it.

After this first Attempt, a peace was settled in Rome for some years; but in
the Consulship of Caeso Fabius and Aemilius Mamercus, Licinius Stolo Tribune of
the People proposed the Agrarian Law a second time in the year 269 from the
Building of Rome. This second Attempt had no better Success than the former,
tho it was passed over calmly enough. Nevertheless the Consul Caeso seeing the
People fond of this Law, and that the Senate was positive it ought not to be
received, contrived a way to satisfy both Parties, as he thought, by
proposing, that only the Lands of the Vejentes, conquered under his Consulship,
should be divided among the People, but this met withno better Success than the
other.

The Tribunes of the People, being angry at the Opposition of the Senate drew
up many Accusations against the Patricians and Noblemen before the People, and
caused many of them to be fined and banished, which so much provoked the
Cousuls, that they caused Genutius the Tribune to be stabbed: this Assassination
raised a great Tumult in Rome, and stirred up the People to revenge, till the
Consul Sempronius was condemned to pay a large Fine.

Lastly, In the year 320 from the Building of Rome, Mutius Scaevola put
Tiberius Gracchus, the Tribune of the People, in mind to have the Agrarian Law
established against the Will of the Senate, Nobles and Rich Commons. Octavius,
his Partner, being rich, was not of the same mind, and opposed the Law.
Gracchus, seeing that, accused him before the People of Prevarication and
Unfaithfulness in his Office, and caused him to be deposed with Disgrace. This
Obstacle being removed, the Agrarian Law passed, and Commissioners were
appointed to divide the Lands.

AGRIPPA,
several Persons among the Ancients bore this Name, which was usually given to
such as came into the World with Difficulty, or which were born with their Feet
forward, as Aulus Gellius affirms. The most eminent of this Name were,

AGRIPPA SYLVIUS,
the twelfth King of the Latins, the Son of Tyberinus Sylvius, whom he
succeeded; he reigned thirty or forty years, and Aremulus succeeded him in the
year of the World 3281.

AGRIPPA MENENIUS,
surnamed Lanatus; he was chosen General of the Romans against the Sabins, whom
he conquered, and obtained the lesser Triumph called Ovation: he was endowed
with admirable Eloquence, which made him undertake with Success to reconcile
the Senate and the People of Rome; to this end he went to the Aventine Mount,
where he pathetically represented to the People, that all the Commonwealth was
but one great Body, of which the Senate is the Head and Stomach; which seems
alone to devour all that the Labor and Industry of the other Parts can get,
but in Reality it is only to distribute it to the rest of the Body to nourish
and strengthen it; and if the Members do not daily supply them with the usual
Nourishment, they themselves would soon be found to be without Vigor, Heat or
Life. This excellent Comparison was so aptly applied, and so zealously
explained by Agrippa, that the People were reconciled to the Senate, who
consented to the Election of a Tribune, chosen out of the People, to protect
them against the Authority of the great Ones. This Magistrate had a right to
oppose the Consultations of the Senate, by saying this Word, Veto, i. e. I
oppose it, and forbid you to proceed further.

AGRIPPA,
named Marcus, a Man of a mean Original, a Favorite of Augustus, Admiral of
the Empire, a great Captain, and a Companion of that Prince in his Victories.
He assisted him much in obtaining that Victory which he had in the Sea Fight
against Sextus Pompeius, of which Virgil speaks. Augustus bestowed the
Consulship upon him twice together, and, as a Surplus of his Favor, he made
him his Son-in-Law, by marrying his Daughter Julia to him, who had been first
married to Marcellus his Nephew, who died without Children. This Agrippa had
two Daughters and three Sons, viz. Calus, Lucius, and Agrippa, who was a
Posthumous Child, i. e. born after his Father's Death.

Augustus adopted Caius and Lucius before they were seventeen years of Age; he
had them proclaimed Princes of the Youth, and earnestly desired that they might
be chosen Consuls. The first married Livia the Sister of Germanicus. These two
Princes were soon taken from him, by the Wickedness of another Livia their
Mother-in-Law, or by their own Misfortunes; one in a Voyage to Spain, whither
he went to command the Armies, and the other in his Return from Armenia, from
whence he came ill of a Wound. As for Agrippa the posthumous Child, Augustus
complained of him, and caused him to be banished by a Decree of the Senate,
into the Isle Planasia. He was indeed a stupid and brutish Prince, and withal a
simple Man. Tiberius, who succeeded Augustus, made his Access to the Empire
remarkable by the Death of Agrippa, who being surpised was slain by a
Centurion, whom he sent on purpose, without making any Defense. Tacit. Annal.
lib. 1.

AGRIPPA,
Herod, the Son of Aristobulus, whom Herod the Elder put to Death. He was King
of the Jews, and had the Favor of the Emperor Caligula, who at his coming to
the Crown released him from Prison, where Tiberius had shut him up, for wishing
Caligula had his place. This Emperor, besides his Liberty, gave him a Chain of
Gold, of the same weight with that which he had worn out of Love to him while
he was in Prison, and gave him the Tetrarchy of his Uncle Philip, who died
without Children, and allowed him to take upon him the Title of The King of the
Jews. He made himself infamous at his Arrival at Jerusalem, by the Death of St.
James the Great, and the Imprisonment of St. Peter. But his Cruelty was not
long unpunished, for as he was in Caesarea Palaestine, busied in the
Celebration of the Public Plays for the Health of the Emperor, he was struck
on a sudden, as he was making a Speech to the People, with a surprising
terrible Pain, of which soon after he died.

AGRIPPINA,
the Granddaughter of Augustus, and Daughter of Marcus Agrippa, was the Wife
of Germanicus the Son of Drusus the Brother of Tiberius. Some believe that her
Husband was poisoned by Cn. Piso, tho this Crime was but weakly proved at the
Condemnation of Piso. She carried her Husband's Ashes to Rome, and laid them in
the Tomb of the Caesors. Tacitus says, she was a Woman of an haughty and
untameable Spirit, but she atoned for her Passions by her Chastity, and the
Love she bare to her Husband.

AGRIPPINA,
named Julia, who married, at her second Marriage, the Emperor Claudius, who
was her Uncle; but she soon after poisoned him with what she put into
Mushrooms, which afterward at Rome were called The Food of the Gods.
Britannicus, who was Claudius's Son by his first Marriage, ought to have
succeeded him in the Empire; but Agrippina advanced her Son Nero to it,
contrary to his Right, that she herself might reign under the Name of her Son.
She had him by Domitius Aeneobarbus her first Husband, and Claudius adopted him
into his Family, which opened a way for his Accession to the Sovereign Dignity.
But this ambitious Princess was well rewarded for it, for Nero caused her to be
slain by Anicetus, and, for completing her Infamy, ordered that the Day of her
Nativity, should be reckoned among the unfortunate Days.

AJAX,
the Locrian, the Son of Oileus, so named from the City and Country of Locris,
near Mount Parnassus. He signalized himself at the Siege of Troy by many
notable Exploits. After the taking of the City, he plucked Cassandra, the
Daughter of King Priam, from the Altar of Minerva, to which she was fled as an
Asylum. Some say, he ravished her, and that Minerva, being provoked, revenged
the Fact by slaying him with a Thunderbolt, which sir'd his Ship, and so
drowned him in the Sea. But Philostratus says the contrary, that Ajax offered
no Force to Cassandra, but that Agamemnon took her away from him, having seen
her in his Tent, and to avoid the Mischief he might design against him, fled by
Sea in the night, and suffered Shipwreck by a Tempest that overtook him. The
Greeks much lamented him, and made an extraordinary Funeral for him, for they
filled a Ship with Wood, as if they would make a Funeral-Pile for him, slew
several black Beasts in honor of him, and having also set up black Sails in
the Ship, they set it on fire about break of day, and left it to run into the
Main Sea all in a flame, till it was consumed to Ashes.

AJAX TELAMONIUS,
the Son of Telamon, King of Salamis, and the fair Eriboea, according to
Pindar. He was one of the most valiant Greeks that was at the Siege of Troy.
After the Death of Achilles, he pretended that his Armor belonged to him as
the next of kin; but Thetis exposing them to the Public, that every one that
pretended a Right to them might claim them, V;lysses disputed it with him and
gained them. Ajax was thereupon so much enraged, that he fell upon a Flock of
Sheep, with his Sword drawn and brandished, and slew them, supposing them to be
Grecians, and then he thrust himself through with his own Sword and died.

AIUS LOCUTIUS,
a Speaking Voice, to which the Romans erected an Altar, according to Cicero
and Aulus Gellius, or a small Temple, according to P. Victor, in the
New-street. The occasion of it, as Cicero and Livy relate, was thus; One named
M. Ceditius, a Plebeian, went and acquainted the Tribunes, that passing through
the New-street in the night, he heard a Voice more than human over the Temple
of Vesta, which gave the Romans notice that the Gauls were coming against Rome.
This Information was neglected upon account of the Person who gave it; but the
Event proved the Truth of it. Hereupon Camillus thought, that, to appease the
angry Gods, he ought to acknowledge this Voice as a new Deity, under the Title
of The Speaking God, and to build an Altar to offer Sacrifice to him.

ALA,
a Wing, in the Roman Armies, was made up of the Cavalry and Infantry of the
Confederates, and which covered the Body of the Roman Army, as the Wings cover
the Bodies of Birds. There was a Right and a Left Wing, both mixed with the
Cavalry and Infantry, which they called Alares, or Alares Copiae. They were
made up each of four hundred Horsemen divided into ten Squadrons, and 4200
Foot. Some say that Pan the Indian, a Captain of Bacchus, was the first
Inventor of this way of drawing up an Army in Battle. whence it comes to pass
that the Ancients have painted him with Horns on his Head, because what we call
Wings they called Horns.

ALADUS or ALADINUS SYLVIUS,
Eutropius calls him Romus Cassiodorus, and Sextus Victor names him Aremulus.
Titus Livius, Messala, and Sabellicus call him Romulus. But tho there are
different Opinions about the Name of this Prince, there is an universal Consent
in the Abhorrence of his Tyranny, and a general Agreement about his
exttaordinary Death. His Pride transported him so far as to equal himself with
Jupiter the King of the Gods in his Age. He counterfeited the Noise of his
Thunder by certain Engines, but at last he perished by a Tempest and Thunder as
real as his own were vain. Fire from Heaven consumed his Palace; the Lake, in
the middle of which it was built, flowed extraordinarily, and contributed to
the Destruction of his Family. He reigned nineteen years.

ALAPA,
a Box on the Ear. Majoris Alapae mecum veneunt. Phaed. I do not grant them
Liberty so easily. (Boxes on the Ear were usually given to Slaves when they
were set at Liberty.)

ALAUDA,
a Lark. The Poets say it was Scylla the Daughter of Nisus King of Megara, whom
she delivered into the hands of Minos King of Crete, having cut off his fatal
Hair, which was of a purple Color. The Gods changed her into a Lark, and her
Father into a Hawk, which continually pursues her, says the Fable to punish her
horrible Treason.

ALAUDA,
the Name of a Roman Legion, of a French one, according to Bochart; the
Soldiers of which carried a Lark's Tuft upon the top of their Helmets.

ALBA,
a Name given to three or four Cities, of which the principal was Alba Longa,
so called by the Ancients because it extended to a great Length in the
Territory of Rome, it was built by Ascanius the Son of Aeneas, from whence the
Inhabitants are called Albini. Ascanius built it in a place where he had
observed a white Sow, thirty years after the Foundation of Lavinium, which his
Father had built. This number of Years was signified to him by the thirty Pigs
which that Sow then suckled. He would have transported the Gods of Troy, which
Aeneas had brought with him, into this new City; but he found the next day they
were carried to Lavinium: whereupon Ascanius left them there, and contented
himself with settling a College of six hundred Trojans, to serve them according
to the Worship used in Phrygia. Aegistheus was chosen to be the Chief of those
Priests. This City had several Kings, and maintained fierce Wars against the
Romans; which did not cease till the famous Combat between the three Curatii on
the Albins parts, and the three Horatii on the Romans side. The three Curatii
were slain, and and by their Death their Country became subject to the Romans,
as both Parties had agreed before the Combat, Metius Suffetius was made the
first Governor of it.

ALBINUS,
a Native of Adrumetum in Africa: He was descended of a Noble Family which came
from Rome, having the Whiteness of the Europeans, but a frizled Beard like
those of that Country; his Stature was tall and proportionably thick, he was of
a melancholy Temper, and had a wide Mouth; he was also a great Eater. A certain
Writer, named Codrus, has told incredible things of him, saying, That he eat at
one Breakfast five hundred Figs, one hundred Peaches, ten Melons, twenty pounds
of Raisins, one hundred Wood-peckers, and four hundred Oysters; which without
doubt is rather an Hyperbole than a Truth. After the Death of the Emperor
Pertinax, Albinus was chosen Emperor by the Troops which he commanded in
Great Britain; and at the same time Severus, who had just defeated Pescennius
Niger, was likewise chosen Emperor by the Eastern Troops. Albinus, fearing
least he should be seized in England, went into France with fifty thousand Men,
and Severus had about as many. Albinus being secure, because the City of Lions
took his part, gave Severus battle. He had an Advantage at the first Onset, and
Severus himself, being fallen from his Horse, had thoughts of giving over the
Battle; but at last Albinus was conquered, and the Conqueror caused his Head
to be cut off and sent to Rome, and cast his Body into the River Rhosne.

ALBION or BRITANNIA,
England. Caesar, l. 5. c. 3. of the War with the Gauls, gives this Description
of it; the interior part of Britannia is inhabited by the Natives of the
Country, but on the Coasts by the Gauls, which, for the most part, keep still
their Names: the Island is well peopled, and their Houses much like the Gauls:
they have much Cattle: they use Copper Money, or Iron Rings by weight, for want
of Silver: they have Mines of Tin in the middle of the Country, and of Iron on
the Coasts, which yield no great Revenue, but the Copper which they use is
brought them from abroad: all sorts of Wood grow there as in France, except
Beach and Firr: the People scruple to eat Hares, Geese and Hens, although they
breed them up for Pleasure: the Air is more temperate than in Gallia, and the
Cold less violent: the Isle is triangular, the side which is opposite to Gallia
is above an hundred and twenty Leagues in length, from the County of Kent,
which is the furthest end toward the East, and where almost all the Ships from
Gallia do land, to the other which is Southward: the Western Coast, which lies
overagainst Spain and Ireland, contains near 180 Leagues in length. Ireland is
not half so big as England: between them lies the Isle of Mon, or Anglesea,
where some say there are thirty Days all Night in Winter; but I found no such
thing, only I have observed by Water-Clocks, that the Nights are shorter in
those Parts than they are in Gallia.

The most civilized People of England are those of the County of Kent, which
lies along the Coasts. The inward parts of the Country are not tilled in all
places, and most of the Inhabitants live upon Milk and the Flesh of their
Flocks, and wear their Skins for Clothing.

All the English paint their Bodies with Woad, which makes them of a bluish
Color, and renders them more formidable in Battle. They shave off all their
Hair except that of their Head and Whiskers. Their Women are common to ten or
twelve, but their Children belong to those who married them.

Tacitus, in the Life of Agricola, gives us this Character of England; It is
the biggest Isle which is yet known: it has Germany on the East, Spain on the
West, Gallia on the South, and the Main Ocean, which has no Bounds, on the
North. Fabius and Titus Livius, the two most eloquent of our Historians, as
well ancient as modern, have compared it to a long Buckler, or the Head of an
Ax, because the hither side is of that figure. It was not known till our time
that 'twas an Isle, after a Tour was made about the Northern Coast of it, where
there are discovered other Isles at a further distance called the Orcades, and
Island it self, which a perpetual Winter keeps from our View. The Original of
the Inhabitants is not known, whether they are Indigenae or Strangers. The
Scots have Hair and a Stature like the Germans. Those who dwell on the side
next Spain, have frizled Hair, and are of a Tawny Color. The rest are like the
Gauls, to whom they are Neighbors.

The Sky is always thick and cloudy, but the Cold is never very fierce: the
Days are longer than in France, but the Night is very clear, especially about
the extreme parts of the Isle, where there is but little distance between the
End of one day and the Beginning of the next; some say, that in a clear and
serene Sky, they do not wholly lose their Light, but it seems to turn about
above the Horizon; so that, properly speaking, they never see the Sun either
rise or set. They have neither Vines nor Olive-teees, nor other Fruit Trees
which grow in hot Countries, although otherwise it is very Fruitful: their Fruits
come out early, but are a long time in ripening, for want of Heat, and by
reason of the abundance of their Moisture.

ALBO-GALERUS,
a sort of Cap made of white Wool, which had a Tuft on the Top, and upon which
they wore Branches of Olives embroidered. The Flamen Dialis, or Priest of
Jupiter only had a Right to wear it.

ALBULA,
a River where Tiberius Sylvius was drowned, who was King of the Albini, from
whom it was immediately named Tiber.

ALBUNA,
a Goddess worshipped in the Country of Tibur [now Tivoli.] Some think she was
Ino the Daughter of Athamas, who fearing her Husband, cast her self headlong
into the Sea with her Son Melicerta. Other Authors confound her with the tenth
Sibyl, called Tiburtina, because she was born at Tibur.

ALBUTIUS,
the Father of the Sorcerer Canidius. He was extraordinarily nice in his
Victuals, and in the Cookery of it, insomuch that he beat his Servants before
they offended. Horace speaks thus of him, lib. 2. Sat. 2. v. 66.

-- Hic neque Servus,
Albuti senis exemplo, dum munia didit,
Savus erit. --
He will not follow the Example of Old Albutius, when he commands his Slaves
any thing.

ALCESTIS,
the Daughter of Pelias and Wife of Admetus King of Thessaly. Apollo obtained
of the Destinies, that if Admetus could procure any Person to die in his stead,
he should live as many years as he had done already. The Father and Mother of
Admetus having refused him that Favor, his Wife Alcestis offered to die for
him. Hercules came unexpectedly, and, having heard what had passed, went to the
Tomb of Alcestis, and rescued her from the Jaws of Death, and restored her to
her Husband. Others say, he went down into Hell, and took her from Proserpina.

Euripides, in his Alcestis, relates, That Hercules was entertained by Admetus
the day that Alcestis his Wife died, and all his House was in Mourning. Admetus
lodged him in an Apartment by himself, that he might not disturb his Guest by
so doleful an Object. Hercules requited his Host well, for he undertook to
encounter Death, who had taken away the Soul of Alcestis; he chased Death away,
brought back her Soul to her Body, and restored his Wife alive to Admetus. This
seems to be the History of Elisha counterfeited, who raised the Son of the
Shunamite from the dead.

ALCIBIADES,
the Son of Clinias and Dinomache, he was the most beautiful Man in the World,
and of the neatest shape that ever was seen. The Grandees of his Family gave
him as great pre-eminence above all the Athenians, as Athens had above the rest
of the Cities of Greece. His Courage and Conduct were shown in the Wars against
the Lacedaemonians and Persians. But this Great Man had so great a Mixture of
Vices and Corruptions, with these rare Endowments of Mind and Body, that he was
condemned to Death, and his Goods to be confiscated, because he blasphemed the
Gods. When he repented of his Extravagances, after this Disgrace, he banished
those that had debauched him, and put himself under the Instruction of
Socrates, who made him a good Man. Afterward flying to King Artaxerxes, he was
basely slain by the Lacedaemonians, who bore him a mortal Hatred, and had made
themselves Masters of Athens and all Greece. His Statue, because he was one of
the most Valiant Grecians, was set up, by a Decree of the Senate, in a public
Place at Rome, according to the Pythian Oracle.

ALCIDES,
an Epithet given to Hercules, from the Word (...), which signifies Strength
and Virtue; or from Alcaeus his Grandfather by the Father's side.

ALCITHOE,
a Theban Woman, who despising the Orgiae, or Festivals of Bacchus, and
beginning a Journey whilst they were celebrating, was changed into a
Screech-Owl, and her Sisters into Batts.

ALCMENA,
the Daughter of Electryo, and Lysidicae, whose Father was Pelops, and Mother
Hippodamia, she married Amphitryo her Cosin-German, upon condition that he
should revenge the Death of her Brother, which the Theleboans, a People of
Aetolia had killed. While Amphitryo was employed against them, Jupiter, who was
in Love with Alcmena, took the shape of Amphitryo, and lay with her a whole
Night, which he made as long as Three, having commanded the Night and Sleep, by
the Mediation of Mercury, not to leave Men for that time, and by this
Conjunction Alcmena became the Mother of Hercules. Lucian has related this
Fable in his Dialogue between Mercury and the Sun, which we shall set down here
entire:

Phoebus. Jupiter says you must not drive to day to morrow, nor the next day,
but keep within; that during that time there may be one entire Night; bid the
Hours unharness their Horses, and do you put out your Light, and repose your
self a while.


Sun. You bring me very strange News, Mercury; I do not know that I have in the
least drove beyond my just limits, or disturbed the Mountains; why then is he
so angry with me, to make the Night thrice as long as the day?


Mercury. Not in the least, this is not to be for a continuance, he only now
desires that this Night may be long on his own account.


Sun. Pray, where is he? From whence sent he you on this Errand?


Mercury. From Beotia Phoebus, he is with Amphitryo's Wife, whom he is
enamored with, and now enjoys.


Sun. And will not one Night be sufficient?


Mercury. No, for he intends to get a great and warlike Hero, and this is
impossible to be done in one Night.


Sun. Let him go on with success; but we had no such doings in Saturu's time;
he never defiled Rhea's Bed, nor left Heaven to fleep at Thebes, but Day was
then Day, and Night had only its proportion of hours, and nothing was strange
and out of due course, nor did he ever meddle with mortal Woman; but now for
the sake of this Wretch, all things must be inverted; my Horses will grow
unmanageable for want of working, the way will become difficult to travel in,
and Men must live in dismal Darkness; thus must they sleep for the Amors of
Jove, till he perfect this mighty Champion you talk of.


Mercury. No more words, Phoebus, lest it prove prejudicial to you. I must make
haste to Luna and Somnus, and tell 'em what Jupiter's Orders are, that she may
retard her Motion; and that he do not leave Men, that they may not perceive
that the Night was so long.


This is the reason why Lycophron calls. Hercules the Lion of Three Nights.
Alcmena having gone her time, first brought forth Iphyclus, which she had
conceived by her Husband Amphitryo. But jeajous Juno hindered her when she was
about to bring forth Hercules, which she had conceived by Jupiter; for she
birb'd Lucina, the Goddess of Childbearing, that instead of assisting her,
she, on the contrary should obstruct her, by making certain Figures with her
Fingers. Pansanias, in his Baeotrice, says, That Juno sent the Pharmacides or
Sorcereresses into the Chamber of Alcmena in the time of her Travail, to hinder
her by their Enchantments: But Jupiter dispelled all their Charms, by declaring
himself from Heaven by Thunder, in favor of his Son, and reconciled Amphitryon
and Alcmena, who were fallen out.

Alcmena dyed in her return from Argos to Thebes, as Pausanius says, on the
Confines of Megara. There was a Dispute between the the Heraclites about her
Burial, some desiring that her Body should be carried to Argos, and others to
Thebes; but the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos ordered, that her Tomb should be
made in Megora.

ALCMON and PASSALUS,
rather Achaemon, or Achmon and Passalus, Two Brothers who were of very wicked
and debauched Inclinations; they were the Sons of a Woman called Sexmonis, who
used to tell Fortunes: She had them beware of a Melampygus, i. e. a Creature
whose back-parts were black and hairy, Wherefore meeting one day with Hercules,
who was asleep leaning against a Tree, they took up a resolution to kill him;
but Hercules awaking, and perceiving their design, seized on 'em, and hanged
'em by the heels on his Club, and as he marched with 'em in this posture, they
perceived his back-parts, and remembering the Prediction of their Mother, they
looked upon themselves as undone: But Hercules having learned of 'em the cause
of their fear, let 'em go.

ALCYON,
The Kings Fisher, a Bird much extolled, of whom this Fable is told; That
Alcynoe the Daughter of Aeolus, having lost the beautiful Cey^, her Husband, in
the Sea, who was the Son of the Day Star, tormented herself with vain Grief;
till the Gods, moved with Compassion, changed her into a Bird, which still
searches about the Water for him she lost there. It is a small Bird, and its
Note is very mournful. To requite her Love, when she makes her Nest, and sits
on her young ones, the Winds are still, and the Sea calm in the sharpest time
of Winter: These serene Days are called Halcyonian from the Alcyon, and during
them, the Sky is calm, and the surface of the Sea as smooth as a Looking-Glass.

Pliny gives this Description of this Bird, Lib. X. cap. 32. It is, says he, a
little bigger than a Sparrow, and of a blue color, but has some red and white
Feathers. The smallest of them sing commonly among the Reeds. They breed about
the middle of December. Their Nests are round, in the form of a large Bowl,
having only a little Hole to go in at.

ALCYONEUS,
a Giant, who had many Daughters, which after his Death cast themselves
headlong from the Cape of Pillena into the Sea: Amphurite moved with
Compassion for 'em, changed 'em into Birds.

ALECTO,
One of the Three Furies of Hell, according to the Poets, the Daughters of
Acheron and Nox, or of Pluto and Proserpina. They are reverenced by the
Ancients, as the Goddesses, by whom Crimes were punished. they are painted with
a furious Aspect, and wearing a Cap of Serpents, holding Whips and lighted
Torches in their Hands.

ALECTRYO,
a young Man, a Confident of Mars in his Amors. One Day when Mars was gone to
see Venus, and lie with her in the absence of her Husband Vulcan, he left him
at the Gate to watch when the Day appeared, but this pretty Youth falling
asleep, the Sun discovered the whole Intrigue, so that Vulcan caught both the
Lovers in his Nets. Mars, angry at this, changed this young Man into a Cock,
who still keeps the Crest of the Helmet which he had before he was changed; and
all his Generation ever since, to retrieve his Honor, give notice of the
approach of the Day.

ALEMANNI,
the Germans: These People, says Tacitus, were never debauched by Commerce or
Alliance with other People, which is the reason that they are all alike; for
they have yellow Hair, blue Eyes, a fierce Aspect, and an advantageous Stature,
yet they cannot bear long Fatigues, and are only brisk at the first; Heat and
Thirst are very unsupportable to 'em, but they endure Cold and Hunger very
well, by reason of the Constitution of their Country. Those that inhabit our
Frontiers value Money upon the account of Commerce, and know some ancient
Pieces of our Coin, which they value more than others, as those that have a Saw
or a Chariot on them. The rest traffic by exchange of Goods still, as the
first Men did. Their Cavalry carry only a Lance and a Buckler: Their Infantry
carry also Darts, of which every Soldier has several, which he knows how to
cast with great Force and Dexterity, being not at all hindered by his Clothes or
Arms; for their only Garment is a long Coat. If we consider their Troops in
general, their Infantry is the best, which is the reason that they mix it with
their Cavalry. It Is such a Disgrace among 'em to quit their Buckler, that they
who have done is, never dare come to their Assemblies or Sacrifices. In
choosing their Kings they much respect their Birth, and in their Governors
their Virtue. None but the Priests among 'em have right to imprison and punish.
Of all the Gods, they chiefly worship Mercury, and sacrifice even Men to him at
certain Solemnities. They think it not agreeable to the Grandieur of the Gods,
to paint them as Men, or shut them up in Temples, but they only consecrate
Groves to 'em, and adore such as are most solitary. They are much given to
Auguries and Lots, which they perform with little Ceremony. They cut a Branch
of a certain Fruit-Tree in several pieces, and having marked them with certain
Characters, cast 'em carelessly upon a white Cloth; then the Priest, or Master
of the Family, if it be a private House, after he has made a Prayer to the
Gods, lifts up each piece three times, and interprets them according to the
Marks on 'em. They also consult the flying and chirping of Birds, and the
neighing of Horses is with them a certain Presage: To this end they feed white
Horses in their dedicated Groves, and will not suffer them to be profaned by
the service of Men; and when they have a mind to consult 'em, they yoke 'em in
a Chariot of their Gods, and the Priest or King follows them to observe their
Neighing; there is no Augury to which they give more Credit. They make use also
of another Invention to know the Event of their Wars; They take a Captive of
their Enemies, and match him with one of their own Party, and judge of the issue
of the War by the success of their Combat. They count by Nights and not by
Days, as we do; and in their Orders of State, they set down on such a Night,
and not on such a Day; because, as they think, the Night was first. They meet
in Council armed, and the Priests alone have power to enjoin silence, as they
have also to punish: Their Punishments are different, according to their
Crimes; they hang Traitors and Deserters on Trees; the cowardly, the base, and
the infamous they smoother in Puddles, and then throw an Hurdle upon 'em. Their
Coat, which is all the Garment they wear, as I have above observed, is fastened
with a Button or Clasp, the rest of their Body is naked: The richest of them
have their Garments not large and full, as the Parthians and Sarmatians, but
close, according to the shape of their Bodies: They also clothe themselves with
Furs. The Women's Garments are much like the Men's, save that they wear a kind of
Linen Shift with out Sleeves, bordered with Crimson-Silk, which leaves their
Arms and Bosom naked. Their Marriages nevertheless are untainted, and their
Chastity is not blemished by their Meetings, Festivals, and public Shows. They
neither send nor receive Love Letters or Billet-Douxes, insomuch that Adultery
is seldom found among so great a People: they allow not second Marriage, and a
Woman takes an Husband to be united to her, as one Body and one Soul. It Is an
odious thing among 'em to destroy a Child in the Womb or hinder Conception;
every one is brought up in his own Family, without any other Nurse than his own
Mother. There are few People that take more pleasure in entertaining Strangers;
it is a Crime for any Man to shut his House against them, whosoever they be:
When any one comes to their Houses, the Master of it gives him whatever he has,
and when he has nothing left, he will carry him to his Neighbor, who receives
him with the same Respect and Freedom. They drink Beer, for no Vines grow in
their Country. Their Food is very plain, wild Fruits, Milk curdled, and
Venison, and they live without Dainties and Expense. They have but one sort of
public Show, their young Men dance naked on the points of Spears and Javelins.
They do not divide the Year into Four parts, as other Nations. The Autumn is as
little known as the Fruits of it. Their Funerals are without any Pomp or
Magnificence, they only burn the Bodies of some Persons of Quality with a
particular sort of Wood, putting nothing upon the Pile but their Arms, and
sometimes the Horse of the deceased without Perfumes or Garments; their Graves
are made of Turfs, and they contemn the Costliness of our Tombs. In fine, they
are great Drinkers, and very great Gamesters, insomuch that they will play away
themselves after they have lost all their Goods.

They celebrate in old Verses, of which all their History is composed, a God
born in their Land, called Tuisco, and his Son, Man, who were the first
Inhabitants of the Country. Caesar speaking of the Germans in his Sixth Book,
De Bello Gallico, tells us, That they have neither Priests nor Sacrifices, and
own no Deity but such as they see and feel the Effects of, as the Sun, the
Moon, and the Fire; and that War and Hunting were their only Exercises.

ALEMANNIA,
Germany. This Country, says Tacitus, is bounded with the Rhine, Danube, and
Ocean, except on the part next Sarmatia and Dacia, where it is bounded with the
Mountains, on which a very warlike People inhabit. The Ocean there makes great
Bays and large Isles. The Rhine takes it rise in the Country of the Grisons,
and falling from the top of the Alps, discharges it self, after a long course,
into the North-Sea, inclining a little toward the West. The Danube falls from
Mount Abnoba, and empties it self into the Euxine-Sea at six Months, for the
seventh is lost in the Marshes. Hercules is said to have been in this Country;
and Ulysses himself, in his long and fabulous Travels, was carried by a Tempest
into Germany, where he built a City upon the Banks of the Rhine, which is still
called Aschelburg, from the Greek Name which he gave it: Some add, that he had
an Altar consecrated to him there, under the Title of the Son of Laertes, and
that there remain to this day some Monuments of him with Greek Inscriptions in
the Borders of the Grisons and Germany, which I neither assert, or call in
question the Truth of:

ALETIDES,
ancient Sacrifices which the Athenians offered to Icarus and Erigone, in which
they danced Puppets. Icarus was the Son of Aebalus, and Father of Erigone, who
having received of Bacchus a Bottle full of Wine, gave it the Shepherds of
Attica to drink, who were very thirsty, because of the Heat of their Country;
they drank of it till they lost the use of their Reason, and supposing
themselves to be poisoned by that Liquor, they fell upon him, and killing him,
cast his Body into a Pit: He had a little Bitch named Mara, who went, and
pulling his Daughter Erigone by the lower part of her Garment, brought her to
the place where the Body of her Father was; she seeing him in this condition,
hanged herself for grief, and many Athenian Virgins, who loved her
extraordinarily, followed her Example. The Bitch also pined away with Grief,
and Jupiter translated her to Haven under the Name of Canicula, i. e. the
Dog Star. Icarus was changed into that Sign of the Zodiac which is called
Charles's Wain, and Erigone into another Sign called Virgo. The Oracle of
Apollo being consulted, ordered that a solemn Sacrifice should be offered to
the Ghosts of Erigone and her Companions, in which the Images of the Virgins
hanged were represented; and 'twas in this Solemnity that some Virgins swung
themselves about in the Air.

ALEXANDER,
surnamed the GREAT, was of a middling stature, and rather small than great, as
his Medal represents him on the Reverse, and as Historians speak of him, which
has given occasion for this Verse,

Magnus Alexander corpore parvus erat.
He had a very lofty Countenance, and his Eyes placed very high in his Head,
well-shap'd, and generally looking upward. He was the Son of Philip, King of
Macedon, and Olympias; he succeeded his Father in his Kingdom, which he found
full of Tumults, and wavering after his Death; but he soon settled it by the
Punishment of his Murderers, and made Greece tremble by the Destruction of
Thebes. He advanced his Arms farther than any King before him, and passing the
Hellespont, defeated the Captains of Darius in a pitched Battle, and conquered
all the Provinces as far as Cilicia, and vanquished Darius, King of Persia.
Lastly, not to mention Tire or Arbella, he subdued Asia, as far as the Indies,
and then the Indies themselves, making the Ocean the Bounds of his Empire. He
dyed at Babylon of Poison, or a Fever, being 32 years of Age, having reigned
Twelve Years. He was liberal and magnificent, and loved Glory and Learning. He
is accused of Cruelty to his Friends who had not Complaisance enough to flatter
him, and believe him the Son of Jupiter. He killed Clitus because he would not
approve that he should use the Customs of those he had conquered, nor that he
should be adored as a God: Yet it is said, that Aristobulus, one of his
Captains, reading to him, as he was sailing upon Hydaspes, a Relation he had
written of his Battle with Porus, in which he flattered him very much;
Alexander threw the Book into the Water, and told him, that he ought to do so,
because he was so base-spirited to attribute false Actions to Alexander, as if
he had done no real ones. In like manner he reprimanded an Architect, who would
have cut Mount Athos after his likeness, and make him to hold a City in one
Hand, and pour a River out with the other. He would not meddle with Darius's
Wife, and took care of his Mother and Children.

ALEXANDER SEVERUS,
the Son of Varus and Mammaea. He was made Emperor of Rome before he was 16
years of Age, and was one of the wisest and most learned of the Emperors. He
would not suffer any Offices to be sold, but gave them, to Persons of Merit.
His Council was made up of the most virtuous and able Lawyers of the Empire,
viz. Ulpian, Callistratus, and Modestinus. He was a great Lover of Arts and
Sciences. He was liberal without Profuseness, valiant without Cruelty, a severe
Judge, yet was every way just and equitable.

He discovered a great Inclination to the Christian Religion; for he set up in
his Chapel the Image of Jesus Christ, together with Abraham's: And some
likewise conjecture, that he intended to build him a Temple at Rome. His
Severity, though just, yet was fatal to him, and provoked the Soldiers of the
German Legion to slay him near Men's, after he had reigned Thirteen years.

He retained so great a Modesty in his highest pitch of Honor, that he never
would suffer himself to be called Lord; for he ordered that all Salutations to
him should be uttered in these words, Ave Alexander, and condemned by his
Modesty his Predecessors, and chiefly Heliogabalus, who would be saluted thus,
Dominus, ac Deus noster sic fieri jubet, Our Lord and God will have it so: As
Suetonius says.

ALIMENTA,
an Allowance of Meat given to a single person to live on for a Year or a
Month. The Romans did often in their Wills, give a certain Sum to serve for an
Allowance of Meat to their Children. In pueros, puellasque singulas damnas esto
dare cibarii nomine aureos december. They also extended this Liberality to their
Freemen, as we learn from the Lawyer Scavola: Quisquis mihi haeres erit,
omnibus libertis meis, quos hoc testamento manu misi, alimentorum nomine in
menses singulos certam pecuniam dato. i. e. I charge him that is mine Heir, to
give monthly a certain Sum for an Allowance of Meat, to all my Freemen, to
whom I have given Liberty by this my Will.

They practiced also the same thing toward those whom they called Alumnos and
Alumnas, as these words in the Law do testify; Mevio infanti alumno meo
quadringinta dari volo, quae peto a te suscipias, and usuras ei quincunces in
annum usque vicesimum aetatis praestes, eumque suscipias, ac tuearis.

ALIMENTARII
pueri, and ALIMENTARIAE puellae, is spoken of young Boys and Girls, which were
brought up in public places, as in our Hospital of Christ-Church: For the
Romans had certain public places where they brought up and maintained poor
Children and Orphans of both Sexes, at the Expense of the Treasury, or of such
Banks of Money as the Emperors, and private Persons had made, and given by
their Will for the Maintenance of these Hospitals. These Children were called,
if Boys, Alimentarii pueri; if Girls, Alimentariae puellae: They were also
often called by the Names of their Founders. Julius Capitolinus, in his Life of
Antoninus, surnamed Pius, says, That this Prince founded an Hospital for Girls,
which were called Faustinae, Faustines, from the Name of his Wife, Puellas
alimentarias in honorum Faustinae Faustinianas constituit. The same Author,
speaking of the Emperor Alexander Severus, tells us, that he followed the
Example of Antoninus, in erecting an Hospital for Boys and Girls, and gave them
his own Name, calling 'em Mammaeani and Mammaeans. Puellas and pueros,
quemadmodum Antoninus Faustinianas instituerat Mammaeanas and Mammaeanos
instituit.

ALLIENSIS PUGNA,
a Fight near the River Allier. The Tribunes going against the Gauls, with a
more numerous Army than the Romans had ever sent out before on foot, gave them
battle having the River Allier on their backs. The Fight was fierce and
obstinate on both sides, but at length the Gauls were Victors, and slew many of
the Romans, because the River hindered their Flight. This day, being the first
of August, was marked in the Roman Calendar, as a fatal and unfortunate day, in
the year from the Building of Rome 365. This Loss was more felt, and
prejudicial to the Romans, as Cicero says, than the sacking of Rome by the same
Gauls; Majores nostri funestiorem diem esse voluerunt Alliensis pugna, quam
urbis captae.

ALLOCUTIO,
an Oration or Speech of a General of an Army to his Soldiers, either to
animate them to fight, or to appease Sedition, and keep them to their Duty. To
this end they raised a little Hill of Earth, as it were a kind of Tribunal of
Turf, upon which the General mounted and spoke to his Soldiers, who were drawn
up in their several Squadrons round about the Tribunal, and having their
Captains at the Head of them. If the General's Speech pleased them, they showed
their Approbations by lifting up their Right-hands, and clashing their Bucklers
one against another; but if they disliked it, a humming Murmur ran through their
Ranks, or else they discovered, by a sullen Silence, that they were not pleased.

If the Enemy pushed on the Battle, the General thought it sufficient to go
through the Ranks to encourage the Soldiers, calling them every one by their
Names, putting them in mind of their Courage, and the Victories they had
gained, and promising them the Plunder, or some other Largess, if they obtained
the Victory.

ALOIDES,
two Giants, the Sons of Aloeus, who in their infancy attempted to pull up
Mount Ossa by the roots, and to set it upon Olympus, and Pelion upon that, that
they might make use of them as a Ladder to climb up into Heaven, and make War
with Jupiter; but these young and rash Fools were punished for their Madness,
and shot to death by the Arrows of Apollo and his Sister Diana. Virgil brings
in Aeneas relating that he saw these two Giants in Hell:

Hic and Aloidat geminos, immantia vid^
Corpora, qui manibus magnum rescindere coelum
Aggressi.
Virg. Aeneid. lib. 6. v. 582. Homer assures us, That they formerly bound the
God Mars, and shut him up in Prison for thirteen Mouths, from whence he could
not be released but by the mediation of Mercury.

ALPHABETUM,
an Alphabet; the orderly Disposition of the Letters of any Language. This Word
comes from the initial Letters of the Greek Tongue, Alpha, Beta.

ALPHEUS,
a River of Areadia. Pausanias, in his Eliaca, tells us, That Alpheus was an
ancient Hunter, who loved Arethusa, and also delighted much in Hunting. He
sought her in Marriage, but she denied him, and flying into an Isle near
Syracuse, she was turned into a Fountain, and Alpheus into a River; which, as
thrd an amorous Impatience, forces its course through the Sea, and mixes its
Waters with Arethuss.

Lucian, in a Dialogue between Neptune and Alpheus, introduces them speaking
thus: Nept. Whence comes it that such a fine River as you, pass through the Sea
without mixing with its Water any more than if you were Ice, like those Fowls
who dive in one place and rise in another? Alph. It is an amorous Mystery which
you ought not to condemn, because you have been in love your self. Nept. Who
are you in love with, is it with a Woman, a Nymph, or any one of the Nereides?
Alph. No, no, it is with a Fountain. Nept. With what Fountain pray? Alph. With
Arethusa. Nept. It Is a fine clear Spring, which rolls its Silver Streams
through the Stones with an agreeable Murmur. Alph. Ah! how well you describe
her, it is she that I pursue. Nept. Ga, and be happy in thy Amor; but tell me
when have thou seen her, thou being in Arcadia, and she in Sicily? Alph. You
are too curious, and press too far for me to answer you. Nept. You are in the
right of it, and I to blame, to retard a Lover in the pursuit of his Mistress;
and when you have met with her, join your self so close to her that you two may
have but one Bed hereafter.

Pansanias enlarges this Fable a little more in his Arcadica; Alpheus, says he,
parts the Lacedaemonians from the Tageates, and bounds them both: its Source is
from Phylace. At some distance from hence he receives the Waters of several
small Springs called Symboles, or A Concouse of Waters. This River has this
particular Quality, that it loses its Waters under the Earth, and they rise
again in other places; it goes into the River Eurotas, and then loses it self,
and rises again in a place which the Arcadians call The Sources. It runs into
the Territories of Pisa and Olympia, and discharges it self in the Adriatic
Gulf; from whence it passes, without mixing its Waters with the Sea, and rises
in Ortygia in the Fountain of Arethusa, with which it mixes.

Hercules cut a Canal from this River, to cleanse the Stable of Augens, which
was filled, with the Dung of three thousand Oxen for thirty years.

ALTAR,
an Altar, upon which Sacrifices were offered to the Gods of Heaven. This Word
comes from Altus, high, because, according to Servius, they sacrificed on them
to the Gods on high, or in Heaven. This is the Difference he makes betwixt
these Words Ara and Altar; Novimus, says he, aras Diis esse superis and
inferis consecratas, altaria vero esse superiorum tantum Deorum; quae ab
altitudine constat esse nominata. We find also another Difference of these
Words, which is this, Altar was built in an high place to which they went up
by Stais, as the great Altars in the Romish Churches; whereas Ara is a low
Altar, like their little; ones.

ALTHAEA,
the Wife of Aeneas King of Calydonia. She revenged the Death of her Brethren
by the Death of her own Son Meleager, burning the Log of Wood which was to
prolong his Life, as long as it lasted and was not consumed by Fire.

AMALTHAEA,
a Sybil surnamed Cumaea, famous in Antiquity for her Prophesies and
Predictions of the coming of the Messiah, who was to be born of a Virgin. We
learn of Servius, that she wrote nine Books of Prophesies foretelling what
should befall the Empire of Rome, addressing her self to Tarquinius Priscus, she
presented them to him, demanding three thousand Crowns in Gold of Philippick
Money; but the King rejected her Present: whereupon she burned three of them in
the presence of that Prince. Returning within a few days, she demanded the same
Price for the remaining six, and being again denied, she burned three more.
This astonished the King so much that he bought the three which were left, at
the same Price she had required for all the nine. They were kept with great
care, and certain Persons appointed to look after them. These Books contained
the Fate of the Empire, and were never consulted but in the time of some
public Calamities.

AMALTHAEA,
the Daughter of Melissus King of Candia, who nursed Jupiter with Goats Milk
and Honey. Some Authors will have it that this Goat was called Amalthaea, and
that Jupiter in gratitude placed it among the Stars; giving to the Nymphs one
of her Horns, which had this Virtue, to furnish them with whatever they
desired; from whence it was called Cornucopia, or the Horn of Plenty.

'Twas also the Name of Atticus's Country House in Greece, which he called so
to intimate, that all things abounded there: for it is very well known that
this Word signifies Plenty. Gic. l. 1. ep. 2. ad Attic.

AMATHUS,
a City in the Isle of Cyprus, consecrated to Venus, whose Inhabitants built a
stately Temple to her and her Minion Adonis. They sacrificed at first Strangers
upon her Altars; but the Goddess abhorring such cruel Sacrifices, changed these
Inhabitants into Bulls, and depriving their Wives of all Modesty, because they
had contemned her Worship, made them to prostitute themselves to all Comers.

AMAZONIUS,
the Month of December was so called in the Reign of the Emperor Commodus by
his Flatterers, in honor of a Concubine which he loved extremely, and whom he
had caused to be painted like an Amaxon, as Lampridius assures us.

AMAZONES,
the Amazons, Women-Warriours of great Courage. They were heretofore Women of
Scythia, who dwelt near Tanais and Thermodn, which conquered great part of
Asia. They lived without Men, and prostituted their Bodies to Strangers, but
killed all their Male Children, and burned off the left Pap of their Daughters,
to make them fit for fighting. From whence some say their Name is derived from
(...), non mamma, which signifies Without Paps.

Strabo denies that there ever were any Amazons. Pliny and Mela make mention of
those of Scythia. Hippocrates says, that there was a Law among them, which
condemned their Daughters to remain Virgins till they had slain three Men of
their Enemies. He also says that the Cause why they cut off the Right-pap, was,
that their Right-arm might become the stronger, because it gained the
Nourishment of the Breast; and they distorted the Legs of their Male Children,
that they might always be Mistresses over them.

Some affirm, that in Africa there was a Realm of Women only, who slew all the
Boys that they brought forth by their Copulation with the Neighboring Nations,
as we learn from Juan de los Sanctos, a Grey-Fryar of Portugal, in his
Description of the Eastern Aethiopa. Aeneas Sylvius relates, that he saw in
Bohemia, for seven years, a Commonwealth exactly like that of the Amazons,
established by the Valor of a Woman called Valasca.

The Names of the most famous Amazons were, Marthesia, Orythea, and
Penthesilea, whom Virgil, in his Aeneids, supposes to be slain by Achilles.

Herodotus, speaking of the Amazons, says, that the Greeks having defeated them
near the River Thermodon, carried away those that remained Captives in their
Ships, who after the Defeat watched their opportunity so well that they seized
the Arms of the Greeks and made a great Slaughter of them; but because they
understood nothing of Navigation, they were cast by the Winds upon the Coasts
of Scythia; where mounting upon the Horses that came in their way, they fought
with the Scythians; who being desirous to make an amicable end of the War which
they had begun, endeavored to persuade them to surrender themselves, and
hoping to gain them by their weak side, told them, that in case they would do
so, they should not be enjoyed by their Lame, but by the handsomest Men. They
stopped their mouths with this Answer, That their Lame were their best Men; which
is since passed into a Proverb among the Greeks, (...). Nevertheless a Peace
was made, and the Scythians gave them a part of their Country, where they
settled themselves on the Southside of Tanais. This is what Herodotus says of
the Amazons of Asia.

Philostratus, in his Picture of Neoptolemus, relates, that they which sail
upon the Euxine Sea do affirm, That along that Coast, between the Rivers
Thermodon and Phasis, there are Amazons, which say, they are descended of Mars,
who busy themselves wholly in Warlike matters, as to draw a Bow, and ride on
Horses; they will not permit a Man to live among them, but when they desire to
have any Children, they go to seek out Men among their Neighbors, and when
they bring forth Boys, they cause them to be gelt, but their Daughters they
bring up to warlike Affairs, feeding them with the Milk of Cattle, and Dew
which falls in the form of Honey upon the Reeds in their Marshes.

The chief Expeditions of the Amazons were the War which they made against King
Priamus, the Assistance they brought him at the Siege of Troy, and their
Invasion of Attica, to revenge themselves of Theseus who had taken away
Antiope. As for their Expedition into the Isle of Achilles, at the mouth of the
Danube, it is a Fiction of Philostratus, which no ways redounds to their
Honor, because they showed themselves very cruel there. It Is true Philostratus
is not the only Man that has represented the Amazons as wicked, for Apollonius
describes them as Salvages, that have neither Faith nor Law.

The Monuments which preserve the Memory of these Warlike Women are, the City
of Thermiscira, the Metropolis of their State, situate in Cappadocia, near a
River well known by the Name of Thermodon: the City of Ephesus and Temple of
Diana are two Works of their hands. Dionysius Afer says, that they built
another Temple to Diana upon the Stump of a young Elm. The Cities of Smyrna,
Thyatira, Cuma and Magnesia are commonly thought to be founded by them.
Apollonius will have it, that they consecrated the Temples even in the
Areopagus, and in the Territories of Lacedaemonia.

The Statue of Diana at Ephesus was adorned with Paps, because the Amazons
consecrated those to her which they cut off.

It appears, by some Medals, that the Amazons wore Garments like Men, but by
others they seem clothed after the usual manner of their Sex.

The ingenious Mr. Pet^^ has written a Treatise which contains things very
learned and curious about these Heroines, as about their Sepulchers, the
Reasons why the Names which they bear are all Greek, and the Chronology of
their History, which may be consulted.

AMBARVALE or AMBARVALIA,
The Feast of Perambulation. The Procession they made about the plowed and sown
Fields in honor of the Goddess Ceres; like the Processions of the Papists at
this day, celebrated upon the Feasts of St. Mark and Rogation-days, with larger
or shorter Litanies. There were two Feasts at Rome of that Name, one in April,
or according to other Authors, in the End of January; and the other in July.

Twelve Arval Brothers, or Priests, of which I shall speak in their place, went
before a public Procession of the Citizens who had Lands and Vineyards without
the City. The same Ceremony was practiced in the Country by other Priests among
the Inhabitants of the Villages. They went three times round the Ground, every
one being crowned with Leaves of Oak, and singing Hymns in honor of Ceres, the
Goddess of Corn. This Ceremony was called Ambarvalia, ab ambiendis arvis; the
Sacrifices which they offered after this Procession, they called Ambarvales
Hostiae.

There were three sorts of them, viz. a Sow, a Sheep and a Bull, which is the
Reason that this threefold Sacrifice was called Suovitaurilia, which is a Word
compounded of Sus, Ovis and Taurus. In the first Sacrifice they prayed to the
Goddess Ceres and the God Mars, that they would preserve their Corn from Mildew
and Hail, and bring it to perfect Ripeness; and in that of the month of July,
they prayed to them to bless their Harvest.

Cato has left us the Form of Prayer used on this occasion, in cap. 141. De Re
Rustica, but this Prayer was made to Mars only.

Mars Pater, te precor quaesoque uti sies volens propitiusque mihi, domo,
familiaeque nostrae: quo jus rei ergo, agrum terram, fundumque meum
suovitaurilia circumagi jussi, uti tu morbos vilos invisosque, viduertatem
vastitudinemque, calamitates, intempestasque prohibessis, defendas,
averruncesque: uti tu fruges, vineta, frumenta, virgultaque grandire, beneque
evenire sinas: pastores, pascuaque salva servassis, dicisque bonam salutem,
valetudinemque mihi, domo, familiaeque nostrae. Harumce rerum ergo, fundi,
terrae, agrique mei lustrandi, lustrique faciendi ergo, sicut dixi, macte hisce
suovitaurilibus lactantibus immolandis esto. Mars Pater, ejusdem rei ergo,
macte hisce suovitaurililibus lactentibus esto. Item, Cultro facito struem and
ferctum uti adsiet.

The same Author has left us also another Form of Prayer, which was made in
the second Feast of Perambulation, in the month of July, in which they
sacrificed a Sow before they began their Harvest, which they called Porca
praecedanea. This Prayer was put up to Janus, Jupiter and Juno, and not to
Ceres any more than the former. Priusquam porcam foeminam immolabis, says
Cato, Jane struem commoveto sic: Jane Pater, te hac strue commovenda bonas
preces, precor uti sies volens, propitius mihi liberisque meis, domo,
familiaeque meae, mactus hoc fercto.

Ferctum Jovi moveto and mactato sic: Jupiter, te hoc fercto obmovendo bonas
preces precor uti sies volens propitius mihi, etc.

Postea Jano vinum dato sic: Jane Pater, uti te struem commovendo bonat preces
been precatus sum, ejusdem rei ergo, macte vino inferio esto.

Postea Jovi sit: Jupiter, macte sercto esto: macte vino inferio esto.

We find likewise that this Ceremony was performed by the Master of the Family,
accompanied with his Children and Servants, every one of them being crowned
with Oaken Leaves, as well as the Sacrifice, which they led three times round
the Lands and Vineyards, singing Hymns to his honor: after which they
sacrificed to him sweet Wine with Honey and Milk; as we may see by the Verses
of Virgil, Georg. lib. 1.

This manner of Procession was always used in the Country, were they had no
Arval Priests as at Rome.

AMBEGNAE or AMBIGNAE,
Victims, which were accompanied and encompassed with other Victims, says Varro.

AMBITUS,
signifies in the Law of the XII. Tables, Aspace of Ground of two feet and an
half, which was left to go about an House, for the Houses of old were not
contiguous for fear of Fire.

AMBITUS,
an earnest Solicitation to get into public Offices. Properly, it is the
surrounding a Person to have his Vote in Elections, being always busy about
him, embracing and caressing him for that end. The Romans made it a Crime to
solicit Offices by too eager Applications, as by extraordinary Gifts,
Threatenings or open Force: they made several Laws to hinder this soliciting,
and punish those that were found guilty of it. The most considerable of them
was that which was made in the Consulship of Cieero, called from his Name Lex
Tullia. By that Law, the Candidates were forbidden to bestow any Combats of the
Gladiators on the People, to make any public Feast, or to cause themselves to
be followed by a Crowd of Clients, for two years before they put in for any
place.

A Senator, who was guilty of a Breach of this Law, was punished with ten years
Banishment; others were find and rendered incapable of any Dignity for ever; as
may be seen in Cicero's Oration against Vatinius and Sextius. Nevertheless,
these things had gone so far in the corrupt times of the Commonwealth, that
some would publicly tell the Tribes what Sums of Money they would give them
for their Votes, which was called Pronuntiare in tribus, says Cicero. They made
use of three sorts of Persons for this purpose, which they called Interpretes,
Mediators, who assisted in making the Bargain, per quos pactio inducebatur,
says Asconius Pedianus: Sequestres, who are the Trustees, in whose hands the
Money agreed for is deposited: and lastly Divisores, Dividers, who were to
distribute the Money to every particular person in the Tribe.

AMBROSIA,
the Food of the Gods, according to the Poets. Lucian, rallying these Poetical
Gods, tells us, that Ambrosia and Nectar, of which one is the Meat and the
other the Drink of the Gods, were not so excellent as the Poets describe them,
since they will leave them for the Blood and Fat which they come to suck from
the the Altars like Flies.

Ambrosia, was also a certain Feast which the Romans celebrated on the 24th. of
November, instituted in honor of Bacchus by Romulus, which the Romans called
Brumalia, but the Greeks Ambrosia.

AMBUBAIAE,
Syrian Women, which dwelt at Rome, and played on a Pipe in the Cirque and
other Places of Sports, like our Gypsies, who play upon the Tabor, and pretend
to tell Fortunes, and do a thousand other cheating Tricks, to sharp People of
their Money. Turnebus assures us, that they lived after this tricking manner,
near the Hot Baths at Baiae. Cruquius is of another opinion, and says, they
were a sort of Women who sold Cosmeticks and Drugs for painting the Skin.
Horace speaks thus of them, Ambabaiarum collegia, pharmacopolae.
Sat. 2. lib. 1.

AMBURBALIA and AMBURBALES,
Hostiae. See Ambarvalia, which is the same thing.

AMBUSTA,
the Marks of Burning which remained upon the Skin. It is a Title in Valerius
Maximus, Ambustarum lib. 8. cap. 1. speaking of two Women whose Reputation was
only blemished, as a Body scarr'd with Burning, tho they were not condemned by
any public Sentence.

So, among the Ancients, those who were killed by Thunder were called
Consumpti, whereas those were termed Ambusti who were only Thunderstruck. For
which reason it was that ^^^ius was surnamed Ambustus, as was also his whole
Family, because he was smitten with Thunder in the hinder-parts: Vt Jovis
dicatur fi^ius, in partibus Fabius adurtiur mollibus, obsignaturque posticis.

AMILCAR,
the Admiral of Carthage, who raised the Honor of his Nation by many brave
Actions, which he did against the Romans. He ordinarily said of his three Sons,
that he nourished three Lions, which would one day tear Rome in pieces, and he
made his eldest Son, the Great Hannibal, to swear upon the Altars of the Gods,
that he would never be at peace with Rome.

AMISSA,
Things lost. These were the ways which the Ancients made use of to find the
things they had lost. Marsus teaches us, that they fixed Papers upon some Post
or Pillar in public places, declaring what was lost, the Name of the Person
who lost it, and the place of his Dwelling, promising a Reward to him that
should bring it, as it is practiced at this day. Quas siquis mihi retuleris,
donabitur anro.
I puer, and eitas haec-aliqud propone columnd:
Et dominum Exquiliis scribe habitare tuuns.


Apuleius tells us, that they caused the thing to be cried in the
Cross-streets, promising likewise a Reward to him that should restore it:

Si quis a fuga retrahere, vel occultam demonstrare potuerit regis filiam,
Veneris ancillam, nomine Psychen, conveniat retro metas Marcias mercurium
praedicatorum.

They went also to the Prater, and asked of him some Persons to make search for
the thing lost, as we learn out of Plautus;

-- Ad Praetorem illico
Ibo, erabo, ut conquisiteres det mihi in vicis omnibus,
Qui illam ivestigent, qui invenieniant.
AMMONIUS or HAMMONIUS,
Jupiter Ammon, worshipped in Libya under the figure of a Ram, of which some say
this was the Reason; Bacchus having subdued Asia, and passing with his Army
through the Deserts of Africa, was in great Want of Water, and ready to perish
with Thirst; but Jupiter his Father assuming the shape of a Ram, led him to a
Fountain where he refreshed his Army, and in requital of so great a Benefit.
Bacchus built him a Temple there, under the Title of Jupiter (...), i. e.
Sandy, because of the Sands of Africa. Others say he was called Ammon from a
Shepherd of that Name, who built an Altas to him there.

The Latin Interpreter of Arutus, who is called Bossus or Germanicus Caesar,
writes, That the Rom which showed the Fountain to Bacchus, when he conducted
his Army through the Deserts of Libys, was placed among the Celestial (...); and
Bacchus erected a magnificent Temple to Jupiter in the place where he found the
Fountain, about nine days Journey from Alexandria, who, from the Sand that was
there, was called Jupiter Ammon. You may consult upon this Subject Quintus
Curtius, lib. 4. Diodorus Siculus, lib. 17. or Arrian, lib. 4. de Expedit.
Alenand,

Jupiter was figured with a Ram's Head because his Oracles were always very
intricate, if we may credit Servius. But Herodotus gives a better Reason, when
he tells us that the Ammonians borrowed this Worship of the Egyptians of the
City of Thebes, where Jupiter had a Ram's Head.

Strabe relates, with some appearance of Reason, that the Place where Jupiter
Ammon's Temple stood, was formerly near the Sea, and that the great Concourse
of People, which came to consult this Oracle, is an evident Proof of it; for a
place so far distant from the Sea, and standing in such vast Deserts of Sand,
could never be so frequented. He speaks elsewhere of the Travels of Hercules,
Perseus and Alexander to consult this Oracle.

This Relation supposes always, that Jupiter Ammon was King of Egypt, whose
Worship, after his Apotheosis or Deification in Egypt, passed into the distant
Provinces. Diodorus Siculus, describing a Tradition of the Libyans, gives us a
Relation that proves the thing, viz. That Jupiter Ammon was a great King, of
whom was made a fabulous God, and a fictitious Oracle after his death. This
Historian cites another more ancient Writer, who says, That Ammon reigned in
Libya, and married Rhea the Daughter of Caelus, and Sister of Saturn and the
other Titans; that Rhea divorcing herself from Ammon, married Saturn, and put
him upon making War with Ammon, in which he was victorious, and forced Ammon to
save himself by Sea, and fly into Crete, where he made himself King.

Arrian says, That Perseus and Hercules accounted themselves the Posterity of
Jupiter; and that Alexander being envious of their Glory, called himself also
the Son of Ammon, who was the Jupiter of Libya.

AMOR,
Love, according to Plato, is a God more beautiful, ancient, and better than
all the fabulous Deities of Antiquity. Simmides makes him the Son of Mars, and
Venus the Goddess of Beauty; as also does Lucian in his Dialogues. Acasilaus
will have him the Son of the Air and Night; Sapho of the God Calus and Venus.
Hesiad, in his Theogonia, says, that he was born of Chaos and the Earth; and
that before the Creation of the World, he was in the Divine Essence, because it
loved its Creatures from all Eternity, before they were created.

He has also diffused the same Spirit of Love among them all, which is nothing
else, according to Empedocles, but that Divine Virtue which inclines the
Creatures to desire an Union one with another; or to speak more properly, a
Divine Intelligence, which has imprinted that Spirit in Nature it self: From
whence arises the Harmony of the Elements, and the Copulation of Animals.

The heavenly Souls, and Spirits themselves, according to the Platonists,
descend by the means of Love into the Body: For which reason it is, that
Orpheus will have it, that Love has the Keys of Heaven Gates, and so he
represents him, as holding them in his Hands. It Is Love or Cupid, says Lucian,
that conquers all the Gods, and Venus herself, who is his Mother. He can do
nothing with Pallas, nor the Muses, nor dares to attack Diana, but he fears not
Jupiter or his Thunderbolts. He is painted in the form of a beautiful Child
with Wings, and a Fillet over his Eyes, who carries a Quiver upon his
Shoulders, holding a Bow and Arrows in one hand, and in the other a lighted
Torch.

The Wings which are given to Cupid denote his Levity and Inconstancy: A Bow
and Quiver full of Arrows are attributed to him, because he wounds the Hearts
of Lovers: He is painted blind, because nothing is more blind than Love.

Love is called by the Greeks (...), from the earnest solicitation which Lovers
make one to the other. They also call (...), Mutual Love, which they make a
God, and affirm him to be the Son of Mars and Venus, as Cicero tells us, Lib.
3. De Not. Deor. whom they mystically represent with two Torches lighted,
joined and tied together. Pausanias, in his Eliaca, makes mention of a Statue
of Cupid and Anteros, who strives to snatch a Palm-Branch which the other holds
in his hand. And Porphyrius, the Philosopher, has left us a Fable upon this
Subject; That Venus perceiving that little Cupid did not thrive, and that he
fell into a languishing condition, went to ask Advice about it of the Goddess
Themis, who answered her, That he had need of an Anteros, or mutual Love to
relieve him; whereupon, a little time after, Venus conceived Anteros, and he
was scarce born, but Cupid apparently grew, and became more beautiful every
day. The Athenians, says Pausanias, erected an Altar to the God Anteros, upon
the account of a certain Milesian, who was much loved by Timagoras. This last
being desirous to give some proofs of his Love, cast himself headlong from a
Rock, and killed himself; at which the Milesian was so troubled, that he also
cast himself down after him, which made the Athenians worship the Ghost of
Timagoras, under the Name of Anteros, as a Revenger of the too great Rigor of
the person loved toward the Lover. Some also call him Anteros, who disengages
unhappy Lovers from that Love which cannot find a suitable return. Dido seems to
allude to this in Aeneid. Lib. IV. v. 478. Invent, Germana, viam, gratare sorori
Quae mihi reddat cum, vel eo me solvat amantem.
Ovid, in like manner says, that they called him Forgetful Love, Lethaeus Amor,
who had a Temple at Rome near the Colline-Gate:

Est prope Collinam templum venerabile portam
Est illic Lethaus Amor qui pectora sanat.
Inque suas gelidam lampadas addit aquam.
In Remed. Amoris. Some have had recourse to Magicians and Charms, to make 'em
love. Lucian brings in an Harlot named Melissa, who desired Bacchis to bring
some Magician to her, who gave Philtres to cause Love, and allure Lovers. She
tells her, That she knew a Syrian Woman, who made a Lover return to her again,
after Four Months absence, by an Enchantment which she then declared to her.
She shall hang, says she, the Calces or Sandals of the Lover upon a Peg, and
shall put upon them some Perfumes, then she shall cast some Salt into the Fire,
pronouncing thy Name and his; then drawing a Magical Looking Glass out of her
Bosom, she shall turn every way, muttering several words with a low voice.

We meet also with other Enchantments set down in Theocritus's Pharmaceutria,
in Virgil and Juvenal. Josephus also, the Jewish Historian, testifies, that
Moses having learned the Egyptian Philosophy, made Rings for Lovers and
Forgetfulness, as also did King Solomon against Witchcraft.

Whatever Effects these Love-Potions might have, what Ovid tells us is more
probable, That Beauty, and something else, not to be mentioned, are the only
Philtres, which engage any Man to love.

Fallitur Aemonias siquis decurrit ad arts;
Datque quod a teneri front revellit equi.
Non facient, ut vivat amor, Medeides herbae,
Mixtaque cum magicis Marsa venena sonis.
Phasias Aesonidem, Circe tenuisset Ulyssem.
Si modo servari carmine posset amor.
Nec data profuerint pallentia philtra puellis
Philtra nocent animis, vimque furoris habent.
Sit procul omne nefas: Ut ameris, amabilis esto;
Quod tibi non facies, solave forma dabit.
Art. Amand. Lib. II. v. 99. AMPHIARAUS,
the Son of Oecleus, or according to some, of Apollo and Hypermnestra; being
unwilling to go with Adrastus, King of Argos, to war against Etheocles, King of
Thebes, hid himself, to avoid the Death which he knew would happen to him in
that Expedition; but Eriphyle, his Wife, being gained by Adrastus with the
promise of a rich Chain, betrayed him, and discovered the place where he was
hid. Amphiaraus, enraged that he was so basely betrayed by the Treachery of his
own Wife, commanded his Son Alcmeon, before his departure, That as soon as he
heard of his death, he should revenge it upon his Mother Eriphyle, as the only
cause of his Misfortune. The Enterprise against Thebes proved very unsuccesful;
for of the Seven chief Commanders, Five of them were slain at the first Onset,
and Amphiaraus was swallowed up alive in the Earth, with his Chariot, as he was
retreating.

Philostratus gives this account of Amphiaraus, in his Second Book of the Life
of Apollonius; Amphiaraus, the Son of Oecleus, at his return from Thebes, was
swallowed up in the Earth. He had an Oracle in Attica, whither he sent the
Dreams of those who came to consult him about their Affairs; but above all
things they must be 24 hours without Meat or Drink and Three days entire
without the use of Wine.

Pausanias, in his Attica, speaks of a Temple consecrated to him; At the going
out of the City Oropus, upon the Seacoasts, about 12 Furlongs from thence,
there stands the Temple of Amphiaraus, who flying from Thebes, was swallowed up
with his Chariot. Others say, that it was not in that place, but in the way
that leads from Thebes to Chalcis. Nevertheless, it is evident that Amphiaraus
was first deifi'd by the Oropians, and afterward the Greeks decreed him divine
Honors. His Statue was made of white Marble, with an Altar, of which only the
third part is dedicated to him, and the rest to other Gods. Near to this Temple
there is a Fountain called the Temple of Amphiaraus, out of which it is said he
came when he was placed among the number of the Gods. None were permitted to
wash or purify in that Fountain, but when they had an Answer from the Oracle,
or found their trouble removed; then they cast some pieces of Silver or Gold
into the Fountain. Jopho of Gnossus, one of the Interpreters of Amphiaraus's
Oracles, published them in Hexameter Verse, which brought the People to his
Temple.

Amphiaraus, after he was deifi'd, instituted the way of foretelling things to
come, by Dreams; and they that came to consult his Oracle, must first sacrifice
to him, as to a God, and then observe the other Ceremonies prescribed. They
sacrificed a Sheep, and after they have flead it, they spread the Skin upon the
ground, and slept upon it, expecting a Resolution of what they asked, which he
gave them in a Dream.

The same Author, in his Corinthiaca, tells us also, That in the City of the
Phliasium, behind the great Market, there is an House which is called the
Prophesying or Divining-place, where Amphiaraus having watched one Night, began
to foretell things to come.

Plutarch, speaking of the Oracle of Amphiarans, says, That in the time of
Xerxes, a Servant was sent to consult it concerning Mardonius. This Servant
being asleep in the Temple, dreamt that an Officer of the Temple chid him much,
and beat him, and at last flung a great Stone at his head, because he would not
go out. This Dream proved true; for Mardonius was slain by the Lieutenant of
the King of Lacedaemon, having received a Blow with a Stone upon his head, of
which he dyed. This is almost all that Antiquity has left us about Amphiaraus
and his Oracles.

AMPHICTYON,
the Son of Helenus; This was he, says Strabo, who appointed that famous
Assembly of Greece, made up of the most virtuous and wise of Seven Cities, who
were called after his Name, as were also the Laws which they made.

Caelius would have us believe, that he was the first that taught Men to mingle
Wine with Water. There was another of that Name, the Son of Deucalion,
Governor of Attica after Cranaus, who is said to be an Interpreter of
Prodigies and Dreams.

AMPHILOCHUS.
Lucian, in one of his Dialogues, entitled The Assembly of the Gods, tells us,
That he was the Son of a Villain that slew his Mother, and that had the
confidence to prophecy in Cilicia, where he foretold all that Men desired for
about Two pence; so that he took away Apollo's Trade. And the same Lucian, in
his Liar, brings in Eucrates speaking thus about Amphilochus; As I returned,
says he, from Egypt, having heard of the Fame of the Oracle of Amphilochus,
which answered clearly and punctually to every thing any person desired to
know, provided they gave it in writing to his Prophet, I had the curiosity to
consult him as I passed.

AMPHINOMUS,and ANAPIUS,
two Brothers who were eminent for their Piety, having saved their Parents, by
carrying them upon their Shoulders, with the peril of their own Lives, out of
the City of Catanca, which was set on fire by the Flames of Aetna.

AMPHION,
the Son of Jupiter and Antiope, the Daughter of Nycetus King of Baeotia.
Antiope was first married to Lycus King of Thebes; but he divorced her, because
she had postituted herself to Enaphus, King of Sicyon. Jupiter, who was in love
with her, enjoyed her under the form of a Satyr. Derce, the Second Wife of
Lycus, caused her to be imprisoned, out of Jealousy; but she having escaped,
and seeing herself pursued, hid herself in Mount Citheron, where she brought
forth Twins, Zethus and Amphion, who were brought up by Shepherds, and being
grown up, revenged the Wrongs done to their Mother by Lycus and Derce, whom
they caused to be pulled in pieces, having tied them to the Tail of a mad Bull.

Amphyon was very excellent at Music, and learned of Mercury to play upon
stringed Instruments, in which he grew so great a Proficient, as the Poets say,
That he built the Walls of Thebes by the sound of his Harp, and that the Stones
put themselves in order to make that Building. Having married Niobe, the
Daughter of Tantalus, he had by her Seven Sons, and Seven Daughters, of which
their Mother was so proud, that she preferred herself before Latona, the Mother
of Apollo and Diana, for which she lost all her Children, except Cloris, they
being slain by Apollo's and Diana's Darts. Amphion, to revenge himself,
attempted to destroy Apollo's Temple; but that God slew him, and punished him
in Hell with the loss of his Sight and Harp.

Amphion received his Harp of Mercury, who was the Inventer of it, as Apollo
speaks in Lucian; He made (says that God to Vulcan) an Instrument of a
Tortoise-Shell, on which he played so excellently, so that he made me jealous,
who am the God of Harmony.

And after he had shown it to Apollo, and the Muses, as Pausanias says, he made
a Present of it to Amphion: (...).

AMPHITHEATRUM,
the Amphitheatre, a place built round or oval, which encompassed the
Roman-Theatre, and was furnished with Seats, on which the People sitting. saw
diverse Shows and Sports which were exposed to view. It is evident, that in
Vitruvius's time the true Amphitheatres were not built at Rome; and therefore
it is a mistake in Pliny, when he speaks of Pempeii Amphitheatri, instead of
Pompeiani Theatri, as Lipsius observes. There were afterward several
Amphitheatres built at Rome, in imitation of the Greeks, of which the most
famous was Nero's, which was built all of Tybertine-Stone, which is as hard and
beautiful as Marble. It was called the Amphitheatre of Nero's Colossus or
Statue. It was 135 feet broad, and 525 long, large enough to contain 87000
persons sitting at their ease; and the height of it was 165 feet. Amphitheatres
and Theaters at first were not built for continuance, being only of Boards,
which they pulled down after the Plays were ended. Dion Cassius says, That one
of these Amphitheatres fell down, and crushed a great number of People under
the Ruins of it. Augustus was the first that built one of Stone in the Campus
Martius, at the Expense of StatiliusTaurus, A. U. 725. and this Amphitheatre
remained till the time of the Emperor Vespasian; for the first being burnt in
Nero's time, Vespasian began a new one, in his Eighth Consulship, two Years
before his Death, but Titus finished it.

Pliny relates, that Curio made an Amphitheatre that turned upon huge
Iron-Hinges, so that two Theaters might be made of that Amphitheatre at
pleasure, on which different Plays might be represented at the same time.

The Amphitheatres were consecrated to Diana Taurica, or Scythica, Jove Latino,
or Stygio, as Martial will have it, and at last to Saturn. Minutius Felix tells
us, That there was an Altar, upon which they sacrificed Men before they began
their Sports.

The Amphitheatre was divided into Three principal parts; the First, which was
the Theater, was the lowest, and made as it were a plain of Sand, which was
called the Cavea, that is to say, the Cave; because it was full of artificial
subterraneous Caverns, of which some were used to shut up Beasts in, and others
served to hold Water for the imittaing of Sea Fights, and for the convenience
of the Spectators. This place was plain, even and sandy, whence it was called
Arena, or the Sand, and from it proceeded that Latin figurative Phrase, In
arenam descendere, which is as much as to say To enter the Combat, because the
Gladiators fought upon that Sand, or on that Sandy Place.

The second part was the Circle about the Arena, which contained a great number
of Seats, with diverse Ascents one above another, that the Spectators who sat
nearest might not hinder those that sat further off from seeing.

The third part was used for the keeping of diverse kinds of Beasts, as Horses
for Races and Hunting of Wild-Beasts, for Criminals, and for keeping the
Athletae, i. e. Wrestlers.

It is very hard, says Justus Lipsius, to set down the precise time when
Amphitheatres were first built; yet that Author does not doubt to fix the
Invention of them about the Declension of the Commonwealth, and believes that
Curio's Theater was an Amphitheatre, because when they pleased they could
divide it into two parts, and when they changed its Form, and used it in its
full Extent it was a true Amphiteatre. These Words are almost the same with
Pliny's, and seem to make that Tribune of the People the first Inventor of
Amphitheatres; for in the same place it is expressly observed, that the
Diversions of the Scene were so artificially disposed, that although there were,
as it were, two Theaters, yet the Contrivance of the Machine-maker did order
things so well, that when they pleased there appeared but one Enclosure or
Amphitheatre.

Nevertheless Statilius Scaurus, that famous Aedile, may be thought to have
preceded Curio in that Design: for, as Pliny says, Scaurus was the first who
exposed to the People an hundred and fifty Panthers: and Bullenger adds, that
he used his Theater as an Amphitheatre.

However it is most evident that Julius Caesar, was the first Inventor of
Amphitheatres; and Bullenger assures us, That after he had subdued Asia and
Africa, he built a Theater of Wood in the Campus Martius, which was called an
Amphitheatre, because of the Ascents that were round it, and upon which the
Spectators might see the Plays, sitting at their ease.

AMPHITRYO,
a Theban Prince, the Son of Alcaeus and Laonoma, the Daughter of Gunaeus,
according to Pausanias in his Arcadica. He married Alcmena of whom the Story is
famous for the Birth of Twins, whereof one was named Hercules, who was the Son
of Jupiter, and was surnamed Alcides, either from his Grandfather Alcaeus, or
else from the Greek Word (...), which signifies Strength or Valor, because of
his extraordinary Strength, by which he subdued so many huge Monsters, and
cleared the Earth of them. See Alcmena.

AMPHITRITE,
a Greek Word which signifies encompassing. The Poets make her a Goddess, the
Daughter of Oceanus and Doris, and Wife to Neptune the God of the Sea.

AMPHORA,
an Earthen Vessel with two handles, wherein were put things dry and liquid, as
Horace says in his de Art Poetica, v. 21. -- Amphora cepit
Institui, currente rota cur urceus exit?
The Potter had a Design in turning the Wheel to make an Amphora, and
nevertheless he made a Pitcher only.

This Vessel contained four Sextaries and an half of Wine, which is about nine
Gallons. Suetonius tell us a Story of a Man who stood for the Quaestorship, and
who drank an Ansphora of Wine at one Meal with the Emperor Tiberius, Ob Epotam
in Convivio propinante se vini amphoram.

This Measure contains also three Bushels of dry Measure, the Standard of it
was kept at Rome in the Capitol, to prevent false Measures, as Rhemnius Fannius
Polemon, who was Lucan's Master, testifies; from whence it was called Amphora
Capitolina. It was a foot square in all its Dimensions, as Length, Breadth and
Depth, and consequently it was Cubical.

AMPLIARE and AMPLIATIO,
[Terms of the Roman Law,] to delay the Judgment of any matter for better
Information, to declare that we must proceed in Law by Writing and Allegations,
when a matter is not sufficiently discovered or proved; for when such a thing
happened in Suits, the Judge pronounced with a loud Voice Amplius; or he cast
into a Pot a Ballot marked with an N and an L, which is as much as to say, Non
Liquet, that is, The Matter cannot be determined as it stands.

M. Acilius Glabrio and Calpurnius Piso forbad Ampliation or Pleadings by
Writing in Lawsuits, as Cicero testifies in his first Oration against Verres.

AMULA,
a sort of Vessel, wherein the Lustral Water, in the Roman Sacrifices, was put.

AMULIUS SYLVIUS,
King of Alba, the Son of Procas, and Brother of Numiter. The Kingdom of right
belonged to Numitor, and his Father gave it him at his death; but Amulius
invaded it, and to secure his Usurpapation he caused Egestus the Son of Numitor
to be slain in hunting, and forced his Daughter, whom some name Ilia and other
Rhaea and Sylvia, to become a Vestal Virgin. She grew big as she was
sacrificing to Mars in a Wood, and was after delivered of Twins, Rhemus and
Romulus, who revenged their Uncle's Death by slaying Amulius the Usurper, and
restoring Numitor to the Throne.

AMYMONE,
one of the fifty Daughters of Danaus, whom her Father forced every day to go
and draw Water in the Lake of Lerna, a City of Argos, and who had her Water-pot
in her hand, says Lucian, because the City was very dry. But Neptune having
seen her fell in love with her and took her away, and striking a Rock with his
Trident he raised up a Fountain in her stead. She was the only one of all her
Sisters who, after her Death, was not condemned to fill a Tub, full of holes,
with Water.

ANALEMMA,
a Greek Word, that signifies those sorts of Sun-Dials, which show only the
Height of the Sun at Noon every day, by the Largeness of the shadow of the
Gnomon. It Is not properly a Dyal, because it does not show the Hours, but the
Signs and Months only. Of late Analemma's and Dials are joined together, which
show the Month by the length of the shadow, and the Hours by the Declination.

ANCAEUS,
the Son of Neptune and Astypalaea, who much delighted in tilling the ground
and planting Vines; when he had spent several Nights in planting a Vineyard,
one of his Servants told him that he should never drink of the Wine of that
Vineyard; but when he had gathered his Vintage, and caused some of the New Wine
to be brought him to drink, he called that Servant to convict him of a Lie; he
nevertheless held firm to his Prediction, repeating the Proverb, Multa cadunt
inter calicem supremaque labra.
Or this, Inter os and offam multa cadunt.


While these things passed, News came to Ancaeus, that a Boar was got into his
Vineyard, and had made much waste in it: he thereupon let fall his Cup, and
went to hunt the Boar, which run at him and slew him. Pausanias, in his
Arcadica, makes mention of another Ancaeus, the Son of Lycurgus, who went in an
Expedition to Cholchos, and was slain by the Calydonian Boar, hunting with
Meleager.

ANCHISES,
the Son of Capys, lived in the Deserts of Phrygia, where he spent his days in
keeping his Flocks. The Fable says, that Venus often came down upon Mount Ida
to enjoy his Love; and of her Aeneas, the Trojan Prince, was born, who in the
Destruction of Troy saved him from the flames, carrying him upon his shoulders.
He died at Drepanum, and his Son celebrated anniversary Games in honor of him,
of which Virgil speaks in his fifth Book.

ANCILE,
see ANCYLE.

ANCULI and ANCULAE,
the Gods and Goddesses of Slaves, whom they honored and prayed to in the
Miseries of their Bondage.

ANCUS MARTIUS,
the Grandson of Numa, and fourth King of the Romans. He succeeded Tullus
Hostilius, and was valiant contrary to the Hopes of his Neighbors. He subdued
the Vejentes in two several Fights, and took some of their Towns. He enlarged
Rome, and fortified Janiculum. He built the City Ostia, at the mouth of Tiber,
to facilitate and secure Navigation. He reigned 24 years.

ANCYLE,
or rather ANCILIA, a sort of Buckler so called from the Greek Word (...) or
(...), which signifies an Elbow. The Bucklers were cut and hollowed into a
Semicircle in the middle, and larger at the two ends.

There was a Festival kept at Rome in March, called The Feast of the Holy
Bucklers. The Occasion of its Institution was thus; In the Reign of Numa, Rome
was afflicted with so great a Plague, that all seized with it died without any
Possibility of Cure. One day as Numa was going in one of the Streets of the
City, there fell down from Heaven upon him, an Holy Buckler, or Ancyle, which
he took as a Token of the Divine Protection; for the Plague began to decrease,
and the Nymph Aegeria told him, that the Fate and Happiness of his City were
annexed to it, as heretofore those of Troy were to the Palladium of Minerva. He
found no great Difficulty to persuade the People to these things, and, that
their Enemies might not take away this Fatal Buckler, he caused Veturius
Mamurius to make Eleven others, so exactly like it, that the Holy Buckler could
never be distinguished from the others.

He put them into the Temple of Mars, under the Conduct of twelve Priests
called Salii; of whom I shall speak in their place.

Mamurius received this Reward, to be celebrated in the Hymns composed in
honor of the God Mars, as Ovid tells us in these Verses, lib. 3. Fastorum v.
391.

Inde Sacerdotes operi promissa vetusto
Praemia persolvunt, Mamuriumque vocant.
Plutarch, explains this otherwise, for he says, That when the Salii made
mention of Veturius Mamurius in the Hymns of Mars, it was only through a
Corruption of their Language, and that they ought to have said, ob veterem
memoriam.

Varro is of the same Opinion, lib. 5. Itaque Salii qui cantant Veturium
Mamurium, significant veterem memoriam. But the greatest number of Authors are
for the former Opinion, which seems the most natural and least strained.

The Feast of Holy Bucklers began the first of March, and lasted three days. It
had several Names, some called it Saliorum Festum Saliares or Martiales Ludi,
Ancyliorum festum, Mamuralia. The Salii carried the Bucklers through the City
dancing, and the Festival was ended with a sumptuous Feast, which was by way of
Eminency called Saliaris Coena. Horace describes this Feast, and what passed in
it lib. 1. Od. 37.

Nunc est bibendum, nunc pede libero
Pulsanda tellus: nunc Saliaribus
Ornare pulvinar deorum
Tempus erat dapibus, sodales.
None could marry, nor go about any Business when these Bucklers were carried,
because as Ovid says, Arms denote Discord, which ought not to be found in
Marriages. Arma movent pugnam, pugna est aliena maritis:
Condita cum fuerint, aptius omen erit.
Fast. lib. 3. v. 395.

Tacitus, in the first Book of his History, attributes the ill Success of the
Emperor Otho against Vitellius, to his Departure from Rome, while these Holy
Bucklers were carrying.

ANDROMEDA,
the Daughter of Cepheus, King of Aethiopia, and Cassiope, who was so rash and
presumptuous to dispute with Juno and the Nereides for Beauty; to punish this
Sauciness, her Daughter was condemned to be exposed naked upon a Rock to be
devoured by a Sea Monster, but she was rescued by Perseus, (who flew through
the Air with the Wings which Minerva lent him to fight against the Gorgons, and
who, by the help of the Buckler of that Goddess, wherein he saw the Image of
Medusa as in a Looking-glass, had taken her by the Hair and cut off her Head,
and then escaped, while her Sisters were asleep,) for as he was on his Return
on the Coasts of Aethiopia, he saw Andromeda just ready to be devoured by the
Monster, and being moved with Love as well as Pity for the Misfortune of such a
fair Unfortunate, turned the Monster into stone by showing it the Head of
Medusa, after he had stunned it with a Blow of his Sword; then loosing the
Virgin, who was tied half naked to the Rock, he helped her to get down the
steep Precipice, and carried her back to her Father, who, to reward him, gave
her to him in Marriage.

Lucian gives us a further Description of this History, in his Commendation of
an House; Behold, says he, Perseus, who slew a Sea Monster and rescued
Andromeda: Consider how in a small space the Painter has well expressed the
Fear and Modesty of this young Fair one, who all naked viewed the Combat from
an high Rock. Consider the terrible Looks of the Monster, who come to devour
her, and the amorous Courage of the Hero. See how he held up his Buckler
against the Monster, which turned him into stone by the force of Medusa' s
Look, whilst he gave him a full Blow upon his Head with a Backsword.

The History of Andromeda may be compared to that of Iphigenia. Andromeda being
exposed to a Sea Monster, to expiate for the Pride of her Mother, who preferred
her own Beauty before that of the Nymphs, she was delivered from it by Perseus,
who married her after he had slain the Monster. This Perseus is nothing else
but an Horseman, according to the signification of the Hebrew word Pharas,
Equus. The place where Andromeda was exposed is Joppa, or Japha, upon the
Coasts of Phoenicia, as Pliny says, In quo vinculorum Andromedae vestigia
ostendunt.

The same Author assures us, that the prodigious Bones of this Fish to which
Andromeda was exposed, were carried by Scaurus of Joppa to Rome; Belluae, cui
dicebatur fuisse exposita Andromede, ossae Romae apportata ex oppido Judaeae
Joppe, ostendit inter reliqua miracula in aedilitate sua M. Scanrus. It Is
evident that it was some Whale, taken at Joppa, whose Skeleton Scaurus showed
at Rome; and that he might make his new Story more plausible, he set it off
with the old Fable of Andromeda. Vossius is of opinion that this Sea Monster to
whom Andromeda was exposed, and from whom Perseus delivered her, was nothing
else but a Ship, or the Captain of a Ship, who had such a Monster for his Flag,
and courted Andromeda, to marry her.

ANDRONES,
a Greek Word which signifies, The Apartment of Men, where they were accustomed
to make their Feasts, into which Women were not allowed to come.

ANGELI,
Angels, These are spiritual Intelligences, which God makes use of, as his
Ministers, to do Men Good or Evil, and to execute the Commands of his Divine
Providence upon them. The Greeks and Latins acknowledged Angels under the Name
of Good or Evil Genii or Demons. It is a Truth which Homer was well satisfied
in, that Angels or Demons do stir up many Motions and diverse Passions in the
Mind and Heart of Man.

Hesiod tells us, that there are thirty thousand Gods or Angels dispersed over
all the Earth, to observe the Conduct of Men; Ter enim decies mill sunt in
terra Dii Jovis, custodes mortalium hominum, qui judicia observant and prava
opera, aere induti, passim oberrantes per terram: these Words Dii Jovis
signify Angels. It Is the Doctrine of the Church, which even the Poets
acknowledged with Hesiod, That the Providence of God watches over the Universe,
and that he has thirty thousand, i. e. an infinite number of Angels, the
Ministers of his wrath. In fine, These Divine Guardians and Observers of our
Actions are invisibly, yet most certainly in the midst of us, and encompass us
on all sides.

Euripides, in Cicero, makes the unfortunate OEdipus say, that he withdrew
himself for fear lest the Evil Genii should hurt the City upon his account,
(...), etc. That Is the Name he gives those Genii or Demons which he believed
were appointed to every particular Person, and were disposed to hurt them, as
there were others who delighted to help and benefit them.

This Opinion of Hesiod, agrees with Varro's and Plato's, who also assign
several Orders of Demons or Intelligences in the Heavens, the Air, the Earth,
and the subterraneous parts, that all the Universe might be filled with Life,
Reason and Understanding, and consequently have a perfect Beauty. Nevertheless
this Difference is remarkable, that Plato will have those Intelligences, which
people and fill the whole Universe, to be created and appointed to their
Offices from the beginning of the World; whereas Hesiod supposes them to be
partly the Souls of the deceased.

ANGERONA,
a Goddess, who is prayed to against a certain Distemper called a Quinsie, in
Latin Angina. Pliny will have her the Goddess of Silence, and Calmness of Mind,
who banishes all Disturbances, and heals all sorts of Melancholy. The Romans
instituted a Feast to her, which they called Angeronalia, because she cured
their Flocks, which were troubled with the Quinsie. She is painted with her
Mouth covered, to show us that Pains and Griefs should be born without
impatient Complaints. They sacrifi'd to her in the Temple of the Goddess
Volnpia, where her Statue was set up.

ANGIBATA,
a Greek Word that comes from (...), and signifies a Transparent Vessel, in
which little Images seem to move up and down in the Water, which are enclosed
in it and sealed up hermetically. This wonderful Effect, which makes a kind of
Enameled Figures to swim in the Water, is seen in an Angibata, which has
lately been found out, in which a small Image rises and falls, turns about and
stands still as you please. This is done by straitning and compressing the
Water more or less with the Thumb, which stops the end of a long Glass Pipe or
Tube filled with Water. The Contrivance is, The little enameled Image, which
is hollow and has a Weight so proportioned to its Largeness, that it will swim
upon the, Water, yet so, that by the Addition of a small Weight it will rise
and sink to the bottom.

ANGLIA,
England, see Albion.

ANGUIS,
a Serpent, which was an ill Omen in Marriages, as we may see by those Verses
of Terence in his Phormio, He will say that lately there happened to him ill
Omens, a Serpent fell from the Tiles through a Gutter. The God Aesculapius is
ordinarily represented under the figure of a Serpent, because he came from
Epidaurus to Rome in that shape.

ANGUSTUS CLAVUS,
a small Button in the shape of the Head of a Nail, which the Roman Knights did
wear upon their Garments, called from thence Tunica Angusti Clavi, whereas the
Senators wore them larger, and their Coat was therefore called Tunica Lati
Clavi. From hence it comes that these Words are often in Latin Authors, and
chiefly in Suetonius, taken for the Dignity of Knights and Senators.

ANIENSIS TRIBUS,
the Tribe of Anio, or the Inhabitants near the River Anio. In the Consulship
of M. Fulvius and F. Manlius, the Censors P. Sempronius Sopho and P. Sulpitius
Severa; made a Census, i. e. took an Account of the number of the People, to
which they added a new Tribe called Aniensis.

ANIGER or ANIGRUS,
a River of Thessaly, whose Waters were sweet and pleasant, but afterward
turned bitter and stinking, because the Centaurs washed their Wounds in it,
which they had received from Hercules, as the Fable says.

ANIMA,
the Soul, which animates all living Creatures in general. This Word comes from
(...), which signifies Wind or Breath; the Latins say, Animam efflare, to
express the yielding up the last Breath, or at the last Gasp.

The Ancients were several ways mistaken about the Nature of the Soul. Some, as
Lactantius says, believed that the Soul was Air. Varro, following this Opinion,
says, The Soul is Air received in at the Mouth, purified by the Lungs, warmed
by the Heart, and from thence dispersed through the whole Body. Some have
formed to themselves an Idaea of Souls, as certain thin Substances like
Shadows, yet visible, performing the same Functions and having the same Organs
with the Bodies which they animate, since they see, speak, understand, and have
need of Boats to carry them over the Rivers of Hell; so that according to their
Argument they are only more subtle Bodies. This Error passed among the
Primitive Christians, notwithstanding the clear Light of the Gospel; and so the
Ancients in their Emblems have represented the Soul by a Butterfly flying from
the Body, which may be observed from a Basso Relievo of Marble, which
represents a young Man lying upon a Bed, with a Deaths-head at his Feet, and a
Butter-fly flying over him, which signifies his Soul, and by its flying away it
shows us, that the Soul had forsaken the Body, to which it was united.

The Butter-fly seems to have come out of the Mouth of the deceased, because
the Ancients thought, as the Vulgar still do, that the Soul took its flight
from the Body at the Mouth, which made Homer say, in his Iliads lib. 9. That
when the Soul has once passed the Fence of the Teeth, it can never return again.

They have expressed the Soul by a Butter-fly, which perpetuates its Being by
changing its shape several times. For after this manner the Pythagorcans
believe that we change our Genus or Species by the Transmigration of our Souls.
Moralis tells us of an Epitaph, by which it appears, that a dead Man ordered
his Heirs to make a Butter-fly over his Ashes; Haeredibus meis mando etiam
cineri ut meo
Volitet ebrius Papilio.


There is yet extant a Representation of a Cupid endeavoring to fix an
unsteady Soul, by fastening it to a Tree, for a punishment of its Inconstancy,
nailing it to a dry stump, and by that means hindering it from entering into the
Body it desired.

Nicetas Choniates says, That some were of opinion that there are two Natures
in the Soul, one luminous and the other dark. This last has its Original from
below, and comes through some subterraneous Caverns; the other descends from
the Height of Heaven all inflamed to adorn the Body; but in its Descent it is
especially cautioned to take care, that while it endeavors to adorn its
earthly Habitation by its Light, it does not obscure it self by the others
Darkness.

The Soul is more particularly said to be that which gives Life to Animals and
Vegetables. The Vegetative Soul is in Plants and Trees, the Animal in Beasts,
and the Rational and Spiritual in Man. The Cartesians define the Soul of Man a
thinking Substance, and by this Quality alone they think they can prove its
spiritual and immortal Nature. As to the Soul of Beasts they say it is an
Automaton, or a Machine that moves of it self and by natural Springs, that
their Soul is a thin an active Substance, which participates of the Nature of
Fire, and is the Source of the Vegetative Spirits.

The Immortality of our Soul was not only the Opinion of the Poets, but of all
Mankind. The first Idolatry was either the Worship of the Stars, or of Kings,
which were Deities after their Deaths. Now this presupposes that they believed
that the Souls of Kings were much of the same Nature with the Intelligences
which govern the Stars. Thus the Apotheosis or Deification of the deceased, was
an evident proof of the common belief of the Immortality of Soul.

The earnest desire of Fame is a secret proof of the inward belief of the Souls
Immortality; for Men would never have taken so much pains to have eternized
their Name and Memory, if the Soul had been mortal: So Horace tells us, That he
should not dye entirely, but that the greatest part of himself would survive
after death. Non omnis moriar, multaque pars mei
Vitabit Libitinam. --
And Ovid says the same in these Verses;

Part tamen meliore mei super alta perennis
Astra ferar.
Cicero, in his Oration for the Poet Archias, explains the Immortality, so much
celebrated by the Poets; he assures us, that it was the Opinion of wise Men,
That immortal Glory, the love of which was so ardent in Man, supposes immortal
Life, which could taste the Sweetness of that Glory. This learned Man treats
upon this Subject in his Tusculan Questions, and observes there, that their
very Burials, Funeral-Elegies, the Examples of those who have devoted
themselves to Death for the Good of their Country, the Love of Glory, wherewith
Men are so inspired, and lastly, all that is said or believed of Hell, and all
that is read concerning it in the Poets, are evident Proofs of the Immortality
of Souls, and of the Belief that all Men have of it, and explaining the reason
which induced Men to describe Hell after the manner that the Poets had
represented it; he says, 'twas because they thought Souls immortal, and not
being able to apprehend any thing but what is material; they had described
Souls, and the Punishment of Hell, by corporial Representations; as we may
learn by Homer, and other Poets.

Euripides, in his Deification of Castor, Pollux, and Helena, tells us, That
the Soul of Man, after Death, has no Enjoyment of this sensitive Life, but
has always the same Understanding, and goes to take up its abode in Heaven,
(...).

Herodotus assures us, That the Egyptians were the first who delivered the
Doctrine of the Souls Immortality.

Plato tells us, That after Death, our Souls are conducted by a Genius, who the
Poets say is Mercury, to the place where they shall be judged; and that they
receive Punishments or Rewards proportionably to the good or evil they have
done in their Lives. Quemlibet morientem cujusque Genius (...), quem vivens
sortitus fuerat, in locum quendam ducit, ubi omnes judicari oportet. Judicantar
and qui honest, just and sancte vixerunt; and qui non, and qui mediocriter.

ANIMALIA,
Animals, which are divided into Terrestrial, Aquatic, Birds, amphibious
Creatures, and Insects. The Pagans adored Beasts, and creeping things, as
Deities; and the most superstitious, as well as the most ancient Worshippers of
this kind, were the Egyptians. Thus, when Caesar made himself Master of Egypt,
Lucian tellus us, That he made a magnificent Treat of many of the Egyptian
Deities; Non mandante fame, multas volucresque ferasque
Aegipti posuere Deos.
Ovid, Lib. V. of his Metamorphos. relates the Flight of the Gods into Egypt
from the War of the Giants, and when Typhoeus pursued them, they concealed
themselves under the shape of diverse Animals, to avoid his Fury.

Herodotus assures us, that the Egyptians were the first that made Statues, and
engraved Animals in Stone: They represented Jupiter with a Rams Head, because
Heracles being earnestly desirous to see him, Jupiter appeared to him with a
Ram's head. He says also, That Pan was one of their greatest Gods, and they
represented him as a Goat, though they knew very well, that he was like the other
Gods. Lucian declares, that the Signs of the Zodiac, and the other
Constellations, were first painted by the Egyptians in the Heavens, or in the
Celestial Spheres, whose Images they would have afterward to be upon the
Earth in the same Animals, whose Nature, they affirmed, depended upon the
Nature of those Constellations, and upon their Impressions on sublunary beings.
It is also probable, that this Fable of the Flight of the Gods into Egypt, and
their Transformation into Animals, was taken from the Opinion of the
Astronomers, who attributed the shape of these Creatures to the Constellations,
and of the Constellations to the Gods, that is to say, to the Celestial
Intelligences.

It Is certain that they distinguished the Gods from the Animals that were
consecrated to 'em, and that they did not give any Honor to those Beasts, but
with relation to those Gods to whom they put up their Prayers, and not to
Animals. Herodotus has given us the reason, why the Egyptians gave so much
Honor to the Ibis, or the Hawk; 'twas because, in the Spring, a vast number of
flying Serpents came out of Arabia, to build Nests in Egypt, but were driven
back by these Birds. 'Twas without doubt to the God, who had sent them these
Helps, that the Egyptians intended to give Honor, by worshipping the Animals
which was consecrated to him. Diodorus Siculus afferts, after Herodotus, That
the Egyptians affirmed, That they worshipped those Animal which were consecrated
to the Gods, in Honor to those Gods; and he assures us, that the Egyption
Priests had secret and mysterious Reasons for their Worship; but the People had
only three Reasons for it, of which the two former seem to be something
fabulous, viz. That the Gods, at the beginning, being assaulted by a rout of
wicked Men, concealed themselves under the Form of these Animals, and ever
since they had honored them. Secondly, That the Egyptians having been often
vanquished by their Enemies, at length became victorious, after they set up the
Figures of these Animals for their Standards. Thirdly, That all these Animals
were extremely useful for the preservation of their Goods and Lives.

Plutarch tells us, That we ought to interpret all these Fables in a pious and
philosophical sense, pie and philosophice: That if the Egyptians did honor
Mercury under the Name of a Dog, 'twas because of the Watchfulness of that
Creature.

There was nothing so lewd as the Worship of the Goat, which they called
Mendes; the Greeks, Pan; and the Latins, Faunus and Silvanus. The Sileni and
Satyrs related to this. The Figures of these Deities were yet more immodest and
impure than the Animals themselves; for they were the original, as I may say,
of the Priapus of the Greeks. All these Idolaters protested nevertheless, That
their intention was by these Symbols, to honor the Fruitfulness of Nature,
that continually produced an infinite number of Beasts, many of which are
Masterpieces of the Fecundity of the divine Power.

Some think that the greatest part of these Transformations of the Egyptian
Gods into Animals, or the diverse ways of representing 'em under the Figures of
these several Animals, arose from nothing else but some Allusions of the Names
to a more ancient Language; for Bochartus observes, that if Isis were changed
into a Swallow, as Plutarch says, 'twas because that Sis in the Hebrew. Tongue
signifies a Swallow: If Anubis were painted with a Dog's Head, 'twas because
Nobach signifies to bark: If Apis was worshipped in the shape of an Ox, 'twas
because Abbir signifies an Ox: If Jupiter changed himself into a Ram, 'twas
because El, which is the Name of God, signifies also a Ram: If Osiris, or
Bacchus be changed into a Goat, it is because Seir signifies a Goat: If Diana be
changed into a Cat, it is because, in the Egyptian Language, Bubastis signifies
a Cat, and that is the Name of Diana: Venus is changed into a Fish, because
Atergatis come near to Dag, a Fish: Lastly, Juno, or Astarte, takes the figure
of a Cow, because Hastaroth signifies Herds of Oxen.

It Is not to be doubted, but from the time of Moses, the Egyptians worshipped
their Gods under the figure of Animals, since Moses himself answers, That the
Israelites could not offer a solemn Sacrifice in Egypt, lest they should expose
themselves to be stoned by the Egyptians, whose Gods they must sacrifice to the
true God.

ANNA PERENNA.
This fabulous Story is told of her:

This Anna, according to some Authors, was the Daughter of Belus, and Sister of
Dido, who fled to Battus, King of the Isle of Malta, after the death of her
Sister, when Hierbas, the King of the Getuli, attempted to take Carthage. When
she perceived herself not safe with Battus, because of the Threats of Hierbas,
she fled into Italy to Laurentum, where Aeneas was settled; and as he walked
one day along the Bank of the River Numicius, he met Anna, and presently knew
her, and conducting her to his Palace, he treated her according to her Quality.
Lavinia was troubled at it, and sought her Destruction, as being her Rival; but
she being admonished of it in a Dream, escaped to the River Numicius, whereof
she was made a Nymph, as she told them that searched for her, and ordered them
to call her for the future Anna Perenna, because she should be for ever under
these Waters: -- Placidi sum Nympha Numici
Amne perenne latens, Anna Perenna vocor.
Ovid. Fast. Lib. III. v. 653.

This News obliged the Albans to make great Rejoycings along the Banks of the
River in Dances, and Feasting; and in imitation of them, the Romans did the
same on the Banks of Tiber. The Virgins took very undecent Liberties, dancing
and Iasciviously sporting without any Modesty: Ovid has described these Feasts,
which were made on the 15th. of March. They sacrificed to her to obtain a long
Life, Annare, and Perennare. Some have thought that she was an old Woman of
Bovillae, who brought Meat to the People of Rome of old, and then fled into the
holy Aventine-Mount, and in Gratitude this Feast was appointed in Honor of her
by the Romans: Pace domi fact a signum posuere perenne,
Quod sibi defectis illa ferebat opem.
Ovid. Fast. Lib. III. v. 673.

ANNALS,
Annals, a chronological History, which describes the remarkable Events of a
State yearly, as the Annals of Cornellus Tacitus: Whereas History, says Aulus
Gellius, descants upon those Events, and upon the Causes which produced 'em. It
was allowed at first to the Chief-Priests only to write the Annals of the
People of Rome; that is to say, the considerable things that happened every
year; and from thence they were called Annaies Maximi, non a magnitudine, sed
quod eos Pontifex consecrasset; says Festus.

ANNALIS LEX,
The Law which appointed the Age at which any Person was promoted to Offices of
State. Eighteen Years was required for one to be made a Roman Knight; and
Twenty five to obtain a Consulship; and so for other Offices. The Romans took
this Law from the Athenians.

ANNALIS CLAVUS,
The Nail which the Praetor, Consul, or Dictator fixed every Year in the Wall
of Jupiter's Temple, upon the Ides of September, to show the Number of Years.
But this Custom was after changed, and the Years were reckoned by the Consuls.

ANNIBAL,
an African, the Son of Amilcar, and General of the Carthaginians in the Wars
against the Romans, whom he beat and defeated in several Battles. He passed
from Spain to the foot of the Alps, in his way to Italy, and went up to the top
of those Mountains in Nine days time, notwihstanding the Snow with which they
were covered, and in spite of the Resistance of the Mountaineers which inhabit
there, whom he shut up in a Rock, which they used for a Retreat; and by an
unheard of Invention, he cut a way through that part of this Mountain which
most obstructed his passage, with Fire and Vinegar. After this, he overrun all
Italy, and brought Terror and Dread with him into all Parts, and chiefly after
the Battle of Cannae, which is a small Village of Apulia, in which the Romans
lost Forty Thousand Men, together with the Consul Aemilius. Annibal sent Three
Bushels of Gold Rings to Carthage, and made himself a Bridge of dead Bodies.
'Twas at this Battle that he showed, that the greatest Men commit the greatest
Faults; for he forgot himself, and lost by his own Carelessness a complete
Victory; for instead of attacking Rome, he went and drowned all his Glory and
Hopes in the Pleasures of Capua. He dyed at the Palace of Prusias, King of
Bithynia, having poisoned himself, because he apprehended, that this barbarous
King would deliver him into the hands of the Romans. Thus dyed this great
General, after he had made War Sixteen Years in Italy, won several Battles,
brought several Nations to a Submission, either by Force or Agreement, besieged
Rome, and made himself Master of diverse Cities.

Juvenal having briefly run over the great Exploits of Annibal, concludes, that
all this Glory ended at last with being conquered, banished, and living as a
Fugitive; reduced to so mean a condition, as to court a petty King of Asia; and
lastly with killing himself by a Ring, which was a sort of Revenge on him for
that incredible multitude of Rings which he had taken from the Roman Nobles
slain in the Battle of Cannae.

Lucian makes him speak thus of himself in one of his Dialogues of the Dead:
Having passed out of Africa into Spain with an handful of Men, I first made my
self famous by my Valor, and after the death of my Wives Brother, having the
command of the Armies, I subdued the Spaniards and Western Gauls; then marching
over the Alps, I conquered all Italy, as far as Rome; after I had gained Three
great Battles, and slain in one day so many Enemies, that I measured the Gold
Rings which the Knights were, by the Bushel, and marched upon a Bridge of dead
Bodies. Being recalled into Africa, to oppose Scipio, I obeyed, as if I had
been one of the meanest of the Citizens; and after being unjustly condemned, I
bore my Banishment patiently.

ANNONA,
the Victuals, or the provision of Corn for a Year.

Annona Civilis, the Corn with which the Granaries of Cities were filled every
Year, for the Subsistence of the Citizens.

Annona Militaris, the Corn which was laid up in the Magazines for the
Subsistence of an Army during the Campaign.

ANNULUS,
a Ring which the Ancients wore on their Fingers. There are Three sorts of 'em;
one sort was called Annuli Sponsalitii, Pronubi, or Geniales, Rings of
Espousals, or Marriage-Rings, which the Bridegroom gives his Bride at their
Marriage; others were called Annuli Honorarii, Rings of Honor, which were used
as Marks of Honor, and distinction between the different Orders of Men, and
with which those also were rewarded, who had done some signal Service to the
Commonwealth; the Third sort were called Annuli Signatorii, or Sigillatorii,
which they used to seal their Letters with.

The Rings which the Romans used to give the Women betrothed to them, were
ordinarily of Iron, and they put them upon the 4th Finger of the hand. I have
seen some also of Copper and Brass, with little Knobs in the fashion of a Key,
to signify, that the Husband, by giving this Nuptial-Ring to his Wife, puts
her in possession of the Keys of his House, of which she ought to have the
care. Some of them are found with these Inscriptions, Bonam Vitam. Amo te, ^na
me.

Rings of Honor, were Marks of Merit in the Persons who wore them. The first
Romans wore only Rings of Iron, as fittest for a warlike Nation, and they
preferred 'em before Rings of value. Tarquinius Priscus was the first that wore
one of Gold; but for a long time the Senators durst not wear 'em. Afterward a
Custom prevailed of giving Gold Rings to them that went on an Embassy into
strange Countries about the Affairs of the Commonwealth; but yet they wore
them only upon the days of their Entries, or Audiences, as a Badg of their
Dignity.

But afterward the Senators wore them of Gold, as also the Knights, to
distinguish themselves from the common People; as they were known from Senators
by a Robe woven with Gold, and by their large Buttons. This happened about the
Second Punick or Carthaginian-War.

We read in Appian of Alexandria, that only Colonels in an Army had a Right to
wear Gold Rings, which they used as a Mark of Nobility.

It is true, that in the Disorder and Confusion of Civil-Wars, the People, and
Soldiers took the liberty to wear 'em, as also Women-Slaves, and those who were
made free, which obliged the Consuls, C. Asinius Pollio and C. Antistius, under
the Emperor Tiberius, to make an Order forbidding the Common People to wear
Gold Rings, at least those whose Father, or Grandfather by the Fathers side,
had not a Revenue of 400 great Sesterces with a right to take place in the
Fourteenth Ascent of the Theater, which was granted to the Roman Knights when
they were present at those Shows.

It is also true, that from the time of the Emperor Commodus, the Slaves made
free were honored with a Gold Ring.

Aurelius Victor says, That the infamous Macrinus, the Son of an enfranchised
Slave, received a Gold Ring, and was thereby equaled to the Knights, as these
Verses of the Poet Statius show:

Mutavitque genus, laevaque ignobile ferrum
Exuit, and celso natorum aequavit honori.
They affected to wear 'em of an extraordinary weight; I have seen some that
weighed Four Pistoles and a half of Gold; which puts me in mind of what Juvenal
says wittily in his Seventh Satyr, That no body will give 200 Pieces to an
Orator to plead his Cause, although he be as eloquent as Cicero, unless they
see an extraordinary great Ring shining on his Finger: -- Ciceroni nemo ducentos
Nunc dederit nummos, nisi fulserit annulus ingens.
Satyr. VII. v. 139.

Pliny tells us, That in his time the Excess was so great, that it seemed to
him, as though every one would be valued only by the Number and Weight of his
Gold Rings, with which they loaded rather than adorned their Fingers. This is
the same that Seneca, the Philosopher, says, Oneramus annulis digitos, and m
omni articulo gemma disponitur.

These Rings were often adorned with Beazels made of the same Matter, or
precious Stones graved several ways.

Under the Emperor Claudius, Seals were ordered to be made of the same Metals,
and not of precious Stones. The several sorts of Engravings which were set in
the Beazels of Rings made the Seals, which we name Annuli Signatorii, or
Sigillatorii, with which they sealed their Letters, which they impressed upon
their Records; as also in their Houses upon their Cellars, where they kept
their Provisions.

They sealed their Letters, as we do at this day, saving, that instead of Silk
they used Thread or Flax, with which they wrapped about the Letter on the
outside, and then laying upon it a sort of soft Clay or Wax, they stamped the
figure of their Seal upon it, after they had a little softened it with Spittle.
Cicero has described the manner of it to us in his Third Oration against
Catiline; Tabellas proferri jussimus, quae a quoque dicebantur datae; primum
oftendimus Cethege, signum cognovit, nos linum incidimus, legimus: We caused
the Letters to be brough:, showed 'em to Cethegus, who acknowledged the Seal,
we cut the Thread, and read them.

Plautus has described the same thing to us more elegantly in his Bacchides:
Cedo tu ceram, and linum, actutum age, obliga ob signa cito: Give me the Wax,
and Thread, quickly; bind up the Letter, and seal it: This Flax was called
Vinculum Epistolae; and Juvenal calls the Impression of the Seal upon the Wax,
that was softened with Spittle, Gemma Uda.

They sealed their Contracts in the same manner, as also their Wills; for as
soon as the Witnesses had heard the Will read, it was sealed in their presence,
and they fixed Three Labels to it, upon which they put Wax, and set their
Seals. This was decreed by the Senate, in the time of Nero, as Suetonius
relates. It was likewise necessary, when a Will was opened, that either all the
Witnesses, or at least most of 'em, should be present, to own their Seals:
Tabellae testamenti aperiuntur hoc modo, ut testes vel maxima pars eorum
adhibeantur, qui signaverint testamentum, ut ita agnitis signis, rupto lino,
aperiatur and recitetur. Jul. Paul.

These Seals were also made use of to seal their Cellars and Pantries, where
they kept Provisions for their Families; for Plautus brings in a Mistress of a
House, who was going to visit her Neighbor, thus speaking in his Comedy,
entitled Casina, Obsignate cellas, referte annulum ad me; And the same Poet
brings in a Slave complaining of his Master for sealing the Salt-Box, for fear
he should take any Salt; Isti parci promi qui salinum servis obsignant cum sale.

ANNULI
Samothracii ferrei, Rings called Samothracian. They had something in them
which secured from Envy, and from other Evils, as Varro says. These Rings, as
Artemidorus says, which were Iron on the outside, and to which Art had
imparted some salutary Virtue, were fortunate in Dreams. Petronius, speaking of
the Rings which Tremalcion wore, tells us, That that which was upon his Little
Finger was of Gold, set thick with small Stars of Iron. Isidore, after Pliny,
teaches, That the Slaves covered their Iron Rings with Gold. These Samothracian
Rings may be said to be Talismans, of which the Iron was wrought under some
Constellation. Such also were those Rings which Solomon taught Men to make, as
Josephus says, which would drive away Devils: and those hollow Rings of
Artemidorus, which enclosed in 'em some supernatural and divine Virtue. The
People of the Isle of Samothrace much addicted themselves to the study of the
Secrets of Nature, and Pythagoras taught them a sort of Philosophy which he
called Divine, and is the same with the Talismans, or Rings made under a
certain Constellation. The Gods of Samothrace were those who presided over the
Talismans. Tertullian mentions three Altars, dedicated to three sorts of
Deities, Magnis, Potentibus, Valentibus; and adds, It Is credible that these
were the Gods of Samothrace, who were potent for the Execution of difficult
Designs, and who presided over great Undertakings. Varro calls them Divi
Potentes, and supposes 'em to be Heaven and Earth.

ANNUS,
the Year. It Is, properly speaking, that Time which the Sun takes in passing
through the 12 Signs of the Zodiac. After several Observations, Astronomers
having determined, That the several Recesses of the Sun have certain Periods,
after which that Planet seems to return to the same Points, in respect to us,
and much about the same time makes the same Alteratoins of Seasons, and
Temperature of the Air; called the Year that Number of Days which the Sun is
passing through those several differences of Distances and Recesses.

Those who observed these things with greater Exactness, did first acknowledge,
That the Sun did run from East to West, round the Earth in twenty four Hours,
by the swift Motion of the Primum Mobile, or Highest Orb. Then they observed,
That the Sun, besides this Motion which is common to all the Planets, had
another also proper to it self, which was from West to East, round the same
Globe of Earth, in the Ecliptic, which cutting the Equator obliquely, rises
on both sides toward the Poles, as far as the Tropicks. And lastly, That the
Sun running, in one Year. through the full Extent of this great Circle of the
Ecliptic, which they have divided into twelve Parts or Signs, by its Motion
causes two very different Seasons, viz. Summer and Winter, when it arrives at
the Tropicks, that is to say, at the two Points of the Solstices; and two other
more temperate, viz. Spring and Autumn, when the Sun cuts the Equator, or the
Aequinoctial.

The Year is called in Greek (...) and (...), that is to say, Returning into it
self; whence it is, that the Egyptians have represented the Year by a Serpent
turning round and biting its Tail: which made Virgil say in his Georgicks, lib.
2. v. 402. Atque in se sua pervestigia volvitur annus.


The Year is either Natural, which is otherwise called Tropical, or Civil. The
Natural or Tropic Year is that exact Space of Time which the Sun takes in
passing through the Ecliptic, which is not always the same, because of the
Inequality of the Sun's Motion; which seems to have been observed in the most
ancient Times by the Egyptian Priests, and Sacrificers to Jupiter Ammon, by
means of the different Quantity of Oil which was burnt continually before the
Statue of that God; for measuring with all the exactness possible what they
spent in the whole year, they found that there was a considerable Difference
between one Year and another, and from thence inferred that the Years were not
exactly equal.

Astronomers have since by the Exactness of their Calculations and
Observations, proved that the Mechanical Conjecture of the Egyptians for the
Term of the Solar Year, observed in the time of Hipparchus and Piolemy, and
about 750 years after by Albategnius, was still found very different in the
time of Alphonsus King of Castile, which was about 400 years after, and the
Modern Discoveries that have been made from the most curious and diligent
Observations have no Agreement with the Ancients.

And as the Duration of the Solar Year, which we have from Ptolemy's
Observations, is the greatest of all, that in Albategnius the least, so that in
Alphonsus's time is in some sort a Mean between both, but that of our time
seems to come near the greatest. Copernicus, who lived about the end of the
last Age but one, took occasion to conjecture that these, tho different
Inequalities, had their determined Periods; and that, in a certain Revolution
of time, they passed through all these Differences, and then returned to the
same Posture they were in before.

He has found out, by a laborious Computation, that the Term of this Period is
about 1716 years, in which time the Solar year runs through all these several
Changes.

But because it would be very hard to fix upon a Computation of Years,
according to such nice Differences, which consist in some few Minutes for each
year, the Astronomers have, for that reason, made use of a mean Duration
between the greater and the less, which contains 365 days, 15 hours, and about
49 minutes.

The Civil Year, which is commonly used by all Nations is very different, both
as to its Beginning and Duration; which nevertheless may be referred to three
different Heads, for they either follow the Course of the Sun, or of the Moon,
or of both.

The Hebrews had two sorts of Years, the Secular or Natural Year, and the
Sacred or Ecclesiastical.

The Secular had respect to the Civil Government for buying and selling, and
began at the Autumnal Aequinox, in the month called Tisri, which answers to our
September, because they believed that God created the World at that time.

The Sacred Year had reference to their Religion, and began at the Vernal
Aequinox, in the month called Nisan, which answers to our April, at which time
they kept their Passover.

The Egyptians, Chaldaeans and Assyrians were the first that measured their
Year by the Course of the Sun, and they thought at first, that the Solar Year
had 360 days only, which they divided into twelve months containing thirty days
each; at the end of which, as we may conjecture by the Story which Plutarch
relates concerning Rhea and Saturn, Mercury added five days, which he called
(...), i. e. Added, by which means the year became 365 days long, without
counting the six hours or thereabouts, by which the Solar Year exceeds that
number of days, and which, making one day in four years, is the cause that
Thot, i. e. the Egyptian year has no determined and fixed place in any part of
the Solar Year, which it anticipates one day every four years, and one month in
120 years, running through its whole Course in the space of 1440 years; after
which it returns to the same point from which it first began.

This way of reckoning the Years has been a long time in use among the
Egyptians, till, after the defeat of Mark Anthony by Augustus at the Battle of
Actium, their Country was made a Province of the Roman Empire, and they were
forced to submit to the Laws of the Conquerours and their Computation of years,
which was the Julian, keeping only the Names of the months, which answered
after such a manner to the Roman Months, that their Thot, the first day of the
Year, always happened upon the 29th. of August; whence it comes to pass that
the first day of the Egyptian Year, which is also called the Coptick Year, is
four whole months and three days before the Kalends of January, which is the
first day of the Roman Year.

The Persians count their Years as the Egyptians do, ever since Cambyses
became Master of Egypt. For having ransacked the Sepulcher of Simandius, he
found a Circle of 365 Cubits round, every Cubit representing a day of the year,
which was graven and marked by the rising and setting of the fixed Stars, which
made them fix their year to 365 days, without mentioning the hours. Quintus
Curtius tells us, that the Persians adore the Sun, and have an holy Fire,
kindled by its Rays, to be carried before their King, who is followed by 365
young Lords, clothed with yellow Robes, to represent the 365 days of the Year.

The Arabians, Saracens, and Turks, at this day reckon their Year by the Course
of the Moon, making it to consist of twelve Moons, whereof some have thirty,
and some twenty nine days, alternatively one after the other, which make all
together but 354 days; so that the Duration of time being less than the Solar
Year by about eleven days, it follows, that their Month Muharran, which they
count for their first place in the whole Course of the Solar Year, which it
precedes 11 days every year, and more than a month in 3 years; so that in less
than thirty four years it runs through all the season of the Solar Year, and
returns to the Point from which it first began.

And since the exact time of the 12 Moons, besides the 354 whole days, is about
8 hours and 48 minutes, which make 11 days in 30 years, they are forced to add
11 days extraordinary in 30 years; which they do by means of a Cycle of 30
years invented by the Arabians, in which there are 19 years with 354 days only,
and 11 intercalary, or Embolismical, which have every one 355 days; and these
are they wherein the number of hours and minutes, which are Surplus to the
whole days in every year, is found to be more than half a day, such as 2, 5, 7,
10, 13, 16, 18, 21, 24, 26, and 29, by which means they fill up all the
Inequalities that can happen.

The Greeks consider the Motions of the Sun and Moon in their Year, and as they
supposed in ancient times, that the Moons Course was exactly 30 days, they made
their Year to consist of 12 Moons, and by consequence of 360 days; but quickly
perceiving their error, they took out 6 days, to bring it to the Lunar Year of
354 days, which being less than the Solar Year by 11 days, they found it
convenient, for reconciling the Inequalities in the Motions of these two
Luminaries, to insert at the end of every second year an intercalary month of
22 days, which they called, upon that account, (...), id est, a Month added, or
inserted.

They understood afterward, that the 6 hours they had omitted, which yet are a
part of the time of the Solar Year above the 365 days, and make one whole day
in four years, were the cause that their Year anticipated the true Solar Year
one day at the end of four years; which obliged them to change their
Intercalation, and put it off to the fourth year: and then leaving only 354
days to the 3 first, under the name of the Common Year, they reckoned 399 days
to the fourth, by the addition or intercalation of one month and an half,
consisting of 40 days, arising from the 11 days by which every Solar Year
exceeds the Lunar, being four times counted, and the day which arises from the
adding of the six hours in four years.

And to render the Intercalation more remarkable, they made a noble
Consecration of it by instituting the Olympic Games, in the time of Iphitas,
at which all Greece met together every fourth year, and hence came the
Computation of time by Olympiads, every one of which consisted of four years,
and are so famous in History.

Nevertheless they found at last, that this space of four years did not
rectify all the Irregularities that happened in the Courses of the Sun and
Moon, which obliged them to double 'em, and make a Revolution of 8 years, and
because they were not hereby yet fully satisfied, they introduced another of 11
years.

Notwithstanding this, the Athenians did not receive such satisfaction as they
hoped for by this last Period of 11 years, but they had still remained in a
perpetual Confusion, had not one of their Citizens, named Meto, an Astronomer
of very profound Judgment, at last discovered, that all these different Changes
which happened betwixt the two Motions of the Sun and Moon would be
accommodated by a Period made up of the two former of 8 and 11 years, i. e. in
the space of 19 years, after which those Stars return again to the same place
where they were at first.

This Period of XIX. Years of Meto, was ordinarily called The Enneadecas
eterais, and was received with so great Applause among the Athenians, that they
would have it written in large Characters of Gold, and set up in a public
Place, which gave it the Name of the Golden Number, and the use of it became
common not only in Greece but also among the Jews, who made use of it to
regulate their years, afterward among the Romans, and lastly, among the
Christians.

The Athenians began their Year at the New Mood after the Summer Solstice, in
the Month called (...), i. e. between the months of June and July. All the
Magistrates, says Pluto, must meet in the same Temple the day before the
Kalends of the Summer Solstice, when the New-year begins.

Some made their Year to consist only of three Months, others of four, as we
read in Macrobius his first Book of his Saturnalia, Chap. 12.

The Carians and Acharnanians made their Year to consist of six months, and
Justin tells us, That they reckoned but fifteen days to their Month.

The Romans had three sorts of Years; 1. That of Romulus, which contained but
ten months, beginning with March, whence it comes that December is called the
last Month. 2. Of Numa, which corrected the gross Mistake of Romulus, and added
two months to the year, viz. January and February, making it to consist of 355
days only, which makes 12 Lunar months. 3. Of Julius Caesar, who discovering a
further Error in the Calculation, viz. That there were ten days more than Numa
reckoned, made a Year of 365 complete days, and reserving the six hours to the
end of four years, made a whole day of 'em, which he inserted before the 6th of
the Calends of March; so that in that year they counted the 6th of the Calends
twice, Bis sexto Calendas, whence came the word Bissextile; and the year had
366 days, and was called Bissextile. And this way of computation has continued
to our time, and from its Author is named the Julian Year.

Now the 10 days which Caesar added to the year were thus distributed, to
January, August, and December, each of 'em two; to April, June, September, and
November, each of 'em one.

But because in these latter times there is still an Error found in this
Calculation, and the Equinoxes insensibly go back from the point where Julius
Caesar had fixed them, they have found out, that the year had not just 365 days
and six hours, but wanted about 11 minutes, which in 131 years, make the
Aequioxes go back about a day; for an hour having 60 such minutes, a day must
have 1440, which being divided by 11 make 130 and 10 over, so that the
Aequinoxes were come back to the tenth of March. For which reason in the year
1582 Pope Gregory XIII, to reform this Error, caused 10 days to be taken from
the Year, to bring the Aequinoxes to the 21 of March, and the 22, and 23 of
September, and to prevent the like for the future, he ordered, that since 131
thrice counted make 393, i. e. almost 400 years, this matter should be
regulated by Centuries, to make the account more easy and complete, so that in
400 years, the Bissextile of 3 years should come to 100 Bissextiles. And this
is that which is called The Gregorian Year.

The Jews count their years by weeks, and call the seventh Sabbatical, in which
they were not allowed to plow their Ground, and were obliged to set all their
Bond-Servants at liberty. They had also their Year of Jubilee and Release,
which was every 50 years, or according to others every 49 years, so that every
year of Jubilee was also Subbatical, but yet more famous than others, and then
all Possessions, and whatever else had been alienated, returned to its first
Owner.

The Greeks counted their years by Olympiads, of which every one contained the
space of four whole and complete years. These Olympiads took their Names from
the Olympic Games, which were celebrated near the City of Pisa, otherwise
called Olympia in Peloponnesus, from whence they were called Olympicks. These
years were also called Iphitus's, because Iphitus first appointed them, or' at
least revived that Solemnity.

The Romans counted by Lustra, of which every one is 4 complete years, or the
beginning of the fifth. This word comes from Luo, which signifies to pay,
because at the beginning of every fifth year they paid the Tribute imposed on
them by the Censors. They also counted their Year by a Nail, which they fixed
in a Wall of the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus.

The Year is divided into four Parts or Seasons, viz. Spring, Summer, Autumn,
and Winter. The Egyptians divided it but into three Parts, Spring, Summer, and
Autumn, allotting to each Season four months. They represented the Spring by a
Rose, the Summer by an Ear of Corn, and the Autumn by Grapes and other Fruits.
Nonnius, at the end of his Lib. 11. of his Dionysinca, describes the four
Seasons of the year thus, The Seasons, says he, appear to the Eye of the
Color of a Rose; the Daughters of the inconstent Year come into the House of
their Father. The Winter casts a seeble Ray, having her Face and Hair covered
with Snow, and her Breast with Hoar-Frost, her Teeth chatter and all her Body
is rough-coated with Cold. The Spring, crowned with Roses, sends forth a sweet
Smell, and makes Garlands of Flowers for Venus and Adonis. The Summer holds in
one hand a Sickle, and in the other Ears of Corn. And lastly, the Autumn
appears crowned with Vine Branches, laden with Grapes, and carrying in her
hands a Basket of Fruits.

The Greeks begin to count the Years from the Creation of the World, on the
first of September.

At Rome there are two ways of reckoning the Year; one begins at Christmas,
because of the Nativity of our Savior, and the Notaries of Rome use this Date,
setting to their Deeds a Nativitate: and the other at March, because of the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ, this is the Reason that the Popes Bulls are thus
dated, Anno Incarnationis.

The ancient French Historians began the year at the Death of St. Martin, who
died in the year of Christ 401, or 402. They began not in France to reckon the
year from January till 1564, by virtue of an Ordinance of Charles IX, King of
France, for before they began the day next after Easter, about the twenty fifth
of March.

ANQUIRERE
capite, or pecunia (in the Roman Law) to require that a Person be condemned to
Death or fined.

ANSER,
a Goose. This Domestic Fowl was in great Esteem among the Romans, for having
saved the Capitol from the Invasion of the Gauls, by her Cackling and clapping
of her Wings. They were kept in the Temple of Juno, and the Censors, at their
entrance into their Office, provided Meat for them. There was also every year a
Feast kept at Rome, at which they carried a Silver Image of a Goose in state
upon a Pageant adorned with rich Tapstry, with a Dog which was hanged, to
punish that Creature because he did not bark at the arrival of the Gauls.

ANTAEUS,
the Son of Neptune and Terra, and one of the Giants which dwelt in the Deserts
of Libya. He forced all Travelers to wrestle with him, and killed them. He
made a Vow to build Neptune a Temple of the Sculls of those he killed. He
attacked Hercules, who taking him by the middle of his Body, choked him in the
Air, it being impossible to kill him otherwise, for as often as he threw him
upon the ground, that Giant recovered new Strength. which the Earth, his
Mother, supplied him with.

ANTECESSORES,
this Word properly signifies those who excel in any Art or Science. Justinian
has honored those Doctors of Law who taught publicly with this Title; there
were four of them in every College, and they made up the Council of State.

ANTECOENA,
the First Course, the first Dish set upon the Table; it was either Fruits, or
Sweet Wine, or some part of the Entertainment.

ANTENOR,
a Trojan Prince, who is said to have delivered the Palladium of Troy to the
Greeks, which was the cause that the City was taken. After the City was taken
and destroyed, he came into Sclavonia, about the Streights of the Adriatic
Sea, where he built a City of his own Name, which is since called Padua.

ANTEROS,
the Son of Mars and Venus, and Brother of Cupid. See Amor.

ANTESTARI,
in the Law, signifies to bear Witness against any one; whence it is that
Horace says in his Sat. 9. lib. 1. v. 76. Vis antestari? Will you bear Witness?
And he that would, did only offers the Tip of his Ear, Ego vero oppono
auriculam: I offer my Ear immediately to show that I consent.

ANTEVORTA and POSTVORTA
Deities honored by the Romans, who took care of what is past and what is
future, and whom they made the Companions of Providence.

ANTICYRA,
an Island lying between the Streights of Meliacum, and Mount Oeta. There grew,
says Pliny, the best Hellebore, which is an excellent Herb to purge the Brain;
from whence comes the Proverb, Naviget Anticyram, as much as to say, That a Man
that has a distempered Head, or a cracked Brain, should go to Anticyra to cure
it with Hellebore.

ANTIGONE,
the Daughter of OEdipus King of Thebes, she served as an Eye to her Father,
after he had lost his Sight in his Banishment. Going to pay her last respects
to her Brother Polynices at his Funeral, against the express Command of Creon,
she was condemned by him to be starved to Death in Prison; but she prevented
her Death by hanging herself. Prince Haemon, Creon's Son, who was about to
marry her, slew himself also upon her Body in a Fit of amorous Despair. The
Poet Sophocles handles this Tragical Subject in his Tragedy of that Name so
nobly, that the Athenians gave him for his reward the Government of the Isle of
Samos.

There was another Antigone, the Daughter of Laomedon, whom Juno changed into a
Stork, because she equaled her in Beauty.

ANTILOCHUS,
the Son of Nestor, who accompanied him to the Siege of Troy, was slain by
Memnon, whilst he endeavored to ward the blow from his Father Nestor. Xenophon
tells us, in the beginning of his Treatise of Hunting, That Antilochus having
exposed his own Life to save his Fathers, deserved so well, that the Greeks
gave him the Name of Philopator, a true Lover of his Father. Quintus Calaber
relates the matter otherwise, That Antilochus having seen two of his Father
Nestor' s Captains, Erenthus and Pheron, stain by Memnon, attempted to revenge
their Death upon him; but having pushed him with his Javelin, Memnon run him
through with his Lance. Nestor Commanded his other Son Thrasymedes to fetch off
the Body of his Brother; but Achilles interposing, slew Memnon. Nevertheless,
Ovid. tells us, That Antilochus was slain by Hestor.

ANTINOUS,
of Bithynia, the Emperor Adrian's Favorite, who was drowned in the Nile, in a
Voyage from Egypt. The Emperor was so sensibly touched with his Loss, that to
comfort himself, he placed him in the rank of the immortal Gods, causing
Temples to be built to him, erecting Altars, and appointing Priests and
Sacrifices.

He caused several Medals to be stamped to perpetuate his Memory, and placed
his Statues in the Colleges.

We have Three Medals of his: upon the Reverse of the First there is the Figure
of a Temple, with the Emperor Adrian built upon the Nile, in Honor of him,
with these Greek words, (...), Adrianus construxit. At the bottom of this
Temple there is drawn a Crocodile, a Creature that abounds in the Nile, where
Antinous dyed.

Leonicus, in his Historia varia, says, That he saw at Venice a Silver Medal of
Antinous, on which were these words, (...), that is to say, Antinous the Here.
On the reverse of this Medal is represented a Sheep, with an Inscription quite
worn out.

There is yet a Third Medal of Antinous, wherein, on one side is the
Portraiture of this young Bithynian Lad of extraordinary Beauty, with these
Greek Letters, (...), Hostilius Marcellus Sacerdos Antinoi Achaeis dicavit: On
the reverse is the Horse Pegasus, with Mercury having his winged Shoes on, and
his Caduceus.

ANTIOPE,
the Daughter of Nycteus, and Wife of Lycus, King of Thebes, whom Jupiter
enjoyed in the form of a Satyr, which was the cause that her Husband divorced
her, and married Dirce, who imprisoned Antiope; but she escaped and fled to
Mount Citheron, where she brought forth Twins, Zethus and Amphion, who being
grown up, revenged the Wrong done to their Mother upon Lycus and his Wife Dirce.

ANTIUM,
a Sea-Town built by Ascanius, according to Solinus; or as Dionysius
Halicarnassus will have it, by one of the Children of Ulysses and Circe, upon a
Promontory, or the top of a Rock, 32 Miles from Oftia; it was the Metropolis of
Volsci, with whom the Romans had War for Two Hundred Years. Camillus took it
from them, and carried all the Beaks of their Ships away, and laid 'em up at
Rome, in the place of their Comitia, or Assemblies, called from thence Rostra.
This City was given to the old Praetorian Soldiers; and Nero caused a Port to
be built there. Antiun, says Suetonius, coloniam deduxit ascriptis veteranis, e
praetorio, ubi and portum operis sumptuosissimi fecit.

ANTONINUS,
the adopted Son of Adrian, to whom he succeeded: He was Surnamed Pius, for his
excellent Morals and sweet Temper, to which a reverse of a Medal alludes, which
represents Aeneas carrying his Father Anchises upon his Shoulders from Troy.
(This was the Badge of Piety and Love toward Parents, among the Ancients.)
Antoninus had a long Visage, which the Physiogmonists say, is a sign of Good
Nature and Kindness, to which we may add a sweet, modest, and majestic Air,
and a due proportion of all parts of his Face, as in the rest of his Body. He
must be acknowledged to be a Prince good, merciful, just, liberal, sober, and
eloquent, one that was truly worthy to govern so great an Empire. This Emperor
was compard to Numa, and indeed they had a very great resemblance one to the
other, both as to their Minds and the Lineaments of their Face. He caused the
Temple of Augustus, which was much ruined, to be rebuilt, and raised a new one
to his Predecessor Adrian, who adopted him. He dyed in the Seventieth Year of
his Age, and was as much lamented, as if he had been a very young Man; and
'twas observed, that he gave up the Ghost as if he had been in a sleep, Heaven
recompensing the sweetness of his Life by the easiness of his Death. He
governed the Empire Twenty two Years and Seven Months, or Twenty four Years,
according to others.

ANTONINUS.
See Marcus Aurelius Antoninus.

ANTONINUS HELIOGABALUS.
See Heliogabalus.

M. ANTONIUS,
Mark Anthony, a Trium-vir, the Grandson of Mark Anthony the Orator, and
Brother of Lucius. He took Caesar's part, when he was Tribune of the People,
and Augur. He went into Gallia, and engaged him in a Civil-War against Pompey
and his Followers. Attempting to possess himself of Mutina, Brutus's Province;
he was declared an Enemy to the Senate and People of Rome, by the persuasion of
Cicero. He established the Triumvirate of Octavius Caesar, Lampidius, and
himself, which they all Three managed with much Cruelty. Caesar abandoned
Cicero to the Resentments of Anthony, who caused his Head to be cut off as he
was carried in his Litter, and set it up in the Rostrum where the Roman Orators
used to plead. In the beginning of his Triumvirate he divorced his Wife Fulvia,
to marry Octavia the Sister of Augustus; but he left her a little time after
for Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt, with whom he was extremely enamored, which so
enraged Augustus, that he raised an Army against him, and defeated him at that
famous Sea Fight near Actium. The year following he pursued him as far as
Alexandria, whither he fled; but seeing himself deserted by his Friends, he
killed himself at the Age of 56 years.

ANTRONIUS,
the Croatian, had a Cow of wonderful Beauty, and he had learned of a certain
Diviner, that he who sacrificed it to Diana upon Mount Aventine, should make
his own City Mistress of the whole World by that Sacrifice. This Oracle being
told to Servius Tullus, he commanded Antrimius to wash himself in the Tiber,
before he offered his Sacrifice. In the interim Servius prevented him; and
sacrificed the Cow, and fastened her Horns to the Temple of the Goddess; whence
arose the Custom of fastening the Horns of an Ox to that Temple, whereas a
Stag's Head was commonly hanged up in other Temples belonging to the same
Goddess.

ANUBIS,
the God of the Egyptians, pictured with the Face of a Dog, wrapped up in
Linen. Diodorus Siculus thought him the Son of Osyris, called Jupiter, under
whose Name Mercury was worshipped, whom Apuleius describes with a Dogs Head,
carrying in his Right Hand the Caduceus, and in his Left a Palm-Branch.

ANXUR, or AXUR,
as it is found on a Medal of Pansa, Jovis Axur, otherwise called Terracina, a
City situate upon an Hill that reaches along the Seaside from Ostia to Naples,
which is Forty Miles from Rome. It was made a Colony in the Year 424. under the
Consulship of Aemilius Mamercus and L. Plautus, who sent thither Three Hundred
Citizens, to every one of whom they gave a considerable parcel of Land. It Is
thought by some, that it was called Anxur, because Jupiter Anxurus, or
Beardless Jupiter was worshipped there; for this word Anxur or Axur, signifies
quasi (...), without a Razor. Circaeumque jugum, queis Jupiter Anxuris arvis
Praesidet. --
Aeneid. Lib. VII. v. 799.

APATURIA,
a Surname given Minerva by Aethra (the Daughter of Oceanus and Thetis) who
consecrated a Temple to this Goddess, according to the Admonition she had given
her, and ordered that the Trazomenian Virgins should for the future dedicate
their Girdles to her at their Marriage.

There were also Feasts called Apaturia, celebrated by the Athenians in
October, in Honor of Bacchus, Jupiter, and Pallas, where the young Men and
Maids spent theri time in Sports and Feasts, which lasted for severaldays.

APELLES,
of the Isle of Coos, one of the most excellent Painters of the Ancients: He
drew several Pictures, all which were great Masterpieces. He drew the Image of
Fortune lying on a Bed, holding upon her Left Arm her Corna-copia, having her
Right Hand supported by a Wheel, to show her Instability and Inconstancy, with
this Inscription, Fortunae Reduci; and when he was asked, Why he painted
Fortune in that posture, he answered, Because she never is at rest. Being on a
time accused by a Painter who envied his Fame, that he had conspired against
King Ptolomy, and caused Tire to revolt, and Pelusium to be taken, the Prince
was thereupon very angry with him, as a Traitor and Assassine, and had cut off
his Head, if one of his Accomplices had not cleared him when he was upon the
Rack. Apelles therefore to revenge himself for this Calumny, which had done him
so much mischief, designed this Picture, He painted a Prince with great Ears,
as Midas is only drawn, sitting upon a Throne attended with Suspicion and
Ignorance, reaching out his Hand to Calumny, who was coming toward him with a
fiery Countenance; she held in her Left Hand a Torch, aad with her other
dragged a young innocent Child by the Hair; before her went Envy with a pale
Face and blear Eyes, accompanied with Fraud and Deceit, which dressed and
adorned Calumny, to make her appear more agreeable; after them came Repentance,
under the Figure of a Lady clad in Mourning, with her Clothes all torn, who
turned her Head toward Truth, being full of Sorrow and Shame.

He also drew the Picture of Alexander in the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, under
the Figure of a Jupiter, holding a Thunderbolt in his Hand, who seems to be
issuing out of the Picture, as well as the Thunderbolt. Pliny says, he had
Twenty. Talents of Gold for this rare piece.

He has left us the Lines which he drew at Protogenes's House, which are so
very fine, that they seem to grow invisible; but this did not gain him so much
Reputation and Esteem as his Venus proceeding from the Sea, although that
Picture was never finished by reason of his Death.

APEX,
a sort of Bonnet, or Cap, very plain and light, which draws to a point on the
top; used by the Priests called Salii.

Festus and Servius derive the word from the Verb Apere, which is an old Latin
word signifying to join or bind; because of the two woollen Strings, which
coming from the Bonnet, were used to tie it under the Chin.

APHRODITE,
a Name given to Venus, because she was generated of the Froth of the Sea, and
from hence her Feasts were called Aphrodisiana.

APIS,
otherwise called Osyris and Serapis, the Son of Jupiter and Niobe, who married
Io, the Wife of King Inachus, and was named afterward Isis. He left his
Kingdom to his Brother Aegialeus, and going into Egypt, he civilized the
Egyptians, which made Hermes Trismegistus think that Apis was a great
Philosopher. He was put to death by one named Typho, who cast himself into the
Sea: When his Wife Io searched for him, a very handsome Bull appeaared to her,
which she believed to be her Husband, whom she afterward caused to be honored
in Egypt, under the figure of that Animal. He was taken out of the midst of
the Herd, but then he was to be white-headed, black in the Body, with a white
Spot upon his Back, the figure of a Snail upon his Tongue, and the Hairs of his
Tail were to be tied double. When this God happened to die, no body valued his
Hair (tho he had the Periwig of Nisus, says Lucian) but he shaved it all off,
in token of his Grief. When he readily took the Meat that was offered him, this
was looked upon as a good Omen; but on the contrary, if he refused to eat, this
was looked upon as a bad one. Thus Germanicus, in his Voyage from Egypt, drew a
Presage of his own Death, from this Animal's refusing to eat Meat out of his
Hand. This is the Fable, the History follows;

APIS,
was one of the most ancient Gods of Egypt, and as he was honored under the
figure of an Ox, many have thought that it was Joseph himself, who was
represented and honored under that mysterious figure. Julius Firmicus
Maternus, who lived in the time of Constantine the Emperor, was of opinion,
That the Egyptians adored Joseph under the name of Apis or Scrapis, which Name
he thought was derived from Sara his Grandmother; and that all this Worship was
given to Joseph, as being the Preserver of Egypt, during the great Famine of
seven years: Josepho post mortem Aegyptii patrio gentis suae instituto templa
fecerunt: and quia Sarae pronepos fucrat, Serapis dictus est.

This Historian afterward relates the opinion of others, who thought that Apis
was a King who distributed great Quantities of Corn among the People in a time
of Famine, and that after his death a Temple was erected to him, in which an Ox
was kept, as the lively Symbol of an Husbandman: Alii repertum in Historiis
Graecorum veteribus ferunt Apim quondam patrem-familias, sive regem in Aegypto
Memphis positum, cum famis tempore frumenta apud Alexandriam defecissent, ex
proprio affatim civibus alimenta praebuisse: quo defuncto, in honorem ejus
instituerint apud Memphim templum, in quo bos, quasi indicium optimi agricolae,
nutritur.

The Worship of Apis was, without doubt, more ancient than the City of
Alexandria, which was built by Alexander: but either this was a Mistake in the
matter of Fact, which does no ways prejudice the rest of the History, or else
under the name of Alexandria we must understand a little City which was
formerly in the same place.

See what St. Austin says of Apis, cap. 5. lib. 18. de Civ. Dei. At this time
Apis, King of the Argives, having sailed into Egypt, and dying there, became
the famous Serapis, the greatest of all the Egyptian Gods.

Now, the Reason given by Varro, why he was no more called Apis, but Serapis
after his death, is very natural and easy, because the Greeks call a Coffin
(...), and the Coffin of Apis having been honored before any Temple was built
to him, from hence he was at first called Sorosapis or Sorapis, and after that
by the change of one letter, which often happens, Serapis. It was also
ordained, That whosoever should call him a Man should be punished with death;
and Varro adds, That all the Statues of Isis and Serapis had a Finger upon
their Lips to signify this Prohibition. As to the Ox which Egypt kept so
tenderly in honor of him, out of a strange superstitious Humor, because they
worshipped it only while alive, and not when it was in the Coffin, they called
it Apis and not Serapis. When the Ox died, another was substituted in his room,
having the same Marks with the former, which passed for a great Miracle; but
certainly it was not difficult for Evil Spirits, who took pleasure in deceiving
this People, to represent to a Cow, when she went to Bull, an Ox having the
same Marks with the former; as Jacob made the Goats and Sheep of the same
colors, by placing speckled Rods before the Eyes of the Dams, at the time of
Conception.

The Author of the Book de Mirabilibus Scripturae, which is among the Works of
St. Austin, affirms, That the Egyptians erected the figure of an Ox near the
Scpulchre of Joseph. Suidas says the same thing, viz. That Apis was the Symbol
of Joseph, or of some other rich Person, who had furnished the Egyptians with
Corn in the time of a great Famine; and that a Temple was built to him after
his death, wherein an Ox was kept, as being the resemblance of an Husbandman,
(...). There is a very great Agreement between Joseph and this Symbol, for it is
very well known, that Joseph interpreted Pharaoh's Dream by the Power of Divine
Wisdom, and that he took the seven fat Kine to be signs of the Fruitfulness of
the Land. Now, it is hardly to be imagined, but this miraclous Prediction of
seven Years of Plenty, and seven of Famine, and the Preservation of Egypt by
laying up great Quantities of Corn, must inspire the Egyptians with a great
Veneration for Joseph; and it was impossible but the great Opinion they had of
him must, in process of time, degenerate into Superstition, in a People who had
so strong an Inclination to it. In fine, Trogus Pompeius, or his Epitomizer
Justin, says, That considering the Veneration that Nation had for Joseph, 'twas
impossible that they, who made all their Benefactors Gods and Demigods, should
not give him Divine Honors.

The Name of Apis agrees very well to Joseph, for since the Egyptian Tongue
must needs have a great affinity with that of the Canaanites or Hebrews, Apis
may be derived from the Hebrew word Ab, which signifies a Father, from whence
we have the word Avus. Now, Joseph was truly a Father to Egypt, and therefore
Pharaoh caused him to be proclaimed every where with this Epithet Abrec, which
signifies Pater Tanet, i. e. a Tender Father.

APIUM,
Smallage, an Aquatick Plant, that grows by the waterside; which, according to
Philostratus and Hyginus, was occasioned by the Death of young Archemorus, whom
his Nurse Hypsiphile left lying upon Smallage near a Fountain, where a Serpent
killed him. Garlands were made of this Plant, which were given to those who
were victorious at the Nemaean Games, that were instituted in honor of him.
Plutarch, in the third Question of his Symposiacks, says, that this Plant was
used for the same purpose at the Isthmian Games, that were in honor of
Palemon. Hence it was that Timoleon, in the War of the Sicilians against the
Carthaginians, took it for an Omen of assured Victory, that the Soldiers had
Bundles of Smallage, since the Victors at the Isthmian Games, that were
celebrated near Corinth, were crowned with it; and hence also the Admiral Ship
of King Antigonus was called Isthmion, because a Smallage grew of it self upon
the Stern of that Ship.

This Plant was peculiarly consecrated to the dead, according to the Testimony
of Pliny, Defunctorum epulis dicatum Apium. And Agrippa, in chap. 25. of his
first Book of Occult Philosophy, informs us, That the Cypress as well as
Smallage was a direful Plant dedicated to Pluto, which it was not lawful for
any to crown themselves with on Festival days.

APOLLINARES LUDI,
the Apollinarian Games, instituted by Augustus in honor of Apollo, as an
Acknowledgment for the Victory he obtained, by his means, over Anthony and
Cleopatra, near the Promontory of Actium. These Games were celebrated every
Year, sometimes on one day and sometimes on another; but afterward they were
fixed to the fourth day of July, by Lucius Varus, the Praetor.

APOLLO,
a famous God among the Greeks and Romans, to whom they attribute the Invention
of many excellent Arts, and to whom they erected many Temples and Statues made
by the most skilful Artificers.

Cicero, in lib. 3. de Not. Deorum, informs us, that the Ancients worshipped
four Apollo's: The first and most ancient was the Son of Vulcan, whom the
Athenians took for their Tutelary God: The second was the Son of Corybas, born
in the Isle of Crete, and who contended with Jupiter for the Government of that
Isle: The third was esteemed the Son of Jupiter and Latona, who came from
Scythia to Delphos: And the fourth was called Nomion, who was born in Arcadia,
and to whom the Arcadians gave that Name, because he had been their Legislator;
for (...) in Greek signifies a Law: yet it is believed that this Name was given
for some other reason, which may induce us to think that the second and third
Apollo were one and the same Person, according to the following Fable, It Is
said therefore that Jupiter having heard the Complaint which the Infernal
Spirits made against the Physician Aesculapius, the Son of Apollo, who cured
the Sick with his Medicines, and even raised the Dead to Life again, as he did
Hippolytus, (which depopulated Pluto' s Kingdom) destroyed him with a
Thunderbolt: Apollo being irritated against Jupiter, revenged it upon the
Cyclops, who made the Thunderbolt, and killed them with his Arrows: for this
Action Apollo was driven out of Heaven, and forced for a Livelihood, says
Lucian, to hire himself out to Admetus in Thessaly, as a Shepherd to look after
his Flocks; and afterward in Phrygia to Laomedon, in the company of Neptune,
where they passed their miserable time in making of Bricks, wherewith they
built the Walls of Troy, and were so unfortunate as never to be paid for their
Labor. From hence it appears that he was called Nomion from (...), which
signifies a Shepherd. The Fable also relates of him, That Mercury, soon after
he was born, stole the Flock of Admetus from him, by playing upon an Instrument
made of Tortoise-shell; but when Apollo would have shot an Arrow at him, he
found that he had also robbed him of his Bow and Arrows, at which the God fell a
laughing, as Horace tells us in these Verses,

Te, boves olim nisi reddidisses
Per dolum amotas, puerum minaci
Voce dum terret, viduus pharetra
Risit Apollo.
Carm. Lib. 1. Od. 10. I intend not in this place to treat of any other Apollo
but him who was the Son of Jupiter and Latona, who was brought to bed of him
and Diana in the Isle of Delos, according to the most common opinion, tho
Tacitus is of another mind, when he tells us, How the Ephesians in former times
represented to the Senate, that Apollo and Diana were not born in the Isle of
Delos, as ignorant People believe, and for proof of this, he says, they showed
at that time a consecrated River and Forest in their Country, where Latona,
being big with these Deities was happily delivered; that the Olive Tree on
which she leaned in the pains of her Travail was still remaining after so many
Ages; that the River was called Cenchris, and the Forest Ortygia; and that
Apollo retired to this place when he fled from the Wrath of Jupiter, after the
slaughter of the Cyclopes. Plutarch, in the Life of Pelopidas, thinks that
Apollo was born in the City of Tegyra, where there were two Fountains, one of
which was called the Palm, and the other the Olive, with a Mountain called
Delos. But whatsoever was the place of his Birth, it is certain that the
Ancients believed Apollo to be the Inventer and God of Harmony, as he himself
boasts to Daphne, who despised his Courtship, -- Per me concordant carmina
nervis.


In the second place they made him the God of Physic and Botany, which consist
in knowing the Virtue of Plants; and this was the opinion both of the Greeks
and Romans, upon which account Ovid brings him in speaking thus, Inventum
medicina meum est, epiferque per orbem
Dicor, and herbarum subject a potentia nobis.
Metam. lib. 1.

Thus Hippocrates ordered his Disciples to swear by Apollo the God of Medicine;
yet Hyginus makes Apollo to be only the Inventer of Medicines relating to the
Eyes, such as our Oculists profess to know. M. Falvius Nebilior being Censor in
the year 574, built a Temple to him under the Title of The God of Medicine; and
the Falisci instituted Sacrifices for him, and a Society of Priests upon Mount
Soracte, where his Priests have been seen to walk unhurt upon burning Coals,
for a proof of their Sanctity, and of the Protection they receive from this
God, as Virgil tells us,

Sum Deum, and sancti custos Seractis Apollo,
Quem primi colimus, cui pineas ardor ace^vo
Pascitur, and medium freti pietate per ignem
Cultores mulid premimus vestigia pra^^.
Aeneid. lib. 11. v. 785. In the third place, the Invention of Bows and Arrows
is attributed to him, and therefore he is made the God of Archers who shoot out
of the Long-Bow, or the Cross-Bow. He killed the Serpent Python with his
Arrows, from whence he was surnamed the Pythian: And obliged the Greeks to
institute the Pythian Games in honor of him, of which I shall speak hereafter.
Instituit sacros celebri certamine ludos,
Pythla de domita serpentis nomine dictos.
Ovid. Metam. lib. 1.

He was accounted the God of Music, and of Poetry, and was always painted with
his Harp when he was in their Company. The Poets commonly invoke him when they
begin their Poems, to the end he may inspire them, and enable them to sing the
Praises of Gods and Men in suitable Strains.

Antiquity also believed him to be a Prophet, who foretold things to come, and
delivered Oracles to Cities and Private Persons who consulted him with Water,
Incense and the Tripod, about their Undertaking: And when he was about to
deliver his Oracles, says Lucian, the Color of his Face changed, his Hair
stood on end, his Throat swelled, his Eyes rolled about, and his Body trembled;
at last he opened his sacred Mouth and prophesied.

The places which were most famous for his Oracles, were Delos, Claros,
Tenedos, Cyrtha and Patara, and from these places he was surnamed Delian,
Clarian, etc. He delivered Oracles at Delos during the six Months of Summer,
and at Patara in Lycia, during the six Months of Winter: the Delians therefore,
fancying that he returned to Delos at the beginning of Summer, came all to
welcome him there with the Sound of Musical Instruments, dancing and playing
antic Tricks, as Virgil has observed in these Verses,

Qualis ubi hybernam Lyciam, Xanthique fluenta
Descrit, ac Delum maternam invisit Apollo,
Instauratque cheros, etc.
Aeneid. lib. 4. v. 143. The Greeks called this Solemnity (...), and the
Removing of the God (...).

At Delos there was an Altar in his Temple, which passed for an extraordinary
piece of Art, it was made of little pieces of Horn, so exactly joined together,
that they seemed all to be but one entire piece. It was called Ara Apollinis,
and Ara Cornea. Martial mentions it in his Book of Shows, Nec Triviae templo
molles laudentur honores.
Dissimuletque deum cornibus ara frequens.
Epigr. 1. v. 3. On this Altar Sacrifices were offered to him, not such as were
bloody, as Macrobius says, lib. 1. of his Saturnalia, but of the Fruits of the
Ground, with the Sound of Trumpets and other Instruments of Music, while the
Altar was crowned with Vervain. This we learn from a passage of Cato in his
Fragments of History: Nutrix haec omnia saciebat in verbenis ac tubis sinc
hostiis Deli ad Apollinis genitoris arom. Nevertheless Victims of Animals, as
of Bulls and the like, were also offered to him; which may be proved out of
Lucian in his Dialogue of Sacrifices, where he introduces Chryses a Priest of
Apollo, and perfectly well skilled in his Mysteries, complaining to the God
himself, That now his Temple was slighted which had been highly esteemed in
former times, when they burnt upon his Altars the Thighs of Bulls and Goats.

He had also a Temple at Claros, a little City in the Territory of Colophona,
where there was also a Mountain and a Grove dedicated to the Clarian Apollo.
This is represented to us in a Greek Medal of the Emperor Trebonian, in which
there is the Picture of the Emperor on one side, and on the Reverse a Temple
standing upon four Pillars; over the forepart of the Gate Apollo sits holding
a Harp in his hand, and under the Stairs of the Temple, these Letters are to be
read TO KOINON (...), the Corporation of the Ionians. Under these Letters is an
Ox to be seen at the foot of an Altar, and round about it there are thirteen
Persons placed in a Semicircle who lift up their hands on high, with this
Inscription under the sides of the Medal, (...), i. e. Under Claudius Aristion,
a Priest of the Ionian Colephonians. This last Word discovers to us, that the
Colophonians stamped this Medal, for their City was one of the most famous in
all Ionia; and that which chiefly rendered it famous was the Temple of Clarian
Apollo, which, next to that of Ephesus, was the most considerable in all Ionia:
although it was never finished, as we learn from Pausanias in his Achaica, yet it
was very famous for the Oracles which Apollo gave there. It was not built in
Colophon it self, but in Claros a little City belonging to the Territory of
Colophon.

The most celebrated and the richest of all the Temples which Greece erected to
this God, was that at Delphos: all the Nations of the Earth vy'd with one
another in sending rich Presents thither, and People came from all parts to
consult this God there. Croesus sent thither Ingots of Gold to build an Altar
in that Temple: and Phalaris, the Tyrant of Agrigentum, made a Present to it of
a brazen Bull, which was a Masterpiece of Art, and a Testimony of his Piety.

The Romans likewise made many Altars, and built many Temples to him at Rome,
and in other Cities of the Empire; but the most famous of them all was that
which Augustus built upon Mount Palatine, after the Victory of Actium which he
obtained over Anthony and Cleopatra Queen of Egypt; from whence Apollo was
called by the Names of Apollo Palatinus, Actiacus, and Navalis: for this Prince
could not satisfy himself with building to this God (to whom he had addressed
himself before the Fight) a Chapel upon the Promontory of Actium, with Games
and Sacrifices in honor to him; but he had a mind to give yet more signal and
remarkable demonstrations of his Piety, by erecting stately Temples to him in
the Capital City of the Empire, whose Structure and Magnificence is almost
incredible. It was built of the Marble of Claros, with diverse Ornaments within
and without of richer Materials: There you might see a spacious Portico for the
holding a Library of Greek and Latin Authors: Upon the Walls of this Temple was
painted the History of Danaus's fifty Daughters on one side, and on the other
Equestrian Statues of the Children of Egypt: In the place before the Temple
there were four Cows of Brass, done by the hand of Myron, and therefore called
Armenta Mironis, which represented the Daughters of Pretus the King of Argos,
who were changed into Cows, because they were counted more beautiful than Juno,
or rather because this Change of 'em was made in their own imagination by a
black Melancholy, whereof Melampus cured 'em with one Dose of Hellebore,
according to the Relation of Pliny. In the same place grew a Laurel-Tree, which
was of the same Age with Augustus, and had been planted before the Palace of
that Prince. The Gates of this Temple were of Ivory, enriched with many
Basso-relievo's, which represented the Gauls when they threw themselves
headlong from the top of the Capitol, and the Fourteen Daughters of Niobe the
Daughter of Tantalus, who perished miserably through the Pride of their Mother,
who had provoked the Wrath of Apollo and Latona against her.

In the Frontispiece there appeared a Chariot of the Sun of massy Gold, whose
Figure was crowned with Rays, which darted so much Fire, and so vigorous a
Light, that they were taken for the true Rays of that Star. Within the Temple
was placed the Statue of the God made of Marble, done by the hand of Scopas, an
excellent Statuary; together with another Giant-like Statue made of Brass,
being Fifty foot high. There also was to be seen a Candlestick in the shape of
a Tree, on whose Branches the Fruit hanged, which were like so many sparkling
Lamps; and on these Branches the Poets hung their Poems which they offered up
to Apollo, as Horace tells us, Ep. 3. l. 1.

-- Et tangere vitet
Scripta, Palatinus quaecunque recepit Apollo.
The same Poet in Compliment to Augustus, invites him to examine these Poems,
and consider whether they were worthy of Apollo;

-- Si minus Apolline dignum
Vis complere libris, and vatibus addere calcar.
Horat. lib. 2. ep. 1. Augustus caused also an Image of the same God to be made
of Silver, which wore Sandals upon its Feet; and for this reason he was called
Apollo Sandapilarius, or rather because this Statue was placed at Rome, in
Sandapilario vico.

The Greeks represented Apollo as young and beardless, having Hair disheveled,
and flying up, as it were, with a blast of Wind, carrying upon his Back a
Quiver furnished with Arrows, and holding a Bow in his Hand, as we see in the
Medals of Nero, where he is drawn crowned with Laurel, having his Quiver upon
his Shoulder, and the Star of Phoebus by his side, with these Greek words,
(...), i. e. Apollo the Savior.

We have also other Medals whereon he is represented, sometimes holding a Harp
in one Hand, and a Branch of Laurel in the other; and sometimes clothed with a
long Robe, having a Harp in one Hand, and in the other a Cup, which is the
Emblem of his Divinity. There is yet remaining an ancient Figure of Jasper, on
which the Tripod of Apollo is to be seen, and the Crow which was consecrated to
him, having at his Feet a Harp on one side, and on the other a Branch of
Laurel. The Emperor Gallienus, after his Expedition in the East, caused him to
be represented in the shape of a Centaur, holding in one Hand his Harp, and in
the other a Globe, with this Device, Apollini comiti. Probus made him appear
like a Charioteer, mounted upon a Chariot crowned with Rays, who holds the
Reins of his Four Horses, with these words, Soli invicto. The other Emperor, as
Constantius, Aurelian, and Crispus, stamped an Image of him upon their Money,
which showed the Figure of a clear Sun, crowned with Rays, holding in the Right
Hand a Globe, and in the Left a Whip, with this Device, Soli invicto comiti;
which signifies, that they had vanquished and subdued many Provinces by the
Assistance of Apollo, or the Sun.

Lucian in his Dea Syria informs us, that there si a Temple in that Country,
where the Statue of Apollo has a Beard, and appears to be of perfect Age, and
not like a young Man, as he is usually represented; because, say they, this is
an Imperfection: His statue there has also this peculiar to it, that it is
clothed, whereas all the other Statues of this God are not. In this Temple
Apollo delivers his Oracles himself, whereas in other places it is done by his
Priests. When he has a mind to foretell any thing, he shakes himself, then the
Priests take him up upon their Shoulders, and if they do not, he moves of
himself and sweats: When they hold him, he leads them whither he will, and
guides them as a Coachman does his Horses, turning here and there, and going
from one place to another: As soon as the High Priest asks him what he has a
mind to know, if the thing displeases him, he goes backward, if not, he goes
forward. Thus they divine what his Will is; and they do nothing either in
public or private until they have first consulted him; and he foretells the
Change of Times and Seasons, and even Death it self.

Among Animals, the Wolf, the Raven, the Crow, the Cigale [the Cicada of the
Ancients, a flying Insect like a Grashopper] the Cock, and the Spar-Hawk; as
also the Laurel, and Olive Tree, among Trees, were consecrated to him by the
Ancients.

Apollo was esteemed a God different from the Sun; for the latter was supposed
to be the Son of Hyperion, one of the Titans, from whence he was called
Hyperione natus, and Titania proles; whereas Apollo was the Son of Jupiter and
Latona; nevertheless they are frequently confounded.

Vossius thinks that the Jubal mentioned in Holy Scripture was Apollo, to whom
the Pagans attributed the Invention and Honor of Vocal and Instrumental
Music. Bochart has observed that the Isle of Delos, where Apollo was born,
takes its name from Dahal, i. e. Terror Deus; that the name of Mount Cynthus,
where Latona was brought to bed, is derived from Chanat, i. e. in lucem edere.
This Fable then of Apollo comes originally from the East, and Apollo is an
Egyptian God, according to Pausanias, who relates that a Senator called
Antoninus built at Epidaurus a Temple to Apollo and Aesculapius, Egyptian Gods;
for of [the four Apollo's mentioned by Cicero, the three latter were certainly
of Greek original, but the most ancient was he of Egypt.

Lactantius proves that Apollo was no more than a mere Man; and that he was
like other Men, not only in his Birth but in his Crimes, which tho the Fable
did not invent, yet could not conceal.

Vossius further tells us, That the Fable of the Raven sent by Apollo, is
plainly copied from the History of the Raven sent by Noah; for as the Raven,
sent to discover whether the Waters of the Deluge were gone off from the Face
of the Earth, did not return again into the Ark; so the Poets feigned, that
Apollo having sent a Raven to fetch Water, this lazy and unfaithful Bird rested
on a Fig Tree, and waited till the Figs were ripe, to eat them, as Ovid tells
us.

Bochart remarks, with great probability, that the Fable of the Serpent Python
killed by Apollo, took its original from Phoenicia, because the Name of Python
or Pethon in the Hebrew Tongue signifies a Serpent, and from thence Apollo was
called Pythian.

APOLLONIUS TYANAEUS,
a Philosopher and Magician, who was for some time one of the Friends of the
Emperor Domitian, but this Happiness lasted not long; for being accused of
having foretold his Accession to the Empire, and sacrificing an Infant upon
this occasion, he was first ignominiously shaved, and then sentenced to die;
but when the Sentence was just ready to be put in execution, he made himself
invisible, and vanished out of their sight who were present, by the Help of a
Demon, who transported him to Pouzol. The Church of Christ never had a greater
Enemy than this Magician; for, by the seeming Innocence of his Life, and his
deceitful Tricks, which were accounted true Miracles, he gave occasion to
Hierocles, a Philosopher, to compose a Book, wherein he compares him, with
mischievous artifice, to JESUS CHRIST. After he had a long time deceived the
World by his Prodigies, he died all alone, having no body with him to bear
witness of his Death, not so much as Damis his dear Disciple, and the Companion
of all his Impostures. No doubt he had a mind to make People believe that his
Body, which never appeared any more upon Earth, was carried up into Heaven, and
that in this also he resembled JESUS CHRIST, whom he pretended to imitate in
his Lifetime. Philostratus has given a large account of it; but it is rather a
well-contriv'd Fable than a true History.

As he was one day haranguing the People of Ephesus, he stopped all on a sudden,
and going back two or three paces, while he looked down upon the ground with
frightful Eyes, he cried out, Smite the Tyrant, smite the Tyrant, meaning
Domitian; his Auditors were mightily astonished at this Discourse, and all of
them expected he should explain himself, which he did immediately, by telling
them, That in that very Hour Domitian was killed; the News of his Death came
quickly after, and the Curious finding that his Words did so exactly agree with
the Action, which happened at so great a distance from him, this wonderfully
increased his Reputation to the Prejudice of the Christian Religion. The
Emperor Caracalla and the Ephesians erected a Statue to him under the Name of
Hercules (...), or He that drives away Evils; and the Emperor Severus had his
Image together with that of JESUS CHRIST in his Oratory.

APOPHRAS,
a Greek word, used among the Athenians to signify an Unhappy Day, on which
nothing was to be undertaken; or for some great Defeat which happened on that
day, or for any other public Calamity.

APOTHEOSIS,
the Consecration or Deification of Great Men after their Death. The Greeks and
Romans placed the Inventors of Liberal and Mechanical Arts amongst the Gods; so
they did Ceres, Bacchus, and Vulcan: they deified also the Founders of Cities,
great Generals, and, in process of time, their Kings and Emperors. This we
learn from Horace lib. 2. Ep. 1. where he writes thus to Caesar Augustus: Cum
tot sustineas ac tanta negotia solus:
Res Italas armis tuteris, moribus ornes.
...........
Praesenti tibi maturos largimur honores,
Jurandasque tuum per nomen ponimus aras.


The Description which Ovid gives of the Apotheosis of Hercules, made by
Jupiter himself, cannot be read without Admiration; and every one must apply it
to the Brightness of a pure Soul, when it goes out of the Filthiness of Body
and Matter, that then being purified from all the Stains of this Mortal Life,
it enters upon a Life altogether Divine. These are the words of Jupiter to the
other Gods:

-- Oetaeas spernite stammas.
Omnia qui vicit, vincet, quos cernitis, ignes:
Nec nisi materna Volcanum part potentem
Sentiet. Aeternum est, a me quad traxit, and expers
Atque immune necis, nulluque domabile flamma.
Idque ego defunctum terra, coelestibus oris
Accipiam, etc.
Metam. l. 9. v. 250. In another place of the same Poet, Venus desires of
Jupiter the Deification of Aeneas:

-- Quamvis parvum, des, optime, Numen;
Dummodo des aliquod. Satis est inamabile regnum
Aspexisse semel, stygios semel isse per amnes.
Assensere Dei.
ibid. l. 14. v. 489. The Meaning of the Poet is, That Aeneas having made a
Descent into Hell, out of Piety and Religion, in his Lifetime, it was not just
that he should descend thither again after his Death. The Expiation of his
Mortality was made, not by Fire, but by Water, and for this end a Commission
was granted to the River Numicius, which washed away the stains of his
Mortality:

Hunc jubet Aeneae quaecunque obnoxia morti,
Abluere; and tacito defer sub aequora cursu.
Corniger exequitur Veneris mandata; suisque
Quicquid in Aenea fuerat mortale, repurgat,
Et respergit aquis; pars optima restitit illi.
Lustratum genitrix divino corpus odore
Unxit, and ambrosia cum dulci nectare mixta
Contigit os, fecitque Deum.
ibid. v. 500. The Apotheosis of Romulus is thus described:

-- Corpus mortale per auras
Dilapsum tenues; ceu tata plumbea funda
Missa solet medio glans intabescere coelo.
Pulchra subit facies, and pulvinatibus altis
Dignior est, etc.
ibid. v. 724. These Deifications were to be authorized in Greece by the Oracle
of some God, and at Rome by a Decree of the Senate, which declared an Emperor
to be of the number of the Gods, and ordered Temples to be built, Sacrifices to
be offered, and Divine Honors to be paid him.

When Alexander the Great had a mind to adore Ephestion as a God; one Philp,
who came from Babylon, gave an account that an Oracle of Jupiter Hammon, had
commanded Ephestion to be worshipped as a God, and to offer Sacrifice unto him,
as Diodorus Siculus tells us in lib. 17. Alexander testified so great Joy at
this Deification, that the Historians say he was the first that offered
Sacrifice to him, and that he killed for that end no less than ten thousand
Victims. But the Athenians did not only adore Great Men after their Death, but
they worshipped them, and sacrificed to them even while they were alive. This
they did to Demetrius Polyorcetes, as Demochares testifies in lib. 20. of his
History, where he relates, That Demetrius returning from Leucada to Athens, the
Athenians came out to meet him being crowned with Garlands of Flowers; that
they made Libations of Wine, and were accompanied with Singing-Men and
Musicians who sung Hymns to his Honor; that the Common People prestrated
themselves before him, crying with a loud Voice, that Demetrius was the only
true God. We salute thee, said they, Son of Venus and of the Almighty Neptune,
and we conjure thee to give us Peace, for thou art the Lord, the other Gods are
asleep in the time of our Necessity, and are deaf to our Prayers. Upon this
Subject you may consult Athenaeus and Duris the Samian. Pythagoras, who was the
first that assumed the Name of a Philosopher, i. e. a Lover of Wisdom, having
dwelt twenty years at Crotona, went afterward to Metapontum and died there.
The Metapontines, admiring his profound Doctrine, consecrated his House into a
Temple, and worshipped him as a God. All Greece decreed Sacrifices to be
offered, and Altars to be erected to Lysander after his Death, upon the account
of his Virtue; and Duris remarks, That he was the first of the Grecians to whom
Divine Worship was given, and in honor of whom Hymns were sung; which must be
understood during his Life, since there were many others to whom Sacrifices
were offered and Altars erected after their Death, a long time before Lysander.

The Romans followed the Example of the Greeks, and made Gods of their
Emperors. The Senate decreed to them Divine Honors, Sacrifices and Temples,
and instituted Priests, Festivals and Games in honor of them, as the Greeks
had done before them. The manner of Deification used among the Romans, was, by
letting an Eagle fly, which came out of the top of the Funeral-pile on which
the Body of the Emperor was burnt; and their Superstition inclined them to
believe that the Soul of the Emperor by this means flew up into Heaven among
the Gods. Thus they deified Judius Caesar, Augustus, and other Emperors
whether good or bad; the good for the great esteem they had of their Virtues,
and the bad out of Flattery, and in compliance with the Torrent of Custom.

APPELLATIO,
an Appeal from any Sentence, when we are not satisfied with it. An Appeal, say
the Lawyers, is nothing else, but a complaint made by a Person who has lost the
Cause to a superior Judge, against the Injustice of an inferior and
subordinate. In the Roman Law, he who would not abide by a Sentence, was
obliged at the instant it was given, or at least in two or three days after, to
declare, either viva voco or by writing, that he did appeal from it; since that
the time was limited to ten days, after which no Appeal was to be admitted. In
France any one may appeal within the space of thirty years.

This Appeal was to be notified to the Judge and the adverse Party. If the Judge
consented to the Appeal, he gave the Appellant a Writing containing a Summary
of the Cause, and the Reasons of his Sentence, which he carried to the
superior Judge; and if he did not consent, nevertheless he gave a Writing
containing an account of the whole matter, and the Reasons why he would not
consent nor admit the Appeal. But whether the subordinate Judge did consent to
the Appeal or not, still the Appellant might always carry the Suit before a
superior Judge. This was a very good Custom tho it is not at present used in
France.

In Civil matters none but he who had lost the Cause could appeal; but in
criminal Causes, when a Man's Life was concerned, any Person was admitted to
bring an Appeal, tho he who was condemned did not desire it.

APPELLATORIUS LIBELLUS,
a Writ of Appeal, a Writ which is obtained in Chancery for admitting an
Appeal, and for summoning the Adversary before the Judge, when he has obtained a
Sentence in his favor, to see if it can be set aside.

APPIADES,
are five Pagan Deities which were adored under that general Name, viz. Venus,
Pallas, Vesta, Concordia and Pax, whose Temples were at Rome near Caesar's
Marketplace, where were the Fountains of Appius, from whence the name Appiades
was given them.

APPIANA FAMILIA,
the Appian Family; most illustrious among the Romans. Its Original was from L.
Appius, who obtained the Prize at the Nemean Games in Achaia. There were many
Consuls of this Name who always maintained the Authority of the Senate, against
the Attempts and Violence of the Tribunes and People.

APPIUS CLAUDIUS,
surnamed the Blind, when he was Censor, caused the way to be paved, which
leads from the Gate Capena to Brundusium, and which from his Name was called
Via Appia. He made also an Aquaeduct, which brought the River Anio into Rome,
the Water whereof was carried up as high as Mount Aventine. He, understanding
that the Senate was just upon the point of concluding a Peace with King
Pyrrhus, caused himself to be carried into the Senate, where by several notable
Arguments he dissuaded them from it, till he had withdrawn his Troops out of
Italy.

APRILIS,
the second Month of Romulus's Year, which consisted only of ten Months, and
commenced with March; but it is the fourth Month of Numa's Year, which
consisted of twelve Months, beginning with January. Macrobius derives the word
Aprilis from the Greek (...), as if one should say Aphrilis, i. e. One
descended of Venus, or Born of the Scum of the Se^, because this Month was
dedicated to Ven^^ by Romulus. There are other Authors who think this Word may
more probably be derived from the Verb Aperiro, which signifies to open,
because in this Month the Flowers begin to blow, and the Earth does send forth
Seeds and Plants.

These Festivals and Solemnities were observed by the Romans, during this Month.

On the Calends of the Month, which was the first day, there was no pleading of
Causes; but the Roman Ladies being crowned with Myrtle, and washed under the
same Trees, offered up a Sacrifice to Venus. Ovid relates the Original of this
Ceremony: He tells us, That one day as Venus was drying her wet Hair by the
Riverside, the Satyrs perceived her quite naked, which caused in her so much
Shame and Confusion, that she covered her self presently with a Myrtle. And
this the Roman Ladies imitate by this Ceremony.

On the same day the Maids, who are fit for Marriage, sacrifice to Fortuna
Virilis, praying her to hide the Defects of their Body from those who have a
mind to marry them, as Ovid tells us, Fast. lib. 3. v. 150.

Ut tegat hoc, celetque viros, Fortuna Virilis
Praestat: and hoc parvo ture rogata facit.
They sacrificed also to Venus surnamed Verticordia, to make the new-married
Husbands prove faithful to their Conjugal Vow.

On the fifth, which was the day of the Nones, the Festival of Megalesia began
to be solemnized in honor of the Mother of the Gods, which lasted for eight
days together. See Megalesia.

On the sixth, the Commemoration of the Dedication of the Temple of Fortuna
Publica was celebrated on the Quirinal Mount, which P. Sempronius vowed, and
Martius Ahala dedicated ten years after, appointing the Memorial of it to be
observed every year.

On the seventh, the Commemoration of the Birth of Apollo was in like manner
observed.

On the eighth Games were appointed for the Victory which J. Caesar obtained
over Juba and Scipio, after the Battle of Pharsalia.

On the ninth and tenth the Games of Ceres were celebrated in the Circus called
Cerealia, which were instituted by C. Meunnius, Aedilis Curulis. See Cerealia.

On the twelfth, according to the new Calendar, was observed the great
Solemnity of the Mother of the Gods, and particularly of her Arrival at Rome,
with Processions and many Games to her Honor.

On the thirteeenth, which was the day of the Ides, a Sacrifice was offered to
Jupiter Victor and to Liberty, because on that day their two Temples were
dedicated at Rome, one by Q. Fabius, in performance of the Vow he had made at
the War against the Samnites; and the other by T. Gracchus, out of the
pecuniary Fines of the Commonwealth.

On the fifteenth, was kept the Festival of the Fordicides, at which thirty
Cows ready to calve were sacrificed. See Fordicidia.

On the same day the Governess of the Vestal Virgins burnt the Calves which
were taken out of these Cows, and of the Ashes a Perfume was made, wherewith
the Romans perfumed themselves on the day of the Palilia, or of the Foundation
of Rome.

On the sixteenth, Augustus was surnamed Imperator.

On the eighteenth, there was a Horse-race, called Equiria, in the Great
Circus; where were also to be seen Foxes running covered with Straw, which was
set on fire to divert the People. The occasion of this Diversion was thus: The
Son of a certain Peasant in the little City of Carseoli, walking about his
Corn, perceived a Fox caught in a Snare; he takes him and binds him about with
some Straw, and having set it on fire, lets him run among the Corn, which he
burnt all up: and the Romans, in revenge for this, burnt the Foxes after this
manner, covered all over with Straw; as Ovid informs us, Fast. lib. 4. v. 711.
Utque luat poenas, gens hac Cerealibus ardet:
Quoque modo segetes perdidit, ipsa perit.


On the nineteenth, or thirteenth of the Calends of May, the Anniversary of the
great Solemnity of the Feast of Ceres Eleusina was observed, at which the Roman
Ladies, clad in white Linen, and holding Lamps in their hands, sacrificed to
her a Sow, with great Solemnity.

On the twentieth or twenty first was celebrated the Feast of Palilia, or the
Foundation of Rome, dedicated to Pales the Patroness of Shepherds. See Palilia.

On the same day a Sacrifice was offered to to the Immortal Gods, for the
Victory which Julius Caesar obtained in Spain over Pompey's Sons, the News
whereof was brought to Rome by a Courier, the Night before the Palilia.

On the twenty first, the Festival was kept which was called Vinalia Priora, at
which a Sacrifice of New Wine was offered to Venus, and according to some, to
Jupiter; of which none were permitted to drink till they had first offered this
Sacrifice. See Vinalia.

On the twenty seventh, was the Feast called Robigalia, from Robigus the God of
Mil-dew and Hoar-frost which blast the Corn. See Robigalia.

On the twenty ninth, the Festival in honor of Flora, the Goddess of Flowers,
was kept, which was called Floralia.

On the last day, some Sacrifices were offered to Vesta, upon the Palatine
Mount, in the Palace of Augustus.

AQUA,
Water, one of the four Elements, or the four Principles which concur to the
Production of all Beings. Thales Milesius, one of the Wise Men, thought Water
was the Principle of all things; but Heraclitus said it was Fire. The Priests,
called Magi, admitted the two Principles of Fire and Water; and Euripides, the
Scholar of Anaxagoras asserted the two other Elements of Air and Earth; but
Pythagoras, Empedocles, Epicharmus, and the other Philosophers, affirmed that
there were four Principles, viz. Air, Fire, Water, and Earth.

The Egyptian Priests, to signify that all things subsist only by this
Element, covered and adorned a Vessel full of Water, which they looked upon as
the Temple wherein their God resided, and prostrating themselves on the Ground,
with Hands lifted up to Heaven, they gave thanks to the Divine Goodness for his
admirable Inventions.

Pliny, in lib. 31. chapter 1. makes an Encomium on Water, wherein he reckons up so
many excellent Qualities of it, as make it probable that this gave occasion to
that superstitious Worship which was paid to it: For he tells us, That the
Empire of the Waters consists in ruling over all the other Elements, in
overflowing the Earth, extinguishing the Fire, in raising it self up into the
Air, and continuing there suspended, in mounting up as high as Heaven, and
descending again with that fruitful Virtue, which makes the Earth produce all
sorts of Plants and Animals. Upon this account it was that the Poets invented
Fables, to make the Wonders of this Element more grateful.

The Book of Wisdom deplores the Blindness of those Idolaters, who worshipped
not the Almighty Power of the true God, but the Force and Abundance of Water,
which has something very beautiful and terrible at the same time, (...).

Plutarch says, That the Egyptians adored the Waters of Nile, whose Inundations
served them instead of Rain. Thus the Nile was held to be their Jupiter, who
was thought to be the cause of Rain; and so in Athenaeus we find this Prayer
addressed to the Nile, as being the Jupiter of Egypt, (...).

The Eastern Nations had no less a Veneration for their Rivers: Herodotus and
Strabo say, the Persians reverenced the Rivers so much, that they durst not
throw nor suffer any Excrement to fall into them, nor so much as wash their
Hands in them. Xerxes sacrificed white Horses to the River Strymon, according
to Herodotus: and Tiridates did as much to the River Euphrates before he passed
over it, according to the Relation of Tacitus. Pliny says, that the same
Tiridates would not put to Sea, because he would not lose that Reverence which
he thought was due to the Ocean, by spitting in it.

Atergatis the Goddess of the Assyrians, of whom we shall give an account in
the proper place, was also the Goddess of Waters; for she was drawn as half
Woman and half Fish.

The Greeks considered Water as one of the four general Principles of all
sublunary Beings, and called it in former times (...).

There are several sorts of Water, that of the Sea, of Rivers, of Springs, of
Lakes, and Rainwater, which is gathered and kept in Water-houses and Cisteins.
Of all these sorts there is none better than Rainwater, says Vitruvius,
because it is composed of the lightest and most subtle Particles, which are
extracted out of all other Waters, and which the Air has purified for a long
time by its Motion, till they are dissolved, and so fall down in Showers upon
the Earth; for the Earth being heated emits its Moisture out of its Breast,
after the same manner as our Bodies, when they are hot, do sweat. There are hot
Springs whose Waters are not proper for ordinary Drink, although they have no ill
Taste; and these are only to be used for the Cure of some Diseases, which
require Dryness and Heat. There are cold Waters whose Smell and Taste are
unpleasant, such are the Waters called Albulae, which are near to Tivoli, and
those in the Springs which are near to Ardea. All hot Springs have a Medicinal
Virtue, beause after they are heated, they have another Effect than common
Water; for the Sulphurous are good for Diseases of the Nerves, which they
fortify by heating them, and besides they consume the bad Humors. The
Aluminous cure those Bodies which are weakened with the Palsy, or any other
such like Disease, by reducing the Parts, which are distempered by Cold, to
their natural state by Heat. The Bituminous, by purging, expel the Diseases of
the inward parts.

There are also cold Waters which are nitrous, such are those near Penna, a
Country of the Vestini, and in the Country of the Cutisians, which are drank
for purging and dissolving scrophulous Tumors.

There is another Water which is not very clear, and besides has Scum or Froth
which swims at top, of the color of red Glass: one of this sort is to be seen,
chiefly near to Athens, where it is conveyed to make Water-Spouts, and is made
use of for washing, but not for drinking.

There are also found many other kinds of Water, which have different
Properties; such is the River Himera in Sicily, which, after it rises from its
Springhead, is divided into two Branches, whereof one, which runs toward
Mount Aetna, is good to drink, because it passes through a sweet Earth; but the
other, which runs through an Earth that yields Salt, has a very saltish Taste.
Likewise in the Paretonian Fields, through which there is a way to the Temple
of Jupiter Hammon, there are found fenny Lakes, whose Waters are so salt, that
the Salt swims at top congealed.

There are other Waters to be met with, which percolate through Veins of
unctuous Earth, and which seem as if mixed with Oil? such is the River Liparis,
which runs to Soli a City in Cilicia, where all those that bath in it, when
they come out of the Water, look as if they were anointed. Near to Dyrrachium
and Apollonia, there are Springs which throw forth great Quantities of Pitch.
There are also Springs which the Moisture of the Earth from whence they rise,
makes very bitter; such is the River Hypanis in the Kingdom of Pontus, which
from its Source for the space of about forty miles is sweet; but when it
reaches to a place 160 miles distant from its Entrance into the Sea, a little
Spring, which runs into it, makes its Waters bitter; this Bitterness proceeds
from a Mine of red Arsnick, which is found near the Head of that Spring.

There are Waters also which are dangerous to those that use them, by reason of
the venomous Juices through which they percolate: such is that Fountain at
Terracina, called Neptuniana, whose Waters are poisonous; such also was that
Lake near Cyderes in Thracia, whose Waters killed not only those that drank of
it, but even those that washed with it. In Macedonia, near the Grave of
Euripides, two Rivulets join together, one of which has a Water so good that
Passengers stop there on purpose to refresh themselves; but the Water which run
on the other side is so pernicious that no body dares come near it.

In that part of Arcadia which is called Nonacris, there distills from certain
Mountains a Water extremely cold, which the Greeks call (...), the Water of
Mourning, which cannot be taken up in any other Vessel, but only in the horny
part of a Mule's Foot. It Is said that Antipater made his Son Iolas carry some
of this Water into the Province where Alexander was, and that it was its Poison
that killed that King.

There is also another Water in the Alps, in the Kingdom of Cottus, which makes
all that drink of it fall down suddenly.

In the Country of the Falisci, near the Road which goes to Naples, there rises
a Fountain, in which are found the Bones of Serpents, Lizards and other
venomous Beasts. There are also some Fountains whose Water is sour; such is
that of Lyncostis, that of Velino in Italy, and that of Theano in the Terra
Laboris, which have a Virtue to dissolve Stones in the Bladder. There are also
some Fountains whose Water seems as if it were mixed with Wine; such is that of
Paphlagonia, wherewith a Man may make himself drunk.

In the City of Equicoli, which is in Italy, and in the Country of the Medulli,
in the Alps, there are Warers which make the Throat swell.

In Arcadia there is a City very well known, called Clitor, near which there is
a Cavern, from whence a Spring rises, which makes those who drink of it hate
Wine; because in this Fountain, Melampus, having first offered Sacrifice,
purified the Daughters of Pretus, to cure them of their Folly, and by this
means de did in effect restore them to their right Wits again. In the Isle of
Chio there is a Spring which makes them mad who inconsiderately drink of it. At
Suza, the Capital City of Persia, there is a Fountain whose Water makes the
Teeth fall out.

AQUA LUSTRALIS,
Lustral Water. The Ancients did not make use of all sorts of Water
indifferently for their Lustral Water, wherewith they purified themselves at
their Sacrifices. The Romans commonly sent to fetch it from the Fountain
Juturna, near the River Numicius; as the Athenians sent to that Fountain which
they called Calirrhoe; the Trezenians to the Fountain of Hippocrene, and the
Persians to the River Choaspes. They always made use of Running Water, which
was clear; such as that of rapid Rivers or of the Sea, which they blessed after
their manner. Hospimanus and Pontanus think that the Ancients used only that
Water which was perfectly pure, without any Mixture, to make their Lustral,
which Opinion they ground on that passage in the sixth Book of the Aeneids,
ver. 229. Idem ter socios pura circumtulit unda,
Spargens rore levi.


Yet Du Choul, speaking of this Lustral Water, says, That they took the Ashes
of the Wood which was made use of for burning the Victim, or of some pieces of
Cedar, of Hysop and Cumin, which they threw into the Fire, when they were about
to extinguish it, and of these Ashes made their Lustral or Holy Water, which
they placed at the Entrance into their Temples in great Vessels, and wherewith
they purified themselves when they entered into them. They had also little
Vessels, or Holy Water Pots, wherein they put some of the Water, and with it
they sprinkled those who were present with a kind of Brush; not unlike that now
used in the Church of Rome.

Ovid has also told us of the Water of Mercury, which was near the Porta
Capena, wherewith Merchants sprinkled themselves, thinking thereby to blot out
the Sins of Injustice and Fraud, which they had committed in their Trading.

The Ancients, when any Person was dying, were wont, out of a superstitious
Fancy, to throw out all the Water in that House where he was, and the
neighboring, because they thought that the Angel of Death, or Satan, who
appeared to all Dying Persons, would wash his Sword, wherewith he had killed
the Deceased, in that Water.

AQUAEDUCTUS,
an Aquaeduct, a Structure made of Stone, standing upon an uneven Ground, which
was to preserve the Level of the Water, and to convey it through a Canal from
one place to another. The Romans were very magnificent in their Aquaeducts,
which were sometimes an hundred thousand geometrical paces long.

The precise time when Aquaeducts first began to be made at Rome is not
certainly known. Pliny informs us, that Ancus Martius, the King, was the first
who began to bring Water from a Fountain called Aufeia, which was afterward
called, from his Name, Aqua Martia. Frontinus who lived under the Emperor
Nerva, and has wrote a long Treatise upon this Subject, attributes the first
Aquaeduct to Appius Claudius, Censor together with M. Plautius Venox, who in
the year 441, under the Consulship of M. Valerius and P. Decius, built a
subterraneous Waterpassage of strong Stones, vaulted at top; the raised Arches
were of Brick or very hard Stone, and were called, Substructiones, opera
arcuata, aerii fornices, and camerati arcus, which are mentioned by Cassiodorus.

The Height of the Aquaeduct of Aqua Martia, which Q. Martius built, was level
with the Top of the Viminal Mount; and that of Aqua Appia was raised an hundred
feet above the Ground.

Some have reckoned up fourteen Aquaeducts which conveyed Water to Rome, that
were of admirable Structure; but Frontinus, who was the the grand Over-seer of
these Waters under the Emperor Nerva, says there were but nine Aquaeducts, in
his time, at Rome.

The first was that which conveyed the Aqua Appia, so called from Appius
Claudius, Censor, who gathered Water together from many places in the Territory
of Freseati, about seven or eight Miles from Rome, and from thence conveyed it
through Canals and Arches into the City; the Current of this Water from its
Springhead, as far as to the Sabini, near the Forta Tergemina was eleven
thousand one hundred and ninety paces long: it was divided at Rome, near the
Mons Testaccus, into twenty Castles or Repositories, called Castella, and
afterward distributed by many Pipes into several Quarters of the City.

The second was that of the Water of the old Tiverone, called Anio Vetus, begun
by the Censor M. Curious Dentatus, in the year 481, under the Consulship of
Septimius Carbilius and L. Papyrius (for the building whereof he employed all
the Spoils he had got from King Pyrrhus) and at last finished by Fulvius
Flaccus the grand Overseer of the Waters. The Canal began about twenty miles
from Rome, above Tivoli, its Course was forty two thousand two hundred eighty
seven paces. This Water served only to wash withal, to water Gardens, and for
Drink for Beasts.

The third Aquaeduct was that of the Aqua Martia, made by the Industry of
Martius surnamed Rex, which was begun by Ancus Martius the King. This Water
came from the Fountain called Piconia, which is in the utmost part of the
Mountains of Peligni; its Course extended to sixty one thousand seven hundred
and ten paces, through subterraneous Channels, and Arches equal to Mount
Viminalis: It entered into the City by the Porta Esquilina, and having furnished
two Mountains of Rome, the Viminal and Quirinal, it emptied it self into fifty
one Cisterns, for the Convenience of many Parts of the City, for this Water was
the clearest and best to drink. This Aquaeduct was built in the year 609. under
the Consulship of Sulpitius Galba and Aurelius Cotta.

The fourth Aquaeduct was that of the Water called Tepula, which the Censors
Cn. Servilius Scipio and L. Cassius Longinus, conveyed from the Territory of
Frescati to the Capitol, being twelve thousand paces long. This Spring had no
certain Source, but only some little Veins or Branches, which met together in
the Canal of the Aqua Julia: one part of this Water was conveyed to the
Country, and the other to the City, which was kept in fourteen Conservatories,
and distributed into the several Quarters of the City.

The fifth was that of Aqua Julia, which M. Agrippa erected in the time of
Augustus, and to which, in honor of it, he gave his Name. This Water was
collected, from many Sources into one great Water-house about six miles from
Rome, its Course extended to fifteen thousand paces and an half; it passed
through the Porta Esquilina, and the Trophies of Marius, and emptied it self
into seventeen Cisterns, for the Accommodation of the several Quarters of the
City.

The sixth was that of Aqua Virginis, so called, because a young Maid first
discovered its Springhead to the Soldiers when they were searching for Water,
as Frontinus tells us in his First Book of Aquaeducts. This was also the work
of Agrippa which he finished in one Year, and about thirteen years after he had
built the former. Its Canal began about eight miles from Rome, in the Territory
of Tusculum, near the Bridge Salaro, and its Course extended to fourteen
thousand one hundred and five paces. It passed through the Campus Martius, and
emptied it self into many Cisterns, for the convenience of the several Quarters
of the City. This Water, to this day is still called Aqua Virginis, and is the
only ancient Aquaeduct that remains: Pope Nicolas V. repaired it.

The seventh Aquaeduct was that of a Lake called Alsietina, four thousand paces
distant from Rome, and six miles to the right hand from the Via Appia. This was
the Work of Augustus, and from his Name it was called Via Augusta. It served
only to fill the Circas with Water for the Naumachiae or Sea Fights, and for
watering Gardens.

The eighth was begun by the Emperor Caligula, but Death prevented his
finishing it: Claudius his Successor thought the Design was too brave to leave
it imperfect. Pliny never speaks of this Work but with great Admiration. It
conveyed the Water of two fine Springs, called Caeruleus and Curtius, which
were in the Country of the Latins, thirty eight thousand paces distant from
Rome, holding its Course for the space of forty six thousand paces in length,
through many Arches, which terminate at last in the Porta Nevia, and rise as
high as Mount Aventine. This Water was called Claudia from Claudius, and was
very good to drink.

The ninth was also begun by Caligula, and finished by Claudius in the same
year with the former. It derives its Water from a place further off than any of
the rest, viz. at the distance of sixty two thousand paces from the City, from
a muddy River called Tiverone or Anio, from which another Aquaeduct was
formerly made, and this latter is named Anio Novus. Claudius thought fit, for
purifying his thick and muddy Waters, to make, at the distance of four thousand
paces from their first Rising, a Pool or Pond, wherein the Mud might settle to
the bottom, which was called Piscina Limaria; but notwitstanding all this
Precaution, when the Rains fell, the Water came to Rome very thick.

These two Works were worthy of a great Prince, as well for the Height and
Magnificence, as for the excessive Expenses that were laid out upon them, which
were found to amount, according to the Computation of Vigenere, to thirteen
millions eight hundred seventy five thousand Crowns: Vicit antecedentes Aquarum
ductus neo^ssimum impendium oper i^ inchoati a Caesare and peracti a Claudio;
quippe a lapide quadragesimo ad eam excelsitatem, ut in omnes Urbis montes
levarentur, etc.

These are the nine Aquaeducts which Frontinus treats of, that had 13594 pipes,
which he calls Quinarios and were one inch in diameter and 3 in circumference.
The first Aquaeduct of the Aqua Appia had 694 pipes: The Anio Vitus, or the
Teverone, had 1981: That of the Aqua Martia had 1741: The Tepula had 445: The
Julia 755: The Aqua Virgo 2504: The Alsietina 592: The Cloudia and Anio Novus
4882. Of all these Pipes there were only 10350 which conveyed Water for the
City, the rest were for the benefit of the Country.

There are also other Aquaeducts made at Rome since Frontinus's Time. Pope Pius
IV. built one in the Year 1563. which brought Water at eight miles distance
from Rome, between Tivoli and Praeneste; it is thought to be the ancient
Alsietina. Sixtus Quintus built an Aquaeduct of the Aqua Felix, in the year of
Grace 1581, as may appear by an Inscription engraven upon an Arch, near the
Gate of St. Laurence,

Sixtus V. Pont. Max. Let us now see how the Partition and Distribution of
these Waters was made into the several Quarters and private Houses.

There were in all Parts of the City Conservatories or Water houses, which were
called Dividicula or Castella, into which the Waters emptied themselves, and
from which they were conveyed on both sides by Pipes. Agrippa alone, during his
Edileship, made an hundred and thirty of these Water-houses, adorned with
Statues and Pillars of Marble.

There were Overseers appointed, to whom the Care of them was committed, who
were called Castellani, who distributed the Water by diverse Conduits into
several places of the City, and even to private Houses, and hindered any private
Person from misapplying the Water to his own Use without Leave first had; which
was granted upon conditon of a certain Duty to be paid, which was more or less
according to the Quantity of Water any one had a mind to have. Marlianus
informs us, That Agrippa was the first who invented this Partition of the
Waters by Inches and Ounces, as well for the Use of the Public as of Private
Persons. The Revenue of these Waters, according to the Computation of Vigenere,
amounted yearly to six millions two hundred and fifty thousand Crowns. The
Water which was not good to drink, as that of Teverone, emitted it self into
Lakes, and served the Beasts to drink, and to wash withal; it was used also for
Baths, for dying, and tanning of Hides, for milling of Cloth, and for
representing the Naumachiae or Naval Fights in the Campus Martius. And after
they had served for these several uses, they were all gathered together in the
Cloacae, or common Gutters, and from thence emptied themselves into the Tiber.

Nero, after the Burning of Rome, says Tacitus, hindered private Persons from
applying the public Water to their own use, as they had been accustomed to do,
made Conservatories, which might serve for quenching Fires, and appointed some
Persons to look after them. The Censors, and after them the Aediles Curuli,
took care of the Aquaeducts and the Waters of Rome. But under the Emperors
Overseers were appointed, who had under them many subordinate Officers, who
distributed them for use of the Public and Private Persons, upon payment of a
certain Duty, and enjoyed the Benefit of it, not as a Property, but only for
Life.

AQUARIUS,
One that pours forth Water; it is a Sign in the Zodiac, which is the eleventh
reckoning from Aries. The Sun moves through it in the Month of January, and this
Sign is of the Nature of Saturn; it is marked thus (...). The Poets feigned,
That this was Ganymede, whom Jupiter ravished under the shape of an Eagle, and
carried away into Heaven, to serve as Cupbearer in the Room of Hebe and Vulcan.

AQUILA,
an Eagle, the King of Birds: He is called The Bird of Jupiter, because he
flies highest of all Birds, and aims, say the Poets, to hatch his young ones in
his Bosom. After this the Fable adds, That there was formerly a King of the
Isle of Cos, called Merops, whom Juno changed into an Eagle, when he was just
ready to put himself to death for the Loss of his Wife. But Agloosthenes
relates, That Jupiter being carried away from Candia, was transported to Naxus,
where, as as he was preparing to make War against the Titans, he saw an Eagle
with his Thunderbolt, which he took for a good Omen, and ever after that this
Bird was taken into his Protection. Some Authors tell us, That Mercury being
smitten with the Love of Venus, and not being able to obtain any Favor from
her; One day as the Goddess was bathing her self in the River Achelous, Jupiter
caused an Eagle to take away one of her Sandals, which he carried to Mercury,
and she to get it again satisfied the Passion of her Lover. Nevertheless Ovid
and Lucian inform us, That it was Jupiter who transformed himself into an Eagle
to carry of the Beautiful Ganymede from Mount Ida.

It was a Bird of good Omen, when it came flying on the right-side with
expanded Wings. Thus Aristander the Soothsayer foretold, That Alexander should
be victorious, because he had seen an Eagle flying from his Enemies Camp into
his own. Thus when Lucumon, called Tarquinius, came to settle at Rome, with all
his Family, an Eagle presaged to him that he should be King; for as he came
near the Janicula, an Eagle came on a sudden and lit upon his Head, and having
taken off his Cap, it played for some time with it in the Air, and then put it
on his Head again; Tanaquilla his Wife, who was afterward called Caia
Caecilia, being a Tuscan by Nation, and very well versed in Augury, interpreted
this Prodigy in favor of her Husband, and assured him that he should be King;
which was justified by the Event. In the Roman Armies the Eagle was the Ensign
that was carried in the first Company of the Legion; it was of Silver, and was
born upon the top of a Pike, with expanded Wings, and sometimes it held in its
Talons the Thunderboltof Jupiter, as being just ready to dart it, It was of
Silver rather than Gold, says Pliny, because Silver is seen at a greater
distance.

The first who carried the Eagle in their Ensigns were the Persians, according
to the Testimony of Xenophon. The Romans having formerly carried diverse other
Ensigns, at last fixed upon the Eagle, in the second year of the Consulship of
Marius, which they made the Ensign for the Colonel's Company in each Legion,
and was carried on the top of a Pike. Some say, That Constantine was the first
who appointed an Eagle with two Heads, to signify, that tho the Empire seemed
to be divided, yet it was but one Body. But this opinion is confuted by an
Eagle with two Heads, which Lipsius observed in the the Pillar of Trajan, and
from the Custom of later times, wherein the Eagle had but one Head, as in the
Seal of the Bulla Aurea, which was made in the time of Charles IV. Emperor.
The Conjecture of Father Menestrier is more probable, who says, That as the
Eastern Emperors, when two of them sat upon the Throne, stamped their Money
with a Cross having a double Bar, which each of them held with one hand, as
being the Scepter of Christians; so the Romans did the Eagle in their Heraldry,
and instead of doubling their Escutcheons and Eagles, they joined them
together, and represented one Eagle with two Heads, which Custom was followed
by the Emperors of the West for some time after.

The Consuls carried a Battoon of Ivory as a sign of their Dignity, on the top
of which there was an Eagle, as we learn from Martial, Da nunc and volucrem
sceptro quae surgit eburno.


AQUILICIANA,
Festivals which were celebrated at Rome during a great Drought, for obtaining
Rain of the Gods. The Priests were called Aquilices, quia aquam cliciebant,
because they brought down Ram upon the Earth by their Prayers.

AQUILO,
the North Wind, which blows from the North-side, which is cold and dry. The
Poets represent it to us, With the Tail of a Serpent, having its Beard and Hair
covered with Snow and Ice. Hesiod, who has given us the Genealogy of the Winds,
makes this, as well as the rest, the Son of the Stars and Aurora.

ARA,
an Altar. Some derive this Word from ardeo, which signifies to burn, because
Perfumes and the Entrails of Beast were burnt on it. Others derive it from the
Greek word (...), which signifies Prayer, from whence comes (...), which
signifies Imprecation. Whatever the Etymology of the Word is, there is
certainly a difference between Ara and Altar, which comes from altus, i. e.
high, for according to Servius they did not Sacrifice on the latter, but only
to the Gods on high, or Celestial Deities, but upon Ara's they sacrificed both
to those and the Infernal Gods. There is also another Difference between these
2 Words, that there were Steps for ascending the Altars which were called
Altaria, but there were none to those called Ara, which were indeed raised upon
the ground, but in a plain and even plat. Yet notwithstanding these
Differences, Authors have confounded these Words, and do often take one for
the other.

We must now enquire what was the Matter of which Altars were made, what was
the Figure and Ornaments, what was their Consecration and Use.

The Matter of Altars was different according to several Countries and Times.

At first they were made only of Turf heaped one upon another. Pausanias, in
his Elegiaca, describing the Altar of Jupiter Olympius, says, That it was made
of the Ashes of the Victims that were sacrificed to him, and was 22 feet high,
and that the Steps for ascending to it were also of Ashes; and that every Year,
on the 19th of February, the Aruspices were wont to carry the Ashes of the
Prytaneum, and make an Altar of them, tempering them with the Water of the
River Alpheus. The same Author mentions another Altar of Apollo Spadius which
was made after the same Fashion. In following times Altars were made of Stones,
of Marble, of Wood, and even of Horn, as that of Apollo in the Isle of Delos.

The Figure of Altars was different, some were round, others apiece or
oval; but they were always turned toward the East, and stood lower than the
Statues of the God, which were placed upon Bases above the Altar. These Statues
were crowned and adorned with Ornaments convenient for them, which expressed
their Divinity: thus also the Altars were adorned with Festoons of Leaves and
Flowers which had been dedicated to them; and so the Statues and Altars of
Apollo were adorned with Laurel Leaves, those of Hercules with Poplar,
Jupiter's with Oak, of Venus with Myrtle, and those of Pallas with Olive
Leaves, Nevertheless the same name Verbenae, was commonly given to them all, as
we learn from Donat^ upon Terence's Andria, Act. 4. Sc. 4. Ex ara hinc sum
verbenas tibi: upon which words he says, verbenae sunt redimicula ararum, sive
omnes herbae, frondesque festae ad aras coronandas.

These Altars were consecrated with Oil, which was poured upon them. The People
of Elis for this end made use of the Ashes which they took from the Prytaneum,
and tempered with the Water of the River Alpheus, and with these they rubbed
over their Altars. They dedicated them afterward to some Deity, and put on
them the Name of the God, together with his who made the Dedication. I will
here subjoin a Form of the Dedication of an Altar:

C. Domitius Valens Duumvir praeeunte D. Julio Severo Pontifice legem dixit in
ca verba quae infra scripta sunt.

Jupiter Optime, quandoque hodie tibi hanc aram dabo dedicaboque, ollis legibus
ollisque religionibus dabo dedicaboque, quas hic hodie palam dixero; uti
infimum solum hujus arae est, si quis hic hostia sacrum fecit, quod in
augmentum ne protollat, idcirco tamen probe factum esto. --

Sicuti dixi hanc tibi aram, Jupiter Optime, Maxim, dico dedicoque, uti sis
volens propitius mihi collegisque meis, decurionibus, colonis, incolis Coloniae
Martiae, Juliae, Saloniae, conjugibusque liberisque nostris.

Here follows likewise the Inscription of an Altar, which the Inhabitants of
Narbon erected to Casar Augustus in their City.

T. Statilio Tauro,

Quod bonum, faustum felixque sit Imp. Caesari Divi F. Augusto P. P. Pontifici
maximo Tribun. potestate XXXIIII.

Conjugi, liberis, gentique ejus, Senatui, populoque Romano and colonis
incolisque C. I. P. N. M. qui se numini ejus in perpetuum colendo obligaverunt,
plebes Narben. aram Narbone in foro posuit, ad quam quotannis VIIII. Kal. Oct.
qua die eum seculi felicitas orbi terrarum Rectorem edidit, tres Equites Romani
a plebe and tres libertini hostias singulas immolent, and colonis and incolis,
ad supplicandum numini ejus, tus and vinum de suo ea die praestent: and VIII.
Kal. Oct. tus, vinum colonis and incolis item praestent: VII. quoque Idus
Januarias, qua die primum Imperium orbis terrarum auspicatus est, ture, vino
supplicent, and hostias singulas immolent, and colonis incolisque tus vinum ea
die praestent.

By these Inscriptions we see, that the first use of Altars, was there to offer
Sacrifices and and Prayers to the Gods to whom they were dedicated.

The second use of them was to render Alliances more solemn, Treaties of Peace
more firm, Marriages more indissoluble, and Oaths more sacred; for the two
Parties having offered Sacrifice to the Gods to witness the Sincerity wherewith
they swore that Alliance, and conjuring them to bring the Infractors of it to
some miserable Death. Thus K. Latinus swear an Eternal Peace with Aeneas, in
the presence the Armies of the Trojans and Latins. Tango aras, mediosque ignes
and numina tester:
Nulla dies pacem hanc Italis, nec faedera rumpet.
Aen. 12. v. 201.

The Romans observed the same Ceremony in the Oaths they took about diverse
Civil Affairs, and prescribed certain Words to be used by him who swore, while
he laid his hand upon the Altar of the Gods. Thus Gripus in Plautus makes
Labrax swear, while he held by the Altar of Venus, to restore to him a
Portmanteau, and makes him repeat after him the Words of his Oath: Act. 5. Sc.
11. Rud. v. 46. Gr. Tange aram hanc Veneris. La. Tango. Gr. Per Venerem hanc
jurandum est tibi. La. Quid jurem? Gr. Quod jubebo. La. Praei verbis quod vis
-- Gr. Tene aram hanc. La. Teneo -- Gr. La. Venus Cyrenensis, testem te testor
mihi: Si vidulum illum, quem ego in navi perdidi, Cum auro atque argento salvum
investigavero, Isque in potestatem meam pervenerit -- La. Tum ego huic Gripo
dico, Venus, ut tu exandias. Gr. La. Talentum argenti magnum continuo dabo. Gr.
Et si fraudassis, dicito, uti in quastu tuo Venus eradicet caput atque aetatem
tuam.

By which Passage it appears, that they used Imprecations against those that
should violate their Oath. From this Custom came the Latin Proverb, Amicus ad
aras, which Pericles first made use of, meaning thereby, that he would serve
his Friends in every thing so far as he could without offending the Gods,
(...). This Answer he gave to one of his Friends, who desired him to bear false
witness in his favor; (...) I ought to serve my Friends, but without touching
the Altar. From thence came also that other Phrase, pro aris and focis pugnare,
which signifies, to fight for the Interest of the Gods and Religion.

The third use of Altars was to serve for an Asylum or place of Refuge and a
Sanctuary to all those who fled to them, whatever Crimes they had committed; for
it was expressly forbidden by the Laws to take any one from them by Force, and
especially from the Altar of Concord; which Privilege belonged also to those
that held in their arms the Statues of the Emperors. This happened often to
Slaves, who being unfaithful to their Master, ran to the Altars and Statues,
which they embraced as a most safe Asylum, as Plautus tells us in this Verse,

Nemo accusat, Sire, nec tu aram tibi nec precacatorem parabis.
Upon this account the Altars were called Arae confugii, and Euripides calls
them the Retreat of Slaves, as the Caves are of Wild Beasts. (...) was the
first who appointed these places of Refuge in the Temples, and at the Altars of
the Gods, that by this means he might People his new City; during the
Triumvirate it was expressly forbidden to take any Criminals by force out of the
Temple of Julius Caesar, who had fled thither and embraced his Altars. In fine,
the privilege of these Sanctuaries came to so great an height, that at Rome and
in the Cities of Greece, the Temples were filled with Debtors, fugitive Slaves,
and Criminals, and yet the Magistrates could give no Orders about them, nor put
any stop to the fury of the People, who protected these superstitions as sacred
and mysterious.

ARA,
a Celestial sign so called from the Altar which the Cyclopes erected, and on
which the Gods swore to assist Jupiter in his War against the Giants; for after
their defeat this Altar was placed among the Stars.

ARAE,
certain Rocks in the Sea, at which Luttutius Catulus obtained a Naval Victory
over the Carthaginians, and where a Peace was made between them and the Romans,
which put an end to the first Punick Wat in the Year from the building of Rome
DXII.

Saxa vocant Itali, mediis quae in fluctibus aras, etc. Virg. 1. Aeneid. v. 112.

Ara Maxima, an Altar called the greatest, from the great quantity of Stones of
which it was built, as Servius tells us. This Altar was erected at Rome to
Hercules in the Marketket place for Oxen, near the Schola Graeca, and hard by
the Entrance of the Circus maximus: The occasion of building it was this. Cacus
being killed by Hercules, Evander, who had observed something very great and
extraordinary in his Physiognomy, desired to know his Name; and understanding
that he was called Hercules, he cried out immediately, that it was he of whom
his Mother Carmenta had foretold extraordinary Prodigies of Courage, for which
an Altar was to be erected to him which should be called, Ara maxima; that he
himself should appoint his own Sacrifice, and prescribe the manner of it to
Posterity: Immediately Hercules sacrificed a fine Heifer out of the Herd, and
appointed those of the Family of the Potitii and Pinarii to be his Priests: Or,
according to Propertius, this Altar was erected to him for finding again his
Drove of Cattle, Maxima quae gregibus deveta est ara repertis;
Ara per has, inquit, Maxima sacta manus.


Ara Lugdunensis, an Altar in the City of Lions, dedicated to Augustus, in the
Year of Rome DCCXLIV. This Altar was in a Temple, which was erected at the
common charge of Sixty several Nations of the Gauls, together with so many
Statues, which bore the Names of each of these Nations. In this Temple the
Emperor Caligula appointed Ludi Academici, as Suetonius says, to which great
numbers of Orators and Poets came from several parts of the World, to perform
their best in Eloquence and Poetry. But because it was ordained, that they who
were outdone should be plunged in the River Saone, if they did not like the
performance of their Tongue; this gave occasion to Juvenal to express any great
fear, by way of Proverb, by the timerousness of an Orator, who was to harangue
before the Altar of Lions.

Palleat ut nudis pressit qui calcibus anguem,
Aut Lugdunensem Rhetor dicturus ad aram.
Juv. Sat. 1. v. 43. Arachne, the Daughter of Idmon of Lydia, very skilful in
the art of Weaving She was so rash that she would be esteemed more excellent
than Minerva; but this Goddess punished her by tearing her Work in pieces, and
giving her a blow with her shuttle, which so mightily offended Arachne that she
hanged her self in despair: But Minerva afterward pitying her misfortune,
changed her into a Spider, which still makes Cobwebs in the Air.

ARBITER,
an Arbitrator, a Judge in an amicable manner, whom the Praetor appointed for
Partners to end their differences; and Arbitrators in general, are such as are
chosen and agreed upon by Two Parties for determining any Controversies between
them: To which end they signed a Bond of Arbitration to submit to the Award
given about the differences, under the forfeiture of a certain Sum of Money to
be paid by those who refused to stand to it.

ARBORES,
Trees. The Pagan Gods, says Phaedrus, in ancient times made choice of certain
Trees which they had a mind to take into their Protection: Thus Jupiter chose
the Oak-tree, Venus the Myttle, Apollo the Laurel, Cybele the Pine Tree,
Hercules the high Poplar, Minerva the Olive Tree, and Bacchus the Ivy. Men did
then also reverence Trees, Woods and Plants, as being the Temples, or Bodies of
some living and intelligent Divinities. The Egyptians abstained from Onions and
Leeks, because they durst not handle these Gods which grew in their Gardens, as
we learn from Juvenal,

Porrum and Cape nefas violare and frangere morsa.
O sanctas geutes quibus hac nascuntur in hortis
Numina!
Sat. 15. v. 9. Pliny tells us, that if the Ancients adored Trees, it was only
because they looked upon them as the Temples of some Divinity. This Testimony
of Pliny shows plainly, that if the Romans adored Groves and their Silence,
[Lucos and in iis ipsa silentia adoramus] this Worship was only paid to some
intelligent Divinity, or to some Genius, which they believed to preside over,
and also to have their Residence in these Trees. Ovid speaking of an impious
Profaner of sacred Groves, and of a great Oak, under which the Dryades often
used their innocent Diversions, tells us, that this Oak being struck with an
Axe by the bold Profaner, declared that a Nymph lodged in the Tree, who died at
the same time with the Tree, but that her Death should not long remain
unpunished. He mentions elsewhere a Mother who was changed into a Tree, and
desired her Son never to touch any Trees, but look upon them as the Bodies of
some-Nymphs. Horace devoted a Pine Tree to Diana, at which he engaged every
Year to offer Sacrifice,

Montium custos, nemorumquc Virgo,
Imminens villae tua pinus esto,
Quam per exactos ego laetus annos,
Verris obliquum meditantis ictum
Sanguine donem.
Lib. 3. od. 22. ARCAS,
the Son of Jupiter, and Calisto the Daughter of Lycaon King of Arcadia, with
whom Jupiter fell in love. Juno, to be revenged of her Rival, changed her into
a Bear, which Diana shot dead with her Arrows in complaisance to Juno.
Pausanias in his Arcadica, says that she was then with Child of Arcas, and that
Jupiter sent Mercury to save the Infant alive, and placed the Mother in the
number of the Stars under the Name of Ursa major, i. e. the great Bear. When
Arcas grew up to be a great Boy, he was presented by some Hunters to Lycaon his
Grandfather, who yet did not know him: But it happened that Jupiter came one day
to see Lycaon, and this King having a mind to try whether he was truly a God or
no, caused Arcas to be killed and cut into morsels, and so served up as Meat
for Jupiter: But he immediately punished his cruelty, by changing him into a
Wolf, and Arcas into the little Bear, Vrsa minor. These Two Bears, says
Vitruvius, are placed in the Artic Circle, so that their Backs touch one
another, having their Bellies turned a contrary way, one to one side, and the
other to the other side. The little Bear is called by the Grecians Cynosura,
and the great one Helice: Their Heads are opposite to one another, and their
Tails also remove from one another for each Head as it goes forward on each
side is to the right of each Tail.

ARCADES,
the Arcadians, who are such Sots, says ^ucian, as to believe that they were
Born before the Moon, and for that reason would never receive Astrology. Their
King Pelasgus first taught them the use of Acorns, for before his time they
lived only upon Herbs and Roots: But Arcas the Son of Jupiter and Calisto,
according to Vigenere, upon the Pictures of Philostratus, first showed them the
Art of tilling the Ground, of sowing Corn and making Bread, with which they
afterward maintained themselves, and forsook their Acorns: This he learned
from Triptolemus the Son of Ceres, and the Country where they dwelt, which was
formerly called Pelasgia, was afterward called Arcadia. Among other Deities
they worshipped Pan and Diana, as Virgil says, Pan Deus Arcadiae. They
sacrificed Men to Jupiter Lycianus, according to the relation of Pliny.
Aristotle tells us Book 4th. of his Meteors, that the Wine of this Country
being put into the Skin of a He-goat, and placed near the fire, calcines
itself, and is reduced to a Salt.

ARCHAGATHUS,
the Son of Lisanias, was the first Physician who came from Peloponnesus to
Rome, under the Consulship of Lucius Aemilius, and Marcus Livius, in the Year
of Rome DXXXV. Cassius Hemina, an ancient Writer, says that the Freedom of a
Citizen was given him, and a Shop was purchased for him at the expense of the
Public, in the Cross Street of Acilius. It Is said also, that the Epithet of
Healer of Wounds was given him, and that at first he met with a wondrous good
Reception; but that within a little while after, when he was obliged to cut and
burn some Members of the Body, for these unmerciful Operations they gave him
the Nickname of a Hangman, and were much disgusted at Rome with Medicine and
Physicians, at least with that part of it which is called Surgery.

ARCHEMORUS,
the Son of Lycus, according to Guichard, or of Lycurgus King of Thracia or
Nemaea, according to others, was killed by a Serpent, and after this manner.
The Argives going with their King Adrastus to the War of Thebes in favor of
Polynice, were extremely distressed with thirst, and the Nurse of the young
Prince, called Hypsiphile, whom they met, went along with him to show them
where they might have Water; but fearing to lay the Infant down upon the
ground, because of the Prohibition of the Oracle, she laid it upon a smallage
Plant, and thither a Serpent came and choked it. Adrastus and the other
Grecians ran to the Place, and found the Serpent still sucking the Blood of the
Child, whereupon they killed it: And to comfort the King for this loss, they
appointed the solemn Games, called Nemaan, to be celebrated every Fifth Year,
at which the Conquerors were crowned with smallage, and the Judges that
prosided over them were clad in Mourning. Clemens Alexandrinus informs us, that
a Funeral Oration in honor of him was also repeated at them.

ARCHIGALLUS,
the High Priest of Cybele Mother of the Gods, who was wont to cut and gash
himself, as the other Priests of that Goddess did, who were called Galli
Cybeles.

ARCHIMAGIRUS,
(...), the Master Cook.

ARCHIMEDES,
of Syracuse, a most skilful Mathematician, who by his Engines defeated all the
Attacks of Marcellus at the Siege of Syracuse, and burnt also the Galleys of
the Romans that were there. The Invention of the Cochlea, or Water-skrew, is
commonly attributed to him, which is called the Mechanical Power of Archimedes,
although Vitruvius does not make him the Inventor of it. Diodorus Siculus, who
lived near the time of Vitruvius, ascribes the Invention of it to him. But as
to the famous use which he says was made of this Machine, to make Egypt
habitable, by draining the lower grounds which had formerly been overflowed
with Water, it may be doubted whether it is not much ancienter than Archimedes.
Cicero glories of discovering the Sepulcher of Archimedes at Syracuse, without
the Gate Acragana, covered all over with Brambles and Thorns which grew in that
place: He says, that he knew it by observing a Cylinder and a Sphere carved
upon the Stone.

ARCHIMIMUS,
(...), the chief Buffoon, or an extraordinary Mimick, who imitates the Gate,
Gesture, and Words of any Person dead or alive.

ARCHITECTONICE,
(...), and

ARCHITECTURA,
the Art or Science of Building. Architecture is divided into Civil and
Military: Civil Architecture teaches to make any Buildings whether public or
private, sacred or profane: Military Architecture teaches to fortify Cities,
Passes, and Seaports. Architecture, says Vitruvius, is a Science, which should
be accompanied with great variety of Studies, and requires a vast compass of
Learning; for by this means it must judge of all the Works of other Arts: In
effect Architecture, or the art of Building comprehends all Sciences, and
therefore the Greeks gave it a Name, which signifies a superiority, or
superintendence over all the rest; and when Cicero would give an Example of a
Science that is of a vast extent, he instances in Architecture.

This Art, like all the rest, had but weak and imperfect beginnings, and was
not perfected till after long use and experience. At first Houses were made
only for necessity; and because in the first Ages Men often changed their
Habitations, they did not trouble themselves to make their Houses either
beautiful or lasting. But when in process of time, every one endeavored to
settle in some particular Country, then Men began to build their Houses, more
solid and strong that they might be able to hold out against the injuries of
time: At last, when Luxury was spread among the most rich and powerful Nations,
then they began to mind the Beauty and magnificence of their Buildings and
having observed what contributed most either to the Strength or Beauty of them,
they set down Rules about them, and so framed the Art of Building well, which
is called Architecture, as those who are perfect Masters of this Art are called
Architects.

The necessity of making several sorts of Buildings first induced the Workmen
to settle different Proportions, and from these different Proportions they
composed different Orders of Architecture. The Orders which the Ancients
established at several times and upon diverse accidents are the Tuscan, the
Doric, the Ionic, the Corinthian, and the Composite. That which forms each of
these different Orders, is the Column with its base and Capital, and the
Entablature, i. e. the Architrave, the Frise and Cornish; for these are the
only parts which in Buildings constitute that which is called an Order, and
each Order has its own peculiar measures. Vitruvius is the most ancient of all
the Architects whose Writings we have; he lived in the time of Julius Caesar
and Augustus, and had viewed the stately Edifices which were then in Greece and
Italy. Several learned Men have also written many excellent Volumes of
Architecture, as Fussitius, Varro, Septimius and Gelsus; and Cossutius a Roman
Citizen was sent for by King Antiochus, to finish the Temple of Jupiter
Olympius in the City of ^hens.

The Original of the Tuscan Order was in Tuscany, one of the most considerable
parts of Italy, whose Name it still keeps. Of all the Orders this is the most
plain and least ornamental: 'Twas seldom used, save only for some Country
Building where there is no need of any Order but one, or else for some great
Edifice, as an Amphitheatre, and such like other Buildings. The Tuscan Column
is the only thing that recommends this Order. The Doric Order was invented by
the Dorians a People of Greece, and has Columns which stand by themselves, and
are more ornamental than the former. The Ionic Order has its Name from Ionia a
Province of Asia, whose Columns are commonly sluted with Twenty four Gutters:
But there are some which are not thus furrowed and hollowed, but only to the
third part from the bottom of the Column; and that third part has its Gutters
filled with little Rods, or round Battoons according to the different height of
the Column which in the upper part is channell'd and hollowed into Groves, and
is altogether empty.

The Corinthian Order was invented at Corinth, it observes the same measures
with the Ionic, and the greatest difference between them is in their Capitals.

The Composite was added to the other Orders by the Romans, who placed it above
the Corinthian, to show, as some Authors say, that they were Lords over all
other Nations; and this was not invented till after Augustus had given Peace to
the whole World. It Is made up of the Ionic and Corinthian, but yet is more
ornamental than the Corinthian.

Besides these Five Orders, there are some Authors who add yet Two more, viz.
the Order of the Cargatides, and the Persic Order. The former is nothing but
the Ionic Order, from which it differs only in this, that instead of Columns
there are Figures of Women which support the Entablature. Vitruvius attributes
the Origin of this Order to the Ruin of the Inhabitants of Carya, a City of
Peloponnesus. He says, That these People having joined with the Persians to
make War upon their own Nation, the Gracians routed the Persians, and obtained
an entire Victory over them; after which they besieged the Inhabitants of
Carya, and having taken their City by force of Arms they reduced it to Ashes,
and put all the Men in it to the Sword: As for the Women and Virgins they
carried them away captive, but to perpetuate the Marks of their Crime to
Posterity, they represented afterward the Figure of these miserable Captives
in the public Edifices which they built, where by making them serve instead of
Columns, they appeared to be loaded with a heavy burden, which was, as it were
the Punishment they had deserved for the Crime of their Husbands. The Persic
Order had its rise from an Accident like this: For Pausanias having defeated
the Persians, the Lacedaemonians, as a Mark of their Victory, erected Trophies
of the Arms of their Enemies, whom they represented afterward under the Figure
of Slaves, supporting the Entablatures of their Houses. From these Two Examples
diverse kinds of Figures were afterward made use of in Architecture to boar up
the Cornishes, and support the Corbels and Brack^^s.

There are still some ancient footsteps to be seen near Athens, of those
Figures of Women which carry Panniers on their Head, and supply the room of the
Cargatides. There are also Figures of Men, who are commonly called Atlantes,
according to Vitrutius, though the Romans called them Telamones. The Greeks had
some reason to call them Atlantes, from Atlas whom the Poets feigned to bear up
the Heavens, but it does not appear why the Latins gave them the name of
Telamones. Boudus in his Dictionary upon Vitruvius, says, that it is probable,
he who first used this Word to signify these Statues which bear some burden,
wrote not Telamones, but (...), which Greek Word signifies, those that are
miserable and labor hard: which exactly agrees to these sort of Figures, which
support Cornishes or Corbels, and which we commonly see in the Pillars of our
ancient Temples, under the Images of some Saints, or some great Persons.

ARCHITECTURE
consists of Three Parts: The first treats of the Building of public and
private Edifices; the second is about the Art of Dialling, which treats of the
Course of the Stars, and the way of making several sorts of Dials; the third is
about the Engines which are made use of for Architecture and for War.

ARCHITECTUS,
an Architect: He ought, says Vitruvius, to be skilled in Writing and
Designing, to be instructed in Geometry, and to have some knowledge of Optics:
He ought to have learned Arithmetic, and to be well versed in History, to have
studied Philosophy very well, and to have some insight in the Music, Laws,
Astronomy, and Physic.

He should be well skilled in Designing, that he may the more easily perform
all the Works he has projected according to the Draughts he has made of them:
Geometry is also a great help to him, especially to teach him how to make use
of the Rule and Compass, how to lay out things by the Line, and do every thing
by the Rule and Plummet: Optics serve to teach him how to admit the Light, and
to make Windows according to the Situation of the Heavens: Arithmetic
instructs him how to calculate the Charges which his Work amounts to. History
furnishes him with matter for the greatest part of the Ornaments in
Architecture, of which he should be able to give a rational account. Philosophy
is also necessary to make a perfect Architect, I mean that part of Philosophy
which treats of things Natural, which in Greek is called Physiology. As for
Music he should be a perfect Master of it, that he may know how to Order the
brazen Pipes, which are lodged under the Stairs of Theaters, so that the Voice
of the Comedians may strike the Ears of the Auditors, with more or less force,
clearness and sweetness.

An Architect ought also to be skilled in the Laws and Customs of places that
he may know how to make partition Walls, Spouts, Roofs, and Common-shores; how
to order the Lights of Houses, the Drains for Water, and several other things
of that nature. Astronomy is also useful to him for making of Sun-dials, by
teaching him to know the East, West, South and North, the Equinoxes and
Solstices, etc. He ought to be knowing in Physic, to understand the Climates
and Temperament of the Air, which is wholesome and which Infectious; also the
Nature of Waters. For without considering these things, he cannot build an
healthful Habitation. If so much knowledge is necessary to make a complete
Architect, it is to be feared there are but few perfect Masters of that Art.

ARCHON,
the chief Magistrate of Athens: The Nine Magistrates who took upon them the
Government of that City, after the Death of Codrus who was the last King of it
were also called so: At first they were chosen to be perpetual Governors; but
in process of time their Office was limited to Ten Years, and at last reduced
to one. This Republic was governed by Nine Archontes, or chief Magistrates,
Six whereof were called, Thesmothetae, i. e. Lagislators; the other Three were,
(...), the King; (...), the General, and the Archon, by way of eminence so
called, as being superior to all the rest. They decided with sovereign
Authority all religious causes and matters of State: They were chosen by lot,
and afterward examined and approved by the People in their Assemblies. This
Name was also given to the Chief President, called Prytanis, who presided in
the Courts of the Fifty Judges, taken out of the Five Hundred, who judged by
turns every Month the Affairs of private Persons.

ARCTOPHYLAX,
a Constellation, which is properly named, the director of the Bear, but is
otherwise called Boots.

ARCTOS,
the Biar, a Constellation, called by the Greeks Arctos and Helice, which is
situated in the North, having its directors near it, which is not far from
Virgo.

ARCTURUS,
is a Star of that Constellation which is properly called Arctophylax: This
Word signifies the Tail of the Bear, because it is very near it. It rises on
the first day of September, and sets on the 13th. day of May; and never appears
but when it brings some Hail or Storm. The Poets feigned that it resides
amongst Men in the Daytime, as a spy upon their Actions, and afterward gives
an Account to Jupiter of their persidious and unjust dealings in Trade, or in
Courts of Justice: This is the meaning of Plautus in these Verses of the
Prologus to his Rudens, etc.

-- Nomen Arcturo est mihi
Noctu fum in caelo clarus atque inter deos,
Inter mortales ambuloque intardius --
Hominum qui facta, mores, piatatem and fidem
Noscamus --
Qui falsas lites falses testimoniis
Petunt, quique in Jure abjurant p^^uni^m,
Eotum referimus Nomina exsoripta ad Jovem.
The Poets made him the Son of Jupiter and Calisto, and others said he was the
Son Lycaon.

Arculae aves, Birds which gave bad emens either by their flying, or their
manner of eating. Because they hindered Men from undertaking any Business, they
were thus named, Aroulae aves, quia arcebant ne quid fioret.

ARCUS,
a Bow. The Bow and Arrows were the first Arms which Men made use of, as may
appear from the 21th. Chapt. of Conesis, where it is said of Ismael, that he
was an expert Archor; and from the 27th. Chap. where Isaac commanded his Son
Esau to take his Arms, i. e. his Bow and Arrows and go a hunting. Pliny in B.
7. Chap. 56. attributes the Invention of Bow and Arrows to Soythes the Son of
Jupiter, from whom the Scythians, who are now the Tartars, took their Name, who
were very dextrous in drawing the Bow: Plutarch also in his Banquet of the
Seven Wise Men, ascribes to them the Bow, and to the Greeks the Invention of
stringed and wind Music. But the Authority of Pliny is of no value, wherein he
differs from the holy Scripture, which doubtless he never had any knowledge of.

Arcus Calestis, the Rainbow which appears in the Clouds a natural Meteor; but
after the Deluge it was appointed to be a Sign of the Covenant which God made
with Noah, and of the Promise he gave that he would never again drown the
World. The Poets feigned that the Rainbow, or Iris, attended Juno, and carried
her Orders from all parts, as Mercury did those of Jupiter. See this Fable more
at large under the Word Iris.

Arcus, a Triumphal Arch, which was erected to the Emperors, and other great
Men in ancient times, in honor of them for their brave Actions; several of
them were erected at Rome; but the most ancient was that of Titus, which was
very ingeniously and magnificently built: On one side of it, there was the
Triumphal Chariot of a Prince, with a Statue of Victory behind him, which
seemed to hold out a Crown to him; the Ark of the Old Testament and the bundles
of Rods were carried before him: On the other side was the rest of the
Triumphal Pomp, as the Two Tables of the Decalogue, the Tables of Gold, the
Vessels of Solomon's Temple, and the golden Candlestick which had Seven
Branches.

The Senate and People of Rome erected likewise a Triumphal Arch to Septimius
Severus, at the foot of the Capitol, after the Victory he obtained over the
Parthians, Armenians and Arabians. Victories were there represented with great
Wings, holding in their hands Trophies and Crowns, with this Inscription.

Imp. Cas. Lucio Septimio M. There are still many other Triumphal Arches to be
seen at Rome as that of Titus and Ves^asian, that of Septimius Severus, that of
Galienus which was built after a very rude manner, being of the Doric Order
with one Arch only, which has this Inscription upon the Frize.

Galieno Clementissimo Principi, There is also an Arch of Marcus Aureltus, and
of Verus, and of Gordianus junior, and lastly, one of Constantine, which the
Senate erected to him for the Victory he obtained against Maxentius at the Pons
Milvius, in the Suburbs of Rome. This last was all of Marble, and of the
Corinthian Order, and had Eight great Columns and Three Avenues. On one of its
sides there is this Inscription, Imp. Caes. Pl. Constantino Maximo.

P. F. Augusto S. P. Q. R.

Quod instinctu divinitatis mentis magnitudine cum exercitu suo, tam de tyranno
quam de omni factione uno tenpore justis Rempublicam ultus est armis.

Arcum triumphis insignem dicabit.



On the other side near the Rising Sun were Written these words, Votis X, and
on the left hand Votis XX. On the Roof of the Arch about the middle on one side
were these words Liberatori Vrbis, and on the other Fundatori quietis. Above
the Capitals of each Column were represented in embossed work the most eminent
Captives, whose Bodies were of changeable Marble, and their Hands and Feet of
white Marble of the Isle of Paros. In the Frize of the little Arches was the
Statue of Constantine, holding in his Hand a Scrowl, which he seems to throw
among the People for a Largess. Suctonius calls these Scrowls Tessera and
Missillia, and also Tessera Nummaria. For these Scrowls contained certain Sums
of Money, and those who caught them were to demand them at the Exchequer, or
the Lot wherewith they were marked, as is done in other Lotteries.

AREMULUS
or Remus Sylvius, the Son of Agrippa Sylvius XII. King of the Latins, who was
killed by a Thunderbolt after he had reigned 19 Years.

ARENA
the bottom and middle of the Amphitheatre, so called, because that Place was
covered with Sand, for concealing from the View of People, the Blood of the
Gladiators that was spilt there at the Combats, which was done either by
removing the Sand which was stained with Blood, or laying some fresh upon it.

AREOPAGUS,
a famous Place in the City of Athens, so called from the Temple of Mars, the
Greek Word (...), signifies a Borough, and Town, and (...), signifies Mars.
There the first Grecians passed a favorable Sentence on Mars, who was accused
by Neptune for killing his Son Hallirrothius, for violating the Chastity of his
Daughter Alcippe.

Varro, as St. Austin tells us, B. 18. Chapter 10. of the City of God, will not
allow the Areopagus, i. e. the Village of Mars to be so called, because Mars,
whom the Greeks called (...) being accused of Homicide before 12 Gods, who
judged him in this Village, was there acquitted, though he had but Six Votes
for him, according to the common custom of that Place, which was always
favorable to the accused. He rejects therefore this common Opinion, and
endeavors to find out another Original of this Name, in some old obsolete
Histories upon pretense that it is a reproach to the Deities to attribute to
them Quarrels, and Lawsuits: And he maintains that the History of Mars is no
less Fabulous than that of the three Goddesses Juno, Minerva and Venus, who
contested before Paris for the Golden Apple the Prize of the most beautiful.

Areopagitae, the Areopagites, the Judges of Athens, who decided all Causes, as
well public as private in the Areopagiu, with a Sovereign Authority, and whose
Decisions were esteemed impartial. They heard Causes only in the night time,
and did not allow the Advocates to use the Ornaments of Rhetoric in defending
their Clients.

ARETHUSA,
the Daughter of Nereus, and Doris, the Companion of Diana, with whom Alpheus
of Areadia, was in Love; but Arethusa, to shun his Courtship, fled into Sicily
to an Isle near Syracuse, where she was changed into a Fountain, and her Lover
into a River, whose Water runs so swiftly that it passes through several
Rivers, and even through the Sea itself, without mingling with them, until it
comes to the Fountain of Arethusa, and then it unites so with that, that they
are no longer two, but one Channel. See Alpheus.

Arethusa is a Fountain of Greece, which, as the Poets feigned, was beloved by
the River Alpheus, who pursues it even in the subterraneous Channels through
which it fled away, as far as Sicily, where Diana received it in the little
Isle Ortygia. Strabo, takes a great deal of pains to refute this Fable, and has
proved that the River Alpheus discharged itself into the Sea like other Rivers.
It Is alleged that such things are found in the Basin of Arethusa, as were
thrown, or had fallen into the River Alpheus, which seems to be a proof of the
subterraneous Communication between them.

Bochart has given a very ingenious explication of this Fable: For he says,
that the Arethusa is a Phaenician Word, that Arith in Syriac signifies a Brook,
that it is probable the Phaenicians called this Fountain Hen-Alphe, i. e. The
Fountain of Willows, or the Fountain for Ships, because it held a very great
quantity of Water, and its Banks were all covered with Willows, which
occasioned the Ships to put in there, and take in fresh Water. Ovid calls this
Fountain Alphcias in his Metamorphoses. The Greeks after this having discovered
this Fountain to contain such abundance of Waters, that as Cicero describes it,
it is fons aquae dulcis incredibili magnitudine, and understanding that it was
called not only Arethusa, but Alpheias, hereupon feigned that it received its
Waters from the River Alpheus in Greece by subterraneous passages.

ARGEI,
or Argea, in the Neuter Gender; were certain Places at Rome consecrated by
Nama in memory of some Greek Princes who were buried there. Every Year a
Sacrifice was offered to them on the 15th. of May, and the Vestal Virgins threw
into the Tiber Thirty Images made of Rushes which were called Argei, from off
the Pons sublicius at Rome. The Flaminica, or Priestess of Juno, was then clad
in Mourning, with her Hair disshevell'd, in a careless dress, without any
Ornament, in a word, in a pensive and sorrowful silence, as we learn from Aulus
Gellius, [Flaminica cum eat ad Argeos, neque caput comito, neque capillum
depectito:] Plutarch in his 32d. Roman Question, says, that the Inhabitants of
Latium had so inveterate an hatred against the Grecians whom they called
Argivae, that they never forgot to throw them into the Tiber from the top of
the Pons sublicius, till Hercules coming to Rome dissuaded them from this
Violence: And yet, to satisfy in some measure their hatred, they dressed up
every Year Thirty Men of straw after the Greek fashion, and caused them to be
thrown headlong from the top of this Bridge into the Tiber, by the Vestal
Virgins and the Chief Priests, after they had offered Sacrifice to the Manes of
the Greeks, whom they had formerly put to death.

Fabius Pictor, about the end of his Book, says that this word comes from one
Argus, who was the Host of Evander, and came with Hercules to dwell at Rome in
ancient times when it was called Saturnina, as being under the Rule of Saturn,
and that the Plain which is at the bottom of the 7 Hills was called the Argean
Field. (Subsidens septem collibus campus Argeus, dictus est ab Argo Evandri
hospite, and ecmitibus Argivi Herculis, qui ad Evandrum venerunt and in
Saturnia subsederunt.

Argentum, Silver, a Metal dug out of the Bowels of the Earth, which holds the
2d. rank among Metals,

Argentum, signifies also Money which is used in Trade and Commerce. It has in
all times been used somewhere, though not in all Nations. Josephus in B. ^st.
of his Jewish Antiquities says, that Cain amassed together great Riches, which
he had extorted (...): And it is observed in the 20th. Chap. of Genesis, that
Abimelech King of Gerar, made a Present to Abraham of a Thousand Pieces of
Silver. Ecce mill argenteos dedi fratri tuo. Plutarch in the Life of Theseus,
the 10th. King of Athens, says, that he stamped Pieces of Silver of the Weight
of two Drams. Servius Tullus was the first King who stamped Money of Copper at
Rome, but pieces of Silver begun first to be coined in the Year 483. to the
value of a Denarius, i. e. 10. Asses. [which in English Money is 7 Pence half
penny.]

Argentei, or Sicli, are the same thing, as may easily be proved by the
Septuagints Translation of the Bible, and by the Latin Version of St. Jerome. in
the 2d. B. of Kings. chapter 18. Ego dedissem tibi, says Joab, december argenti
siclos, and the other answers, si appenderes in ^anibus meis mill argenteos.
This sicle of Silver was of the value of 2 Shillings and Six Pence in our Money.

ARGILETUM,
a long Street in the City of Rome over against the Men's Palatinus, which
reached from the end of the Velabrum, or Tuscan Street, as far as the Theater
of Marcellus to the Herb-Market. It was so called from one Argus who a had mind
to kill Evander, but he himself was slain and buried there. Varro thinks that
this Place was also called by this Name, from Argilla, or fat Earth, whereof
there is a great quantity in that Place.

ARGONAVIS,
the Ship of the Argonauts, in which Jason sailed to Colchos, to fetch the
Golden Fleece. This Ship was built by Argus, with the help of Miuerva, of the
Pine Trees in the Forest of Pelens or Dedona. Phaedrus in the 4th. Book of his
Fables, Fab. 6. speaks of it after the following manner. I would to God that
the Thassalian Ax, had never cut down the high Pines of the Forest of Peleus,
and that the subtle Argus, having a mind to go upon the Waters a daring Voyage,
exposed to many visible dangers of Death, had never framed a Ship by the Art of
Pallas, which by opening the 1st. Entrance into the Sea, that hitherto had
continued inaccessible, has been so fatal both to the Greeks and Barbarians.
You will tell me doubtless, continues the same Author, that all this Prayer is
impertinent, and founded upon a mistake about the 1st. Ship, since it is
certain that a long time before the Argonautes, Minos overcame the Violence of
the Eg^an Sea, by covering it with a great Fleet, and revenged the Death of his
Son by a Punishment no less just than Exemplary.

ARGONAUTAE,
the Argonauts, a great number of Illustrious Greeks, who embarked with Jason
to go and fetch the Golden Fleece, viz. Hercules, Theseus, Castor and Pollux;
Orpheus, Typhis, Lyna^^s and some others, who arrived all safe at Colchos,
after they had escaped some Dangers.

ARGUS,
the Son of Apis succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of the Argives, and from
him the Argives took their Name, for they were not so called before. It was
under his Reign, that Greece 1st. began to ma^sure the Ground, and sow Corn.
Argus after his Death was honored as a God, and Temples, and Sacrifices were
appointed for him; which Honor had been given before him to one called
Honogyrus, who was struck dead with a Thunderbolt, and was the 1st. who yoked
Oxen to draw. St. August. B. (...). Of the City of God, Chap. 6.

Argus, the Son of A^estor, a vigilant Prince and one of great Circumspection,
to whom the Poets gave a hundred Eyes to denote his Vigilance. They also
feigned that Juno employed him to observe the Actions of Jupiter her Husband,
and to guard Io the Daughter of Inacus whom he loved. But Mercury killed this
Argus by the order of Jupiter, after he had lulled him asleep with the sound of
his Pipe. Juno to recompense the Faithfulness of her Spy, changed him into a
Peacock, which has as many golden Circles in his Tail, as Argus had Eyes.

Ariadne, the Daughter of Minos, King of Crete or Candia, by Pusiphae. When
Thescu^ was sent to Candia by the Athenians, to be devoured by the Minotaure,
she instructed him how to get out of the Labyrinth in which this Monster was
enblos'd, by giving him a Clue of Thread, which succeeded so well that after he
had killed the Monster, he got out of the Labyrinth, though the escape was very
difficult by reason of the many turnings and windings that were in it. After
his Escape he forgot his Benefactress, and abandoned her in the Isle of Chio or
Naxos, where she married Bacthus, who placed the Crown she had then upon her
Head amongst the Stars.

ARICIA,
a little of City Latium in Italy, which was built by Hippoli^us the Son of
Theseus, in Memory of his Wife, who had the same Name, as Martial tells us, B.
4. Her Name was also given to a Forest, wherein Diana concealed Hippolytus,
after he was raised from the Dead by Aesculapius; as an acknowledgement for so
great a Benefit he erected a Temple, to him whose Priests were to be fugitive
Slaves. Hard by there was a Fountain sacred to the Nymph Egeria, where King
Numa, having learned Hydromancy, or the Art of Divination by Waters, boasted
that he had frequent Conversation with that Nymph, that he might the more
firmly establish his Empire, raise his own Reputation to a higher Pitch, and
conciliate greater Authority to his Laws among the common People. ^oli^ms and
Cassius Hemina, think that the City of Aricia, was built by Archilacus the
Sicilian, in the Year 425. from the building of Rome. It obtained the
Privilege of the Roman Freedom, and was at first a Municipal City, and
afterward a Roman Colony, as Florus tells us, Marius Anttum, Ariciam and
Lavini^n colonaias devastavit. It was the Place of the Nativity of Accia, the
Mother of the Emperor Augustus.

ARIES,
a Ram a Warlike Engine used by the Ancients. It was a great Beam of Wood
strengthened with Iron at the end, which represented the Head of a Ram,
wherewith the Ancients were to batter the Walls of Cities, there were Three
sorts of them, one was hanged upon Ropes, another run upon Wheels, and a third
sort was born up in the Arms of those who made use of it.

This Machine was first invented after this manner; when the Carthaginians laid
Siege to Gades, they thought it convenient immediately to demolish a Castle
which they had taken, but having no proper instruments for that purpose, they
made use of a great Beam of Wood which many Men bore up in their Arms, and
striking the top of the Walls with the end of this Beam by their redoubled
blows, they made the uppermost Stones to come down, and so descending lower
from one Lay of Stones to another, they battered down the whole Fortification.
After this a Carpenter of the City of Tire, called Pephasmenos, taking the hint
from the former Experiment, hanged one Beam upon another like a Balance, which
being thrust forward with great force, by many repeated blows he beat down the
Wall of the City of Gades.

Cetras the Caelcdonian was the 1st. who made a Carr of Wood which moved upon
Wheels. Upon the Carr he laid many pieces of Timber, whereof some stood
upright, and others lay athwart, which he joined together and made a Hut of
them, in which he hung up a Ram, and then he covered it with Ox-hides to secure
those who played the Engine for battering down a Wall: And this Hut was called
a Snail to the Ram, because it moved but very slowly. Polydus the Thessalian at
last perfected the Engine at the Siege which King Philip the Son of Amyntas
laid to Bizantium. This is what Vitruvius tells us B. 10. Chapter 17. But Athenaeus
in his Book De Machinis, thinks that Geras the Carthaginian was the Inventor of
this Engine: He says also, that this Architect did not sling his Ram in a Hut,
as Vitruvius explains it, but that it was carried by several Men who pushed it
forward by the strength of their Arms.

ARIES
a Ram, the first sign of the Zodiac. This was the Ram according to the Fable
of the Golden Fleece, which carried Phryxus and Hell through the Air, and
which Jupiter placed among the Signs of the Zodiac. This Sign to this Day
makes the Vernal Equinox; although Vitruvius, tells us that when the Sun has
reached the 1st. part of the Sign Arles, it makes the Vernal Equinox. Columella
gives the reason why the Solstices and Aequinoxes among the Ancients were not
at the entrance of the Signs, but at the 8th Part: This came to pass, says he,
because then sollow'd the Festivals which had been appionted about that time of
the Year, at which, Endoxus, Meto, and other ancient Astronomres thought that
the Points of the Aequinoxes and Solstices happened, though they were at the
beginning of the Signs, as Hipparcus showed afterward.

Aries, the Ram with the golden Fleece, so famous in fabulous Stories Strabo
relates the Expeditions of Phryxus or Jason, and the Argonautes into Calches,
for seizing and carrying off the great Treasure that was there, and chiefly the
great Mass of Gold which was gathered out of the Sand of a River by the
straining it through a Ram's Fleece; and from thence he concludes that all
which the Poets have said of it, is nothing but a true History, either from the
Nature of these Places, or from the successful Voyages which have been made
thither at diverse time.

Pliny gives a strange account of the Riches of Colches, and he forgets not the
golden Fleece, because the best Gold is that which is gathered out of Rivers by
the help of Fleeces which gave occasion to the Fable.

Bochart thinks, that when the Poets express the Riches of the King of Colchos
by-golden Fleece, it may proceed from the Ama biguity of the word Gasa, in its
original Language which is Syriac, for it signifies a Treasure, and also a
Fleece, and in allusion tthis, the Poets took occasion to Pun. Heo adds as a
probable Conjecture that the two Bulls which guard the Treasure are nothing
else but the two Walls which encompass the Castle wherein it is kept, because
the Syriac word Sour signifies a Bull and a Wall; and that the Dragon which
guarded the Treasure, was nothing else but the Iron Gate of the Castle, because
Nachas signifies both a Dragon and Iron.

ARION,
a Native of Methymna in the Isle of Lesbos, an excellent Player upon the Harp,
and a Lyric Poet, growing rich, and being desirous to return into his own
Country, says Phaedrus, that there he might show great Riches. Having therefore
embarked in a Ship, the Seamen, a faithless and inhuman sort of People, having
a mind to throw him into the Sea, that they might take his Riches to
themselves, he prayed them that before they did it, they would give him leave
to make his own Funeral Oration, and to sing an Elegy to his Harp: After that
when he threw himself into the Sea, with the most precious things that he had
about him, the Dolphins which came running to the Ship, being charmed by the
sweetness of his Music saved him from drowning, and one of them carried him
upon his Back as far as Tenara, whence he went to Periander, who being
acquainted with his Story, caused all the Seamen to be hanged in the Place
where the Dolphin had set him on Shore: For sometime after the adventure of the
Dolphin, it happened that the Ship on which Arion had embarked, was by a Storm
cast upon the Coasts near Corinth, and then Periander caused all the Seamen to
be brought before him; and having inquired of them what was become of Arion,
they answered him that he was dead and they had buried him: Whereupon
immediately he caused them to be carried away to a place near the Monument he
had erected to the Dolphin, which died after it had carried Arion a shore: And
there he made them swear that Arion was dead, and then brought forth Arion
before them, in the same kind of Habit which he had when he threw himself into
the Sea to avoid their Fury, and he caused them all to be hanged near the
Monument of the Dolphin. The Gods also to recompense the Friendship of this
Dolphin and eternize its Memory, placed it among the Stars.

ARISTAEUS,
the Son of Apollo and Cyrene, who was desperately in Love with Euridice the
Wife of Orphaeus: She died of the Bite of a Serpent, as she fled from the
amorous pursuit of Aristaeus; the Nymphs enraged at this Misfortune killed all
Aristaeus's Bees, but he by the advice of his Mother consulted Proteus about
this Loss, who ordered him to sacrifice 4 Bulls and 4 Heifers to appease the
Ghost of Euridice, which being done, immediately there came forth Swarms of
Bees out of the Entrails of the slain Victims. It Is said that he first invented
the way of extracting Honey from the Wax-combs which the Bees make, and of
making Oil out of Olives, and of curdling Milk. He was placed among the Number
of the Gods after his Death, and adored by the Shepherds.

The Education of Bacchus was committed to Aristaeus, according to the
Traditions of the Lybians, which are related by Diodorus Siculus. The same
Author elsewhere gives us an Account, that Apollo transported into Lybia a
Grecian Virgin called Cyrene, and built there a City of her Name by whom he had
a Son called Aristaeus; and caused him to be nursed up in a Wilderness by the
Nymphs, who taught him the Culture and the Use of Olives, of Bees, and
Milk-meats, as Butter, Cheese, etc. which he in process of time communicated to
Mankind. After diverse Voyages at length Aristaeus came into Sardinia and
Sicily, and having passed over from thence into Thracia, he was there initiated
by Bacchus into his Mysteries, who taught him many things useful for human
Life. At last Aristaeus died near Mount Hemis, and was there honored as a God,
not only by the Thracians but also by the Graecians.

Herodotus, relates a Story of Aristaeus, in which Apollo is very much
concerned. He was of Preconnesus, where it was commonly thought that he was
dead; but he appeared again at Cyzicum as one returned from the dead: He
disappeared yet once more, and 340 Years after he showed himself again to the
Metapontines in Italy, whom he affirmed to be the only Persons of all the
Italians, whom Apollo had honored with his Presence. enjoined them to erect a
Statue to him in the Temple of Apollo, near that of Apollo himself. The
Metapontines consulted the Oracle about it, which commanded them to obey him,
and so they did.

ARISTANDER,
a famous Diviner, who foretold a Victory to Alexander, having seen an Eagle
fly round about him, Quint. Curt. B. 4. and 7.

ARISTARCHUS,
a Grammarian of Samothracia, who was the Disciple of Aristophanes. He
methodiz'd the Verses of Homer by the command of Pisistratus the Tyrant of
Athens, and took the Liberty of rejecting some of them as did not please him.
From hence came the Custom of calling any one by the name of Aristarchus, who
is a critical and severe Censurer of other Men's Works. Aelian says that he
wrote more than a 100 Commentaries. He flourished in the time of Ptolemaeus
Philometor, to whose Son he was Praeceptor.

ARISTIDES,
surnamed the Just, who was the Son of Lysimachus. He restored Aristocracy, or
the Government of the Grandees in Athens, and upon that account by the
persuasion of Themistocles who maintained the Popular State, he was banished by
Ostracism. He maintained always an even and unimitable Temper of Mind, in
Prosperity as well as Adversity. The evil Treatment which he received from his
Enemies, never made him in the least depart from the Rules of Justice, and he
neither governed himself by Passion, nor by Prejudice. He had so great a Love
for Poverty, that when he died the Public was obliged to Inter him, leaving
nothing behind him. Lucian in his Description of Calumny, says, that as just as
he was yet he conspired against Themistocles, being Jealous of his Glory; for
the best Men have their Faults and their Passions.

ARISTIPPUS,
a famous Debauchee, who led an effeminate idle Life, in sensual Pleasures and
Feasting. He was very ingenious in the Art of Luxury, and was always maintained
at Athens, or the Court of the Kings of Sici^y, who esteemed him highly,
because he understood good eating, would dance after drinking, and knew exactly
how to make the best Sauces and Ragoo's. He showed himself so excellent in this
Art, that the Princes Cooks would come to take Orders from him, and he would
not receive them unless he was in the humor, says Lucian.

ARITHMETICA,
Arithmetic, a Science which teaches the Art of accompting, and all the Powers
and Properties of Numbers. The 4 first Rules of Arithmetic are Addition,
Subtraction, Multiplication, and Division.

There was a Digital Arithmetic, which is more ancient as well as more
Natural; for this way of reckoning by the Fingers seems to have been instituted
by Nature, which has given us this Expedient as more easy than any of the rest.
The Fingers are limited to 10. which is a mysterious Number, and represents any
thing that is most perfect and complete: Thus we plight our Truth to one
another by joining our two right Hands together.

Ten is also composed of the 4 first Numbers. 1, 2, 3, 4. Which Plato commends
at the beginning of his Timaeus; for these Numbers being joined together make
the Number 10. And when we arrive at that, we begin again at one, for 10 and 1
make 11. 10 and 2 make 12, and so forwards Pliny tells us, that the Ancients
reckoned no further than to 100000.

Those who in Progress of Time invented the Cipher, and the Arithmetical
Figures which we now make use of, have given us no more than 10 of them. And
the Pythagoreans, after the Jewish Cabbalists, maintain that all Tens are full
of Divine Mysteries, which gave occasion to the Institution of Tenths as due to
God, by which we pay him Allegiance and Homage for all the Fruits which the
Ground produces by his Benediction.

Besides this digital Arithmetic is very ancient, Nicarchus in a Greek Epigram
tells us of an old Man, who begun again to reckon his Years upon his left Hand.
St. Jerome informs us as to this matter, that the number of a 100 was carried on
from the left Hand to the right, and was reckoned upon the same Fingers, but
not on the same hand; upon which account Juvenal speaking of the happy old Age
of Nestor, tells us, that he reckoned hitherto the number of his Years upon his
right Hand.

Numa erected a Statue to Janus, according to the Relation of Pliny, whose
Fingers of its right Hand were so disposed as to signify the number 300, the
Thumb and Forefinger standing out at the full length, while the other Three
were bended toward the Palm of the Hand, and the Fingers of the left Hand
signified 55. the Thumb and middle Finger being bended inwards, while the 3
other stood straight. Beda treats of the same thing in the 1st. Book Of the
Nature of things, but after a different manner.

It will not be impertinent to our present Subject to relate a Discourse which
Francis the 1st. had one Day at Dinner as it is set down in Vigenere.

A Discourse was begun in Praise of Augustus, whose custom it was to keep
always in his Chamber two great Registers, one in which were entered the
Receipts; and the other, in which were the Expenses of so vast an Empire. As to
my self, said the King, I have likewise 2 Registers which I never part with
Night nor Day, viz. my 2 Hands, whereof the Left represents to me my Receipts;
for the Thumb, which is the strongest of all the Fingers, signifies my Demains,
which is also the most solid and lawful Revenue that a good Prince can have;
the Forefinger signifies my Aids and Subsidies, the middle Finger, which is
the Iongest, denotes the Taxes, the Finger next to it, the casual Forfeitures;
and lastly, the little Finger, the Salt and Excise. The right Hand represents
to me my Expense in general; the Thumb signifies the Maintenance of my House,
the Salaries of my Menial Servants, the great and little Equeries, and the
Treasury, the fore Finger signifies the Fund reserved for the Necessities of
the State, the middle Finger, a Fund for the Armies by Land; the Ring Finger,
or the 4th. the Payment of all the Officers of the Kingdom, and particularly of
the Judges in the Courts of Justice, which bought to administer Gratis to my
Subjects, and the little Finger a Fund for the Armies by Sea.

The Romans marked their numbers by Letters, which they disposed after this
manner.

1 I One 5 V Five 10 X Ten ^0 L Fifty 100 C a Hundred 500 D Five Hundred. 1000
M a Thousand 5000 Five Thousand 10000 Ten Thousand 500000 50000 Fifty Thousand
100000 100000 a Hundred Thousand

These are the Figures of the Roman Numbers together with their signification
and value; for as Pliny observes, the Ancients had no Number above a 100000,
but when they reckoned higher, they set down this Number twice or thrice, from
whence also comes the Custom of counting, by these Phrases, Bis, ter, quater,
quinquies, decies centena millia.

For the better understanding the Roman Numbers we must consider. 1st. That
there are but 5 different Figures which are the 5 first, and that all the rest
are composed of the I. and the C, yet so that the C, is always turned toward
the I, whether it be before or after, as is easy to be seen. 2dly. That when
ever there is a Figure of less value before another which is of greater value,
the former signifies that you must take so much off from the latter: As IV.
Four, XL. Forty, XC. Ninety. From hence it appears, that there is no Number
which may not be expressed by the Five first Figures. 3dly. That in all these
Numbers the Figures increase gradually. 1st. By a quintuple Proportion, and
then next by a double of the last before it: Thus the 2d. is 5 times as many as
the 1st. and the 3d. is twice as many as the 2d. the 4th. is 5 times as much as
the 3d. and the 5th. twice as much as the 4th. and so of all the rest. 4thly.
That the Figures begin always to multiply on the right side, after such a
manner that all the s which are put on that way are counted by Fives, as those
which are on the other side are counted by Tens: And so we may easily find out
all sorts of Numbers how great soever they are. Thus when an Author of the last
Age, in a List of the Roman Empire, had set down the names of its Citizens, in
the following Figures contrary to the Custom of the Ancients CCCCCCCI -- I.
CCCI. CC. taking the C next to the I on the left Hand for a 1000. or the first
which is on the right Hand for 500. and so going on to the end by a decuple
Progression in each Figure, on one or on the other side, I perceive quickly
that there are here in all, one Million, Five Hundred Millions, a Hundred and
Ten Thousand Citizens: Which may be thus expressed in the Arabic Figures,
1500110000.

Now if we reflect upon this way of accompting, we may easily understand, that
it had its original only from hence, that Men having begun at 1st. to reckon
upon the Fingers, they counted till it came to five upon one Hand, and then
having added the other to that Number, they made of them both Ten, which is the
double of the former: And this is the true Reason why the Progression in these
Numbers is always from one to five, and then from Five to Ten.

All the Roman Figures themselves are also owing to the same original. For what
can be more natural than to say, that the I is the same thing as if a Man show
one by holding forth one Finger only, andthat the Figure V. is the same thing
as if a Man catching the 3 middle Fingers, should hold forth only the little
Finger and the Thumb, as containing the whole Hand, and that if you add to
these the same two Fingers of the other Hand, joined to either at the top, they
will make as it were two V's, whereof one will run across under the other, and
so make an X, which signifies Tin.

Manutius shows also that all the other figures are derived from the first,
because an V is nothing else but two 1's joined at the bottom, so an L is
nothing but two I's, whereof the one is perpendicular and the other horizontal,
and if to these you add a third at the top [then they signify an Hundred by
that Figure, in Lieu of which the Transcribers for the greater ease made use of
a C. If a fourth I be joined to the other three so as to make a square thus,
this Figure signified five Hundred, in lieu of which they used afterward, 1st.
the I, and then the D. At last by doubling this Square, they made their
Thousand, instead of which the Copiers either for Ornament or better
Convenience, began first to round the Figure, and make it with one stroke of
their Pen thus. and after that, thus, o, from whence it comes to pass, that we
often meet with an Eight, made horizontal, or a Greek Omega, to signify a
1000. But afterward they marked it thus, CI, and then thus, CD. and at last,
because this has a great Affinity with the Gothic M. they used a simple M. to
denote a. Thousand, as the C. a Hundred, and the D. for Five Hundred. And from
hence it comes to pass, that there are just Seven Letters which are used for
these sort of Numbers, viz. C. D. I. L. M. V. X. unless you will add to them
the Q. also, which some have used for five Hundred, according to Vossius.

We must also observe there are some who maintain, that when there is a line --
above the Figures, this makes them stand for so many Thousands, as V. is Five
Thousand. X. is Ten Thousand. I know not whether any examples of this can be
found among the ancients; but as it is certain that the way of accompting
maintained by Priscian, who thought that for signifying the Tens of Thousands,
we must place an X between C thus, CX is altogether false and contrary to
Antiquity, and that his Error proceeds only from his Ignorance of the true
original of this way of reckoning, which he had a mind to accommodate to our
present way, which increases always by a decuple Progression. But if at any
time there be found an L between two C's thus CL, or the like, it is only a
Fault of the Transcribers, who finding in these Cases the I to be commonly
bigger than the C, mistook it for an L.

A GENERAL TABLE Of Characters for Numbers.
The ARABIC. GREEK. ROMAN. 1 One. a. or I (...) I Unum. 2 two. b. II (...) II
duo. 3 three. g. III (...) III tria. 4 four. d. IIII (...) IV quatuor. 5 five.
e. P (...) V quinque. 6 six.. PI (...) VI sex. 7 seven. z. PII (...) VII
septem. 8 eight. e. PIII (...) VIII octo. 9 nine. th. PIII (...) IX novem. 10
ten. i D (...) X december. 11 eleven. ia. DI (...) XI undecem. 12 twelve. ib. DII
(...) XII duodecem. 13 thirteen. ig. DIII(...) XIII tredecim. 14 fourteen. id.
DIIII.(...) XIV quatuordecim. 15 fifteen. ie. DP (...) XV quindecim. 16
sixteen. i. DPI (...) XVI sexdecim. 17 seventeen. iz. DPII (...) XVII
septemdecim. 18 eighteen. ie. DPIII (...) XVIII octodecim. 19 nineteen. ith.
DPIII (...) XIX novemdecim. 20 twenty. k. DD (...) XX viginti. 30 thirty. l.
DDD (...) XXX triginta. 40 forty. m. DDDD (...) XL quadraginta. 50 fifty. n.
[D] (...) L quinquaginta. 60 sixty. x. [D]D(...) LX sexaginta. 70 seventy. o.
[D]DD (...) LXX septuaginta. 80 eighty.. p. [D]DDD (...) LXXX octoginta. 90
ninety.. [D]DDDD (...) XC nonaginta. 100 a hundred. r. (...) C centum. 200 two
hundred. s. (...) CC ducenta. 300 three hundred. t. (...) CCC trecenta. 400
four hundred. u. (...) CCCC quadringenta. 500 five hundred. ph. [] (...) D, or,
I quingenta. 600 six hundred. chapter [] (...) DC sexcenta. 700 seven hundred. ps.
[] (...) DCC septingenta. 800 eight hundred. o. [] (...) DCCC octingenta. 900
nine hundred. [] (...) DCCCC noningenta. 1000 a thousand. ^. (...) M, or, CI
mill. 2000 two thousand. b. (...) MM, bismille. 3000 three thousand. g. (...)
MMM ter mill. 4000 four thousand. d. (...) MMMM quater mill. 5000 five
thousand. e. [] (...) VM, or I quinquiesmille. 6000 six thousand.. [] (...) VIM
sexies mill. 7000 seven thousand. z. [] (...) VIIM septies mill. 8000 eight
thousand. e. [] (...) VIIIM octies mill. 9000 nine thousand. th [] (...) IXM
novies mill. 10000 ten thousand. ^ (...) XM. or CCI decies mill. The year
1696. one thousand six hundred ninety six. (...) Annus. (M DC XC VI)
millesimus, sexcentesimus nonagesimus sextus.

ARISTOTELES,
the Son of Nichomachus a Physician, and Phestia. He was very deformed; but he
was one of the greatest Genius's of his Age. He studied 20 Years under Plato
the Philosopher, and was Praeceptor to Alexander the Great, by whom he was very
much esteemed. He was the Author of the Sect of Philosophers, called
Peripateticks: He died at 63 Years of Age, and some think that he threw himself
into the Straits of Eurippus, out of Vexation because he could not comprehend
the Cause of its Flux and Reflux He is called the Genius of Nature, and Plato
named him the Philosopher indeed. His Books lay a long while concealed at
Athens, and were not transported to Rome, till after the taking of that City by
Sylla; this Treasure was preserved and brought to Light by the means of
Tyrannion the Grammarian, and Andronicus the Rhodian. Lucian rails at him in
his Dialogue of the Dead, and introduces Alexander speaking thus to Diogenes.
Why do thou weep poor Fool, says Diogenes, did not Aristotle teach thee, that
all this is but Vanity? Alexander answers him, what do thou say, Diogenes, of
him who was the basest of all my Flatterers; pray do not force me to publish
his Faults, and to tell thee how he has abused my good Nature, and the extreme
Passion I had for Learning. Sometimes he cajoled me for my Beauty, sometimes
for my Riches, which he was so hardy as to rank in the Number of good things,
that he might neither be ashamed to ask nor receive them. This is what I
learned by his Instructions. To take these things for good which are not so the
Loss of which does now afflict me. The same Author tells us also, that
Aristotle, did only give a rude Draught of the Art of Parasites.His Doctrine
which is now in the Schools, has met with various Entertainment, sometimes
good, and sometimes bad: On this Subject the Reader may consult. Mr. de Lannoy
de varia Aristotelis Fortuna.

Arithmetica,
see before Aristoteles.

Arma,
Arms, which Men made use of, either for attacking others, or defending
themselves. It Is certain that the Arms of the ancient Heroes, as well Defensive
as Offensive, were of Copper or Brass. This is what the Poet Lucretius tells
us. The first Arms says this Poet, were Hands, Nails, Teeth, Stones, and
Sticks: Afterward some invented Arms of Iron or Brass; but those of Brass,
were 1st. used.

Arma antiqua manus, ungues, den^esque fuere.
Et Lapides, and item silvarum fragmina, rami;
Post^riut ferri vis est aerisque reperta.
Sed prior aeris erat quam ferri cognitus tisus,
Lucr. l. 5. v. 1282. Tubal-Cain, one of the Posterity of Cain, according to
the Scripture, was the Master and Father of the Smiths, and of all those who
worked in Iron and Steel, Tubal-Cain fuit Malleator and Faber in cuncta opera
area and ferri, Genesis 4. 8, 22. Now this Tubal-Cain was the Vulcan of the
Pagans, as Diodorus Siculus tells us, [A Vulcano fabricationem aeris, auri,
ferri, argenti, and caeterorum omnium quae ignis operationem rejiciunt
inventam.] lib. 5. p. 341. Josephus says that Moses was the first who armed any
Troops with Iron, and that he gave them in Egypt the Buckler and the
Headpiece. Plutarch relates in the Life of Theseus, that Cinon, the Son of
Miltiades having a mind to carry the Bones of this Hero from the Isle of Scyros
to Athens, found the Point of a Lance which was of Brass, together with a Sword
of the same Metal. It Is certain also from the former Passage of Lucretius, that
Arms of Iron and Steel were used among the Greeks and Romans, both for their
Cavalry and Infantry.

They divided their Infantry into those that were heavy armed, and those that
were light armed, whom they called Velites, and who had casting Weapons: Such
were the Slingers who threw Stones, the Darters who cast the Javelin, and the
Archers who shot with Bows; these had their Head covered with a Murion; carried
a little round Buckler upon their Arm, and a short dagger by their side. Under
the Emperors, Trajan, Adrian, and Antoninus Pius, these Velites, or Skirmishers
wore a Corslet of Iron, or a Curiass, adorned with Scales resembling Fishes,
like that of the Archers: But the Slingers were clad in nothing but their usual
Habit, having the lappet of their Coat tucked up to put Stones in it: The
Archers, or such as drew the Bow, were armed with a Helmet upon their Head, and
Armor adorned with Scales, having on their right side a Quiver furnished with
Arrows, on their left a Dagger, or Sword, holding a Bow in their Hand, with
which they shot their Arrows.

As to the Soldiers which were heavy armed, their Head was guarded with a
Casquet or Helmet of Iron, which came down very low before, and behind
descended as far as their Shoulders: Their Body was armed with a Coat of Mail,
together with Knee-Pieces and Bracelets. They carried on their Arm a Shield 2
Foot broad, and 4 Foot long strengthened with an Iron Plate that went round
about it: In the middle was an Ironboss jurting out very serviceable to keep
off Blows [or glance of Darts and Stones.] They had also a Sword by their left
Side, and a Dagger which cut with two edges. Besides all this they were armed
with a Dart, and two Spears 4 Foot long, having Iron Spikes at the top.

The Greeks were not so heavy armed; they carried long Pikes, or Sarissa's [a
peculiar sort of Spear which was used by the Macedonians] which were Staves 18
Foot long, wherewith they forced their way across the Battalions of their
Enemies. Dio, in the life of Antoninus Caracalla the Son of Severus, relates
that the Macedonian Phalanx [being a Apiece Army consisting of 8000
Footmen set in close Array] in the time of Alexander the Great, made use of a
Salade or Headpiece made of the raw Hide of an Ox, and had their Body covered
with a Jacket, or Coat of Mail, made of Flax or Hemp twisted into Cords, and 3
times doubled [which were called Thoraces trilices, from the number of Cords
fixed one upon another] Homer in the 3d. Book of his Iliads, arms thus the
famous Paris: He first put on his Greaves, or the Armor of his Legs; then he
clothed himself with the Coat of Mail, tied his Sword by his Side, took his
Shield, and armed himself with a Helmet adorned with Feathers of diverse Colors.

Now follow the Arms of the Roman Cavalry. A Horseman carried a Lance in his
right Hand, and a Shield on his left (which was an ancient kind of offensive
Weapon, made in the form of a light Buckler, which the Horse of the Household
who fought with a Lance, in former times carried on their Arm) his Body was
covered with a Coat of Mail (which is a piece of Armor made in the Form of a
Shirt, and wrought over with many rings or little marks of Iron) which came
down as low as his Knees: His Hands were covered with Gantlets (which were
large Gloves of Iron for arming the Hard of a Horseman) and his Fingers covered
with thin Plates of Iron, joined together in the Fashion of Scales; and his
Arms with Bracelets (a Piece of defensive Armor which covered the Arms) as
also his Knees with Greaves (a kind of Boots, or Armor for the Legs) on his
Head he wore a Morion with a Crest adorned with Plumes of Feathers and various
Figures of Beasts-upon it. Their Horse were armed with a Coat of Mail and
Plates of Iron.

The light Horsemen carried a Javelin, or Half-Pike in their right Hand (which
Javelin was 5 Foot and a half long, and had a Head of Iron with three edges
which was sharp-pointed) and in their left Hand they held a great Shield, and
wore a Casque upon their Head.

There were also some Throwers of Darts which were light armed. They carried on
their Back a Quiver full of Arrows, and had a Bow out of which they were to
shoot them: They wore a Sword on their left Side, and some of them had a Dagger
on the right side; their Head was armed with a Casquet, and their Legs with
Greaves.

The ancient Names of the Greek and Roman Arms and Weapons with their
Explication.
A Slinger was one who threw Stones with a Sling. The Slingers were a part of
the Roman Militia. 1. A Sling is an Instrument made up of two Strings, having a
little Pouch like a Net in the middle for holding the Stones that are thrown
out of it. 2. A Dart is a missive Weapon, made of Wood, that is armed with a
sharp pointed Iron at the end, which is thrown with the Hand. 3. A little
Shield, or a kind of a round Buckler, wherewith the Infantry in former times
was armed. 4. Pilum, The ancients called any Shaft of Wood armed with Iron by
this Name, and so all sorts of Arrows and Darts which they let fly were called
Pila 5. A Dagger is a large Poniard, which anciently they used in fighting. 6.
A Salade, is a slight covering for the Head, which the light Horsemen wore It
differs from a Helmet in this, that it has no Crest, and is hardly any thing
but a Weapon. 7. A Morion, is the Armor of a Soldier being a Pot which he
wore upon his Head to defend it: It was used by Foot Soldiers. 8. A Curiass,
is a defensive Armor made of a Plate of Iron very well beaten, which covers
the Body from the Neck down to the Wast, both before and behind. 9. Greaves, a
kind of Boots or Armor for the Legs. 10. A Bracelet, a piece of defensive
Armor which covers the Arm. 11. A Pavice, is a Piece of defensive Armor which
the ancients wore in the Wars, it was the largest sort of Bucklers, whose two
sides bended inwards, like the Roof of a House, or a shed of Boards for
Soldiers; and so it differed from a Target. 12. A Target, in Latin, Pelta, is
a Buckler used by the Romans, which was bended in the Form of a half Moon, and
of an oblong Figure. 13. A Coat of Mail was a piece of Armor made in the Form
of a Shirt, and wrought over with many little Rings of Iron. 14. A Jacket is a
short Coat which the Cavalry in ancient times wore over their Armor and
Curiasses; it was made of Cotton or Silk stitched between two light Stuffs; and
sometimes also of Cloth of Gold. 15. A Headpiece, is a Piece of defensive
Armor for covering the Head and Neck of a Cavalier, which is otherwise called
a Helmet.
The offensive Arms or Engines which the Romans made use of in attacking Places.
1. A Rhalestra, a great Engine for throwing of Darts; the Invention of it is
attributed to the Phaenicians. Vegetius says that in his time Scorpiones, which
M. Perrault has translated Arbalestres were called Manubalista, to distinguish
them from their great Balistae or Catapultae which were not portable, after the
same manner as our Harquebusses and Pistols are distinguished from Cannon. 2.
Balista, an Engine which the Ancients made use of for throwing Stones; it
differed from the Catapulta in this, that the latter threw Darts, but both of
them let fly after the same manner. 3. Aries, the Ram, was a vast long Beam,
strengthened at one end with a Head of Iron, which was hung on two Chains,
wherewith they used anciently to batter the Walls of Cities. There were 3 sorts
of them, one was hanged upon Ropes, another run upon Wheels, and a 3d. Sort was
sustained by the Arms of those who played it. When the Carthaginians besieged
Gades, they judged it expedient suddenly to demolish a Castle which had been
taken, but wanting proper Instruments for that purpose, they made use of a Beam
which several Men bore up with their Hands, who thrust forward the end of it
with so great Violence against the top of the Wall, that by their redoubled
Blows they beat down the uppermost Lays of Stone, and so descending from one
Lay to another, they at last demolished the whole Fortification. After this a
Carpenter of the City of Tire, called Pephas^^^nos, taking the hint from this
first Experiment, hanged one Beam to another, like a Balance, and by the force
of the many great blows which the Beam gave while it was played, he battered
down the Wall of the City of Gades.

Cetras the Chalcedonian was the first who made a Car of Wood which was driven
upon Wheels, and upon this Car he reared up many Posts standing upright, and
Beams lying across, whereof he made a Hut, and having hanged a Ram in it, he
covered it over with Ox Hides, to secure those who played the Engine for
battering down the Wall. Since that time this Hut was called a Tortoise to the
Ram, because it advanced but very slowly. Such were the first Essays of this
kind of Engine; but Polydus the Thessalian improved them to the highest
Perfection at the Siege which King Amyntas laid to Byzantium, who invented also
many other sorts of them, which might be made use of with very much ease.

Athenaeus, in his Book of Machines, says that Goras the Carthaginian was the
Inventor of the basis of this Engine, and he adds, that this Architect did not
hang the Ram up in it, as Vitruvius explains it, but that it was born up by
many Men who thrust it forward: He says also that some others supposed it to
run upon Wheels; besides, Turnebus had reason to think, that Vitruvius took
from Athenaeus the greatest part of what he relates here of Warlike Engines,
though Casaubon holds that Athenaeus lived a long time after Vitruvius, and
grounds his Opinion upon the relation of Trebellius Pollio, who says that the
Emperor Galienus caused many Cities to be fortified by Byzantine Architects,
whereof one was called Cleodamas, and the other, Athenaeus. Vossius follows the
Opinion of Turnebus, because Athenaeus's Book is dedicated to Marcellus, who
lived before Vitruvius.

4. Catapulta, a Warlike Engine, which the Ancients used for casting the larger
sort of Darts and Spears upon their Enemies. Some hold that the Catapulta was
invented by the Syrians. 5. Corvus Eversor, the demolishing Crow, which was
also called the Crane. It does not appear by the Descriptions we find in the
Ancients, of the Engine called the Crow, that it could be of any use for
demolishing; J. Pollux and Polybius speak of an Engine which is called the
Crane, and another called the Crow, but both the one and the other were made
for hooking in, drawing too, and taking away by Force; for the Crane of Pollux
was used on the Theater for raising Weights, and the Crow of Polybius was
employed for grapling the Ships of the Enemies in a Fight. 6. Sambucus or
Sambuca: This Engine is so called from a Greek Word which signifies a
Triangular Instrument of Music, made in the Form of a Harp, for this was a
Triangle composed of Strings that made one of its Sides, and of the Body of an
Engine, which made the other Two. The Warlike Engine of this Name was the same
with that which we now call a Portable-Bridge. When this Bridge of the Sambuca
was laid down, it was supported by Ropes, and thus the Besiegers made use of it
for passing over from their Turrets of Wood unto the Walls of the Besieged. 7.
Scorpiones, were the larger sort of Balista's, which the Ancients made use of
for attacking and defending Walls; they were Engines made up of unequal
Circles, and were called Scorpions, either upon the account of the effect they
produced, which was to wound with little Arrows, like a Scorpion which wounds
with a small Sting, or else upon the account of the Figure of their Bow, which
represented two Arms bending backwards like the Feet of a Scorpion. After this
manner Ammianus Marcellinus describes the Scorpion, which he supposes to
resemble a Balista, rather than a Catapul^a, for he says, that the Scorpion was
made for throwing Stones by the help of a Wooden Beam which he calls Stylus,
and which was joined in the Ropes that were fastened to the two bended wooden
Beams, (which are like those that are used in the Engine for sawing) after such
a manner that the Stylus being drawn back by 4 Men, and after that let go, it
throws out the Stone which was in one of the Slings fastened to the end of the
Stylus. 8. Helepolis, was a Turret which destroyed Cities. King D^^etrius, who
was called Polioctetes; upon account of his resolute Attacks for taking of
Cities, caused Epimachus an Architect to build an Helopolis against the
Rhodians: It was 125 Foot high, and 40 Foot broad, covered with Hair-Stuff, and
Hides lately flead off. Diognetus rendered this design of it ineffectually
against Rhodes, and freed the City. He brought the Helopolis into the City, and
set it up in a public Place with this Inscription; Diognetus made this Present
to the People of the Spoils of their Enemies. 9. Testudo, a Tortoise, is an
Engine which the Ancients made use for undermining and battering of Places. It
was a Fence made of Wood that run upon Wheels, which served to cover the
Soldiers when they were at work. Facere Testudinem was a kind of scaling used
among the Ancients, which was done by the Soldiers when they stood close
together, and covered themselves with their Bucklers, for so they made a kind
of Ladder for their Companions by which they might climb up upon the Walls. The
Invention of this Testudo is attributed to Artemon the Son of Clazomenes. 10.
Malleoli, or Pyroboli, according to Nonnus and Vegetius, were Engines set on
Fire by a mixture of combuslible Matter wherewith they were besmeared, and
which being closed at the end, according to the Description of Ammianus
Marcellinus, were shot cut of a Bow, to set on Fire any military Engines or
Ships on which they lighted. Caesar in his Commentaries says, that the G^^s
fired the Camp of Q. Cicero, by throwing into it with Slings such Balls of
Earth as were kindled before they were thrown.
Armisalii, a sort of Dancers in Armor, who danced the Dance called Pyrricha,
which is performed with Arms, by keeping time while they strike their Swords
and Javelins against their Bucklers.

Arquites, Archers, who shot Arrows out of a Bow.

Ars, an Art, is a Collection of Precepts, Rules, Inventions and Experiments,
which being observed give success to our undertakings in any Affairs, and
render them useful and pleasant. In this Sense Art is divided into two
Branches, whereof one comprehends the Liberal, and the other the Mechanic Arts.

The Liberal Arts are the Sciences, such as Poetry, Music, Painting,
Philosophy, Mathematics, Architecture Civil and Military, Physic, Geometry,
Arithmetic, etc.

The Mechanical Arts are those which require more the Labor of the Hand and
the Body, than of the Mine.

Thetzes says, that in the time of Noah a certain Egyptian called Vulcan found
out Fire, and invented those Arts in which Fire is employed, and that the Greek
Poets having been Educated in Egypt, transported them into Greece, and
attributed the whole Glory of these Arts to their own Nation.

It Is certain that Noah was the first Inventor of all Arts, as well as of the
cultivating of the Vine; yet it cannot reasonably be denied, but that during
the Sixteen Ages which passed between the Creation of the World and the Deluge,
Men had invented many Arts and Sciences which Noah could not be ignorant of,
having lived Six Hundred Years before the Deluge; these therefore he restored
after the Deluge, or else invented some of these Arts a new.

Artemisia, was the Wife of Mausolus King of Caria: When he was dead and his
Body burnt and reduced to Ashes, Artemisia mixed these Ashes with sweet-scented
Waters, and drank them up, because she thought she could not better restifie
the extreme Love she had for her Husband, than by drinking his Ashes, and
making her self by this means his Sepulcher. Yet she built him a stately
Monument in the City of Halicarnassus, enriched with Images of Marble, which
was accounted one of the Wonders of the World, and a Masterpiece of
Architecture. This Work has so far merited the approbation of all Ages, that
all the magnificent Monuments of Kings and other Heroes are named from it,
Mausolea. Artemisia died 2 Years after her Husband, for grief that she had lost
him. We must not here conceal a brave Action which she did after the Death of
Mausolus, which was this. Having taken upon her the Government of the Kingdom,
the Rhodians could not endure that a Woman should reign over all Caria, and
therefore they equipt out a Fleet to make themselves Masters of the Kingdom.
But Artemisia being informed of it, gave orders that a Fleet of Ships should he
hid in the little Harbor which the King had caused to be cut, together with
Gally-Slaves, and such Military Men as had been accustomed to fight at Sea, and
that the rest should appear openly upon the Ramparts. Then the Rhodians
approaching with their Fleet very well equipped, as it was just ready to enter
into the great Harbor, the Queen gave a signal from the Walls to give them to
understand that the City would surrender. Whereupon the Rhodians left their
Ships and went into the City, and immediately Artemisia caused the little
Harbor to be opened, out of which came the Fleet, and went into the great
Harbor, where the Rhodians had left their Ships; these her Fleet carried away
with them into the open Sea, after they had furnished them with Seamen and
Soldiers; and at the same time the Rhodians having no means left of escaping
were all killed in the public Place wherein they were found shut up.
Nevertheless the Queen went straight to the Isle of Rhodes with the Ships of
the Rhodians; and the Inhabitants seeing the Ships return crowned with Laurel,
received their Enemies, whom they took for their own People returning
Victorious: But Artemisia possessed her self of their City.

Vetruvius, from whom I have taken this History, says that the Mausoleum was
built in the City of Halicarnassus. Although Mausolus, says he, was born at
Mylassus, yet he resolved to fix his abode at Halicarnassus, seeing that was a
Place of a very advantageous Situation, and very convenient for Commerce, as
having a very good Harbor. The Place on which it stood, was bending after the
manner of a Theater; and in the lower part of it which was near the Harbor he
designed to build a pubblick Exchange, but in the middle of the Decsivity of
the Hill, he made a great and wide Street, in which was built that excellent
Work called the Mausoleum, which is one of the 7 Wonders of the World.

There is a Medal of Queen Artemisia; which on the Reverse has the Figure of
the Pyramid of the Mausoleum which she built for her Husband: It is of Silver
and well cut. On one side of it there is the Face of the Princess, having her
Hair encompassed with a Royal Diadem; on the other there is the Pyramid of the
Mausoleum, and on the top of it there is a Man standing upright leaning upon a
half Pike, and upon the lowermost Leg of the Pyramid there is the Greek Letter
PH. to signify the Affection which Artemisia had for her Husband, together
with these words (...).

There is also another sort of Medal of Brass on which there is the perfect and
entire Figure of the Mausoleum.

ARTEMISUM,
a Temple in Italy, in the Forest of Aricia, whose Original was as follows.
Pylades and Orestes having suffered Shipwreck when they were just ready to be
Sacrificed, killed those that guarded them, and massacred K. Thoas; and after
that carried away captive the Priestess of Diana. and the Goddess her self to
whom they were to be offered in Sacrifice: They landed in Italy, and built a
Temple to Diana, which was called Artemisium, or Dianium, where Slaves are
sacrificed to that Goddess, and whose Priest ought to be a fugitive Slave.

ARVALES,
the Fratres Avales, so called ab arvis, i. e. from the Fields, because they
Preside over the Sacrifices that were offered to Bacchus and Ceres for the
Preservation of the Fruits of the Earth. Fulgentius gives the following Account
of their Original. The Nurse of Romulus called Acc^ Laurentia, had a custom of
offering every Year a Sacrifice to desire of the Gods a plentiful Crop, and in
doing this she was accompanied with her 12 Children: But one of them being
dead, Romulus who was very willing to countenance this Devotion of his Nurse,
put himself in his stead to fill up the number of Twelve, and gave this
Society, the Name of the Twelve Arval Brethren, which they have kept ever
since. They held their Assemblies commonly at the Capitol in the Temple of
Concord, or in a Wood consecrated to the Goddess Dia, about 5 Miles distant
from Rome, and which li^es in that way which now is called Via Campana. They
wore a Crown made of Ears of Corn tied up with a white Ribbon. Those who were
promoted to this Dignity were made Noble, and exempted from all Offices in the
City and from Taxes. Some Authors have thought that they had the Authority of
determining the Limits of Lands and Inheritances; but others attribute this
Authority to certain Persons who are also called Arvales Sacerdotes.

ARUSPEX,
One that divined by Inspection of the Entrails of Beasts, which the Ancients
killed in Sacrifice to the Gods, from which they drew Prognostics of future
Events.

ARUSPICINA,
Divination by the Entrails of Beasts slain to the God's. This sort of
Divination is very ancient, and was practiced by the Chaldeans, Egyptians,
Greeks and Africans, and afterward by the Tuscans, who became most excellent
in it. From them the Romans learned this Science; Romulus at first instituted
Three Aruspices, one for each Tribe, into which he divided his People;
afterward the Senate ordained that a certain number of Young Men of a noble
Family should be sent to Tuscany, to be better instructed in this Science.
Cicero limits the Numbers to Six, Valerius Maximus makes 10 of them, and some
others 12.

It Is said, that Tages the Son of Genius and Grandson of Jupiter taught the
Tuscans this Art, and Cicero in the 2d. Book of Divination relates to us
something of the Fabulous Story of this Tages. viz. That when a Peasant was
tilling the Ground, the Coulter of his Plough happened to cut deeper than was
usual; and then he saw a Clod assume the Figure of a young Infant, whom the
Inhabitants called Tages, and that this Tages instructed the Peasant presently
how he might predict things to come by Animals: This is also confirmed by Ovid.

Indiginae dixere Tagem, qui primus Hetruscam.
Edocuit gentem casus aperire futuros,
Ovid. lib. 15. Metam. v. 558. This Art took its Conjectures of things future,
either from the Motions of the Animal which was to be sacrificed, or from its
Entrails which were pulled out, or lastly, from the Fire into which they were
thrown after they had been carefully examined.

It was observed whether the Animal went without struggling to the Sacrifice,
whether it did not make unusual Noises at the time of Immolation, or whether he
did not get away out of the Hands of those who led it.

After this the Entralls were examined which the Aruspex pulled out, such as
the Liver, the Heart, the Spleen and the Reins, their Color was carefully
considered, and strict enquiry made whether there was any Spot or Blemish in
them.

After this these perts were cast into a Fire newly kindled, and then the
Divinor looked carefully whether the Smoke and Flame ascended together like a
Globe, and whether they parted, one going to one side, and the other to
another. From all these Signs they took Prognostics good and bad which moved
them either to pursue or desist from any Undertaking.

Presages also were taken from consecrated Wine or Water wherewith the Victim
was sprinkled, and it was observed whether the Wine of which the Libation was
made, did not lose its Color or Taste; as it happened to Dido, who at the time
of sacrificing found the Wine changed into black Blood, that it was corrupted
in the Vessel into which she had put it, as Virgil relates, Latices ingressere
sacros.
Fusaque in obscenum se vertere vina cruorem.
Aeneid. l. 4. v. 455.

And thus it happened also to Xerxes, who on the Eve before he attacked the
City of Sparta, saw the Wine which was poured out for him to drink, three times
changed into a very bad Blood, as Valerius Maximus tells us, [Infusum nempe
paterae ejus vinum, in sanguinem, nec semel, sed iterum ac tertio conversum.]

We must not think that Wisemen among the Romans gave credit to these foolish
Fables about the Inspection of Entrails, which were believed only by the
ignorant People, as Cicero tells us in his 2d. Book of Divination. [Aruspicina
ego Reipublicae causa communisque Religionis colendam censeo, sed soli sumus.]

Princes made use of it to keep the common People and Soldiers in their Duty:
So did Agesilaus, according to the Relation of Plutarch; For he being in
Egypt, and perceiving the Soldiers to be wavering in their Duty, thought fit
to confirm their staggering Faith by writing on the Palm of his Hand in great
Greek Characters, N^KH, which signifies Victory; and after this having slain a
Victim, he took its Entrails reeking hot into his Hand, and held them there so
long till these Characters were imprinted upon them, and then having shown them
to all the Army he removed their Fears and gave them fresh Courage, by this
word which appeared upon the Entrails of the Victim, for now they all believed
that the Gods did promise them Victory.

At, is derived from Aes according to Varro, and formerly Assis was used for
the Nominative: It signifies the weight of a Roman Pound, which was only 12
Ounces.

As, a piece of ancient Roman Money, made at ^st. of Copper in a Lump which
weighed a Pound, and which did not begin to be stamped till the time of Servius
Tatla^, and did always retain its weight of a Pound until the 2d. Punick War
against Carthage, when they began to coin six Asses out of a Pound, each
weighing 2 Ounces, according to the Testimony of Pliny; and because the weight
of an As was different at several times, when Authors would express the Asses
of a Pound-weight, they say, Aes grave, which is not the same thing with Rude,
as (...) thought, for Rude is opposed to Signatum, which signifies Money,
whereas Grave respects only the weight, and cannot agree both to one and
the other.

Now because at first they weighed their Money, from thence came the Words
Impensae, Expenses, Dispensator a Steward, and Libripens a Treasurer.

It Is not easy to know certainly when the Romans first began to make use of
Silver Money: Pliny writes that it was five Years before the first Punick War,
and Varro thinks that Servius Tullus was the first that brought it into use.

An As according to our Money at present is in Value a Half-penny-farthing, as
may be seen in the Tables annexed to the laze Cambridge Dictionary.

An As is used also for any entire thing, which is divided into twelve parts,
as an Inheritance, an Estate, in which case the parts are called Ounces: Which
Observation will help us to understand many Expressions scattered in Latin
Authors, as Haeres ex ass, a general Heir, or an Heir to all the Goods; Eaeres
ex besse, an Heir to two Thirds; Hares ex semisse, an Heir to one Moiety;
Haeres ex dadrante an Heir to 3 Fourths, and so of the rest which may be easily
understood by the following Table.

As, called also Libra and Pondo, 12 Ounces. The whole and entire thing
divisible by 12. Deunm, 11 Ounces, so called because there wants an Ounce.
Eleven Twelfths. Decunx, 10 Ounces, that is to say december U^^tiae. Ten Twelfths.
or Five Sixths. Dodrans, 9 Ounces, because deest quadrans. Nine Twelfths or
Three Fourths. Besses or Bessis 8 Ounces, because deest triens, according to
Varro. Eight Twelfths or Two Thirds. Septunx, 7 Ounces as much as to say septem
unciae. Seven Twelfths. Semissis for Semiassis; six Ounces. A half Pound or Six
Twelfths. Quineanx, 5 Ounces. Five Twelfths. Triens, 4 Ounces, i. e. the third
part of in As. Four Twelfths of One Third. Quadrans, 3 Ounces. One Fourth.
Sextans, 2 Ounces. One Sixth. Sescunx, for Sesqul uncia, 1 Ounce and a half.
One Eighth. Uncia an Ounce. One Twelfth.

ASAROTA,
a sort of Floor. Pliny says, that painted Pavements, wrought artistcially,
came from Greece, and that among the rest, the Pavement of Pergamus, which was
done by Sesus, was the most Curious. This word Asarotos, signifies that which
is not swept away. [ab a Privative and (...)] and, this Name was therefore
given it, because they saw upon the Pavement the Crumbs, and other things which
fell from the Table while they were at Meat, so lively represented, that they
seemed to be Realities, and that the Servants took no Care to sweep the Rome
clean. This Pavement was made of small Shells painted with diverse Colors, and
that which was most admired in it, was a Dove drinking, whose Head cast a
shadow upon the Water. Monsieur Perrault rejects this opinion of Pliny about
this word, and thinks it more probable, that these black Pavements which by
reason of their dryness drank up all that was spilt upon them, should rather be
called (...) either because it was neither convenient to sweep them, or wipe
them with Spunges, as they did other Floors, or else because they appeared not
to be sweps at all.

ASBESTOS,
i. e. Incombus^ible, is a sort of Stone, of which Cloth was made which would
not burn, though it was thrown into a great Fire. Pliny mentions a Fla^ that
grew in the Indies, which he calls Asbestum.

Some think that the dead Bodies of the Romans which were burnt, were wrapped
up in this Cloth to preserve their Ashes. But Pliny assures us, that it was
kept for the Kings of those Countries upon the account of its scarceness.

Strabo and Plutarch relate that the like Cloth was also made of the Stone
Amiantus, and that some at that time had the secret of Spinning it, which is
not incredible, as many persuade themselves, since it is a Stone that may be
all drawn out into Threads.

ASBOLUS,
a Centaur which Hercules hanged upon a Gibbet.

ASCANIUS,
the Son of Aeneas and Creusa, who came with Aeneas his Father into Italy.
After the Death of Aeneas, Ascanias was besieged in Lavinium by Mez^utius after
such a manner that he saw he could not long defend himself: Whereupon he sent
to him to sue for Peace, which was offered him indeed, but upon very
dishonorable Terms: and therefore he resolved to use his utmost endeavor to
oppose him by a vigorous Sally: But before this was put in Execution, he
observed a good Omen; for having made a Division of the Heavens, a clap of
Thunder passed from the right to the left in a serene Day, which gave him great
Encouragment to execute his design. Having therefore for this end made choice
of a very dark Night he made some false Attacks upon the weakest of the Enemies
Quarters, but his chief assault was upon the Place of the greatest strength,
which was less carefully guarded. This Stratagem succeeded very well for him,
for his Enemies were defeated, and Mezentius his Son lost his Life upon the
Place. After this Victory Ascanius went and built the City of Alla lenga 30
Years after Lavinium, in the Place which was marked out to him by the 30 little
Boar-pigs of the white Sow. He reigned 38 Years.

Sub Ascia dedicavit. Monsieur Spon in his Antiquities of the City of Lions,
Chap. 4. Says, we have hitherto said nothing of this Phrase, sub Ascia
dedicare, which we meet with so often in Inscriptions upon the Tombs of the
ancient Pagans. Monsieur Chorier, who has described the Antiquities of Vienna,
explains it very ingeniously: (...), says he signifies in Greek a Shadow, from
whence comes the word (...), and in Latin Ascia, which signifies a Place
without a Shadow; and it was usual with the Ancients to set up their Tombs in
an open Place, or in a Place without a Shadow.

It Is true the generality of Antiquaries use the word Ascia for an Instrument,
wherewith they cut and polished the Stone which was to be laid upon Graves:
From whence it comes to pass that in the Laws of the 12 Tables we have this
Clause. Rogum Ascia ne polito, that we should not polish the Monuments of the
dead. But this Law was disused and the Romans growing more powerful and rich,
would not lose their Pomps and Vanities even after their Death: Witness the
many stately Mausolca, which are to be seen in all Italy and other Provinces of
their Empire. Some think that a certain Figure made in the form of an Ax, which
we often meet with upon ancient Inscriptions, is that Ascia whereof we are now
speaking. Gaichard in his first Book of Funerals, speaking of these words tells
us, that the Law of the 12 Tables forbad to polish the Wood of the Funeral
Pile, but that this Law was not at all observed; and that every one caused the
Wood of the Funeral Pile to be polished, and adorned it with Pictures made of
Wax of diverse Colors; (...) which Custom adds he, we may refer these 3 Words
sub Ascia dedicare. I do not think continues he, that the Romans added at the
end of their Epitaphs these words to show that the Mable had been polished, for
as much as the Ax which is there represented is not a Tool proper for polishing
Marble or Stone, especially seeing that part of the Stones where these words,
and that Figure is to be found, are rough and unpolished.

ASCLEPIADES,
a Greek Physician, of whom we read this Inscription at Rome. L. ARUNTIO
SEMPRONIANO

Authors mention two of this name who were Physicians: He who was Physician to
Domitian possibly was the last of the two, and he who was Cicero's Friend, the
first. But here we must observe, that these Greek Physicians when they came to
Rome, took upon them a Praenomen, the name of a Family, and a Surname, although
in their own Country they had only one Name or Surname. And the Reason of this
was, because their Freedom being given them at Rome, they were incorporated
into the Tribes, and adopted into the Families of the Republic. Thus
Asclepiades, who according to the Custom of the Greeks had but one name,
assumed here 3 preceding Names, Lacius Aruntius Sempronlands, that of
Asclepiades continuing still as an Agnomen or 2d. Surname.

Reinesius, in his Inscriptions published a little while ago, makes this
Asclepiades different from him, who is mentioned by Authors as famous for the
Books he wrote about Medicaments; and he thinks that he who is meant in this
Inscription was the Son or Grandson of Aruntius the Physician, to whom 250
Sestertia magna, were given as Pliny tells us as a Reward, Book 9. of his
History.

There is a 3d. Asclepiades according to an Inscription which we find at
Arignan. C. CALPURNIUS ASCLEPIADES. VERONIA CHELIDON. probatus a viris clariss.

CAIUS CALPURNIUS ASCLEPIADES, a Physician of the City of Prusa at the Foot of
mount Olympus, obtained of the divine Emperor Trajan, 7 Cities for his Father
and Mother, himself and his Brethren; and was born the 5th. Day of March, under
the 13th. Consulship of Domitian, on the very same day that his Wife VERONIA
CHELIDON was born, with whom he lived 52 Years being approved by Persons of the
first Quality upon the account of his Learning and good Behavior, he was
Assessor to the Magistrates of the People of Rome, not only in Asia, but a so
in other Provinces. He lived 70 Years.

This Asclepiades was never made a Freeman, as Rei^esins thinks, since he took
upon him the name of CAIUS CALPURNIUS ASCLEPIADES, and there is no L, in the
Inscription, to signify that he was Libertus. His Country was the City of
Prusa, which is still to this Day called Prussa in By^^inia, at the Foot of
Mount Olympus. From this Place the 1st Asclepiades originally came, who was
Cicero's Friend, and the Author of a Sect which pretended to cure Diseases by a
moderate way of living rather than by Medicines; for Strabo and Galienus say,
that he was of the City of Prusa in Bythrnia: And if we compute the Times in
which these 2 Asclepiadas's lived, he who is meant in this Inscription, might
be Grandson to the former, and inherit his Learning and Reputation; since he
obtained by the Bounry of the Emperor Prajan, probably upon the account of
delivering him from some dangerous Diseases, the Possession of 7 Cities, which
is a very remarkable particular of History. He was born under the 13th.
Consulship of Domitian, which answers to the Year from the building of Rome
DCCCXL. and to that of our Lord, LXXXVIII. and be died in the 70th. Year of his
Age under the Empire of Antoninus Pius, in the Year of Rome DCCCCX, and
consequently he was Physician under Trajan, H^d^anus, and Antoninus, and also
under many Magistrates, which shows that he was in a free Condition and highly
esteemed.

Besides these 3 Ascl^p^ade^^ who were Physicians, we find also another called
TITUS AELIUS ASCLIPIADES, in Gruter, who was made free by the Emperor, and one
named PUBLIUS NUMITORIUS ASCLEPIADES, a Freeman and Sextum-vir of Verona, and
lastly one LUCIUS FONTEIUS FORTIS, of the Race of the Asclepiades's, or at
least of their Profession; for in succeeding times the Name of Asclepiades was
used for the Title of a Sect, or of Professors of Physic.

ASCOLIA,
certain Games in Honor of Bacchus, at which People danced upon Goat Skins,
which were blown up like Bladders and anointed with Oil, that so the Dancers
might make the Diversion more Pleasant to the Spectators by their Fall.

ASPHODELUS,
the Daffodil, an Herb which has a strong Smell when it is in Flower. Lucian
thinks that a Meadow was planted with these Daffodils in Hell, through which
the River of Oblivion runs.

ASSA
vox, and.

ASSATIBIA,
The Voice alone: One Fiute alone, without being accompanied with the Voice.

ASSARIUS or ASSARIUM,
the same with As among the Ancients, says Charisius. Dionysius Halicarnasscus
also says, that Assarium was a piece of Money of Copper, of a Pound-Weight: Yet
Hisychius explains it to be (...), a little piece, and according to Suidas
(...) are (...), little Pieces of Money of Copper. Agricola in B. 2. de pond.
takes it for the half of an As, which he confirms by Josephus and Wascrus; but
of an As minted, and reduced to half an Ounce, so that this would be no more
but the 4th. part of an Ounce. It Is certain that it was a very little Piece,
and so much its Termination sufficiently shows, that it is only a Diminutive
from Assis

ASSEUM,
a Stove or Bagnio, a Place where the Air only is heated to make People sweat.

ASTARTA,
or ASTARTE, The Goddess Astarte is called in Scripture, Ashtaroth, which
signifies Sheep or Flocks. Scaliger thinks that this Name was given her upon
the account of the Multitude of her Victims, dea Sydoniorum. Sanchoriathon says
that the Goddess Astarte is Venus-Vrania, or the Moon, which is the same with
Venus-Urania, or Caelestis; Astarten Venerem Phaenices praedicant: They say
also that she has the Head of a Bull, as a token of her Sovereignty, which
agrees to the Crescent or New Moon.

This made Bochart believe, that she was Io the Goddess of the Greeks, which
was transformed into a Cow. Ciccro in B. 3. Di Natura Deorum would have her to
be Venus, and having distinguished many Venus's, he says, that Venus of Syria,
or Tire, was Astarte, (...) Venus Syria (...) concepta, quae Astarto vocatur.
This is also the Opinion of Suidas: But St. Austin on the contrary thinks that
Astarte was Juno, which he proves from the Judgment of the Carthoginians, who
could not be ignorant of the Religion of the Phaenicians, and servicrunt Baal
and Astartae; These are the words of Scripture which this Father explains of
Jupiter and Juno, in Lib. Jud. 9. 16.

Lucian, on the contrary says that Astarte is the Moon, although he relates
that the Phaenicians made her pass for Europa, the Daughter of King Agenor, who
was carried away into Candia by Jupiter when he was transformed into a Bull.
There is also a great Temple in Phanicia, among the Sidonians, which is
dedicated to Astarte, whom I believe to be the Moon; although a Priest of the
Temple told me, that she was Europa, the Sister of Cadmus and the Daughter of
Agenor, who disappeared I know not how; and that afterward the People of the
Country built her a Temple, and gave it out that Jupiter had ravished her for
her Beauty. She is still to be seen engraved upon their Money, sitting upon a
Bull; but there are some who do not believe that she is the Person to whom this
Temple is dedicated.

There is some Ground to conjecture that in this Case we have an Example of the
Custom of the Phaenicians mentioned by Philo, the Interpreter of Sanchoniathon,
viz. that they gave to the Stars the Names of their Kings, and so they paid
Religious Worship to them as well as to the Stars. They might then attribute to
the Daughter of King Agenor the Temple built in Honor of Astarte, i. e.
according to Lucinn, to the Moon. Josephus speaks of the building of the Temple
of Hercules, and of that of Astarte at Tire, whose Names are manifestly derived
from this Divinity; such as,

ARISTARTUS,
BELOASTARTUS, i. e. BELUS ASTARTUS.

ASTRA,
the Stars, Luminions Bodies, which move in the Heavens above the Elementary
Region. Porphery had reason to say, that the Ancients admiring the
extraordinary Beauty and Splendour of the Star Venus, thought that by her
Influence she contributed very much to Generation, which moved them to
represent her under the Figure of a Woman of extraordinary Beauty. This Planet
Venus is also called the Star of the Shepherds. It is called Lucifer or the
Morning Star, when it goes before the Sun, and Vesper, when it follows him.
Mercury is another Planet which scarce ever parts from the Sun, upon which
Account he is rarely visible, and the Ancients confounded him sometimes with
the Sun, and said that this Planet was as it were his Soul and Intelligence,
for which reason they made him the Teacher of Wisdom and Knowledge.

From whence it appears that the Gentiles looked upon these Stars living and
intelligent Beings, and that they managed their Influences by their
Intelligences.

Horace calls learned Men Viros Mercuriales, as being more plentifully enriched
with the Gifts and Influences of Mercury. In this Sense we must understand the
beginning of the first Book of Manilius, where he says that the Stars know and
work our Destiny by their Wisdom and Influences.

Hesychius says, that the Babylonians called the Star Mercury, Sechez. The
Western Nations were no less persuaded that Mercury was a Star that had
Dominion over Reason, Discourse and Understanding.

The Gauls mentioned by Caesar in his Commentaries, regarded more the Fabulous
History of Mercury, than the Nature of the Star that goes under that Name. From
the same Principle it was, that the ancient Representations of Mercury had
neither Arms nor Legs, to give us to understand, if we may believe Plutarch in
this Case, that the Wit and Wisdom of the Mind alone can compass all things,
without the help of the Senses, and the Members of the Body: [Propterea
Mercurios seniores sine manibus and sine pedibus fingunt, hoc obscuras quasi
per Aenigma inducentes haud quaquam a senibus requiri ut corporis ministeria
obeant, dummodo oration sit efficax and facunda.

ASTRAEA,
the Daughter of Jupiter and Themis, the Guardian of Justice. The Poets have
feigned that she descended on Earth in the Golden Age; but when Men in
succeeding times became corrupt and perfidious, this Divine Woman re-ascended
into Heaven, and was placed in the Zodiac in the Sign Virgo.

ASTRAGALUS,
a Greek Word, and a Term of Architecture, is a little Round Monlaing wherewith
the top and bottom of Pillars are adorned, which is made in the form of a Ring
or Bracelet: Sometimes it is cut in the Shape of little Beads, from whence it
has the name of a Chapter.

ASTROLABIUM,
an Astrolabe, is a Mathematical Instrument that is flat after the manner of a
Sphere described upon a Plain. It serves chiefly at Sea, for observing the
height of the Pole and of the Stars; it hangs upon a Ring, and has an
Alhidade, or moveable Rule furnished with little Pins, which shows the heights
upon the Circle which are on its sides being divided into 360 Degrees. There is
a hole within its Limb, wherein diverse Plates are, on which are, marked the
Azimuths and other Circles, for making various Observations; and that at the
top which is pierced through, and is therefore called Aranea, serves to make
many Observations on the Stars.

ASTROLOGIA,
Astrology, a Conjectural Science, which teaches us to judge of the Effects and
Influences of the Stars, and which pretends to foretell all sorts of Events. It
is a very vain and uncertain Science.

ASTRONOMIA,
Astronomy, which treats of the Nature of the Heavens and the Stars The
Aethiopians, as it is said were the first who discovered this Science, because
their Air is very clear, and they have not such change of Seasons as we have:
Besides that this Nation is very subtle and surpasses all others in Wit, and
Knowledge. Afterward they improved this Science with great Application of
Mind, for they measured the Course of each Star, and distinguished the Year
into Months and Seasons, regulating the Year by the Course of the Sun, and the
Months by the Motion of Moon. Moreover they divided the Heaven into 12 Parts,
and represented each Constellation by the Figure of some Animal, from whence
proceeds the Diversity of their Religion and Gods, for those who more
particularly observed the Proprieties of the Ram adored it, and so on of all
the rest.

The Chaldeans were above all others addicted to this Science, insomuch that
they would be esteemed the Inventors of it. As for the Greeks they learned it
from Orpheus, who gave them the first Light into it, though but obscurely, and
under the Veil of many Mysteries and Ceremonies: For the Harp upon which he
celebrated the Orgia [i. e. the Bacchanalia] and played Hymns and Songs, was
composed of Seven Strings which represent the Seven Planets, upon which Account
the Greeks placed it in the Heavens after his Death and have called a
Constellation by its Name. And therefore he is painted sitting upon a Harp,
encompassed with an infinite number of Animals, which are a Representation of
the Celestial Fires.

In the time of Atreus and Thyostes the Greeks were arrived to great Knowledge
in Astronomy; and the People of Argos having decreed that their Empire should
be given to him who was most skilful in it. Thyestes discovered to them the
Proprieties of the Ram, from whence some took occasion to say, that he had a
Ram or God: Atreus observed the Course of the Sun to be contrary to that of the
Primum Mibile, which caused him to be preferred before his Rival. The same
Judgment is to be given of Rellerophon, for it is not believed that he ever had
a winged Horse, but only that his Mind soaring up into Heaven, made many nice
Observations about the Stars. The same is to be said of Phryxus the Son of
Athamas, who is said to have gone through the Air upon a Golden Ram. Dadalus and
his Son were likewise very learned in Astrology, for one of them confounding
himself in this Science perhaps gave Occasion to the Fable: Also Pasiph^e,
hearing her Father discourse of the Celestial Bull and the other Stars, fell in
Love with his Doctrine, which occasion to the Poets to say, that she was
enamored with a Bull.

There are some who have divided this Science and assigned to each Astronomer
his different part. Some have observed the Course of the Moon, and others the
Motion of the Sun, or of some other Planets, with their different Influences.
Thus it was with Phaeton and Endymion, whereof the former left us this Art
imperfect by his untimely Death, and the latter performed his Part so well that
he is said to have lain with the Moon, and enjoyed her Love. From hence it is
that the Poets make Aeneas to be descended of Venus, Minos of Jupiter,
Ascalaphus of Mars, Autolycus of Mercury, because they were born under these
Planets, and because they always retained something of that Planet which was
ascendant at their Birth, therefore Minos was a King, Aeneas was a beautiful
Man, Ascalaphus was valiant, and Autolycus theivish. Neither must we imagine
that ever Jupiter did chain up Saturn, or throw him down headlong into Hell,
as ignorant People believed, but the former part of the Fable was feigned upon
the account of his slow, and sluggish Motion; and the vast distance of the
Ether in which he moves, from this Earth, was taken for the Abyss of Hell. All
that the Poets say of the Adultery of Mars and Venus, and the manner of
discovering it, is taken from Astrology; for the frequent conjunction of these
2 Planets gave occasion to these Fictions.

Lycurgus, the great Lawgiver of the Lacodemonians, framed his Commonwealth
upon this Model of the Stars, and forbad his Citizens to march out to Battle,
before the full Moon, because then its Body is more vigorous.

The Arcadians are the only People who would not entertain Astronomy, because
they were such Pools as to think that they were born before the Moon.

ASYLUM,
(...), a place of Safety where none durst seize a Criminal that flies to it,

Some pretend that the first Asylum of Greece was that which was designed by
the Oracle of Jupiter Dedonaeus, mentioned by Pausanias, who assures us that
the Athenians obeyed the Oracle, and granted their Lives to all those who fled
for Refuge into the Areopagus to the Altars of the Goddesses.

The same Pausanias tells us, that the Phliasians very much revered a Temple of
the Goddess Hebe, to which this Privilege was granted, that all Criminals
should find there the Pardon of their Crimes, without any Exception whatsoever;
and that they fastened their Chains to Trees which were before the Temple. This
Author elsewhere mentions a Temple of Minerva in Peloponnesus, where Criminals
were so strongly protected, that none durst so much as demand them back again:
But this Historian has also given us what is more remarkable concerning the
Antiquity of Sanctuaries, or Places of Refuge: For he says, that because
Neoptolemus the Son of Achilles had put Priamus to Death, although he retired
near the Altar of Jupiter Hercienus, yet he was killed near the Altar of Apollo
of Delphos; from whence it is called the Punishment of Neoptolemus, when one
suffers the same Mischief which he had done to another. Thus the Asyla of
Altars and of Temples was ancient in his time. About the time of Solomon, and
of the Foundation of the Temple of Jerusalem; there is an Asylum mentioned in
the Book of Kings.

But the Asylum of the Altar among the Israclites is far more ancient than that
of the Temple of Solomon, and the time of Homer or the Trojan War, for it is
mentioned in Exodus, as a thing established in Moses's Days.

The Asylum of the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, was one of the most Famous.
Strabo tells us, that several Princes allowed it sometimes a larger, and
sometimes a less extent beyond the Temple itself.

There were whole Cities of Refuge among the Israelites, which were counted
Asylum's; also the League of the People of Smyrna, with King Seloucus shows us,
that that King granted the Privilege of being an Asylum to the whole City of
Smyrna.

The whole Island of Samothrace likewise enjoyed the same Privilege according
to Titus Livius.

Herodotus assures us, that from the Trojan War there was a Temple of Hercules
in Egypt, whither Bondslaves fled, and after they had received the Marks or
Badges of that God, to whom they had devoted themselves, they could never be
retaken by their Masters.

Statius has made a curious Description of the Asylum, and Altar of Clemency,
founded by the Posterity of Hercules, who were particularly careful of that
Protection.

Sic sacrasse loco commune animantibus agris Confugium, etc.

There are some Authors, that attribute Asyla's to Cadmus, who invented that
Expedient to People his new City of Thebes, which Romulus imitated, when he
built Rome, for he left a place covered with Wood o^ purpose, between the
Capitol and the Tarpeian Rock, which he promised to make a safe Asylum to all
Persons that fled thither, whether Slaves, or Freemen, as Ovid tells us in his
3d. Book of his Fasti. Romulus ut saxo lucum circumdedit Alto
Cuilibet huc dixit, confuge tutus eris,
v. 431.

This Asylum at Rome remained sacred, and was not violated till the Reign of
Augustus, and Tyberius, who seeing its abuses, abolished it. For the Liberty of
Asylum's, as Tacitus reports, Lib. 3. of his Annals, was come to so great an
height, that at Rome, and in the Cities of Greece all the Temples were full of
Debtors, Fugitives, and Criminals, so that the Magistrates could not regulate
them, nor stop the Fury of the People, who defended these Superstitions, as the
most sacred Mysteries. Upon which account it was resolved that the Provinces
should send their Deputies to the Senate.

The Ephesians came first in, and represented, that Apollo and Diana were not
Born in the Isle of Delos, as the ignorant People believed, but that they had
in their Country a River, and sacred Forest, where Latona being big with these
Deities, was happily delivered; that Apollo had fled into that place to avoid
the Anger of Jupiter after he had conquered the Cyclops, and that Bacchus
having vanquished the Amazons did pardon all those who had escaped to the
Altar. That Hercules being Master of Lydia did enlarge the Immunities, and
Privileges of the Temple. Then the Magnesians were heard, who pleaded that
Scipio after the Defeat of Antiochus, and Sylla after the Victory ove:
Mithridates, had rewarded their Fidelity and Courage with an inviolable Asylum.
in the Temple of Diana Leucophryna. The People of Aphrodisium and Stratonice,
alleged their Privileges granted them by Caesar, and confirmed by Augustus for
the Service they did their Party, and were publicly commended for continuing
constant in their Alliance during the Parthian Invasion. The Deputies of
Hierocaesarea derived their Asylum's higher, and said, that their Temple
consecrated to the Persian Diana was built by Cyrus, and honored by Perpenna
Isauricus, and several other Captains, who had enlarged the Privilege of it two
Miles round on every side. The Inhabitants of Cyprus maintained the Glory of
the Goddess of Paphos, and Amathusia, of whom they had two Temples in their
Island, they defended also the Privilege of that of Jupiter of Salamis built by
Teucer, when flying from the Anger of his Father Telamon, he took Sanctuary in
their Country.

The Senate says Tacitus retrenched this Privilege, and ordered that these
Decrees should be graven upon Brazen Tables, and put in their Temples to
preserve the Memory of this Regulation, and to prevent any Attempts for the
Future, contrary to the Determinations of the Senate under a pretense of
Religion.

Afterward it was discovered, adds Tacitus, which was concealed with much
Grief, for the more Vicious tock the Liberty to reproach the Virtuous, and to
stir up envy against them, by embracing the Statue of the Prince. The
Magistrates themselves upon this account were afraid to offend their Slaves and
Freemen, which obliged Sestius to declare in a full Senate, that Princes were
like the Gods, but the Gods would not hear wicked Men's Prayers, nor allow a
retreat into their Temples to the Feet of their Altars, or to the Capitol, for
Criminals to abuse them.

These Declarations were the cause that these words were set and engraven upon
many Statues, a servo tangi ne fas est, as I have seen these words written upon
a Statue of Mars. Mavortio sacrum hec signum; a servo tangi ne fas est.

At last Asylum's would protect only those who were guilty of small Faults, for
notorious Offenders were taken by force from the Altars and Statues of the
Gods, and often burnt, as Plautus teaches us in his Comedy, entitled RUDENS,
where he makes Labrax speak thus to the Old Demons.

LA. Mihi non liceat meas Ancillas Veneris de ara abdacere?


DAe. Non licet, ita est Lex apud nos.


LA. Imo hasce ambas hic in ara ut vivas comburam, etc.


Ast. 3. Sc. 4. ATALANTA,
the Daughter of Schaeneus, King of the Isle of Scyrus, who being of an
extraordinary Beauty, attracted several Lovers to her, whom after she had
overcome in a Race she put to Death, for as she excelled all in her time for
swiftness, so she resolved to marry none but him, that should excel her in
running. Hippomenes the Son of Mars entered the Lifts, with her and gained the
Victory, by casting three Golden Apples, which Venus had given him out of the
Garden of the Hesperides in her way, for she stopping to take them up, her Eyes
were dazzled with their shining, and he overcame her by this Stratagem, and
enjoyed his Love, but lying with her in the Temple of Cybele, the Goddess was
angry at the action, and metamorphosed them, the one into a Lion, and the other
into a Lioness.

ATE,
a Prophetess or Goddess, according to Plutarch, In his Banquet of the seven
wise Men, whom Jupiter cast down headlong from Heaven to Earth at the Birth of
Hercules, wherein Juno deceived him. Homer makes A^e the Daughter of Jupiter,
who was sent to Men to be the Source of all Evils, in the Company of the Litae
the Daughters of Jupiter, who comfort them, but because they are very old,
lame, and blind, they come often very late.

Homer also makes mention of Ate, whom he affirms to be a Goddess for midable
to Men, Gods, and even to Jupiter himself, although she is his Daughter. And
after he has related the Surprise that Juno put Jupiter in, when she caused
Eurysthcus to be born before Hercules, which gave him Power over Hercules, he
says, that Jupiter being angry with Ate cast her down headlong from Heaven to
Earth, swearing that she should never return thither again. So that Ate
concerns her self wholly with humane Affairs. Illico corripuit Aten, and
juravit firmum juramentum, nunquam in Olympum, and Coelum stellatum redituram
Aten, quae omnes infortunio afficit, (...), sic fatus ejicit a Coelo stellato,
manu rotans fulgur, mex autem pervenit ad opera hominum. It is evident, that
the name of this Goddess comes from (...), nocco, who if Homer makes the
Daughter of Jupiter, it is because no Evil happens to us, but by the permission
of Providence; that if this Goddess was heretofore in Heaven, and was banished
out of it, 'twas because the Division among the Angels was but once made, when
they became Evil of Good, as they were created, and by their own Sin separated
themselves from the Company of Blessed Spirits. The Banishment of Ate to the
Earth signifies nothing else but the terrible Effects of divine Justice, which
shows itself only upon the Earth, because that is the only Theater of Injustice.

ATELLANAE COMOEDIAE,
Atellan Comedies, or Farces, which were acted at the end of Comedies to divert
the People. The Original of these Farces was as Atella, a City of Apulia in
Campania, between Capua and Naples, whose Inhabitants were very Satirical, and
full of filthy, and obscene words. These Farces were acted by the Youth in
Masquerade, as Festus observes, and Titus Livius adds, that the Atellans would
not suffer any to act their Farces that were Stage Players or Comedians, for
they were not removed from their Tribe as infamous, nor prohibited from going
to War, as other Comedians were. Tertia species est fabularum latinarum, quae a
civitate Oscorum At-lla, in qua primum caeptae Atellanae dictae sunt. Diomedes
the Grammarian, Quod genus ludorum ab Oscis acceptum tenuit juventus, nec'ab
histrionibus pollxi passa est; ^oinstitutum manet ut actores Atellanarum, nec
tribu moveantur, and stipendia, tanquam expertes artis ludicrae, faciant.

ATELLANI VERSUS,
Verses, of which these sorts of Farces were composed, which were very free,
and a little lascivious.

ATHAMAS,
King of Thebes, and Son of Aeolus. He married Nephele, by whom he had two
Children, Phryxus and Hell, Nephele being turned mad by Bacchus, Athamas
divorced her, and married Themisto the Daughter of Hypsaeus, by whom he had
Sphincius, and Orchomenus, but being also divorced from her, he married Ino the
Daughter of Cadmus, by whom he had Learchus and Melic^rtus. Themisto being very
angry to see her self so supplanted, resolved to put Ino's Children to Death,
and hiding her self in a Place of the Palace, she slew her own Children instead
of her Rivals, being deceived by the Clothes which the Nurse had put on them.
This cruel Mistake made her slay her self: Ino being thus rid of Themisto's
Children, contrived to take off Nepheles's Children, whom she hated, and to
that end procured a Famine in her Country, being advised to parch the Corn, and
not sow it, which caused a Famine and a Plague.

Athamas sent to consult the Oracle at Delphos, how he might be delivered from
these Evils, but his Messengers being bribed by Ino, told him that the Oracle
had ordered that he should sacrifice his Son Phryxus, who offered himself
voluntarily to Death, notwithstanding Athamas was against it. But as they went
to sacrifice him, the Accomplices discovered to Athamas the Malice of Ino, who
immediately delivered her, and her Son Melicertus to Phryxus to be revenged on
her, but as he was going to put them to Death, Bacchus whom she had nursed
delivered them, by covering them with a Cloud. Athamas was punished with
Madness by Jupiter, and slew his Son Learchus, whom he took for a Lions Whelp.
Ino escaped with her Son Melicertus, and cast her self head long into the Sea,
where Neptune Deifyed them; Ino under the name of L^^o^thea, or the Mother
Mutata, and Melicertus under the Name of Palaemon or Portunus.

ATHENAEA,
Feasts at Athens dedicated to the Honor of Minerva, of which some were kept
every Year, and others every Five Years, according to the Institution of
Ericthonius, King of Athens, as Pausanias says.

ATHENAEUM,
a Place at Athens consecrated to Minerva, where the Greek Poets went to make
an Offering of their Works, as the Latins consecrated them in the Temple of
Apollo. This Place was like a public School, where they taught the Liberal
Arts.

ATHENAE,
Athens, the most famous City of Greece, situated in that part of Achaia, which
lies upon the Coast, from whence it was called Act and after Attica. The first
Founder of it was Cecreps in the time of Moses, from whence it was called
Cecropia or Ionia, from Ion the Son of Xuthus, and afterward Athens from
Minerva, for (...) in Greek signifies Minerva. This City was famous for
Learning, and Eloquence, and the Defense of all Greece. says Lucian in his
Praise of Demosthenes.

I might, adds he, speak of the Gods, to whom it owes its beginning, their
Amors, Decrees, Dwellings, Presence and Mysteries. I might speak of its Laws,
Decrees, Assemblies, Colonies, Victories and Trophies, which are so great and
many, as well by Sea, as by Land, that he must be more eloquent than D
mosthenes, which can sufficiently describe them.

It was governed by Kings, for the Space of 460 Years, of whom the first was
Cecrops, but their Power degenerating into Tyranny, the People shook of the
Regal Yoke, which ended in Codrus. They were governed for a long time after, by
500 Magistrates, named PRYTANES, who ruled by turns, 50 at a time, and after by
Nine Magistrates, of whom the Chief was called ARCHON. This Government did not
continue above 460 Years, and their Commonwealth or somewhat like it being
often interrupted by Tyrants, who assumed an absolute Authority. This City
anciently so great is now reduced to a small Castle, and a few Fishermens Huts,
but the Ruins of it gives us a sufficient Proof of its Antiquity.

Varro gives this Account of the Original of the word Athens, An Olive Tree,
says he, growing up out of the Earth on a sudden in a certain Place, and a
Spring of Water rising in another, these Prodigies astonished the King, who
sent to Apollo at Delphos to know the Signification of them, and what he should
do. The Oracle answered that the Olive Tree signified Minerva, and the Water
Neptune, and it belonged to them to see from which of those two Gods they would
name their City.

Hereupon Cecrops assembled all his Citizens, as well Men as Women (for the
Women at that time had a Voice in their Councils.) When then they came to vote,
all the Men were for Neptune, and all the Women for Minerva, and because there
was one Woman more, Minerva carried it, and the City was named Athens, which is
taken from that of Minerva, whom the Greeks call (...). Neptune being incensed
at it depopulated the Country of the Athenians with his Waves, and to appease
him says the same Author, the Women suffered 3 sore Punishments. First, that
from that time they should never have a Voice in their Councils, the 2d. that
none of their Children should bear their Name, and lastly, that they should not
be called Athenians but Atticks.

Varro gives us also an historical and not fabulous Reason of the Name of
Athens, and tells us that there happened so great a Difference between Neptune
and Minerva about it, that Apollo durst not be an Arbitrator between them, but
left the Decision of it to Men, as Jupiter did that of the three Goddesses to
Paris, and adds, that Minerva carried it by the number of Votes.

ATHENIENSES,
the Athenians, a People of Attica, whose chief City was Athens, very civilized
and polited by Learning, and being brought up in the Poverty of Philosophy,
were such Enemies to Luxury, that they reformed even Strangers who came among
them, so far were they from suffering themselves to be corrupted by them.

They particularly honored the Goddess Minerva, to whom they built a Temple,
where certain Virgins kept Celestial Fire near the Image of the Goddess, and
their Money, as also their Banners bore her Image. They also gave a special
Worship to Ceres, appointing a Feast to her, during which time the Women were
not allowed to marry, and abstained from eating, lying upon the Ground Nine
whole Days. They put Malefactors to Death, by making them drink the juice of
Hemlock.

We read in the Discourse of Philostratus, Of the Nativity of Minerva. That the
Rhodians wanting fire for the Sacrifices, the Goddess left them, and went to
the City of Athens, to which she gave her Name. The Inhabitants having a fine
and polished Mind gave her a particular Worship, building her a Temple in their
Castle, under the name of Parthenos, which signifies a Virgin, where they set
her Image of Gold and Ivory made by the Hands of Phidias, 39 Foot high, who
engraved on her Shield, or Buckler, the Battle of the Amazons, with the
Athenians, as also that of the Giants with the Gods, and upon her Slippers the
Fight between the Centaurs and Lapithae.

The Athenians, says Elian, wore Purple Garments, having their Hairs tied with
Ribbons of Gold and Silver, adorned with golden Grasshoppers.

Thucydides in the beginning of his History, calls the Athenians, (...) that is
to say, Wearers of Grasshoppers, and the reason he gives for it is this. He says
'twas to distinguish Freemen from Slaves. Lucian tells us the same thing.
Tretzes teaches us, that the Grasshoppers which the Athenians wore, were to
show, that they were great Speakers, and very prolix in their Discourse.

ATHLETAE,
Wrestlers, or Combatants, courageous and strong Men, who addicted themselves
to bodily Exercises, as running, fighting and others of like Natures, among the
Greeks, and Romans, and for whom the Ancients appointed Prizes.

These Athletae were in great esteem among the Greeks but were infamous at
Rome, for some time Ulpian the Lawyer freed them from the Marks of Infamy.

This is the way, by which they were matched in the Plays of the Cirque. They
took an Earthen Pot, into which they put certain Balls about the bigness of a
Bean, on which was set an A, or a B, or some other Letter, and always two
Letters alike. Then the Champions come forth one after another, and made their
Prayer to Jupiter, before they drew, and then put their Hands into the Pot, but
the Herald of the Plays stretching out of his Rod hindered them from reading
their Tickets till they were all drawn. Presently one of the Judges, or some
other Person took every ones Ball, and joined them together who had the same
Letters; If the Number of the Athletae were odd, he that had the single Letter
was to fight with the Conqueror, which was no small Advantage, because he came
fresh to the Combat with him who was weary.Their Food was Barley Bread, which
was the Reason they were called Hordearii, i. e. Barly-eaters, and also another
sort of Bread, called Coliphia, of (...), Membra, and (...), Robusta, because
it made their Bodies strong and robust. Some fed them with soft Cheese, and
Dromeus was the first who fed them with Meat according to the Testimony of
Pausanias in his Eliaca, who gives us the History of Four famous Athletae of
extraordinary Strength, of whom the first was POLYDAMAS the Thessalian, who in
his Youth encountered and slew a Lion of a vast Bigness, which harbored in
Mount Olympus, and infested the whole Country round about. Another time he took
a fierce Bull by the hinder part, and pulled off both his Feet, and with one
hand he stopped a Chariot in its full Course. The 2d was Milo of Crotona, who
knocked down a Bull with a Blow of his Fist, after he had carried him a long
way upon his Back. The third was THEAGENES the Thasian, who took a Brazen Image
off its pedestal, and carried it a great way. The 4th. was EUTHIMUS a Native of
Locris in Italy, who fought against an evil Spirit, which very much disturbed
the Inhabitants of Themessa, and conquered him, insomuch that he married the
Damosel, who was carrying to be sacrificed to it, and freed the Country from
that mischievous Demon.

ATHOS,
Mount Athos, situate between Macedonia and Thrace. Xerxes cut a way through it
to make a Passage for his Army, when he went into Greece. Lucian relates that
the Architect Dinocrates, who was in the Army of Alexander, offered him to cut
Mount Athos into the Shape of a Man, who should hold in his left Hand a great
City, and in his right Hand a Cistern which should receive the Waters of all
the Rivers which fell from that Mountain, and to convey them into the Sea.

Alexander commended his curious Design, but did not allow of the Place,
because there were no Fields about the City to furnish the Inhabitants with
Corn for their Subsistence.

ATIS,
a Young Man of Phrygia, of extraordinary Beauty, who was passionately loved by
Cybele the Mother of the Gods. The Poets make her run in a Fury to Mount Ida,
being transported with Love, and searching the Forests and Rocks for him,
riding in a Chariot drawn by Lions, and followed by the Corybantes, who make
the Mountain resound her Cries, and Revellings; she made him Overseer of her
Sacrifices upon condition that he should preserve his Virginity, but having
violated it, Cybele to punish him for it, made him so mad that he wounded and
would have slain himself, if that Goddess had not changed him into a Pine Tree.

There is a Temple in Syria, says Lucian, dedicated to Rhea, or Cybele, by
Atis, who first taught Men her Mysteries, for all that the Lydians, Phrygians,
and Samothracians knew of them, came from him who was a Lydian. After Rhea had
made him an Eunuch, he lived like a Woman, and assumed that Habit, and in this
Garb he went over the World, and divulged her Ceremonies, and Mysteries. When
he came into Syria, and saw that the Temple on this side of Euphrates would not
entertain him; he stayed there, and built a Temple to the Goddess, as is to be
observed from many things for her Statue stands upon a Chariot drawn by Lions,
she holding a Drum in her Hand, being adorned with Towers, as the Lydians paint
her.

By the Fable of Atis the Favorite of Cybele, who was afterward made an
Eunuch died, and was raised again. Julius Finicus understands Corn, and the
other Fruits of the Earth, which are cut with an Hook, or Sickle, die in the
Granary, and rise again by the Seed which is sown in the Earth.

ATIS, or CAPETUS SYLVIUS, or AEGYPTUS.
Dionysius named him, Capetus; Eusebius, and Livy call him only Atis, and
Cassiodorus terms him, Aegyptus, a King of the Latins, over whom he reigned 39
Years.

ATLAS,
King of Mauritania, who because he was much addicted to Astronomical
Observations, gave occasion to the Fables, which will have Atlas hold up the
Heaven, and that Hercules took his Place for a Day to ease him, because Atlas
being the first, who taught the Course of the Sun and Moon, the setting and
rising of the Stars, and all the Motion of the Heavens, which he had discovered
with much Ingenuity and Labor. The Painters and Carvers in Memory of it have
represented him as holding up the Heavens upon his Shoulders. Ovid tells us,
that Atlas was changed into a Mountain by Perseus, at his Return from his
Expedition against the Gorgens, for refusing to entertain him, but Hyginus
says, that Atlas having sided with the Giants in the War against Jupiter, when
he had overcome them, the God constrained Atlas for favoring them to bear the
Heavens upon his Shoulders.

Indeed there were 3 Atlas's, the 1st. King of Italy, the Father of Electra the
Wife of Corytus. The 2d. was of Arcadia, the Father of Maia, of whom Mercury
was born. The 3d. of Mauritania, Brother of Prometheus, of whom we have already
spoken.

Herodotus knew no other Atlas, but a Mountain in Africa, which seemed to touch
the Heavens by its height, so that the neighboring People called it the
Pillar of Heaven, and derived their Name from it. But Diodorus Siculus tell us,
that in the furthermost Parts of Africa, Hesperus, and Atlas two Brothers had
Flocks of Sheep with red Wool, from whom the Poets took occasion to make these
red Sheep to pass for golden Apples, because the Greek Word (...) signifies
Sheep and Apples. Hesperides gave his Daughter Hasperis in Marriage to Atlas,
who had 7 Daughters by her, who were called Hesperides or Atlantiades, who
Busiris King of Egypt stole, but Hercules traveling through Africa conquered
Busiris, recovered Atlas's Daughters, and restored them to their Father. Atlas
to require this Favor taught Hercules Astrology, in which he grew famous, and
gave him a Celestial Globe. Hercules carried this Science and Knowledge into
Greece, and the Greeks feigned that Atlas supported the Heavens, and was
released from it by Hercules.

ATLANTIDES,
the Daughters of Atlas, whom the Greeks called Pleiades, and the Latins,
Vergi^^ae, were placed among the Stars. They show the convenient time for
putting to Sea, and are a sign of the Spring.

ATREUS,
the Son of Pelops, King of Mycenae and Argos. He made his Brother Toyestes eat
two of his Children at a Feast, viz. Tantalus and Plisthenes, to be avenged of
him. Tayestes made an escape fearing the Cruelty of his Brother Aireus. The
Poets tell us, that the Sun abhorring so great a Wickedness, hid himself, and
retreated back into the East.

Aegysthaeus, the natural Son of Thyestes revenged the Death of his Brother
upon Atreus, whom he slew with his Son Agamemnon, at his Return from the Siege
of Troy, by a correspondence with Clytemnestra his Wife.

ATRIUM,
is generally taken for all the inward parts of the House. Virgil uses this
Word in the same Signification as Vitruvi^s when he writes. Porticibus longis
fugit, and vacua atria lustrat.
Aeneid. lib. II. v. 528. Apparet Domus nitus, and atria long a patescunt.
Ibid. v. 483.

For it is easy to see, that Virgil in that Place understands by Atria, all that
can be seen within the House, through the Gate when it is open, as the Courts
and Porches. Vitruvius applies to all the kinds of Atriums two Ranks of
Pillars, which make two Wings, that is to say, three Walks, one large One in
the middle, and two narrow Ones on each side.

ATROPOS,
one of the three Destinies, which cut the Thread of Man's Life. See PARCAE.

ATTALUS,
King of Pergamus, who at his Death made the People of Rome Heirs of his
Kingdom, and of all his Wealth by Will, which raised a great Disturbance at
Rome, and caused a war in Asia, for Tiberius Gracchus Tribune of the People,
demanded that the Goods of Attalus might be distributed among the People. The
Senate opposed this Demand, and ordered the Consul to put Gracchus to Death,
which he refused to execute, but Scipio Nassica Chief Priest of Jupiter,
throwing his Garment upon his Head, said, they that love the Good and
Preservation of the Commonwealth, let them follow me, and going immediately up
to the Capitol, he was followed by the Senators, who slew Gracchus and all his
Parties in their Seats in the Capitol. Aristonicus, who affirmed himself to be
the Son of Attalus, and in that Quality thought to enjoy the Estare, which the
Romans claimed as Legatees of the King, was an occasion of a 2d war in Asia.

ATTELLANAE,
See ATELLAAe.

ATTILIUS REGULUS,
a Roman Consul, who won many Victories against the Carthaginians. He slew with
a Stone ^ost out of a Balista, a Serpent of a very great bigness and sent the
Skin to Rome, which was 26 Foot long. The Carthaginians sent an Embassy to
Sparta to desire a General, who sent them Xanthippus, who defeated the Roman
Army, and took Regulus Prisoner. But after they had lost a Sea Fight, and
suffered several other misfortunes, they sent their Ambassadors to Rome, with
Regulus their Prisoner, to desire a Peace, but he dissuaded them from it. This
generous Roman would return to Carthage to keep his word; the Carthaginians
being angry with him, because he had not obtained a Peace for them, put him to
death by a new kind of Punishment. They drove an Hogshead full of great Nails,
and having put him into it, rolled him about so long, till he died with the
repeated Blows.

There was one Marcus ATTILIUS, a Duum-vir, whose Office it was to keep the
Books of the Sibyls, whom Tarquinius caused to be thrown into the Sea, sowed up
in a Leathern Bag, because he had permitted Petronius Sabinius to copy out
these Books, and this manner of Punishment was afterward inflicted on
Parricides. Et justissime quidem, quia pari vindicata parentum, ac Deorum
violatio, expianda est. It being just that an Offense against Parents should be
punished after the same manner as an Offense against the Gods.

ATYS,
see ATIS.

AVENTINUS,
Mount Aventine, at Rome, which was 13300 Foot in Compass. Authors give us
several Originals of the Word. Naevius will have the Name Aventius to come ab
avibus from the Birds of Prey of Tyber, and the adjoining Marshes, who roosted
there at Night. Virgil seems to confirm this Opinion speaking of it. Dirarum
nidis domus Opportuna volucris.
Aeneid. Lib. VIII. v. 233.

Titus Livius maintains that this Mountain was called Aventine from AVENTINUS,
King of Albany who was buried there. Others think 'twas called Aventine, ab
adventu, from the great concourse of People, who came thither to sacrifice to
Diana, who had a Temple built there. This Mountain had several other Names
according to Festus, it was called MURCIUS, or MURCUS, Fabius Pictor calls it
also REMURIUS, from Remus, to whom Romulus consecrated it after his Death, not
permitting any Persons to dwell upon it, because the Auguries were not
favorable to his Brother. It was also called the Hill of Diana, because of her
Temple that stood upon it. Ancus enclosed it with Walls and gave it to the
Latins for their Habitation, but it was not reckoned within the Precincts of
Rome, till the time of the Emperor Claudius, about 800 Years from the
Foundation of it, contrary to the Judgment of the Diviners, who held that Place
as unfortunate, because of that which happened to Remus, who was buried there,
and because of the Birds of Prey that lodged there.

Upon this Mountain stand, besides the Temple of Diana, those of Bona Dea,
Victorious Hercules, Queen Juno, Luna, Victoria, Libertas, and an Altar to
Jupiter Elicius.

AVERNUS,
the Lake Avernus in C^^ania near Baiae and Put^oli. This Lake sent forth such
ill Vapors, that a Bird could not fly over it but it died, Fabulous Antiquity
has dedicated this Lake to Pluto, and believed that it was the Entrance into
Hell.

AVERRUNCUS DEUS,
the God which averts Misfortunes, and evil Accidents. The God to whom the
Romans prayed to avert, and remove any Evils that threatened them. Apollo and
Hercules were of the Number of these Gods among the Greeks, as Castor and
Pollux among the Romans, and they were from hence called (...), that is to say
who turned away Evil.

AVES,
Birds, which the Soothsayers consulted in all Undertakings of the
Commonwealth, observing their Chirping, Flying, and the manner of their
feeding, and from hence they foretold, the good, or ill Success of their
Attempts. There were some Birds of a good and happy Omen, and others which they
called Oscines from whose chirping they presaged, and others called, Praepetes,
whose flight they observed. An Eagle flying on the right Hand was an happy
Omen, on the contrary, if a Vulture happen to overturn an Eagles Nest, and
tread upon the Eaglets, this signifies Trouble and Disgrace, as it happened to
Tarquinius Superbus, and to Dionysius of Syracuse, who lost his Kingdom after
an Eagle had taken a Javelin by Force out of the Hands of one of his Soldiers
and cast it into the Water. But I shall speak of this more at large under the
word AUGUR.

AUFEIA,
a Fountain, whose Waters were excellent to drink. It has its Rise in the
Mountains of Abruzzo, and runs up to Rome, after is has passed through the
Country of the Marsi. And the Lakes Celanus. Ancus Martius brought it to Rome,
and for that reason it is called after his Name, Aqua Martia.

AUGEAS, or AUGIAS,
King of Elis, rich in great Cattle, having Stables, in which he kept
continually 3000 Oxen, insomuch, that the Dung and Filth which was heaped
together for several Years, filled the Air with Infection. Augeas agreed with
Hercules to cleanse his Stables, allowing him the tenth part of his Flocks.
Hercules performed it by the means of the River Alpheus, by turning an Arm of
it, and making it run through the Stable, it carried away all the Dung. This
made the Stable of Augeas to become a Proverb, to describe an infamous Man full
of all sorts of Vices, as Lucian has done in his false Prophet. According to
the Example of Hercules I will labor to cleanse the Stable of Augeas, and I
will show you some Filthiness, by which you may guess how great a Quantity of
Dung there was which 3000 Oxen had raised in the space of several Years, but I
fear we shall be both ashamed, I for discovering so many Villainies, and you for
inviting me to it.

Augias not making a graceful Acknowledgment of the Service that Hercules had
done him, and refusing to make good his Word, Hercules slew him.

AUGILES,
a People of Cyrene in Africa, who worshipped no other Gods, but dead Men's
Ghosts, whom they invoked in all their Affairs, and in all their Undertakings,
and by whom they swore sitting upon their Sepulchers.

AUGUR,
a Sooth-sayer, which comes ab avium garritu, the Chirping of Birds.
Nevertheless this word is of a more large Signification, being taken for all
those, that foretell things to come by the Heavens, or the effects of Nature.

This Art is very ancient, for it is forbidden by Moses in Leviticus, Chap. 17
and in Deuteronomy. Chap. 18. It was in very great esteem among the Chaldeans, who
made it a particular Profession, the Greeks learned it of them, and afterward
the Tujcans became very expert at it.

The Romans valued it so highly, and thought so well of this Science, that by a
Decree of the Senate it was expressly ordered, that the advice of the Augurs
should be exactly followed, without the least deviation from it, as we learn
from Cicero in his 2d. Book de Legibus AUGURI PARENTO, Romulus did not begin to
build Rome, till after he had consulted the Augurs, and the other Kings so
lowed his Example in this, having for that end sent for the most sk^rful Augurs
of Heturia, to instruct the young Roman Nobility in that Science, for they did
not think it fit to make the Art common, least it should become contemptible,
and mercenary, as Cicero tells us, Ne ars tanta propter (...) hominum a
Religionis Autoritate abdu^^r^tur ad mercedem, atque quaestum. Romulus made a
College of 3 Augurs only taken out of the 3 Tribes, into which he divided the
People of Rome at first. Servius Tullus added a 4th. They were all of the
Lineage of the Nobility, to the Year 454, when under the Cousulship of Q.
Apul^ius. and M. Valerius Corvinus, the Tribunes of the People demanded that
the Commonalty should be raised to the Dignity of the Augurs, which was granted
after some Contest, and five of the People were advanced to that Office, and so
the College of Augurs was made up of nine Persons till the time of Sylla, who
increased the number to (...) according to Florus, and Titus Livius, and
according to others to 24. They were governed by a Person who was called
Magister Collecti Augurum. Besides the public Augurs the Emperors had some
peculiar to themselves, which had their dwelling in their Palace.

The Augurs were at first chosen by the People divided into Curtae or Parishes,
yet we find that when any one of them died, two of the most ancient chose one
of those who studied the Science of Augury, and presented him to the whole
College, who received him after Examination, and consulted an Augury upon that
account to know the Will of the Gods.

Nevertheless we have an Example in Titus (...) of an Augur chosen by the
People, but some say it happened only because there was a Contest among the
Augurs about the Election, for it is evident, that the College had Right to
choose till the Year 651, when Marius being Consul the third time, and Lucius
Aurelius Ocestes, (...). Domitius Aenebarbus, Tribune of the People being angry
with the Augures, because they did not choose him to that Dignity, caused a Law
to be made called Domitia, which gave the right of choosing the Augurs,
Chief-Priests, and other Priests to the people of Rome assembled by their
Tribes, that he might make the greater Confusion, and satisfy his own Passion
the more, as Cicero speaks in his 2d. Book of the Agrarian Law.

This was easy for him to do in the Consulship of Marius, who owed his Dignity
and Fortune to the Tribunes of the People. Sometimes after Sylla repealed the
Domitian Law, and restored to the Auguros the Right of Election, but Titus
Atticus Labienus Tribune of the People^ under the Consulship of Cicero and
Antonius, repealed this last Law, and restored the Domitian, which he effected
by the Solicitations of Julius Caesar, who thought that if he restored to the
People who loved him, the Liberty of choosing Chief-Priests and Augurs, he
should himself be infallibly chosen Chief-Priest, which accordingly happened
after the Death of Metellus Pius, when Caesar was dead, Antonius being Consul,
he abrogated the Domitian Law a second time, and received Sylla's, that he
might have M. Aemilius Lepidus chosen Chief Priest, whose Son he had married to
his Daughter.

The Face of Affairs soon changed again, and the Domitian Law was restored by a
Decree of the Senate, which nulied all the Acts of Antonius made on that
account, in the Consulship of C. Vicius Pansa, and Aulus Hirtius. but Augustus
having put an end to the Civil Wars, abolished the Domitian Law for ever, and
resiored the ancient Privileges to the Augun and other Priests, till at last
the Emperors assuming an absolute Authority, took to themselves the right of
making Chief-Priests and Augurs, which continued till the Emperor T^^codosius
as is evident in Pliny Junior, who requested of Trajan that he would pl^^se to
honor him with the Dignity of one of the 7 Ep^lones, which were a sort of
Priests, of whom we shall speak in their proper Place.

The Person who was chosen to be an Angur, ought to be of a blameless Life, and
fair Reputation, as well as without any bodily Defect. The Ordination of an
Augur was not to be reversed, and he could not be deprived of the Dignity upon
any account whatsoever. He made a Magnificent Feast at his Entrance upon the
Office, to all the rest of the College called Caena Auguralis.

Their Authority and Power sufficiently appears by this Constitution taken out
of the Law of the XII Tables, where it is expressly o^^ered, that nothing should
be undertaken without them, and whatever they approve of condemn shall be
approved or condemned. Quae Augur injusta, nefasta, vitiosa, dirave dixerit,
irrita, infestaque sunto, quique non paruerit capitale esto They had Power to
dissolve Assemblies and remove Magistrates, as Levy relates in several Places.
C^nsul^i Augures vitiosum Dictatorem pronunciarunt. The Judgment of one Augur
only was not to be depended on, but all the College being met, was to pronounce
the Judgment together, upon the matter propounded, as Alexander ab Alexandro
says. Sed tamen soli Auguri sine Collegio auspicia interpretari non licuit,
totum enim Cellegium censere, and sententiam far decebat. Which was enacted
to prevent any Inconvenience that might arise, by the Ignorance or Malice of a
single Person, who might be corrupted.

The Senate might meet in no Place, but what was consecrated by them, and if
while it was assembled, they observed any Sign of ill Luck, they had a Power to
dismiss it, as also to depose any Magistrate, when his Election was made
contrary to the Solemnity of their Auguries.

There were several Sorts of Auguries, and diverse Ceremonies observed in
taking of them.

To understand this, we are to know, that the Word AUGUR, taken in a general
Signification, comprizeth Divination by the Entraits of Beasts, which they
slew; but to take it in its proper and natural Signification, it signifies
only, a Prediction by Birds, of which there are three Sorts, AUGURIUM,
AUSPICIUM, and TRIPUDIUM SOLISTIMUM,

When the Auguries favored any Action, they called them Prospera, and the
Augures being consulted, answered id aves addicunt; but when they opposed it,
they termed them adversa, infausia, and piacularia, and the Augur answered, id
aves abdicunt.

If the Auguries presented themselves before the Augurs sought them, they were
called Oblativa, but if they appeared not till begged, they were termed
impetrita

The Auguries which were taken from certain Appearances in the Air, were the
most considerable, and solemn of all others, as not being capable to be
reiterated the same Day, and dissolved Assemblies, if a Magistrate desired to
prevent an Assembly of the People, or put it off to another time, he would set
up in the Cross-ways that he observed the Signs of the Heavens that day, and so
'twas wholly put off; allo die dixerit,

But the Senate perceiving the Abuse, which that Custom had brought in,
ordered, that notwithstanding these Notices, an Assembly summoned in due form,
should not desist from sitting.

This Sort of Augury, which they called Augurium de Caelo, or, servare de
Caelo, was taken from extraordinary and sudden Signs, which they observed in
the Heaven.

Now among these Signs there were some called Bruta, or Vana, which soreshewed
nothing, others were called Fatidica, which portended Good or Evil, and of
these last, some were called Consiliara, which happened when they were
deliberating about any Affair, and seemed to advise it, others Auctoritativa,
or Authoritatis, which came after the thing done, and confirmed or approved it.

Lastly, there were others called; Postularia, which obliged to repeat the
Sacrifices, and other Monitoria, which admonished what to avoid.

All times, and every Day of the Year were not proper to take Auguries.
Plutarch tells us, that Metellus the Chief-Priest, forbad to take Auguries
after the Month of August, because the Birds shed their Feathers at that time:
Or in any Month of the Year immediately after the Ides, because the Moon then
began to decrease, or on any Day after Noon.

The Place on which an Augary was taken, was a rising Ground, and for that
Reason was called, Templum, Arx, or Auguraculum, according to Festus. There was
a Field set apart for it a little distance from Rome, called Ager effatns, as
Servins upon Virgil observes.

When all things were fitly disposed to take an Augury, and after all
Ceremonies were performed, the Augur entered into his Tent or Pavilion, clothed
with his Augural Robe, called Laena or Trabea, holding in his right Hand his
Augural Staff called Lituus, crooked at the top much like a Bishops, or Abbots
Crosier, where being ser down, he casts his Eyes round him, and divides the
Heaven into Four Parts with his Staff, drawing a Line from the East, named
Antica, to the West, named Postica, and another Cross it from, South to North,
called Dextra and Sinistra.

This Ceremony being performed he sacrificed to the Gods, making this Prayer to
them, as it is related to us by Livy, at the Election of Numa.

Jupiter Pater, si est fas hunc Numam Pompilium cujus ego caput teneo, Regem
Romae esse, ut tua signa nobis certa and clara sint inter eos fines quos feci.
This Prayer being made, the Augur returned to his Seat and ^ooked about very
attentively to observe from what Part, and in what manner the Sign from Heaven
appeared.

There was a deep Silence for that time, every one joining his Prayers and Vows
to the Prayers and Vows of the Augur. This shows us the meaning of that Latin
Expression, sedere Augurem, which is as much as to say to attend the Augury, or
some sign from Heaven to know the Will of the Gods about any undertaking.

When he saw any Lightning appear, or heard any Clap of Thunder from the left
Side, that was taken for a favorable Presage, as Virgil teaches us. Audiit and
Coeli genitor depart serena.
Intonuit Laevum,
Aeneid. lib. IX. v. 630.

Donatus explaining these Verses assures us, that what they heard from the left
side came from the right of the Gods. Quia sacrificant is Latus laevum, dextrum
est ejus, qui postulata largitur.

If there appeared nothing but a Wind, they took notice from what Quarter it
came, supposing that the Winds were the Messengers of the Gods, which
discovered their Will to Men, as Statius teaches us, etc. -- Ventisque aut
alite visa
Bellorum proferre diem --


Which is confirmed by Luctatius, who tells us that the Augurs knew future
things, by the blowing of the Wind. Solent Augures ventorum flatibus futura
cognoscere.

When the Augur had received some favorable Presages, he came down from the
Place on which he stood, and declared it to the People in these Words. Id aves
addicunt, the Gods approve it, the contrary is, id aves abdicunt, the Gods
disallow it.

They observed, that the Gods confirmed a Presage by some new Sign, as Virgil
makes Aeneas speak to Anchises.

Da deinde auxilium Pater, atque haec omnia firma. Aeneid. Lib. II. v. 691.

All that we have said about taking Auguries from the Signs of Heaven, is
likewise practiced in the Auguries taken from the chirping or flight of Birds.
The Augur distinguishes with his Augural Staff the Regions of the Heaven and
Earth, in which compass he intends to take an Augury, having first made a
Prayer to the Gods. This Augury is called Oscinum, and they that take it
Oscines.

The different manner of the flying of Birds, makes them sometimes be called
Sinistrae, an ill Omen, sometimes Funebres or Arculae, Fatal, and which
prohibit any Action; sometimes Deviae; which show a Difficulty in the
Execution; sometimes Romores, which hinder it, and sometime Inebrae, which
betoken some Impediment, and lastly, sometimes Alterae, when a second Presage
destroys the first.

The Ancients were so much addicted to these Superstitions, that they never
would undertake any thing without taking a sign from the Birds.

In the great Affairs of the Commonwealth, they consulted the Signs of the
Heavens, in those of Wars, the chattering, and flight of Birds, and their
manner of eating their Meat, and for that end they fed Poultry in Coops, which
they called holy Pullen, and which they fetched commonly from the Island of
Eubaea, and he that had the keeping of these Poultry, was called Pullarius,
says Cicero.

The Consul gave him Notice, who had the Care of this Poultry to get all things
ready to take the sign; then he flung Corn to the Poultry, if they eat it
greedily, moving fast with their Feet, and crowding about, this was a
favorable Omen, but if on the contrary, they refused to eat or drink, it was
an unfortunat Sign.

This is the Form which they used in taking a Sign. They always consulted some
skilful Persons in those sorts of Divinations.

Quinte Fabi, te volo mihi in Auspicio esse, or in Auspicium adhibere, dicito
si silentium esse videtur. Quintus Fabius, I desire that you would assist me in
taking a Sign; tell me, if all the Ceremonies used in the like Case, have been
exactly observed, and if the Sign be not defective: He answered, Silentium esse
videtur, nothing is wanting. DICITO, si pascuntur Aves? quae? aut ubi? Attulit
in cavea pullos Pullarius. Tell me, whether the Birds eat or no? They eat and
the Poultry keeper has brought the Pullen into the Coop.

The Veneration for Auguries, was so strongly imprinted on the Minds of the
Romans, that they looked upon them as Impious Persons, who contemned or derided
them, attributing the Misfortunes which happened to Claudius Pulcher, to the
Anger of the Gods, who seeing that the Poultry would not eat, threw them into
the Sea, saying in Raillery, They Will drink at least if they will not eat.

There was a College of 300 Augurs, at Lions.

AUGUSTUS,
Octavius Caesar surnamed Augustus, by the Senate, an Epithet, which the Romans
gave to their Gods, as well as Emperors. He was the Son of Octavius the
Praetor, and Accia, great Grand Child of Julius Caesar who adopted him. Observe
what Vitruvius says in his Preface to his Six Books of Architecture, which he
dedicated to him.

When I consider, Sir, that by Virtue of your divine Genius, you are become
Master of the whole World, that your invincible Valor has vanquished all your
Enemies, and gloriously protected your Subjects, for which all Nations pay
Homage to you, that the People and Senate of Rome do build the Assurance of the
Peace which they enjoy, upon the Wisdom of your Government only. When I reflect
upon the large Extent of your Mind, whose cares are not confined to the Affairs
of State, but has regard to the most minute advantages of the public, I
observe, that you are not content to make the City of Rome the Mistress of so
many Provinces, as have submitted to her, but you make her admirable for the
excellent Structure of her great Buildings, and that you will have their
Magnificence to equal the Majesty of your Empire.

Indeed there never was a Prince, that was more Magnificent in his Buildings,
or more Liberal than Augustus, having built many Temples to the Gods, it Rome
and elsewhere.

He composed several ingenious Works, which discover his Personal Learning, but
they are lost through the Injuries of Time, As his Exhortations to Philosophy.
13 Books of his Life, the Funeral Orations of Julia his Aunt, Octavia his
Sister, Drusus Marcellus and Agrippa, his Treatises of Government, a Poem on
Sicily, the Tragedies of Ajax and Achilles, and several other Greek and Latin
Works, which he read, says Suetonius, in the Senate, and before the People.

Being Consul the sixth time, and seeing his Power established by the Defeat of
Lepidus and Autonius, which put an end to that cruel Tri-umverate, he abolished
the Laws which he had made in his Usurpation, and made others, says Tacitus, by
which the People might live in Peace under his Empire: He died at Nola in the
67th. Year of his Age, and left only one Daughter, and she very loose and
wicked. His Will was brought to the Senate by the Vestal Virgins; he made
Tiberius and Livia his Heirs, adopting him into the Family of the Caesar's, and
giving her the Title of Empress. He gave to the People of Rome, 43500000
Sesterces, a 1000 to every Soldier of his Guards, and 300 to them in the
Legions. His Body was carried to the Fire upon the Senators Shoulders, and
burnt in Mars's Field, which he had appointed for his Burial. He refused the
Dignity of Dictator and King, and was content with a more modest Title, the
Prince of the Senate. His Funeral being performed, Temples, and Divine Honors
were appointed him, not only at Rome, but also almost in all Places with
Sacrifices and Priests.

A Society of 25 Priests was instituted in Imitation of that, which Titus
Tatius introduced long before at Rome, to preserve something of the Religion of
the Sab^^s. This Society consisted of 21 of the chief Men of the City, which
were chosen by Lot, and Tiberius, Drusus, Glaudius and Germanicus were added to
them.

One Month in the Roman Calendar, which before was called Sextilis, was named
from him, Augustus. He was the first that bore the name of Pater Patriae,
according to the Testimony of Pliny, which Title also Ovid gives him. Sancte
Pater Patriae, tibi plebs, tibi Curiae nomen,
Hoc dedit.
Fast. Lib. II. v. 127.

Tiberius his Successor began to build him 2 Temple at Rome, which was finished
by Caligula, and repaired by Antoninus Pius, as his Medals show.

AUGUSTALES, and SODALES AUGUSTALES.
Augustines, or a Society of Priests, instituted in Honor of Augustus, after
the Romans in Flattery had ranked him amongst the Number of the Immortal Gods.
It was the Emperor Tiberius, who founded this Society or College, which he
called AUGUSTALES, to offer Sacrifices in the Temple he had built for him,
appointing a Revenue for their Subsistence. This was not only done at Rome, but
also in the Provinces of the Gauls, and chiefly at the City of Lions, where he
had a Magnificent Temple built to him at the Expense of Twelve Cities, in which
was a Statue for every Province, to to show to Posterity; that they all had
contributed to the adorning of that Temple.

It Is credible, that that Temple stood where now is the Abbey of Aisnay at that
Place, where the Saone and the Rhone join, for there are yet some Ruins of it,
which are Cast Pillars, as is justified by a certain ancient Marble, which is
to be seen at Lions in the Church of St. Peter belonging to the Nuns. JOVI OP.
MAX. FLAMEN

Thus Flattery and Superstition increasing, Communities of Priests were at
length instituted in Honor of the Emperors whom they deified after their
Death, and called them by the general Name of Augustales, or by the Name of the
Emperor to whose Service they were consecrated, as FLAVII, ADRIAN ALES,
AELIANI, ANTONINI.

But that which made these Societies more eminent and famous was this, that the
new Emperors themselves entered among them in Imitation of Tiberius, who entered
himself into the number of the Priests of Augustus, and caused Drusus
Germanicus and Claudius to do the like. Nero also did the same, and therein was
followed by other Emperors.

AUGUSTALIA,
Feasts, celebrated October. 12. for the happy Return of Augustus to Rome, after
he had settled Sicily, Greece, Syria, Asia, and Parthia in Peace, and to that
end an Altar was built with this Title, Fortunae Reduci.

AUGUSTALES,
Plays instituted in Honor of Augustus. The public Plays, says Tacitus, newly
consecrated to the Memory of Augustus were interrupted at the first Show by the
Emulation of the Actors. This Prince had before showed, that he was much
pleased with these sorts of Diversions in Favor of Maecenas, who was
passionately in Love with a Mimick, named Batillus.

AURELIUS,
Marcus Aucelius, the Roman Emperor, who was adopted by Antoninus. His Medals
represent him with a grave and modest Countenance, which the Philosophers
affected. He imitated them with their long Beard, and was surnamed the
Philosopher, to honor him for the Inclination which he had for their Learning
and way of living. The title of the Speech of Athenagoras who was sent to this
Prince to make an Apology for the Christian Religion, is in these Terms. TO THE
EMPERORS MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONINUS, AND LUCIUS AURELIUS COMMODUS, ARMENIANS,
SARMATIANS, AND WHICH IS MORE, PHILOSOPHERS. And the beginning of the Life of
Marcus Anrelius written by Capitolinus is in these Terms. MARCO ANTONINO IN
OMNI VITA PHILOSOPHANTI VIRO. He also often repeats this Sentence of Plato.
That those S^ates are most flourishing where Philosophers ruled, or where the
Rulers studied Philosophy. He was a meek Prince, a Wise, Prudent, Sober,
Liberal, and great Captain. He was sickly through his Application to Study.

AURELIA PORTA,
the Aurelian Gate, above the Janiculus, so called from one Aurelius, a Person
who had been Consul. It Is called at present, St. Panecace Gate

AURELIANUS,
an Hungarian, (some assign Dacia or Mysia for his Country) a Man of an obscure
Birth. He was raised to the Throne by the Legions, after he had passed through
all the Offices of the Army with Honor, which was the Reason that the Senate
and People received him with great Applause.

He subdued the Scythians and Marcomanni, after which Victory he exercised
great Cruelties at Rome, upon all Sorts of People. Nevertheless he did one Act
of Clemency, when he took the City of Tyana in Cappadocia. He met with so great
Oppositions, that he swore in his Wrath, he would not leave so much as a Dog
alive. He got into the City by the Treachery of One of the Inhabitants, and
when the Soldiers began to plunder, and put all the Citizens to the Sword,
according to his Resolution he told them, that he would allow them to kill all
the Dogs.

He made War with Zenobia, who kept the Eastern Empire after her Husband
Odenatus. The Queen knew all the Oriental Languages perfectly, and spoke the
Greek and Latin in their Purity. Trebellius Pollio says, she was the fairest
and most valiant of all Women, she made the whole East to tremble, beat the
Leiutenants of the Emperor Gallienus, and maintained a stout War against the
Romans, in which the Emperor Aurelian conquered herand carried her Captive to
Rome. Several blamed him for this Action, but he wrote a Letter to the Senate
and the People of Rome to excuse himself, and in it gives such a Commendation
of this unfortunate Princess, as if she were one of the most formidable
Enemies, that the Empire ever had.

After this famous Victory, Aurelian built a Temple for the Sun at Rome, and
enriched it with the Spoils of the Palmyrians, and the Images of the Sun and
Belus which he brought from Palmyra, as Herodian assures us.

He wasslain between Byzantium and Heraclea, as he went to the War against the
Persians, by the most valiant Men of his Army, who believed this a false
Slander of his Secretary, named Menestheus, that he sought their Lives in the
6th, or 7th year of his Reign.

AURIGARII, AURIGAE, AURIGATORES,
Coach-men, who in the public Plays of the Cirque disputed with the
Competitors, with whom they contended in driving the Chariots for the Prizes,
which were proposed. They made up certain Colleges, or Societies, which are
distinguished by Colors, of which we read the 4 Principal in Geuters
Inscriptions, viz. Russatam, the Red, Prasinam, the Green, Venetam, the Blew,
and Albatam, the White. The Ancients thought that the 4 Seasons of the Year
were represented by them, in which Nature takes a new Habit, or as we now
speak, every Troop representing one of the Seasons by its color, the Green,
the Spring, the Red, the Summer, the Blew the Autumn, and the White, the
Winter, because it is covered with Snow and Ice.

AURORA,
the Mother of Memnon. The Poets have feigned her to be the Daybreak, which
gives notice of the rising of the Sun above our Hemesphere, as Orpheus speaks,
(...). She was the Daughter of Hyperion, and Thia, as Hesiod tells us in his
Theogonia, and according to others of Titan, and the Earth. Some give her the
Epithet of (...), Torch bearer, because of the Light she imparts to the Earth,
as also (...), clear shining, because of her Brightness. The Poets represent
her drawn in a Chariot, having her Fingers dropping with Dew. The Fable is that
having one Day at the rising of the Sun cast her Eye upon Tithonus the Brother
of Laomedox, a young Prince of singular Beauty, she fell in Love with him, and
carried him into Aethiopia where she had Memnon by him.

AURUM,
Gold, a yellow Metal, the most shining, ductile, heavy, and precious of all
Metals. It is taken out of the Mines in 3 Forms. 1. Of Grains, of which some
are round, others b^o^d and long. 2. In a kind of Stone. 3. In Dust, or Sand.
The most famous Country for finding of Gold is Caribana in Peru, and Vallivia
in Chili. Pliny says, that Gold was brought into the indies by flying Aunts;
but he was misinformed.

The Poets have feigned Autmn to be the Son of the Sun, as being its best
Production. Pindar says, that Gold is a bright Fire that shines in the Night.

Homer compares it to the Graces, for there is nothing so agreeable and welcome
as Gold, which Jupiter himself makes use of to gain the Favor of his
Mistresses, as he did to Danae, by changing himself into a shower of Gold.

Gold was very scarce at Rome at first, but it became more common afterward.
Appian tells us, that ^ulius Caesar brought from the Gauls to Rome 200 Marks
of Gold in 2822 Crowns by the Victories which he had gained there, and this
Gold was called Aurum Coronarium.

The Gold which the Consul Cepio took out of the Temple of Jupiter at Toulouse,
amounting to 900^0 ^0 of Gold, but it proved unlucky to him, being defeated by
the imbri, whence came the Proverb, AURUM THOLOSANUM, to signify a fatal
Thing, which brings Ill-luck.

AUSPICIUM,
it was a kind of Augury amongst the Ancients, when they considered the Fright
and Chirping of Birds, to know whether any Undertaking which they were about,
would prove Happy, or Unfor tunate. Pliny attributes the Invention of Auspicium
to Tiresias the Thiban, who studied the Flight of Birds, ab avium aspectu; and
of Augur^ to Caras, ab avium garritu, from their Chirping, and Chattering.
Clemens Alexandrinus will have the Phrygians to be the first who observed the
Flight of Birds, which they called, Praepetes, as those were called Oscines,
who observed their Chirping, and manner of Eating.

In this Sense we must understand this Verse of Horace, lib. III. Od. 27.

Oscinem corvum prece suscitabo
Solis ab ortu.
The Three most considerable Birds, were the Raven, the Crow, and the Owl, as
also the Eagle, Vultur, and Kite.

Romulus instituted Auspicia at Rome.

AUSPEX,
he that took the Auspicium by the flight of Birds, see AUGUR.

AUTUMNUS,
Autumn, the 3d. Season of the Year, when they gather the Grapes, and Fruits.

Heyrod in his Theogonia makes the Seasons the Daughters of Jupiter, and
Taemis, and counts but three, as Orpheus does, in which Phidias follows him,
having carved but 3 Statues of these Goddesses. The Egyptians owned by three,
Spring, Summer, and Autumn, allowing each 4 Months, and representing them by a
Rose, an Ear of Corn, and an Apple, or Grape. Nonnus about the end of the
Eleventh Book of his Dionysiacks, reckons 4 Seasons in the Year, as does
Philos^^atu^, Winter, Spring, Summer, Autumn. The Seasons say^ h^, have Eyes of
this Color of dried Roses, the Daughters of the inconstant Year, swift of
Foot, as a Storm of Wind.

There is at Medon an Autumn of Marble, made by one ^r. James a Native of
Angoulesme, under the Figure of a young Man Crowned with Vine Branches, and
Grapes, which he made at Rome in the Year 1550.

B.
IS the 2d. Letter in the Alphabet in all Languages, the Hebrews call it Beth,
and the Greeks, Beta, and the Latins, Be, as the English do, and its
Pronunciation imitates the Cry, or Bleeting of Sheep.

This Letter is in the number of those Consonants, which we call Mutes, because
they have a Sound more low, and indistinct than others.

B. and P. have so near a Relation one to another, that Quintilian tells us,
that in obtinuit, Reason Requires, that we write a b, but the Ears can hear
nothing but a p^^^optinuit. This is the cause that in ancient Inscriptions, and
old Glossaries; these two Letters are often put one for the other; as apsens,
for absens, obtimus, for optimus, pleps, for plebs, poplicus, for publicus, and
the like. Hence it is, that we still write suppono, for subpono, oppono, for
obpono, and several Nations often pronounce one of these Letters for the other,
as the Germans, who say, ponum vinum, for bonum vinum, and the like.

The Greeks often change these two Letters, one for the other, and Plutarch
assures us, it was usual with the Priests of Delphos to say, (...), for (...),
and (...), for (...). From whence it comes to pass, that as often as it follows
an S. we still change b into p. scribo, scripsi, as the Greeks say, (...), etc.
B. says, Priscian, can never be put before S. in any Syllable.

It Is in conformity to this use that the Latins have taken pasco, from (...),
papae, from (...), buxus from (...), pedo, from (...), puteus, from (...), and
the like; as the Greeks have taken (...) Turris, from the Phaenician word
Bourg.

It Is also common to these two Letters to creep into words without occasion; as
absporto, for asporto obstendit, for ostendit, obstentui for ostentui, and from
hence it comes, that from urere, we say comburero, and according to Nonnius,
celebre is used for celere.

B, has also a great similitude with V consonant, and hence it is, that when
Words are changed into another Language, they are often taken one for another,
as (...), vivo, (...), vis, (...), volo, (...). venio, (...), vado, (...),
vescor, (...), vox, (...), vorax, (...), voveo.

From hence also it comes, that the Greeks sometimes translate those Latin
Words, by a B, that begin with V, as (...), for val^re.

But this affinity of B with V, does but little favor the Pronunciation of the
Spaniards, and Gascoiners, who always pronounce V for B, and B for V.

And although this Error be no small one, yet it is more ancient, than it is
commonly thought; for not only Adamantius speaks very particularly of it in
Cassiodorus, but we meet with many Examples of it upon Old Marble, as BASE for
VASE, CIBICA, for CIVICA, and in like manner V is put for B, VENEFICIUM for
BENEFICIUM; SIBE for SIVE. And in the Pandects of Florence, Av eo for ab eo,
VOBEM, for BOVEM, VESTIAS, for BESTIAS, and the like.

But besides this Resemblance that B has with V consonant, it has the same with
F, or (...), for we say Bruges for Fruges, as Cicero observes; from (...) comes
fremo, and on the contrary we say, sifilare for sibilare, from whence come the
French word Siffler; af nobis is used for ab nobis, and we still write Suffero
for subfero, sufficit for subficit, and suffusio for subfusi^. And according to
Festus, Album is derived of (...) asort of white Scurfe, or rough Tettar; and
from (...) comes Ambo.

B, among the Greeks is a Numeral Letter, and signifies Two, but when an Acute
Accent is set at the bottom of it, it expresses Two Thousand.

BAAL,
or Bell, is named the most frequently in Scripture of all the False Gods. The
Hebrew or Phaenician Word sigsignifies a Lord. It was commonly used by the
Africans in Carthage, as descending from Tire in Phaenicia, as Servius explains
these Words of Virgil.

Impleveritque meropateram, quam Belus and omnes

A Belo soliti. Aeneid. Lib. I. v. 733. and uses these words. Langua Punica Bal
Deus dicitur, apud Assyrios autem Bell dicitur Saturnus, and Sol. All these
proper Names, whether African or Assyrian come from it, Annibal, Asdrubal,
Adherbal.

Servius was not the only Person, that believed that Baal was Saturn. Eusebius
speaks the same in his Chronicon. Tharoe anno XXIX. Assyriorum Rex primus Belus
mortuus est, quem Assyrii Deum nominarunt, and alii dicunt Saturnum.

Theophilus Archbishop of Antioch, tells us also that the Eastern People
worshipped Chronus, or Saturn, Belus or Bal.

But if on the other side, Servius says, that Bal is the Sun, he has some that
defend his Opinion. Hesychius tells us, that (...), signifies (...), and (...)
Phrygiorum lingua (Rex) The same Author adds, that in Crete the Sun was
worshipped under the name of Abelius. The Emperor Heliogabalus seems to have
had both the Names of the Sun, (...), and Bal, or Bell united in his. Seldom,
from whom this is taken says that Heliogabalus comes from Hagol Baal, id est
Rotundus Deus, which agrees with his Image, which was according to Herodian a
round Stone in shape like a Cone. Eusebius is of the same opinion, or at least
assures us, that it was the Opinion of Sanconiathon, who says, that it was to
the Sun, that the Name of Beelsalsamen, that is to say, the King of Heaven, was
given.

We must not believe that these two Opinions are contrary to one another,
because the Phaenicians take Saturn for the Sun, as Servius tells us in the
same Place, Assyrios constat Saturnum, quem eundem and Solemn dicunt Junoncmque
coluisse.

BABYLO,
Babylon. The Scriptures gives us this account of the Original of this City.

When Men were multiplied after the after the Flood, they departed from the
East, and found a Plain in the Country of Shinar, where they settled
themselves. Then they said one to another, come, let us make Bricks, and burn
them in the Fire. Then they took Brick instead of Stone, and Slime in stead of
Mortar, and said, let us build us a City, and a Tower, whose top may reach unto
Heaven, and let us make our selves spoken of, before we are separated one from
another. But the Lord came down to see the City and Tower which the Children of
Men had built, and said, let us go down, and confound their Language, that they
may not understand one another, and from hence it was called. Confusion.

This City thus named Confusion is Babylon, and profane History much celebrates
it, by which it seems that the Giant Nimrod was the Founder of it. This the
Scripture had intimated before, saying. That Babylon was the Chief of his
Kingdom, although it was not come to that Point of Grandeur, which the Impiety
and Pride of Men had determined to bring it. Bodinus and Sabellicus confound it
very unfitly with Susa, and others with Bagdat, or Bagdat, or Bagadet in our
times, for the one was situate on the Banks of Euphrates, and the other stands
on the side of Tygris, some Ruins of it are to be seen at this Day, Forty Miles
distant from this latter, as the Authors who have seen it testify. Josephus
will have it, that this Work was undertaken, that they might have a Retreat
from an other Flood if it should happen, but that is only the Imagination of
this Author. Some make Semiramis the Foundress of this City, but she only
increased and beautisied it, having encompassed it with a Brick-wall cemented
together with Slime, after she had built several beautiful Aedifices with very
pleasant Gardens, in which she set on work more than 300000 Men for several
Years.

BABYLONICI,
Babylonians, a very voluptuous People, who worshipped the Fire. They washed
their Bodies after their Death, and wrapping them up in Cerecloth covered them
over with Honey. Ninus, one of their Kings, being slain in the Battle which he
lost with Zoroastres King of the Bactrians, was buried in a Tomb, and Old Belus
caused himself to be put after his Death into a glass Urn full of Oil, which he
ordered to be enclosed in a Magnificent Monument.

BACCHANALIA,
Bacchanals, celebrated in Honor of the God Bacchas, and which were called
Liberales, or Orgiae, or Dionysiaca.

The Orgiae, Bacchanals, Liberales, and Dionysiaca are usually taken for the
same, but there was a difference between those Pagan Ceremonies, for the Feasts
of Liber, or Libera, were celebrated in Honor of Liber or Bacchus every Year
on March the 17th. when the Young Men between 16 and 17 Years Old, put off
their Garment bordered with Purple, called Praetexta to take the Toga virilis
from the Hands of the Praetor with a Surname, which made them capable of going
to the War, and of the Offices of the Commonwealth. But the Bacchanals were
kept every Month, and the Dionysiaca or Orgiae every Three Years, which gave
them the name of Trieterica.

Macrobius, in the first Book of his Saturnalia, Chapter 18. Having proved by
good Reasons that Bacchus and Apollo are but one thing, adds, that the
Bacchanals were celebrated every two Years upon Mount Parnassus, dedicated to
Apollo, and the Muses, where the Satyrs assisted.

Authors refer the Institution of the Feast of Bacchus to the Athenians, which
passed at first for very honest Plays, and Metriments among the Pagans. They
carried a Barrel of Wine wound about with Vine-Branches loaded with Grapes.
They drew an Hee-Goat by the Horns, to sacrifice him with a Basket full of Figs
and Grapes, having their Heads crowned with Vine Branches, and the Bacchae
which were the Priests of that God, held in their Hands Staves twisted with
Ivy, dancing and wantonly playing in the Streets, and crying Evobe, that is to
say, an happy Life.

But these Feasts were in length of time changed into a licentious use of all
Sorts of Debaucheries.

Varro tells us, that in certain Places of Italy, these Feasts of Liber or
Bacchus were celebrated with such Liberty, that they worshipped in Honor of
him, the Privy Members of a Man, and that not in secret to preserve themselves
from Disgrace, but in public, to glory in their Wickedness; for they placed
them honorably upon a Chariot, which they drove through the City, after they
had first carried it through the Country. But at Lavinium there was a whole
Month spent in the Feasts of Liber only, during which time the greatest
Filthinesses were acted, till the Chariot had crossed the public Place, and
was come to the House where it was appointed, that the thing it carried should
be put; after which, the most honest Matrons of the City, was obliged to go and
crown that infamous Depositum before the whole Multitude.

The Romans were not more moderate in these abominable Practices. It was a
certain Greek, of a base Birth, a Priest, and Diviner, skilful in the hidden
Mysteries of these Sacrifices, as Livy says, who first settled this Feast in
Tuscany, and from thence it came to Rome. A Company of married Women only, met
in the Night to celebrate those Mysteries of the God at first, but a Woman
named Paucula of Padua, a Stage Player by Profession, admitted Girls and Boys
of all Ages, and conditions to them, who in the darkness of the Night defiled
themselves with all Sorts of Abominations, and Lewdnesses, but at last the
Disorder and Looseness of these Feasts grew so high, that the Consuls Spurius,
Posthumous, Albinus, and Quintus Martius Philippus, made secret Enquiry into
the Superstition of these Bacchanals, which they performed in the Night with
such abominable Lascivousness, and utterly abolished them, having found Seven
Thousand Persons of that infamous Society.

Nevertheless part of those Superstitious Ceremonies were again established
according to the Humor of those Times, and an old Woman went about, crowned
with Ivy, having a Company of other roaring Women to attend her, who imitated
her in her Gate, and lascivious Postures, who all cried out with a loud Voice,
Evohe.

She carried a Cake made with Honey, of which she gave a Piece to every one she
met.

The Athenians also celebrated a Feast to Bacchus, during which the young Maids
carried gilt Baskets full of Fruit, and this Feast was called CANEPHORIA, and
the Maids CANEPHORAE, from the two Greek Words, which signify to carry a
Basket. The rerinthians put a Serpent into this Basket, for the Celebration of
their Mysterios, dedicated to the Worship of Bacchus. This is what Catullus
would have us to understand by this Verse.

Pars obs^ura cavis celebrabant Orgia Cistis.

They had a Cover, that they might preserve the Mysteries of Bacchus, and hide
them from the Eyes of those, that were not initiated, whom they treated as
Profans.

BACCHAE,
Priestesses of Bacchus, Menades, Bassarides, or Thyades, the Ministers of the
God Bacchus, who celebrate his Orgiae or Mysteries.

The Bacchae, which accompanied the Troops of Bacchus, took their Name from the
Hebrew Word, Baca, which signifies to lament and howl, for Lamentations,
Cryings, and Howlings were very common in the Mysteries of Bacchus. They were
also called Thyades from the Hebrew word Thaha, that is to say, to cry and run
up and down. They are also named Mamallonides, from the Hebrew Memallelar, i.
e. Praters and Talkative-Persons.

These raving Women were clothed with Tigers and Panthers Skins, with their
Hair all loose, throwing their Head backward. They were crowned with Ivy,
carrying in their left Hand, a Thyrse, which was a Pine. Staff. Tacitus
speaking of one of these Bacchae, says, Ipsa orine fluxo thyrsum quatiens, and
Sidonius Apollinaris describing the Troops of Bacchus, makes mention of the
Thyrse, Tiger-skins, and Drums.

They went through the Mountains in the Company of Bacchus, crying out like mad
Persons, and often repeating Evohe Bacchae, that is to say, let Bacchus live
happily. (An Epithet, which was given him by Jupiter, when in the War with the
Giants, Bacchus being transformed into a Lion, vented his Fury on them, and
tore them in pieces.)

BACCHUS,
the Son of Jupiter and Semele. Apollodorus in his third Book of the Original
of the Gods, gives us this Relation of the Nativity of Bacchus. Cadmus, says
he, had Four Daughters, Antinoe, Ino, Semele, and Agave, with a Son named
Polydorus. Ino married Athamas, Antinoe Aristaeus, and Agave Eehion. As for
Semele, Jupiter was in Love with her, and withdrawing himself from the Embraces
of Juno, he gained the Favor of his Mistress. Juno envying the Happiness of
her Rival, disguised her self to cheat her, and taking the Shape of Beroc
Semele's Nurse, she informed her that to be assured of the Love of Jupiter, she
ought to pray him to show himself to her, in all his Glory. Jupiter having
consented to it, Semele was not able to endure his Splendour and Majesty, but
the Fire of his Lightning laid hold on the Roof of the Chamber, and consumed
it. All that could be done in this Surprise, was to save the Child (for she had
been big some Months) and to put him very hot into Jupiters Thigh, where he
fulfilled his time, at the end of which he came out, and was put into the Hands
of Mercury, the Messenger of the Gods, and the Confident of their Love, who
carried him first to Ino his Aunt, and to her Husband Athamas, to take care to
nurse him and bring him up, but Morose Juno, resolving to show her Displeasure
to them, caused Athamas to slay his eldest Son Learchus as he was a hunting,
taking him for a Deer, whereupon Ino cast her self into the Sea with her Son
Melicerta. Then Jupiter to free little Bacchus from the Fury and Persecutions
of Juno changed him into an Hee-Goat for a certain time. When he recovered his
first Form, Mercury carried him to the neighboring Nymphs of the City Nysa in
asia to complete his Education, who named him Dionysius from the Name of his
Father and of his Country. Lucian says, that Bacchus assumed the Shape of an
Hee-Goat, to surprise Penelope, the Daughter of Icarus, whom he forced in
Arcadia, and had Pan by her.

The Theology of the Egyptians, and ancient Greeks teaches us, that Bacchus or
Dionysius is an Emanation or divine Power, and confounds him with Phoebus,
Apollo, Pluto, Apis, Anabis, and Osyris.

It also confounds him with Janus, and Noah, and represents him by a Triangle,
which is a Figure of the Divinity according to the Ancients; and Plutarch
undertakes to prove, that Bacchus is the God of the Hebrews, and that all the
Observations of the Jews are nothing else but the Ceremonies of Bacchus.

Homer as well as all the rest of the Greek Poets makes Bacchus the Son of
Jupiter and Semele; but Pausanias delivers the rest of his Story after a
different manner. The Inhabitants, says he, of the City of Brasias hold that
Semele having brought forth Bacchus, Cadmus her Father being angry at it shut
up both the Mother and the Child into a Chest, and threw them into the Sea,
which cast them upon the Coast of the Brasians, who taking it out of the Water,
opened it, and found that the Mother was already dead, but the Infant being
alive, they caused it to be nourished and brought up. They add, that Ino
wandering at that time was his Nurse, and they show a Cave, where she nursed
him, which to this Day is called Bacchus's Cave. U^pian in Athenaeus's
Dipnosophistes, after Euhemerus of the ^sle of Coos, in Book 30. of his
History, relates that Cadmus the Grandfather of Bacchus, was Cook to the King
of the Sidonians, and having debauched a dancing Maid of that Kings, named
Harmonia, he had by her Semele the Mother of Bacchus.

Lucian in his Dialogue between Jupiter and Juno makes them speak thus. Juno. I
am ashamed, O Jupiter, to have such a drunken and effeminate Son, as this of
thine is, who is always in the Company of certain mad Women, and who are more
masculine than he. Jupiter. But this effeminate Man has conquered Thrace and
Lydia, and subjected the Indies to himself, having made the King Prisoner with
all his Elephants; and which is most strange, he did all this with his leaping
and dancing among the Women, at the sound of the Drum and Flute, and for the
most part drunk. If any One dare speak of his Mysteries, he will take them in
his Chains, and Agave herself, has torn in Pieces her Son Penthius. Is not this
Great and Worthy of Jupiter? What will he not do when he is sober, since he
does so great things when he is drunk.

The same Lucian in Bacchus, relates his Expedition to the Indies thus: Bacchus
says he, attempted the Indies, notwithstanding the Raillery of some, and
Compassion of others who believed that he would be crushed by the Elephants, if
he escaped the Fury of their Arms, for his Army was only made up of Women moved
with divine Fury, who instead of Bucklers carried Drums, and Cymbols; for
Javelins, Staves twisted about with Ivy; for Arms, Garlands of the same Tree,
and for Armor, Skins of Hinds and Panthers. They were attended with a Troop of
Satyrs, who did nothing but leap, and skip like Kids, whose Tails and Horns
they have. Bacchus also had Horns and was without a Beard, clothed with
Purple, and gilded Buskins, and having Vine Branches laden with Grapes, woven
between his Locks of Hair. He rode in a Chariot drawn by Tigers, which was all
he had terrible; his Two Lieutenants were, the One a little old Man with a flat
Nose, trembling all over, clothed in Yellow, with large upright Ears, and a
great Belly, riding for the most part of his time upon an Ass, and for want of
that supported by a Staff, but in all things else a great Captain; the other a
Satyr with Horns, his Thighs hairy, with the Beard and Feet of an Hee-Goat,
holding in his left Hand a Flute, and in the other a crooked Staff, and runs
through all the Plain, leaping and dancing, and much terrifying the Women, for
he was hasty and passionate, and when he came near them, they ran with their
Hair flying about their Shoulders, crying, Evohe, as acknowledging him for
their Master: Nevertheless these mad Women, among their other exploits, tore
Flocks in pieces and eat their Flesh raw.

The Indians seeing such a ridiculous Crew, more fit for a Ball than for a
Warlike Encounter, disdained at first to take Arms, and thought to send their
Women to fight them, for fear they should disgrace their Valor by such an
unworthy Victory, but when they understood, that that Army, though ridiculous,
kindled a, Fire every where (for Fire is the Dart of Bacchus, which he has
borrowed from the Thunder of his Father) they armed themselves in have, and
mounting upon their Elephants came full of Rage and Anger to encounter these
Incendiaries.

When they came in sight of them, they put themselves in order for Battle,
covering the Front of their Troops with their Elephants.

Bacchus also mustered his Army, and set Silene on his right Hand, which is
that great flat Nosed Captain above mentioned; and Pan on his left, and placed
himself in the middle, after he had dispersed the Satyrs every where, as many
Officers, and Captains, and given them for their word, Evohe. Immediately the
Bacchae sounded a Signal with their little Drums and Trumpets, and a Satyr
having blown his Horn, the Ass of Silene began to bray so terribly, that being
joined with the howling of the Bacchae (who then discovered the Iron of their
Thyrses, and the Serpents they were girded withal) the Indians and their
Elephants sied before they were within reach of their Spears, and so they were
defeated, and subdued.

Diodorus in his second Book of his Antiquities gives an historical Relation of
Bacchus, and tells us, that the most wise of the Indians say, that Bacchus
invaded their Country with a great Army from the Western Parts, and that he
over ran all the Indies, not finding any City that dare oppose him; but the
great Heats of the Country much incommoding his Army, he left the Plains, and
retired with his Army into the hollow of the Mountains, which he called the
Thigh, which gave an occasion to the Greeks to feign, that Jupiter put him into
his Thigh. He taught them afterward how to plant, and dress a Vineyard, caused
several Cities to be built among them, and furnished them with Laws, and died
after he had reigned over them 52 Years.

Antiquity has given Bacchus several Names. He is called BIMATER, that is to
say, One who had Two Mothers, viz. Semele and Jupiter, in whose Thigh he
fulfilled his Time, after he was taken out of the Belly of his Mother. He was
named Dionysius, from (...), from Jupiter his Father, and the City Nysa, where
he was nursed. Diodorus places this City in Arabia, or in Egypt on the
Confines of Arabia. Arrian, and Quintus Curtius say it is in the Indies, of
whose Opinion is Pomponius M^la, thus speaking of it. The fairest and largest
of all the Cities in the Indies, is Nysa, where Bacchus was nursed, which gave
occasion to the Greeks to feign that he was shu^ up in Jupiter's Thigh. Pliny
speaks of another City called Nysa, which is in Caria. Stephanus reckons Ten of
the same Name in several Kingdoms.

Some give him the name of Liber, either because he rejoices, and frees the
Mind from the Troubles of Life, or because he obtained Liberty for the Country
of Baeotia.

He is also surnamed BROMIUS (...), from Fear or (...) from Thunder, being born
of a Mother, who was consumed by Jupiter's Thunder.

He is called LYAEUS from the Greek word (...) to drive away, or because Wine
excels Grief.

Lastly, some give him the Epithet of Evan, which in the Indian Tongue
signifies Ivy, which is consecrated to him. We see him sometimes represented to
us in the Shape of a Child, holding in his Arm a Bunch of Grapes, and sometimes
in the Form of a Man carrying a Pine-branch. We have a reverse of a Medal of
Severus, and Julia, where is the Figure of a Chariot drawn by Two Panthers, in
which is set a Young Man holding a Pot in his left Hand, and in the other a
Tigers Skin, to show us, that Bacchus was the Conqueror of the Indies, and
other Eastern Countries, because he is pictured in a Triumphal Chariot with a
Dart in his Hand. and his Enemy prostrate at his Feet. The Philosopher Albricus
tells us, that some have painted Bacchus with the Face of a Woman, with naked
Breasts, and Horns on his Head, crowned with Vine-leaves, and riding upon a
Tiger, carrying a Pot in his left Hand, and a Bunch of Grapes in his right.

Some picture Bacchus both Male and Female, as is visible on the Consular
Medals of the Cassian Family, which show us the Figures of Liber, and Libera,
i. e. Bacchus both Male and Female. Orpheus in his Hymn against Masae has
positively asserted, that Bacchus was ever thought to be of both Sexes; as the
greatest part of the Gods are. He had a Magnificent Temple at Rome, in which
they sacrificed to him Hee-Goats, because they destroy the Vine-branches, and
eat the Grapes, as Virgil teaches us. -- Baccho Caper omnibus aris
Caeditur,
Georg. II. v. 380.

BACCHUS,
the Son of Jupiter and Semele, otherwise called Dionysius, from the Island
Dia, now Naxus, after he had overrun all the East with his Army, subdued the
greatest part of the Indies, and taught Men the use of Wine, was put by them
into the Number of the Immortal Gods; but when the Thebans disputed his
Dignity, publishing that he was not the Son of Jupiter, but of some Man who had
left his Mother, he filled their Women with a divine Fury, so that they ran
with their Hair flying about their Shoulders loose into Mount Cytheron, crying
Evohe. Tiresias and Cadmus were by this Action convinced of his Divinity, and
none but Pentheus opposed it, discoursing of the Superstition of the Orgiae,
and laboring entirely to abolish them; at which the God being provoked, made
him mad also, and drove him into Mount Cytheron, where he was torn in pieces by
the Theban Women, who were before turned Furies, and took him for a Lion, and
his Mother Agave was the Woman that cut off his Head, not knowing who he was.

The Tyrrhenians, famous Pirates in the Mediterranean Sea, as they were robbing
upon the Coasts of the Aegaean Sea, met with Bacchus upon the Shore, and having
taken him Captive, thought they had got a considerable Prize, whereupon they
began to insult over him, and to offer him some Indignities; but the God seeing
their ill Designs, changed them into Dolphins to punish them, as we learn from
Philostratus in his Character of the Tyrrhenians.

Tzetzes thinks that Noab lived at the same time with the Bacchus of the
Indians, and Osiris of the Egyptians, and that he had for his Servant,
Mercurius Trismegistus, who was the first Inventer of Learning, and Arts, from
the Instructions which he had received from Noah, who had preserved Arts,
Learning, and Sciences, which had been invented, and exercised, during the 16
or 17 Ages which preceded the Deluge. The same Author says elsewhere, that near
the Mountains of India, are to be seen the Pillars of Bacchus, not of the
Bacchus of Thebes in Greece, but of Egypt, who found out the dressing of
Vineyards, who bears the Name of Osiris, and is no other Person but Noah. Prope
montes Indiae columnae quaedam constitutae sunt, columnae Dionysi, non Thebani,
sed Vini Inventoris.

Vossius shows us the Similitude there is between the History of Moses, and
Fable of Bacchus. Moses, says this learned Man, was born in Egypt, and Orpheus
in the Hymns attributed to him, testifies the same of Liber or Bacchus, making
him the Son of the Goddess Ists, and saying that he was born upon the Bank of
the River Nyle, where Moses was exposed. His Nurses may also represent to us
the Sister and Mother of Moses, to whom Pharaoh's Daughter entrusted Moses to
be nursed.

Moses after his Birth was first exposed upon the Banks of Nile in a little Ark
made of Bulrushes woven together. Pausanias also relates that the Brasiatae in
Laccdemonia in Greece, affirm that they took their Name from the little Boat,
or Ship, wherein Bacchus being shut up, was cast upon their Coast, (...),
Incolae ea sermontbus vulgarunt, quae neutiquam alii Graecorum Populi
confitentur; Semelem quidem Jovi Liberum patrem peperisse, a Cadino vero
deprehensam cum puero recens. Nato in arcam conjectam, eam arca^n aestu
jactatam in fines suos ejectam.

The Name of Moses comes from his being taken out of the Waters, (Moses i. e.
extra^tus) Orpheus in his Hymns, or in his Mysteries, gives to Bacchus the name
of Moses, and calls him a Person born of the Waters, (...).

Moses had two Mothers, One that bore him, and another that adopted him, and
educated and kept him in the Kings Palace 40 Years, and we know the Reason, why
Bacchus was called. (...), a Child of two Mothers, because Jupiter completed
what was wanting of his time.

Bacchus was educated in a Mountain of Arabia, called Nysa. Diodorus Siculus,
and several others make mention of it, and we know, that Moses lived Forty
Years in Arabia before he returned into Egypt to take upon him the Conduct and
Government of the Children of Israel. Moses also is well known to have
frequented Mount Sinai, which by a small Transposition of Letters, is Nysa, and
it is possible that Mountain might have those two Names. Vossius also observes,
that the Alexandrtan Chronicle speaking of Twelve famous Mountains uses these
Words, (...). Some say that Nysa was a City, which stood upon Mount Meros,
which signifies in Greek, (...), a Thigh, and from thence came the Fable of
Jupiter's Thigh. Others think, that Nysa stood upon the side of a Mountain,
which the Hebrews call, Jarkere har, crura Montis.

Plutarch speaks of the Banishment of Bacchus, which is apparently the Flight
of Moses into Arabia, after he had slain an Egyptian, who was about to kill an
innocent Israelite.

But the Poet Nonnus, who has written the Fable of Bacchus at large, speaks
plainly of the Flight of Bacchus toward the Red Sea, (...). He could not have
spoken any thing more positive, nor more exactly like the History of Moses,
stripped and freed from the Disguise of the Fable of Bacchus.

Moses had many Battles in Arabia, and gained glorious Victories, also Diodorus
Siculus relates out of the Poet Antimachus, how Bacchus found a Potent Enemy
there, which was Lycurgus King of Arabia, who had resolved to destroy him, and
all his Menades, or Bacchae.

The Army of Bacchus, which overrun all Arabia with him, was made up of Men
and Women, according to Diodorus Siculus. We know also, that Moses passed
through all the Deserts of Arabia, with an Army of 600000 fighting Men, but it
was followed with a much greater Number of Women and Children.

Orpheus in his Hymns, Euripides in his Bacchae, and Sophocles in certain
Verses set down by Strado, say, that Bacchus had upon his Forehead the Horns of
a Bull (...), which agrees with the Horns of Light, i. e. those luminous Rays
which came from the Face of Moses, when he returned from Conversing with the
Oracle of God. The Hebrews give this Ray of Light, the name of an Horn, Koren,
whence comes the (...), of the Greeks, and the Cornu of the Latins; to which
agrees the Latin Translation, quod cornuta esset facies Mosis.

Moses struck the Rock which his Rod, and there came out a Stream of Living
Water; now Euripides in his Bacchae, says as much of a Baccha that followed
Bacchus; Thyrsum autem quaedam arripiens percussit Petram, aquae processri
humor.

One of the most faithful Servants of Moses, is Celeb, who gave such
illustrious Proofs of his Courage and Fidelity, when he went to observe and
discover the promised Land, and brought back with the other Spies, that famous
bunch of Grapes: In like manner the Poets make a Dog to have been the Companion
of Baccbus, the Hebrew word Celeb signifying a Dog. Nonnus relates the
Discourse of Bacchus, when he translated his Dog to the Stars, and made a
Constellation of it, called Maera or the Little Dog, which contributes to the
ripening of the Grapes.

Orpheus gives Bacchus the Title of a Lawgiver, (...), attributing to him a
double Law, as if he alluded to the Two Tables of the Law of Moses, or to
Deuteronomy which is one of the Books of Moses. Lastly, Vossius observes that
it is absolutely necessary, to distinguish between the Bacchus of the Indians,
and Bacchus of Egypt and Arabia, which is Moses, and acknowledges that these
are, as it were the two Originals, from which the Greeks have taken the Copy of
their Bacchus of Thebes, who is much later than that of Egypt, as this
Posterior to that of the Indies.

Eusebius has observed that Osiris is the same with Bacchus, as well as
Diodorus Siculus, who tells us, that Cadmus made the Bastard Son of his
Daughter Semele to pass for the Son of Jupiter, and for another Ofiris, and how
Orpheus brought all the Worship of Ofiris, or Dionysius, and Bacchus into
Greece.

The same Authors relate elsewhere, that Cadmus was obliged by the Commands of
his Father Agenor, King of Phaenicia, to go and find out Europa his Sister,
stolen away by Jupiter, and not finding her, he staid in Boeotia, where he
built the City of Thebes, and that Semele conceived by Jupiter and had Bacchus
by him; but Eusebius tells us at the same time, that the Greeks had done
nothing but copied out the Actions of other Nations more ancient than
themselves; and Diodorus Siculus owns in the same Place that there was another
Bacchus more ancient, named SABAZIUS, the Son of Jupiter and Proserpina, whose
Mysteries were celebrated in the Night.

This BACCHUS SABAZIUS was a Phoenician, and one of the Gods Cabiri, according
to the Scholiast of Apollonius of Rhodes. Quidam ferunt Cabiros prius fuisse
duos, seniorem quidem Jovem, and Bacchum, Juniorem. We have proved that Noah
was the first to whom the Assyrians or Babilonians applied the History or Fable
of Bacchus.

Cicero mentions five several Bacchus's. Dionysios maltos habemus, primum a
Jove and Proserpina Natum; secundum Nilo, qui Nysam dicitur interemisse;
tertium Caprio patre, eumque Regem Asiae praefuisse dicunt, cui Sabazia sunt
instituta; quartum Jove and Luna, cut sacra Orphica putantur confici; quintum
Niso natum and Thione, a quo Trieterides constitutae putantur. De Nature. Deor.
lib. III. It Is not easy to distinguish all these Bacchus's. Diodorus Siculus
makes but one of the first and third of Cicero, saying, that Sabazius was the
Son of Jupiter and Proserpina; the Fourth is the same with that of the Greeks;
He that reigned in Asia, may well be that of the Ass^rians. Cicero had no
Knowledge of the Bacchus of the Arabians, which they call UROTAL.

Diodorus Siculus distinguishes between several Bacchus's, but allows the
greatest Antiquity to him of the Indies, where Wine was first found out.
Nonnulli tres diversis temporibus extitisse asserunt, and sua cuique facinora
attribuunt; inter quos omnium vetustissimus natione Indus sit. Hic quod sponte
ob benigni tatem Aeris, and solis temperiem regio illa vitium fertilus est,
primus racemos torcularibus pressit, and emolumenta vini observavit. Hic ille
Bacchus aiunt, arma per universum orbem circumtulit, and vineas conserendi
rationem edocuit. It Is hard not to acknowledge, that this is the History of
Noah, who planted a Vineyard in Armenia, which may pass for one part of the
Indies, for some give the Name of Indies to all the Eastern Provinces. Diodorus
says, that Bacchus is said to be born twice, because the Vine was before the
Deluge of Deucalion, and grew again after the Deluge, when all thought it was
dead.

Philostratus assures us, that the Indians held that their Bacchus came to them
out of Assyria, wherefore the first Bacchus was the Assyrian, and so can be no
other than Noah.

The Lybians according to Diodorus, had also their Bacchus the Son of Jupiter
Ammon, and Amalthea, whom they also paint with Horns. They maintain that he was
much more ancient than the Egyptian or Grecian, although Diodorus owns, that
the Grecian, though the last swallowed up all the rest, so that their
Antiquity was then almost forgotten.

The Romans never knew any but the Bacchus of Greece, the Memory of all the
rest being quite lost through their very great Antiquity.

Posthumous the Dictator vowed, and built a Temple to Liber and Libera.

Nonnus thinks that the several Names of Bacchus are for the most part the
Names of the true God, which the Impiety of Idolaters attributed to their false
Gods. Dionysius may come from Jehova Nissi, that is to say, Dominus veaeillum
m^^m. IACCHUS may come likewise from Jehova or Jao, for so the Greeks sometime
pronounce Jehova. ADONEUS plainly comes from Adonas. ELELEUS comes from El,
Elohim, that is to say Deus Deorum. HYES comes from hu es, i. e. ipse ignis.
ATTES comes from atta cs, i. e. tu ignis, for Bacchus was born according to the
Fable among the Fires of the Thunder of his Father Jupiter. Bacchus is often
represented by the Poets under the Form of a Bull, because God is often called
in Scripture, Abbir, which signifies the Strong, and a Bull. EVOHE is a Term,
which the Scripture uses in speaking of Drunkards. Cui vae, tui evohe, iis qui
vino immorantur. BASSAREUS comes from Batsar, which signifies, to gather the
Vintage. DITHYRAMBUS comes from the Syriack, dithert abban, which is the same
with (...) i. e. who has Two Fathers. IACCHUS come from the Syriack Janko or
Jacco, which is the same with Puer Lactens, and such is Bacchus often
represented. It Is feigned that he was born of Jupiter's Thigh, because it is a
Phrase used among the Hebrews to express ordinary Generation. Nasci de faemore
Patris. If some say he was, born upon the Mountain Merus, (...), it is because
the word signifies a Thigh, or rather because the Hebrew Tongue calls those
parts of Mountains, J^^^^ Jarkete, Thighs, which we call the Sides. If Bacchus
has been called BRISAEUS, and BRESSAEUS, it comes from the Syriack bres ^cubsa,
that is to say, lacus mellis, for all the Ancients have made Bacchus the
Inventor of Honey. As to the name LIBER, Bochart beiieves, that it is an
Imitation of the Hebrew Word Her, hurim, which signifies Noble and Free
Persons, as in Ecclesiastes, Filius Hurim, is the same with Filius Heroum.

BAETYLIA,
rough and shapeless Stones, which were the first Statues, which Men began to
adore. This Name comes evidently from Bethel, which was the Name which Jacob
gave a Stone, upon which he laid his Head to sleep, and which he dedicated in
the Morning to God, pouring out Oil upon it, in Memory of the Vision he had
been of a Mysterious Ladder.

BALISTA,
a Sling, a Warlike Engine, which the Ancients used to cast Stones with Slings,
says Vitruvius, were made after diverse manners, though all used to the same
Purpose. One sort was framed with Levers, and Bars, another with Pullies,
another with a Crane, and others with a toothed Wheel. This Engine was made
much like a Cross-Bow, which cast Bullets.

BALNEAE, or BALINEAE,
Baths, to bath and wash in, very common among the Greeks, and Romans.

Two things are understood by this word, the Buildings, in which these Baths
were enclosed, called Balnearia, and the Tubs wherein they bathed.

It Is not certainly known, who brought in this Custom of Bathing, but it is
plain that the Greeks used it before the Romans. We also find that the
Carthaginians had some Baths for Persons of Quality, and others for their
common People.

The Romans at first used Baths, very seldom, contenting themselves to wash
their Feet, Arms, and Hands every Day after Travel, unless on Feasts, when they
washed their whole Body.

In these early times when Luxury had not disordered their Manners, they did
not aim at any Magnificence, or Pleasure in building Baths, but afterward
things came to such an excess, that in the time of Sylla, a certain Man named
Sergius Orata built a Bath hanging in the Air, at great expense. Hic est
Sergius Orata, qui primus Baineas pensiles habuit.

M. Agrippa to gain the good esteem, and favor of the People of Rome, caused
an 170 public Baths to be built in that City, with all the Ornaments and
Magnificence imaginable.

But the most extravagant Expenses in building Baths, was in the time of the
Emperor Augustus, when they appeared as so many Cities for their vast extent,
and for the Variety of Apartments which they contained, the one being for
Summer, and the other for Winter.

The most famous Baths were those of M. Agrippa, Nero, Domitian, Alexander
Severus, Vesoasian, Titus, Gordian, Aurelian, and Trajan, but that of Autoninus
Caracalla, which was built at the Foot of Mount Aventine and that of
Dicclesian, did much excel all the rest before mentioned, in Grandeur and
Beauty.

The Romans went into the Baths for their Health, convenience, and often for
their Pleasure only, for they thought that the Bath conduced very much to their
Health, by provoking Sweat, and helping Digestion, so that when they found
their Stomachs overcharged with Meat, they went to the Bath, as we learn from
Juvenal's First Satyr, where he inveighs against those who having gorged
themselves with eating, were forced to go into the Baths to relieve themselves.
Poena tamen praesens, cum tu deponis amictus
Turgiaus, and crudum pavonem in Balnea portas.
v. 142.

Then found also, that a Bath was good to refresh themselves after some
considerable Fatigue or Travel, as Celsus the Physician tells us, which makes
Plautus say, that all the Baths in the World were not sufficient to remove the
Weariness he felt, Nunquam aedepol omnes balincae mihi hanc lassitu^^^^^
eniment.

The Bath in like manner was very convenient to cleanse the Body from Fifth,
and any Nastiness, which stuck to it; the Romans having not the use of Linen,
they made their Limbs, more supple and vigorous, being rubbed and anointed,
after they had left the Bath.

In fine, nothing was more surprising, than the largeness and costliness of
these Buildings; it is too little says Ammianus Marcellinus to compare them with
Cities, because they equalled whole Provinces, Lavacra in modum Provinciarum
extructa.

These stately Buildings contained Porches, Walks, Groves, Fish Ponds,
Tennis-Courts, Halls, and infinite Variety of Apartments, some to undress in,
others for sweating, and others to be rubbed and anointed in with the most
costly Perfumes.

The most rare and precious Marbles were used in building these Places; in them
they raised many Pillars and several Figures of Jasper, Alabaster, and
Porphyry; Gold, and Azure shined from all parts. The Floors, and Ceilings were
of inlayed, or Mosaic Work; Arabian Perfumes filled those Places with their
Odours; the Waters fell by degrees, and by their Fall made very pleasant
Cataracts to the sight, which were after received into Cisterns covered with
Silver, and went away through Pipes of the same Materials; the Roofs were of
Stone, and the Walls were plaistered over in the side with a Cement, called
Maltha, from whence the Walls were called, Malthati parietes.

The Water was carried into these Baths through Pipes, which came from the
Aquaeducts of the City, and fell into spacious Cisterns, which they call by a
general Word Baptisteria, lavacra, lavabra, and alvei. There were three sorts
of them, One for hot Water, another for warm, and another for cold.

These Baths were so large, says Lipsius, that in those of Antoninus Caracalla
1800 Persons might bath themselves without any Inconvenience.

Lucian gives us the Description of a Bath which Hippias, an excellent
Architect, made, which I think fit to set down here. It was built upon a very
sleep Ground, which he had levelled at the bottom, with a Foundation suitable
to the largeness of the Building, which was well joined from top to bottom for
long continuance. The building answered to the extent of the Place, and agreed
very well with the plat Form in all its Proportions. At the entrance of it was
a large Porch, into which they ascended insensibly by broad Stairs. Through
this they passed into a great Hall, which would hold all the Servants very
conveniently: On the left Hand were Chambers for Pleasure, having in them
private places very convenient, and very lightsome. Then were Apartments for
Persons of Note, which had on their sides Wardrobes to undress in. In the
middle was a lodging very lofty, and open, where were set Three Baths of cold
Water; it was lined within with Laconick Stone, and adorned with ancient
Statues of Marble, of which, One represented Health, and the other Aesculapius;
from thence they went into an Oval Apartment, where they at first felt grateful
Heat, which increased by little and little. From hence they passed to the right
Hand into another lightsome One to anoint themselves, which had Privacies on
both sides, to receive those that came from the Exercises. Farther was another
Apartment, more beautiful and convenient than all the rest, as well to stand,
as to lie down or sit in. Then there was an hot Antichamber, lined with
Numidian Stone, which led into the last Apartment which shined on all Sides.
This had likewise Three Baths of hot Water, from whence they might pass into
the cold Baths through a Stove, without going through the Places by which they
came in. Thus ends the Description of the Bath of Hippias.

Some have reckoned Six Hundred and Seventy public Baths at Rome, and Eighty
Two private Ones. Publius Victor counts Eight Hundred and Sixty Public Ones.

Besides the Water-Baths to wash in, there were dry Stoves in an Hall, whose
Roof was made in a Semicircle, in the middle of which was an Hole to let in the
light, with a Buckler hung up in it, by means of which they could increase or
lessen the Heat, by letting it down, or raising it.

This Place was called LACONICUM, because the Lacedaemonians were the Inventors
of these dry Stoves for sweating, using them ordinarily from the time that
Apollonius Tyanaeus forbad, by the advice of the Ephori hot Baths, which were
of little use, unless to make Men lazy and esseminate. Seneca the Philosopher
calls these P^aces, Sudatoria, and sometimes Sphaerifleria, from their
Spherical and round Figure, as Suetonius calls them in the Life of Vespsian.
Cicero names them Assa, and Cornelius Ce^sus, Assas sudationes; they were very
profitable for Digestion, and by sweating to drive out a Quantity of Water from
all parts of the Body, which made them more active, and better disposed.

There were in the Both diverse Chambers for several uses, as there were also
in the Stoves. Some were for undressing called by the Greeks (...), and by the
Latins, Spoliatoria, that is to say, Chambers of Spoil; others for wiping and
drying the Body, after having been in the Baths, and others for rubbing and
anointing, named in Greek, (...), and in Latin, Unctuarta.

Vitruvius describes to us the manner of making these Stoves.

Hot, and warm Stoves says he, ought to have their Windows out of the reach of
the cold, or if the Place will not bear it, turned to the South, because the
time for bathing according to Custom, is from Noon to the Evening. It should be
contrived that the hot Bath for the Men, and that for the Women, should be near
one another, that they may both heat with the same Furnace. There must be
placed upon this Furnace, three large brazen Vessels, One for hot Water, the
other for warm, and the third for cold, and these Vessels so ordered, and
disposed, that that which holds the warm Water, shall go so far into that which
contains the hot, as to take its heat from it, and in the like Proportion shall
the cold Bath go into the warm; the Under-part of the Baths shall be heated by
one Furnace only. This Bath ought to be lightsome above, that it be not darkened
by those that are about it. The Seats about the Bath should be so large, as to
hold those who wait, till the first Comers who are in the Bath come out of it.

Although Baths were built for the public, yet there were some, at which
certain Fees were paid for bathing in them, which for that Reason were called
Balneas meritorias, but what they gave was but a small Matter, viz. the Fourth
part of an Assis, quadrans, which was paid to the Keeper of the Baths, which
gave Occasion to Seneca to call the Baths, Rem quadrantariam, and Horace to
say, Lib. 1. Sat. 3. Dum tu quadrante Lavatum Rexibis. --

Only Infants under 14 Years of Age paid nothing, as Juvenal teaches us in this
Verse

Nec pueri credunt, nisi qui nondum aere lavantur.
Sat. 2. v 152. It was not permitted to go into the Bath at all Hours of the
Day, but only at certain fixed Hours.

The Emperor Adrian published an Edict, forbidding to open the Baths before Two
a Clock in the Afternoon, Mess in case of Sickness, ante octavam horam in
publico nominem, nisi agrum lavare jussum est. (Now the Eighth Hour was our two
a Clock in the Afternoon, because they began the Day from our Six a Clock in
the Morning, or thereabouts.)

The Hour for going into, and coming out of the Bath, was made known by the
Sound of a Bell, which was called, Tintinnabulum, as these Verses of Martial
testify,

Read pilam, sonat aes Thermarum, ludere pergis?
Virgin vis sola lotus abire domum.
Give over playing at Ball, the Bell sounds for the Bath, for if you hold on
your Play ye cannot bath your selves unless in the cold Bath, called Virgo.
(which was a Water that came to Rome.) Marc. lib. XIV. Epigr. 163.

From hence we learn, that the Romans did not go into the Baths, till after
Noon ordinarily, unless upon the Account of Sickness, because then they were
more free, and less troubled with Business, for they allotted the Morning to
wait upon, and court the Favor of the Grandees of Rome, and to follow their
own business, after which they eat soberly, and then either took their Ease, or
went to some Exercise, and to take their Pleasures. From whence they went into
the Bath to dispose them for their Supper, as Persius testifies in this Verse.

His mane edictum post prandia Callirhoen do.
I allow, says this Poet, these loose Fellows to go in the Morning to the
Praetors Court to hear the Judgment there, and after Dinner I permit them to
court the Women, for Callirhoe was a famous Harlot, or rather (according to
another Interpretation of this Verse of the Persius) I permit them to go into
the Bath, because Callirhoe was a famous Fountain of Athens, and so by an usual
Figure common among the Poets, Callirhoe is taken in general for a Bath. Pers.
Sat. 1. v. 134.

After they had bathed, they had their Bodies rubbed, and the Hair pulled off
with Pincers, or small Twitchers of Silver, and them rubbed them with a Pumice
Stone to smooth the Skin, which they anointed with a perfamed Oil, pouring it
out by Drops, out of a small Vessel, which they called Gutrus, Glans, Ampul^a,
or Laecythus.

They often made a Collation of Fruits, and talked of things pleasant, and
diverring, from whence it came that the Baths were called Garr^la Balnea.

BALNEARII SERVI,
the Servants belonging to the Bath. Some were appointed to heat them, which
were called Fornacatores; others were called Capsarii, who kept the Clothes of
those that went into them; others were named Aliptae, whose Care it was to pull
off the Hair, and others were called Uactuarii, who anointed and perfumed the
Body.

BALSAMUM,
Balm, a Shrub of India, which is of great use in Medicines. When the Boughs of
it are full of Sap, they make an Incision with a Flint or Potsherd (for it will
not endure Iron) and there distills out of it a thick Juice of a Pleasant Smell,
and it is used in the Cure of several Wounds, and some Distempers of the Body.

BALTEUS,
a Belt, a large Girdle of Leather used to carry a Sword, and a Dagger inset
with Bosses of Gold, Silver, or Copper.

BAPTAE,
Athenian Priests of the Goddess Cotytto, who was the Goddess of La
civiousness, and whose Feasts and Sacrifices were kept in the Night, with all
the Beastliness imaginable. Eupolis was thrown into the Sea by the Priests, for
having made a Comedy in which he discovered the filthy Actions, and lewd
Conversations.

BARBA,
the Beard, the Hait that grows on the Face. The Romans for a long time wore it
without shaving or cutting, and the time is not exactly known, when they began
to do it. Titus Livius seems to tell us, that this Custom was in use from the
Year 369, for speaking of Manlius Capitolinus who was taken Prisoner, He
relates that the greatest part of the People being troubled at his
Imprisonment, changed their Clothes, and let their Beards, and Hair grow.If
this were so, then we may infer that out of times of Mourning they had their
Hair cut and their Beards shaved.

Nevertheless Varro speaks clearly, that the first Barbers came out of Sicily
to Rome, in the Year 454, and that a Man called Ticimus Menas brought them.
From that time the Young Men began to have their Beards cut, and Hair, till
they came to be 49 Years old; but it was not allowed to be done above that Age,
says Pliny. Scipio Africanus had himself shaved all his Days, and Augustus did
the same in Imitation of him.

The Young Men did not begin to shave themselves, till they were Twenty or
Twenty one Years of Age, as did Nero and Caligula, but Augustus did not do it,
till he was Twenty five Years old.

The Day wherein they were shaved the first time was a Day of rejoicing, and
they were careful to put the Hair of their Beard into a Silver or Gold Box, and
make an Offering of it to some God, particularly to Jupiter Capitolinus, as
Nero did, according to the Testimony of Suetonius.

Only the Philosophers let their Beards grow, and wore them very long, without
cutting, or shaving.

BARDI,
Bards, ancient Poets among the Gauls, who described in Verse, the brave
Actions of the great Men of their Nation. They were so called from one BARDUS,
the Son of Druyis, who reigned over the Gauls.

There were Four sorts of Men comprised under the general Name of DRUIDES, viz.
The VACERES, who attended upon the Mysteries of their Religion; the EUBAGES,
who were employed in judging of Prodigies; the BARDES, who celebrated in Verse
the Heroical Actions of their great Men; and the SARRONIDES, who administered
Justice, and instructed the young Gauls in the liberal Arts and Sciences.

BASILICA,
a Greek Word that signifies a Kings Palace; it was a public Building at Rome,
magnificently raised, in which they administered Justice. It was covered, and by
that a Basilica was distinguished from the FORUM, which was a public Place
open to the Air.

In these Basilica's were large Halls with Roofs, and Galleries raised upon
rich Pillars. On both sides of these Galleries were Shops, where the finest
Wares were sold. In the middle was a large Place for the Convenience of Men of
Business and Merchants, as is at a little distance from the Palace at Paris.

The Tribunes administered Justice there, as well as the Centum-viri. In them
were also Chambers built, where the Lawyers and Pleaders maintained by the
Commonwealth resided, to answer to all Points of Law, when they were
consuited. This is doubtless, what Cicero means, Epist. 14. lib. 2. ad At.
Basilicam habeo, non villam, frequentia formianorum, because Men came from all
parts to consult him in his Country House, as if he were in a Basilica.

The principal Basilica's at Rome were these, Julia, Porcia, Pauli, Sisimini,
Sempronii, Caii, Lucii, and Argentariorum, the Bankers.

Others were also built for the Convenience of Traders, and Merchants near the
great Roman Place. The Scholars went thither to make their Declamations, that
they might appear, and have the more Auditors to hear them, according to the
Testimony of Quintilian. Lib. 12. Chap 5.

Large and spacious Halls were first called Basilica's, because they were made
for the People to meet in, when Kings administered Justice themselves;
afterward, when they were left to the Judges, Merchants built them for
themselves; and lastly, they were taken for Churches by the Christians. Then it
happened that they built most of their Churches in the Fashions of Basilica's,
which differed from the Temples of the Ancients, in this, that their Pillars
stood within, whereas in Temples they stood without. Basilica's were for
Tradesmen and Pleaders, as now the Halls of a Palace are, where they administer
Justice.

BASSAREUS,
and BASSARIDES, Epithets given to Bacchus, and the Bacchae, from the long Robe
Bassara, which they are said to wear, as Hesychius, and Pollux teach us; and as
we learn from the Statues of Bacchus. Phornutus, and Acron, the Scholiast of
Horace, think that this Word Bassara, comes from a City of Lydia, called
BASSARA, from whence the Fashion of it came.

The Grammarian Cornutus upon Persius will have them to be so called from Foxes
skins, which in the Thracian Language are called Bassares, with which the
Bacchae were clothed,

BATTUS,
a certain ridiculous Poet, who used the same Repetitions frequently in his
Poetry, which has given occasion to call a Discourse full of Repetitions,
Battology, from his Name.

It was also the Name of a Shepherd of the City of Pylus, who was changed by
Mercury into a Touchstone, because he had not kept his word with him about the
Theft, which he made of the Sheep of Admetus's Flock, kept by Apollo to his
Disgrace.

BATUALIA,
Fencers, exercised with blunt Arms; for we say, rudibus batuere, to fight with
dull Weapons, or in jest.

BATHILLUS,
a Buffoon and very good Dancer, whom Maecenas loved to an excessive Degree. He
made him his Freeman, and he lived in the time of Augustus and Nero.

BEELPHEGOR,
of whom it is spoken in the Book of Numbers, that a Part of the Israelites
gave themselves to the impure and execrable Worship of that false God, and that
God took a dreadful Vengeance on them: Initiatusque Israel Beelphegor, occidat
vnusquisque proximos suos, qui initiati sunt Beelphegor. It Is probable that the
God which was honored upon Mount Phegor or Phogor, was Saturn, according to
Theadoret. St. Jerome believed, that Beelphegor was the God Priapus. Fornicati
sunt cum Madianitis, and ingressi sunt ad Beelphegor idolum Madianatarum, quem
nos Priapum possumus appellare. He says also the same thing, writing against
Jovinian. Proprie quippe Phegor lingua hebraea Priapus appellatur.

BELIDES,
Belides, or Danaides, were the Fifty Daughters of Danaus, the Son of Belus,
surnamed the Old, who slew their Husbands, the Sons of the King of Egypt, the
first Night of their Marriage, except only One, named Hypermnestra, who did not
slay her Husband Lynceus.

BELLEROPHON,
otherwise named HIPPONOMUS, son of Glaucus King of Corinth; he slew his
Brother Beller, and from thence was surnamed Bellerophon, as much as to say,
the furtherer of Beller. After he had committed this Murder he fled to the
Court of King Praetus, who received him favorably, but his Wife falling in
Love with him, and not being able to induce him to satisfy her unchaste Desires,
she accused him to her Husband for attempting her Chastity. The King being
angry at the Action, but unwilling to break the Rules of Hospitality, which he
had allowed him, contented himself instead of slaying him, to send him to his
Father in Law Jobates King of Lycia, with Letters signifying his Condemnation.
Jobates willing to execute the King's orders, sent him to fight against the
Chimaera, but he brought it to an happy end by the help of his Horse Pegasus;
the King admiring his extraordinary Valor, gave him his Daughter in Marriage.
The Fable adds, that being desirous to fly up into Heaven by the Help of his
Horse Pegasus, he was cast down Headlong by Jupiter, to punish his proud
Rashness, and being made blind by his Fall, he died a wandering Vagabond.

Homer gives us this Account of Bellerophon, in the Sixth Book of his Iliads,
v. 160. etc.

BELLEROPHON, the most beautiful and valiant of the Argives, was passionately
loved by Antia the Wife of Praetus, who being not able to persuade him to yield
to her unlawful Desires, went to her Husband and told him. You must either dye,
or put Bellerophon to Death, who has attempted my Chastity, although 'twas she
her self, that had solicited him to love her.

Praetus was very angry, but would not put him to Death, but sent him with
private Letters to his Father-in-Law in Lycia, which ordered him to put him to
Death. He went into Lycia under the Protection of the Gods, where being arrived
near the River Xanthus, the King looked favorably upon him, and gave him all
the Honors imaginable. He stayed Nine Days together with him, sacrificing
every Day an Ox. At the end of that time he asked him the Reason of his coming,
whereupon he immediately gave him the Letters of Praetus his Son-in-Law, and
having read them, he sent him to fight the Chimaera (an horrible Monster to
behold, for he had the Forepart of a Lion, who vomited Fire and Flames, the
middle of a Goat, and the Tail of a Serpent.)

He subdued this Monster by the Protection of the Gods, and killed it. After
this Victory he went to War against the Solymi, and then against the Amazons,
and because he returned Victorious, King Jobates sent an Ambush to kill him,
but he defeated them all. This induced the King to give him his Daughter in
Marriage, for the sake of his Courage and Virtue.

But to return to the Allegories of this Chimaera, and Bellerophon. Palephates
speaks thus of them. Some say that Bellerophon rode upon a winged Horse, which
is both ridiculous and unpossible, unless they could lend him all the Feathers
of the swiftest Birds. Others would have us also believe, that Bellerophon slew
the Chimaera of Amisodar, a Monster which had the Forepart of a Lion, and the
middle of a Goat, and the hinder-parts of a Serpent. Others will have it, that
it had only the Three Heads of these Creatures, which is less credible. This
then is the Foundation of all these Fictions.

BELLEROPHON,
was a young Man of Corinth, very beautiful, and liberal, who having fitted a
Ship which he named Pegasus, he went to coast along the Phrygian Shore, where
at that time reigned Amisodar, near the River Xanthus, along by which there
arises a Mountain named by the Inhabitants, Telmessus, to which there is an
Ascent from the Plain on two sides of it. On the side next the City Xanthus,
there were very good Pastures, but ont the side next Caria it was barren, and
inaccessible; in the middle there was a Gulf, from whence there came out at
certain times Flashes of Fire, and Flames and Clouds of Smoke. To this Mountain
is joined another, named Chimaera, upon which there was a Lion, and at the Foot
of it a great Serpent, which did much harm among the Flocks, which fed
thereabout, as well as to the Shepherds, and Inhabitants round it. But
Fellerophon landing on these Coasts with his Ship, named Pegasus, because it
was a good Sailer, and very swift in its Course, went to those Mountains, and
setting the Woods on Fire, destroyed those Monsters, which gave an Occasion to
the Fable to say, that Bellerophon being mounted upon Pegasus, had killed the
Chimaera of Amisodar.

BELLONA,
the Goddess of War, the Wife, Mother, or Nurse of Mars; some will have her to
be Minerva, and Pallas. This false Deity was so much honored by the
Cappadocians, that they built a Temple to her in the City Comana, and her
Priest, or Sacrificer was the first Person in Honor and Dignity next to the
King. She is painted in Armor with a menacing or furious Countenance, holding
a Trumpet, and a Whip in her Hand, and sometimes a lighted Torch.

Appius Claudius, who was after stricken blind for having profaned the
Priesthood of Hercules, built her a Temple at Rome, according to the Vow he had
made to her in the Battle against the Samnites. This Temple was in the Circus
of Flaminius near the Carmental Gate. In it, foreign Ambassadors were admitted
to audience, and they hung up their Bucklers, and other Arms, as Appius did
according to Pliny. Posuit in Bellonoe aede Majorum suorum Clypeos.

There was near this Temple a Pillar named BELLICA, from which the Consuls, or
Herald cast a Javelin, as far as they could, as if they had cast it into the
Enemies Countries, to declare War against them.

The Feast of this Goddess was kept upon the Fourth Day before the Nones of
June, because on that Day, Appius dedicated a Temple to her.

The Priests of this Goddess, which from her Name were called Bellonarii, drew
Blood from all parts of their Bodies, to appease her with that Sacrifice. Some
thought that they had a Gift of Prophecy, to foretell the great Events of War.
For that end they entered in a Fury, and holding naked Swords in their hands,
they cut deep Gashes in their Arms, and Thighs, and with the Blood that issue
out of the Wounds, making a Sacrifice to Bellona, not giving her any other
Victims, as Tibullus tells in these Verses,

Haec ubi Bellonae motu est agitata, nec acrem
Flammam, non amens verbera torta timet.
Ipsa bipenne suos caedit violenta Lacertos.
Sanguineque effuso spargit inepta Daeam.
Statque latus praefixa veru, flat saucia pectus,
Et canit Eventus, quos Dea magna movet.
BELUS,
the Ancients do not tell us very clearly, what sort of Deity Belus was.

Hesychius says, that it was the Heaven, or Jupiter, and that the Sun was
called Bela.

St. Jerome, and St. Isidore are of Opinion, that Saturn was named Belus.

Herodian in the Life of Maximinian assures us, that the People of Aquileia
gave the Sun the Name of Beles. Some Manuscripts and Inscriptions call him
Belinus or Belenus.

The God Baal, or Baalphegor, who is mentioned in the Old Testament, was the
same Belus, who was the Author of the Idolatry and Priesthood of the Chaldeans.

There was another Belus the Son of Neptune, who married Isis after the Death
of Apis her first Husband, when Cecrops reigned at Athens. Aegyptus and Danaus
were his Sons, and thence it comes to pass, that the Fifty Daughters of Danaus
were called BELIDES.

BEEL, or BELUS,
says Varro, is the same with Jupiter the Son of Saturn. He was the first as
St. Cyril tells us in Lib. 3. against Julian the Apostate, who took upon
himself the Name of God, and set up Idolatry, causing Temples to be built,
Altars to be made, and Sacrifices to be offered in Honor of himself, which his
Son Ninus, and Queen Semiramis much promoted.

BERECINTHIA,
the Name of a Mountain, and City in Phrygia, where Cybele the Mother of the
Gods was most zealously worshipped, and was from thence named Berecinthian.

BERONICE,
Berenice, Queen of Egypt, and Wife of Ptolomaeus Euergetes her own Brother,
who having vowed her Hair to the Goddess Venus, if her Husband returned safe
from a Voyage, which he made into Asia, consecrated and laid up her Hair in the
Temple of the Goddess to fulfill her Vow, but it being not to be found, the
Magician Conon a little after, that he might gain the Favor of the King, who
was angry for the loss of it, persuaded him, that it was put among the Stars,
and changed into those Seven Stars, which appear in the Form of a Triangle at
the Tail of the Caelestial Sign, called the Lion. Callimachus made a Greek
Elegy upon this Subject, which Catuilus has turned into Latin.

BEROSUS,
a Chaldean, to whom the Athenians erected a Statue with a gilded Tongue, upon
the account of his excellent Eredictions.

BES, or BESSIS,
the Mark, or 8 Ounces, part of the Assis. BES, for BIS, which is Two Triens,
which are each Four in Value.

BESTIAE,
Beasts, either wild, or domestic Creatures, which were presented at Rome, in
the Plays of the Amphitheatre, for Shows to the People.

Some pleased the People with hunting of these Beasts, in which they made them
fight with Men, or one with another.

Vopiscus has given us a curious Description of an hunting, which the Emperor
Probus made upon the Circus, after his Triumph over the Germans. He gave, says
he, a great hunting, where the People got an advantage by the Havoc made in
it. He caused his Soldiers to pluck up Trees by the Roots, and by covering
them with Earth, set them again, so that the Circus seemed on a sudden to
become a flourishing, Wood, which he filled with Ostriches, Stags, Wild Boars,
Bulls, and Wild-Goats. All these Beasts were left to the People, and every one
catched what he pleased. Another Day he gave an hunting of an Hundred Lions
upon the Amphitheatre, which being let out, made a Noise like Thunder with
their terrible roarings. In the same Place an Hundred Lybian Leopards, and as
many Syrian; and an Hundred Lions, and Three Hundred Bears, were presented
fighting together.

Men entered the Combat with fierce Beasts. The Fencers and Slaves fought
artificially with Lions, and Leopards, and often conquered and slew them.

Criminals also, who were condemned, were exposed to Beasts without any Arms to
defend themselves, and often they were bound, and the People were pleased to
see them torn in pieces, and devoured by those hungry Creatures. This was the
most usual Punishment, which the Pagan Emperors inflicted upon the first
Christians, whom they ordered to be given to the Beasts, damnati (...) Bestias.

Some Freemen also to give proof of their Skill and Courage would fight with
Beasts.

Women themselves, according to the Relation of Suetonius, would dare to divert
the Emperor, and People, by engaging with the most cruel Beasts.

Lastly, These Creatures were made to fight one with another, Lions with Bears,
Rhinoceros's with Elephants, which would show much Activity and Cunning in so
great a Body.

BIAS,
of Priene, a Philosopher, and one of the Seven wise Men of Greece. The City,
where he lived, being taken, he fled, and would not carry any of his Goods with
him. His Fellow Citizens asked him, why he did not take his Goods with him, he
replied. All that is mine, I have with me; meaning his Wisdom and Mind.

BIBLIOTHECA,
a Library, a Room filled with Books.

The Kings of the Race of Attalus, being Lovers of Sciences and Learning, built
a Library at Pergamus. King Piolemy did the like at Alexandria. Plutarch
writes, that the Kings of Pergamtu's Library contained Two Hundred Thousand
Volumes, but was much inferior to that of the Kings of Egypt, which Aulus
Gellius assures us had Seven Hundred Thousand; and Gallen tells us, that the
Kings of Egypt were so very zealous to increase the number of the Books of
their Library, that they would give any price for the Books, which were brought
them, which gave an Occasion of forging abundance of Books, and attributing
them to such Authors, as did not compose them, that they might put a greater
value upon them.

This Library was burnt by the Romans in the first War, which they made in
Egypt. Aulus Gellius says, that it was set on Fire through mere carelessness,
and that not by the Roman Soldiers, but by their Auxiliary Troops; which he may
be thought to speak, that he might free his own Nation from the imputation of
so barbarous an action, since the Persians, as illiterate as they were thought,
spared the Library of Athens, when Xerxes had taken that City, and set it on
fire.

The Roman Emperors erected diverse Libraries at Rome with great expense, and
much magnificence; and Augustus caused a beautiful and spacious Gallery to be
made in Apollo's. Temple, that he might put therein a Library of Greek and
Latin Books.

BIBLIS,
The Daughter of Miletus and the Nymph Cyane, who being fallen in Love with her
Brother Caunus, and finding no way, to enjoy him, hanged herself. Ovid in his
Metamorphoses says, that the Gods changed her into a Fountain, which bears the
same Name.

BIGAE,
a Chariot for Racing, drawn by two Horses abreast.

BIGATI NUMMI,
Pieces of Money, stamped with the Figure of a Charior drawn with Two Horses
abreast.

BISSEXTUS,
the Odd day, which is inserted in the Calendar every fourth Year, that the
Year may equal the Course of the Sun. This Intercalation, or Interposition was
found out by Julius Caesar, who having observed, that the Sun finished its
course in Three Hundred Sixty Five Days, and about Six Hours, added one whole
day every Fourth Year, that he might take in these Hours, and this Day he
inserted next the 23. Day of February, which at that time was the last Month of
the Year among the Romans. It was called BISSEXTUS, because the Sixth of the
Calends of March was then twice counted, bis sexto Calendas Martias, and that
Year had 366 Days

BITO, and CLEOBIS,
the Sons of Argia, the Priestess of Juno. When their Mother was going to the
Temple of that Goddess in a Chariot drawn with Oxen, and the Oxen moved too
slow, these Brethren drew their Mothers Chariot to the Temple of Juno, and
their Mother when she had sacrificed to the Goddess, begged a Reward for her
Children, who voluntarily submitted their Necks to the Yoke. This was granted;
for when they had feasted plentifully upon the Sacrifice, they lay down to
sleep, and were both found dead together without Pain, and had the Honor of
that Action.

BITUMEN,
a black Juice, which will grow hard, by putting into Vinegar, yet will swim
upon Water. It cannot be cut with Iron, nor Brass, nor will it mix with
Menstruous Blood. The People of the Country assure us, that Bitumen runs
together on helps, and is driven by the Winds, or drawn to the Shore, where it
is dried both by the heat of the Sun, and the Exhalations of the Earth, and
then they cut it, as they do Stone or Wood. There was such an Abundance of it
at Babylon, says Vitruvius, that they used it for Mortar to build their Walls.

BOCCHYRIS,
King of Egypt. He was so just in his Judgments, that according to Diodorus,
the Egyptians made use of his Name, as a mark of just and upright Judgment.
It Is said that in his time (which was in the Days of Romulus and Remus, the
Founders of Rome) a Lamb spoke.

BOEDROMIA,
Feasts, which the Athenians celebrated every Year in Honor of Apollo, for the
Victory which Theseus gained over the Amazons. From it Apollo had the name of
Boedromius.

BONA DEA,
the good Goddess, named by the Ancients, Fatua, or Senta. This Deity was had
in great Veneration by the Roman Ladies. She was Dryas the Wife of Faunus, of
an exemplary Chastity: They sacrificed to her in the Night, in a little
Chapel, into which it was not permitted to Men to enter, or be present at her
Sacrifices; whence it is that Cicero imputes it to Clodius as a Crime, that he
had entered into this Chapel in a Disguise, and by his Presence had polluted
the Mysteries of the good Goddess.

This Sacrifice was kept Yearly in the House of the High Priest, and that by
his Wife with the Virgins consecrated to the Good Goddess. By her, some
understand the Earth, and it is for that reason, that she is sacrificed to by
the People, because nothing is so dear to them as the Fruits of the Earth. This
is no just Ground, why the Romans might not understand by this Deity an ancient
Queen of Italy, named Fauna, for most of the Heathen Gods had a double Relation
in this kind; and this was the Occasion of it.

It is certain that in the primitive Times, all their Worship terminated upon
material Beings, as the Heaven, Stars, Earth, Sea, Woods, Rivers, and other
things of the like Nature, which the first Men through Ignorance believed to be
the sole Causes of all the Good or Evil that happens in the World: But as
Opinion can find no stop, when once the Bounds of Nature are passed over, the
religious Respect, which they entertained for these Beings, extended itself
with more Reason to the Persons themselves, who had invented this Worship, and
had persuaded others to it. This Adoration increased more and more in following
Ages, through the Respect which Antiquity begets, and great Preeminence it
gives to all things, and because Men have always had an Inclination to think
the Gods like themselves, for this Reason, which Cicero gives (which is) that
there is nothing, that appears so excellent to Man, as Man himself, they came
by Degrees not only to deify the Inventers of these Worships, but also to
confound them with the Deities, which they had found out. Hence it came to
pass, that the same God was worshipped in several Places of the World under
different Names, as all the Mythologists confess, because they bore the Name of
those eminent Persons, who had each of them settled their Worship in those
Countries. Wherefore it is probable, that 'twas Fauna, who first began the
Worship of Terra (or the Earth) at least in Italy; since she was after
confounded with that Deity there. She was called Bona D^a, or the Good Goddess
by way of Excellency, and that for the best Reason in the World, because there
is no being that does Men more good.

If the Sex of this Queen were not enough to make us think this Deity rather to
be a Female than a Male, since they are often not distinguished, yet that which
bears Fruits as the Earth does, has so much greater likeness to a Woman, than
a Man, that we need search no farther for a Reason; and this is the manifest
cause, why Women were only to perform her Service, and Men totally excluded.

This Non-admission might also proceed from this Story. That this devout Queen
was so chaste, that no Man, but her own Husband ever saw her, nor knew her
proper name, for she was called Fauna in after Ages for no other Reason, but
because her Husband's name was Faunus. In Respect therefore to her signal
Chastity it was, that all Men are forbidden to be present at her Worship, the
High Priest himself in whose House it was performed, and who was the
Chief-Minister in all others, not excepted; for he was obliged to depart out of
his House before they began, and carry along with him all the Men which were
there, of what Quality soever they were. All Pictures also which represented
any Male were covered; the vestal Virgins were summoned to it. Of all Plants
with which the House was to be adorned, only the Myrtle was forbidden, because
it was consecrated to Venus, and her Service began just at Night. -- Velari
pictura jubetur
Quaecunque alterius Sexus imitata figuram est.
Juv.

BOOTS.
Charles's Wain, a Constellation in the Heavens called by the Greeks,
Arctophilax, which signifies, the Keeper of the Bear, because he drives a
Chariot drawn by Fourteen Stars after the manner of an Ox-head.

BOREAS,
the North Wind, called also Aquilo; it blows between the Oriental and the
North Solstice. The Poets feign him to be the Son of Astreus, and falling in
Love with Orythia, stole her, that he might have the Enjoyment of her.

Philostratus makes Boreas the King of the Winds, who sent his Two Children,
Zethes (that is to say, a strong Blast, and Calais i. e. a gentle Gale) in the
Expedition to Colchos. But Apollonius Rhodius gives us a more particular
Account of this Fable. The Children of Boreas, says he, were also in the
Expedition at Colchos. He begat them of the Nymph Orythia, whom he stole from
Athens.

These Two Persons had gilded Scales, which covered their Shoulders, and Wings
on their Feet, with a long Purple Head of Hair. They drove the Harpies which
much molested Phineus King of Thrace, into the Island Strophades, but were
warned by Iris, to desist from the Pursuit, that they might not hurt Jupiter's
Dogs, as the Harpies were.

Pausanias tells us, that the People of Megalopolis in Greece, gave as great
Honor to the Wind Boreas, as to any God whatsoever, because he had assisted
them with a great Force against the Attempt made upon them by the Lacedaemonians.

They dedicated, says the same Author, in his Eighth Book, Page 513, an Altar
to the Wind Boreas, and the Citizens offered a Sacrifice to him every Year.
Boreae ara dicata est, cui anniversarium Megalopolitani sacrum faciunt, etc.

When Homer says, that the North Wind was transformed into a Stone-Horse, and
covered several fine Mares, of which he begat Twelve Colts so swift and light,
that they could run upon the tops of standing Corn without breaking it, and
upon the Waves of the Sea without making any Impression upon them, 'twas
because he really believed that they were Mares, that would conceive by the
Influences of the Wind.

Virgil relates that as a true Story of the West Wind, which Homer speaks of
Boreas, as a Fable.

BOS,
an Ox, a Beast, which the Ancients offered in Sacrifice to several of their
Deities, as Jupiter the Chief of their Gods, and such an Ox according to Homer
ought to be Five Years old. Yet Plutarch assures us, that Solon forbad by his
Laws, that Oxen should be sacrificed; but Aelian explains it of Oxen used in
plowing.

Oxen were also sacrificed to Cybele the Mother of the Gods, and those
Sacrifices were for that reason called Tauropolia, to return Thanks to that
Goddess of the Earth, for teaching Men the Art of taming those Creatures, and
using them in tilling the Ground.

The Greeks also offered black Bulls to Neptune, to denote the raging of the
Sea when it is moved.

The Superstition of the Ancients proceeded so far as to offer Hecatombs, or
Sacrifices of an Hundred Oxen to Jupiter.

Strabo teaches us, that these Hecatombs came from the Lacedaemonians, who every
Year offered a Sacrifice of an Hundred Oxen in the name of an Hundred Cities,
which were under their Command and Government.

But these Expenses appearing too great to some Persons, they reduced these
Sacrifices to Twenty five Oxen, and supposed through a Childish Distinction,
that because these Oxen had each of them Four Feet, it was sufficient to make
an Hecatomb, that there was the number of an Hundred found in those parts.

One of the Ancients finding himself in great Danger upon the Sea, through a
Tempest, promised to offer an Hecatomb, if he escaped; but being not able to
discharge his Vow by reason of his Poverty, he contrived to make an Hundred
small Oxen of Dough, and to offer them to the Gods that had delivered him. Some
attribute this false Hecatomb to Pythagoras; for Diogenes Laertins tells us,
that the Philosopher having found out a new Demonstration in his Trigonometry,
offered an Hecattomb of these Artificial Creatures to the Gods.

BRABEIA,
the Rewards, which the Ancients gave to Actors, Dancing-Women, Jack-puddings,
Vaulters, and Stage Players.

BRABEUTES,
was he, who in the public Shows and Plays, ordered them, provide the Expense,
and distributed the Rewards.

BRACCAE,
Breeches, the Linen which covers the secret Parts, as our Linings, This word
is from the Celtae, who gave the Name of Gallia Bracata to that part of France
called afterward Gallia Narbonensis. They were a sort of Breeches, or as others
think, a short Gown: Mr. Du Cange accounts them, that part of the Clothes, that
cover the Thighs, as our Breeches do; that the word comes from Brace, or
Braccae, because they were short. Salmasius will have it to be derived from
(...), and others think it comes from the Hebrew Borec, which signifies a Knee,
because that Garment reached no further than their Knees.

BRACHIALE,
a defensive Armor to secure the Arm.

The Complete Horsemen of Old wore them. The Switz-Foot also do so now, but
they are only the Pike-men.

BRACHMANES,
Brachmans, Philosophers, and Poets among the Indians. Strabo gives us an
elegant Description of these Brachmans, and represents them to us, as a Nation
devoted as much to Religion, as the Jews were.

As soon as their Children are born, their Doctors come and bless their
Mothers, and give them some virtuous Instructions. While they are in their
Infancy, they appoint them Masters, and accustom them to a thrifty way of
Living. They teach their Philosophy in Woods, and allow none to marry, till
they are Thirty Seven Years of Age; Their Life is very laborious and
mortifying, but after that they allow something more Liberty. Their Doctrine
was, that this Life is only a preparation and passage to an eternal and happy
Life to those who live well; That the joy, and grief, good and evil of this
World are but Dreams and Fantoms. They were much of the same Opinions with the
Greeks; that the World had a beginning, and should have an end. That God made
it, governs it, is present in it, and fills it.

Strabo afterward relates a Discourse, which Alexander the Great had with one
of the most famous Brachmans, named Calanus, who laughed at the rich Garments
of Alexander, telling him, that in the Golden Age, Nature produced a great
Plenty of those things, but now Jupiter had changed the State of Affairs and
obliged Men to procure themselves another sort of Plenty by Arts, Labor, and
Thriftiness; that Men began to abuse this second Favor, which was a just
Reason to think that the World was now quite changed.

St. Clement of Alexandria speaks of the Brachmans almost in the same manner as
Strabo. He assures us that they would not eat any living Creature, nor drink
Wine; observed a continual Continency, eat but once a Day, and some of them
only once in Two or Three Days; and that they looked upon Death, as a Passage
into another Life.

BRANCHIDAE,
the Priests of Apollo Didymaeus, who uttered his Oracles near the Promontory
of Ionia. This Name was from one Branchut a Thessalian, who affirmed himself to
be the Son of Apollo, and to whom Sacrifices were offered, as to a God.

BRIAREUS,
one of the Giants, the Son of Coelum and Terra, who had an Hundred Arms
according to the Fable. He was chosen by the Sun and Neotune, to decide their
difference about the Territory of Corinth, which he adjudged to Neptune, and
gave the Sun the Promontory above the City.

BRITANNICUS,
the Son of the Emperor Claudius and Messalina. His Mother-in-Law Agrippina,
raised Nero to the Empire, to his Prejudice, by means of Tiberius. He was
poisoned at the Age of Fourteen Years by Nero's Order. The Account which
Tacitus gives of him, is this. Among other Pastimes, which the Youth used at
the Feast of the Saturnalia, there was a certain Play, in which they made a
King, who commanded all the Company. It fell to Nero's Lot to be chosen, who
gave trifling Commands, sometimes to one, and sometimes to another; but when he
came to Britannicus, he ordered him to rise up, and rehearse some Verses,
thinking to make him laughed at; but he not seeking to excuse himself, began a
Poem, wherein he complained of the Wrong done him, and described the Misfortune
of a Prince, who had been deprived of his Kingdom, where by he moved the
Compassion of all present. Then Nero being nearly touched with this Affront,
resolved to kill him immediately by poisoning him and to that end gave a
Commission to the Captain of the Praetorian Band, named Pollio, who had in his
Custody, that famous Woman for poisoning, named Locusta, whom he had before
made use of, to destroy the Father of Britannicus.

It was a Custom for the Emperors, Children, to dine with the other Princes,
who were of the same Age, at a Table that was not served with so much State.
Wherefore to prevent that the Person who was to taste Britannicus's Meat and
Drink should not be poisoned, they gave him some Drink a little too hot, which
when he had tasted he gave to the young Prince, who refusing to drink it, they
gave him some cooler Water, which was poisoned, and seized all his Members in
such a manner, that he lost his Speech, and Life in an Instant. He was carried
into Mars's Field with very little Ceremony, but in so great a Tempest, that
the People took it for a mark of the divine Anger, who detested so black and
infamous an Action.

BRONTES,
one of the Cyclops, who wrought in Vulcan's Forge, so called from the Greek
Word (...) which signifies Thunder, because of the Noise and Clatter, which he
makes upon his Anvil. Hesiod makes him the Son of Coelum and Terra, as well as
the other Cyclops, Styropes, and Piracmon.

BROTHEUS,
the Son of Vulcan and Minerva, who seeing himself derided for his Deformity,
cast himself into the Fire, preferring Death before a contemptible Life.

BRUMALIA,
the Saturnalia, which were kept at the Winter Solstice, or upon the shortest
Day of the Year. See SATURNALIA.

BRUTUS,
the Name of several Romans. Lucius Junius Brutus, the Founder of the Liberty
and Commonwealth of Rome, which had been governed by Seven Kings Successively.
He had seemed till the Death of Lucretia to be of a very dull and slow Wit, but
the Death of that famous Woman changed him on a sudden, for he delivered a
funeral Oration in praise of her so well that the People looked upon this Proof
of his excellent Wit, and Eloquence for a Prodigy, and Miracle from the Gods.
The People at the Conclusion of this Speech cried out, LIBERTY, and made Brutus
Consul, giving him an absolute Power. He was slain in a single Fight with
Aruns, the Son of Tarquinius, but slew his Enemy at the same time. The Roman
Matrons lamented him, and wore Mourning for him a whole Year, acknowledging him
the Revenger of the violated Ghastity of their Sex, in the Person of L^^retia.

M. and Decius Brutus, were the Institutors of the Shows of Gladiators at Rome,
which before had never been used in any Man's Memory. They introduced them in
Honor of the Funerals of their Fathers.

According to Florus these Shows did not begin till Three Years after.

There was another Brutus of the same Family, who was one of the Murderers of
Julius Caesar. He was driven from Rome by Anthony, and killed himself in the
Philippick Field, a little time after.

BUCCINA,
a sort of Trumpet, used by the Romans in their Wars.

BUCEPHALUS,
the Horse of Alexander the Great, that is to say, Ox-head, because of his
Cross-sight, which made him shy, and Fiery, or because he had a Neck and Head
like a Bull. He would not suffer that any Person should mount him but
Alexander, In the War with the Indians, he exposed himself to the Enemies Darts
to save his Master, and finding himself wounded, he fled out of the Battle, and
when he had carried Alexander to a Place of Safety he died, at which this
Prince was much troubled, and made a Magnificent Funeral for him. In the Place
where he was buried, he built a City, which he named from him Bucephalia, 'twas
in the Indies, as Pliny relates, lib. 6. c. 10.

BULLA,
a Boss, or Ring, or Medal, which the Romans wore upon their Breast, and was
used as an Ornament for such as rode in Triumph. The Children of the Nobility
wore it with their Garment, called Praetexta, bordered with Purple, and never
went without it, till they put off that Garment, as Persius tells us. Cum
primum pavido custos mihi purpura cossit.
Bullaque succinctis L^ribus donata pependit.
Sat. V. v. 30.

Pliny discovers to us the Original of this Ornament thus. He says, that the
Son of Tarquinius Priscus, the Fifth King of Rome, when he was but Fourteen
Years of Age, showed an extraordinary Courage in the War against the Sabines,
and slew one of his Enemies Captains with his own Hand. His Father commended
this Action before all the People, and as a Reward of it, gave him a Robe edged
with Purple, and adorned with this Bulla, or Ring, which he hung upon his
Breast, and came down as far as his Stomach, as the Popish Bishops Crosses do.
In these Bulla they had Preservatives against Enchantments, and Witchcraft. In
after times it became a Custom to give this Ornament to Noblemens Children,
animate them by this Badge of Virtue to behave themselves valiantly in War, and
at the same time to preserve them from the Contempt of Men.

These Bulla were made in different Shapes, as we may observe, but chiefly
those that were worn against Enchantments, for they often resembled the Privy
Parts of Beasts, and Men.

BUSIRIS,
the Son of Neptune, who under a Pretense of entertaining Strangers slew them,
and offered them in Sacrifice to Jupiter, which stirred up Hercules to kill
him, to revenge that cruel Inhumanity. Hence this Name was made Proverbial, to
express such as love Murder and Bloodshed.

BUSTUM,
a Pile of Wood, or the Place where the Bodies of dead Persons were burnt in
ancient times. They whose Business it was to preside over it, were called
BUSTUARII.

BYRSA,
the Tower of Carthage. The Word is Greek, and signifies a Skin, because it is
said, that Dido flying from the Anger of her Brother came into Africa, and
boughe as much Ground of Jarbas, as a Bulls Skin could cover, but she contrived
to cut the Skin into Thongs, and by that Means gained a large piece of Ground,
big enough to build a Castle on, and named it BYRSA, as we understand from
Virgil, Liber. 3. Aeneid. v. 374. Mercatique solum facti de nomine Byrsam.
Taurine quantum possent circundare tergo.


This Donatus explains of the Leather Money, which anciently was in use, and
with which Dido paid King Jarbas for the Land she bought of him.

C
C The third Letter of the Alphabet, and one of those Consonants, called Mates.

It is pronounced different ways, but usually like a K, unless before the
Vowels, A, O, and U, when it is pronounced sometimes like an S, and then a
little Line is drawn from the bottom of it C, which the Printers call a C with
a Tail, but the French a Cedille.

C, is a numeral Letter among the Ancients, and stands for an Hundred, but with
a Line drawn over the top, C, it signifies an Hundred Thousand.

When we meet in History with a single C, it denotes Consul, when with a double
CC, it for the most part signifies Consules.

This Letter has a near Relation to G, and Q for G, is but a diminutive of C,
in the Judgment of Quintilian, so like are they one to the other, for of (...),
we make Gubernator, (...), Gloria, and of Egi, actum. Quintilian further adds,
that it is not material whether Gaius or Gneius, be written with a C, or a G,
and of pornicere, (which is still in use in Sacrifices) is made porrigere, and
the like.

There is the like Affinity between C, and Q, so that several Grammarians have
cast out Q, as a superfluous Letter, affirming that C, and V, are sufficient to
express whatever is written with Q, and it is worth our Observation, that the
Greeks have no Q, which is taken from the Coph, or Koppa of the Syrians, and in
French it has not a different Pronunciation from a single K, or C, before A, O,
and U.

This Letter was accounted a sad, and fatal Letter among the Ancients, because
they made use of it, in the Sentences of Criminals, being set upon their
Tickets, or Ballots, for, I condemn the accused, Condem^^.

Among the Greeks, this Letter has the Shape of the Round C Sigma, much used in
the ancient Monuments engraven in the Times of the Roman Emperors from Augus^^^
to Constantine.

CABALA,
an Hebrew Word which signifies Receptio, which is a secret Knowledge that the
Jews pretend to receive by Tradition and divine Revelation, by which they
explain all Mysteries of Divinity, and all the Operations of Nature. They spend
most of their Time in making Mysterious Comparisons of things to the Letters of
the Hebrew Alphabet, in which they show much Ingenuity, but withal as much
Vanity and Superstition. Dr. Robert Fludd an English Man has made large
Discourses and Apologies for it, in his Nine great Volumes, which may be
consulted.

CABALISTA,
a Cabalist, one who is well skilled in the Jewish Cabalistical Learning.

CABALLUS,
the Horse Pogasus, to which the Fable has given Wings, as he flew to Mount
Helicon, he caused a Fountain to rise out of a Rock by a Blow of his Hough,
from whence it was named Hippocrene, or the Fountain of the Horse. It was
consecrated to Apollo and the Muses, and upon that account its feigned that the
Poets drank of that Water to make their Poems to be admired and approved.
Perstus would have us to understand thus much by the first Verses of his first
Satyr.

Nec font labra prolui Caballino:
Nec in bicipiti somniasse Peruasso
Memini, ut repent sic Poeta prodirem.
I never dipped my Lips in the Waters of the Fountain of the Horse Pegasus. I
do not remember, that I ever slept upon Parnassus, which has Two Tops, that I
might immediately commence Poet.

The Quirinal Mount at Rome was called Caballus, in the time of the Roman
Emperors, because of the Marble Statue of Alexander the Great, taming his Horse
Buccphalus, set there.

CABIRI,
the great Gods of Samethrace. Varro calls them Divi potentes, and they are the
same which the Samethraciant name, the powerful Gods, which are Coelum and
(...) Apollonius in the first Book of his (...), will have these Gods to be
Four in Number, to which he gives these barbarous Names, though forbidden to
discover them. AXIEROS, which is Ceres, AXIOKERSA, which is Preserpina,
AXIOKERSOS, which is Pluto, and CASMILLUS, or CAMILLUS, which is Mercury.
Others say, they were but Two, JUPITER, and DIONYSUS, some think, they were
called C^biri from certain Mountains of Phrygia, which have the same Name.

The Fragment of Sanconiathon quoted by Ensebius, tell us, that at Berith in
Phoenieia, they worshipped certain Gods called Cabiri, from the Hebrew Word
Cabir, which signifies Great and powerful. We are also taught from the same
Fragments, that the Gods Cabiri, were the Sons of Jupiter, and were called
DIOSCURES, i. e. Children of Jupiter, SAMOTHRACES, because they were worshipped
in the Isle that bears the same Name.

Herodotus relates, that Cambyses being in Egypt, and treating whatever the
Egyptians counted Holy with Contempt, and Ralliery, went into the Temple of
the Cabiri, and laughing at their Images, burnt them.

The other Nations of the World imitated the Egyptians, and had their Cabiri,
as well as they, whom they honored in their Temples.

The Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, says, that there were at first but Two
Cabiri, Jupiter, and Bacchus, but names others afterward, viz. AXIEROS,
AXIOkERSA, and AXIOKERSOS, and Fourth named CASMILLUS, which is MERCURY.

M. Bochart derives these Names from the Hebrew Tongue, for he tells us that
AXIEROS, is the same with Achasi eritz, that it to say, the Earth is my
Possession, so that it can be no other but Cires, AXIOKERSOS, and AXIOKERSA, my
Possession is Death and Destruction, which are undoubtedly Pluto and
Proserpina; as for Casmillus he was rather a Minister of the Gods Cabiri, then
one of them, for Plutarch says, that the Greeks and Romans gave that Name to a
young Officer in Jupiter's Temple, as the Greeks gave it to Mercury. Servius
will have it, that in the Tuscan Language, Mercury was called Casinillus, as
being the Minister of the Gods.

Strabo mentions the Opinion of some, who held that there were but Three Gods
Cabiri, as also Three Nymphs Cabiri, Cabiros tres, and tres Nymphas Cabiridas.
And it is certain that there were at first, but Three Cabiri, as Tertullian
asserts positively in his Book de Spectaculis. Macrobius is of Opinion, that
the Gods, which Aensas carried from Troy into Italy, were these Gods Cabiri,
and it is for this Reason that Virgil calls them the great Gods.

Dionysius Halicarnassaeus relates at large from the Credit of Callistratus,
the Story of these great Gods, which Dandanus carried out of Arcadia, into the
Isle of Samethrace, and from thence to Troy, where he placed them with the
Palladium, which contained the Fate of Troy. He adds that Aeneas carried them
afterward into Italy. Herodotus gives the Name of Cabiri to the Gods of
Samothrace, and says, that they were the Pelasgi, and Athenians together, that
carried them into Samethrace.

CACA,
the Sister of Cacus, worshipped by the Romans in a little Chapel, called
after her Name, where the Vestal Virgins went to offer Sacrifices.

CACUS,
the Son of Vulcan and Medusa, whom the Fable represents to us with Three
Heads, casting Fire and Flames out of his Nostrils, as Plutarch tells us. Cacus
according to History was the Servant of Evander, a very wicked Man, who
committed great Robberies. He attacked Hercules, as he returned out of Spain,
and robbed him of most of his Cattle, drawing them into his Cave by their
Tails, that his Robbery might not easily be discovered; but Hercules having
found it by Caius's Sister, and by the lowing of the Cattle, he slew the Thief
and buried him in his Cave throwing it down upon him. Hercules in Gratitude
built an Altar to JUPITER the FINDER, near the Gate called Trigemina, and
sacrificed a Bull to him upon it.

CADAVER,
a dead Corpse. Lucian in his treatise of Mourning has made a pleasant and
useful Description of the Ceremonies used about dead Persons, and says.

After the nearest Relation has received a dead Person, and closed his Eyes,
his next Business is to put a piece of Money into his Mouth to pay the
Ferry-man of Hell, who is Charon, but never considers whether it be Money that
is current in that Country, so that in my Opinion he had better give him
nothing, than that he should be constrained to send it back again. After this
Ceremony he washes the Body of the dead Person with warm Water, as if there
were no Water below, or that he were to assist at a Festival, at his first
Arrival: Besides this, he perfumes him, crowns him with Flowers, and puts him
on his best Cloths, either because they fear he will dye of cold by the way, or
that otherwise he will not be treated according to his Quality. All is
accompanied with Complaints and Mourning, Tears and Sobs, to agree with the
Master of the Ceremony, who orders all Matters, and recites with such a
mournful Voice all his former Calamities it would make them weep, if they had
never seen him. Then some tear their Hair, others beat their Breasts, or
scratch their Faces, some rend their Clothes and cast dust upon their Heads, or
fall down upon the Ground, or throw themselves against the Walls. So that the
dead Man is the most happy of all the Company, for while his Friends and
Relations torment themselves, he is set in some eminent Place, washed,
cleansed, perfumed, and crowned, as if he were to go into Company. Then his
Father or Mother if he had any, leave the Company and go to him to embrace him
with such ridiculous Lamentations, as would make him burst with Laughter, if he
could be sensible of it. There are some, who at the Death of their Relations,
kill their Horses and Slaves, to send them for their Use into the other World,
and burn or bury with them, their most valuable Goods, as if they would be
useful to them. Nevertheless, all that these People do, is neither for the
Dead, who can know nothing of it, though they cried Ten Times as loud, nor for
themselves, for then they might act in Silence. So that, if it be not done
merely for Custom sake, it is only for fear they should be thought to have no
Friendship for, or good Opinion of their Neighbors. If he could be sensible of
what they do, doubtless he would say, why do ye lament me so much, and torment
your selves for me, who am happier than you? Is it because the Darkness wherein
I am frights you, or because you think I am smothered with the Weight of my
Tomb? But a Dead Man has nothing to fear, since now he is past all
Apprehensions of Death, and my burnt or putrified Eyes have no need to see the
Light. Besides, were I miserable, what good could all your Complaints do, or
the smitings of your Breasts to the Tunes of Instruments, and this crowned
Tomb, these Tears, and Lamentation of Women? Do you think this Wine which you
pour out, runs down to Hell, or is good to drink in another World; as for the
Beasts which you but in Sacrifice one part of them rises in Smoke and the rest
is consumed into Ashes, whic are very indifferent Food.

This sort of mourning for the Dead, was much alike at Rome and Greece. But
their Burials differ according to the Diversity of Nations; for the one burn,
or bury them, and the other embalm them. I have been present at the Feasts in
Egypt, where they set them at the end of their Table; and sometimes a Man or
Woman is forced to deliver up the Body of his Father or Mother to conform to
that Custom.

As for Monuments, Columns, Pyramids, and Inscriptions, nothing is more
useless; there are some that celebrate Plays in Memory of the Dead, and make
Funeral Orations at their Burials, as if they would give them a Certificate or
Testimonial of their Life and Manners.

After all this, some treat the Company, where the Friends comfort you, and
desire you to eat. How long say they, will you lament the dead? You cannot
recall them to Life again, by all your Tears? Will you kill your selves with
Despai^ for your Friends, and leave your Children Orphans? You ought at least
to eat, because by this means you may mourn the longer.

Thus far Lucian. When the Body is laid upon the Pile of Wood to be burnt, some
Person opens his Eyes, as it were to make him look up to Heaven, and having
called him several Times with a loud Voice, his next Relation sets Fire to the
Pile of Wood with a Torch, turning his Back upon it to show that he does that
Service for the Dead with Regret.

Pliny is of Opinion, that burning of the Bodies of the Dead was not ancient at
Rome. We do not, says he, find, that any of the Cornelian Family were burnt,
till Sylla; but Pliny seems to contradict himself, when he writes, that King
Numa forbad to pour Wine upon the Fires, which were kindled for the burning of
the Dead; and Plutarch assures us, that Numa did strictly forbid that his Body
should be burnt after his Death, but he ordered Two Tombs of Stone to be built,
in one of which his Body should be laid, and in the other those holy Books
which be had written about Religion, and the Worship of the Gods, which is
Proof that burning of Bodies was very ancient, and that it was at least used in
his Time. The Laws of the XII Tables, which were made Three Hundred Years after
the building of Rome, which forbad the Burial, or burning of Bodies within the
City, does not at all favor the first Opinion of Pliny, for nothing else can
be concluded; but that there were Two ways of disposing of dead Bodies in use,
burying, or burning, and both were forbidden within the City to avoid
Infection, and secure it from the danger of Fires, which might happen by that
means.

Cicero teaches us, that the Custom of burying Bodies was introduced at Athens,
by Cecrops, and that they buried them with their Faces to the West, whereas at
Megara they turned their Faces to the East. The Custom of burying Bodies lasted
a very long time throughout all Greece, and that of burning them came from the
Gymnosophists of India, who had used it long before.

The Egyptians embalm the Bodies of the Dead, to preserve them from
Corruption. The Aethopians had diverse ways; sometimes they cast them into the
Currents of Brooks and Rivers, sometimes they burnt them or put them in
Earthern Vessels, according to the Testimony of Herodotus and Strabo.

The Indians eat them, that by this curious Secret, they might give them a
second Life by converting them into their own Substance.

Those People whom Herodotus calls, the Macrobies, or Long-lived dry the
Bodies, then paint their Faces with white, and so restore them to their Natural
Color and Complexion.

Then they wrapped them up in a Pillar of Glass, in which having kept the Body a
whole Year they set it up in some place near the City, where all might see it.

Diodorus Siculas relates that there were certain People, who after they had
burnt the Bodies, put their Ashes and Bones into Statues of Gold, Silver, and
Earth, covering them over with Glass.

The Garamantes bury their dead on the Shore in the Sand, that they may be
washed by the Sea.

When the Body of the dead is consumed by the Fire, and all present have taken
their last farewell, Vale aternum nos eo ordine, quo Natura vlouerit, sequemur,
the nearest Relations gather up the Ashes and Bones, which they sprinkle with
holy Water, and then put them into Urns of different Matter, to set them in
their Tombs, pouring out Tears upon them, which being catched in small Vessels,
called Lacrymatoriae, they are likewise reposited with the Urn in the Tomb.

It is very uncertain how they could gather the Ashes, and keep them mingling
with those of the Wood and other things, which were burnt with the Bodies.
Pliny mentions a sort of Linen which grows in the Indies, called by the
Greeks, Asbestos, (...) not to be burnt, of which is made a Cloth that will
not burn, although it be cast into the Fire. In this the Body being wrapped up,
the Ashes of it may easily be kept together without mixing with those of the
Wood; but this is not probable, since the same Pliny tells us, that this Cloth
was very rare, and was preserved for the Kings of the Country only.

Perhaps they made use of another Cloth made of the Stone Amiantus, which
Pliny says, they had the Art of spinning at that Time, and Plutarch assures us,
that in his Age there was a Quarry of that Stone in the Isle of Negropont, and
the like is found in the Isle of Cyprus, Tines, and elsewhere.

They might have also some other Invention, as to set the Body upon the Fire in
a Coffin of Brass or Iron, from whence it was easy to gather the Ashes and
Bones that were not consumed.

CADMUS,
the Son of Agenor, King of Phoenicia, who was sent by his Father to find out
Europa, which Jupiter had taken away, but not hearing of her after several long
and dangerous Voyages, he went to consult the Oracle of Delphi, who ordered him
to build a City in the Place, whither an Ox should lead him. And preparing in
the first place to sacrifice to the Gods, he sent his Companions to the
Fountain of Dirce, which was near, to fetch him some Water, but they were
devoured by a Dragon. Minerva to comfort him for this Loss, advised him to go
and slay the Monster, and to sow its Teeth upon the Earth. This being done, he
saw armed Men immediately to grow up, who slew one another, except Five who
surviving that Slaughter helped him to build the City, which he called Thebes,
and reigned there several Years. He married Harmonia, or according to Ovid,
Hermione, the Daughter of Mars and Venus, by whom he had several Children,
which came all to miserable ends. Cadmus was expelled out of Thebes by Amphion,
and went into Europe with the Phaenicians. It Is said that he brought with him
Sixteen Letters of the Greek Alphabet, that he taught to write in Prose, and
that he was the first that set up Images in the Temples of the Gods He was
changed into a Serpent with his Wife, through the Anger of the God Mars,
because he slew the Dragon which kept the Fountain of Dirce.

Cadmus was one of the Grecian Heroes, of which the Pagans often made their
Gods.

Bochart informs us, that Cadmus was one of those Cadmonites, of whom Moses
speaks in Genesis. The Name of Cadmonites, was given them, because they lived
about Mount Hermon, which was the most Easterly Country. It is probable that
Hermione Cadmus's Wife might have taken her Name from that Hill. And because
these People were part of the Hivites, it was feigned that Cadmus and Hermione
were changed into Serpents, because the Syriack Word Hevaeus signifies a
Serpent. The Fable says, that Cadmus having sown the Serpents Teeth, there came
up armed Soldiers, which slew one another, and there survived Five of them
only, which subdued Baeotia. Bochart ingeniously conjectures, that these are
only Allusions to the Phoenician or Hebrew words, for these Two Terms, seni
naas, signify both the Teeth of Serpents, and Points of a Sword. Hyginus tells
us, that Cadmus found out Steel first at Thebes, as also the Metallic Stone,
of which, Steel and Copper is made, still called Cadmia. The armed Soldiers
were at length reduced to Five, because the word Hames signifies Five. It
imports also a Soldier girded, and ready for Battle, because the Soldiers
girded their Body about the fifth Rib.

Nevertheless some Interpreters of Finder relate, that Cadmus and Hermione
lived to a very old Age, and were by the special Favor of the Gods carried
into the Elysian Fields in a Chariot drawn by two Dragons, which doubtless was
the Occasion of the Fable.

Euhemerus, of the Isle of Cos, in the third Book of his sacred History, will
have it that Cadmus was the Cook of the King of the Cydonians, one of whose
Maids, a Player the Flute he debauched, and had by her Semele, whom she put in
a Chest with Bacchus, and cast her into the Sea, because she prostituted her
self to Jupiter.

Such as have allegorized this Fable, say, that Cadmus was a very valiant
Prince, who conquered the Kingdom of Boeotia, by force of Arms, which was then
governed by a King named Draco; that he endeavored to divide it among his
Subjects, but they quarrelled and destroyed one another, and so he invaded the
Kingdom. This History made the Poets feign that he slew a Dragon, and sowing
the Teeth their sprung up Men, which killed one another.

CADUCA BONA,
Escheats, Goods which are forfeited to the Kings Treasury, by the Laws of
Escheats which were made in the Time of Augustus, to increase the Treasure,
which was exhausted by the civil Wars. These Laws were contained in several
Articles.

1. That all Persons who lived a single Life, should enjoy no Legacy, if they
did not marry within the time limited by that Law, and if they did not,
whatever they had bequeathed to them by Will, should be paid into the Treasury.

2. That those who had no Children should lose one Moiety of what was left them
by Will, and this is that which the civil Law calls, Poena orbitatis.

3. All that was given by Will to any Person, who died in the Life of the
Testator, or after his Decease before the Will was opened, was an Escheat, and
belonged to the Treasury.

4. Every Heir, who was negligent in revenging of the Death of him, whose
Estate he inherited was deprived of his Inheritance, and it came to the
Treasury. In a Word, Caducum, in the sense of the civil Law is meant of any
Legacy, or Gift of Inheritance, which is void, There is a Title in the Civil
Law, de caducis tollendis.

CADUCA AUSPICIA,
Vain Signs by Birds, which are of no Use.

CADUCA VOTA,
and CADU. CAe PRECES, Fruitless Vews, and vain Prayers which are not heard.

CADERE CAUSA, or LITE,
to lose his Suit or Cause. An ancient Term of Law.

CADERE VOTIS,
to make Vews in vain which are not heard. To hope vainly.

CADUCEUM,
an Heralds Staff. The Wand which Mercury according to the Fable received of
Apollo, in exchange of the Seven-stringed Harp, which he gave him, was so
called.

The Poets speak of many Virtues, which this Wand of Mercury had, as to lay Men
asleep, and to raise the Dead. The Word comes from the Latin Cadere, which
signifies to fall, because this Wand had a force in it to appease all
Differences, and make Men's Arms to fall out of their Hands, as Mercury proved
by Two Serpents which were fighting, for he threw it down between them, and
they were Friends, and from that time Mercury always carried it as an Ensign of
Peace.

This Wand according to the Egyptian Mythology was straight, adorned with Two
Serpents twining round it, and as it were joined together about the middle of
their Bodies which seek to kiss one another, making an Arch of the highest part
of their Bodies.

The Ambassadors of Rome sent to make Peace carried a Wand of Gold in their
Hand, and were upon that account called Caduceatores, as those who were sent to
declare War, were called FECIALES.

The Ancients have attributed many wonderful Effects to the Cadinoeans,
alluding to the Rod or Staff of Moses, with which he did such Miracles in
Egypt, before Pharaoh, and the Magicians of that Country.

CAECIAS,
the East Wind, which blows from the Parts where the Sun rises, and raises
Clouds, from whence comes the Proverb. It is attended with Mischief, as the
Cecias with Clouds.

CAECILIUS,
of Epirus, who was the Freedman of Atticus a Roman Knight. He taught Grammar
at Rome and was the first who read Virgil and the other Latin Poets to his
Scholars.

There was another of that name, who was a Gaul, who has written of the
Civil-Law, and of the signification of its Terms.

CAECUBUM,
a Town of Campania, whence came the excellent Wines which Horace and others of
the Poets speak so often of. Their Vineyard was destroyed by Nero, as Pliny
relates.

CAEDERE
pignora, or Sectionem pignorum instituere, or pignora auctione distrahere (In
the Roman Law are used to signify) to sell by Auction, or by Parcels, the Goods
which were seized from any one.

CAELIUS,
one of the Seven Mountains of Rome, so called from Caelius Vibenus King of
Tuscany, who assisted Romulus against the Latins. This Mountain was enclosed
within Rome by Tullus Hostilius, who built his Palace there. There were many
beautiful Temples upon it, viz. That of Faunus, Venus, Cupid, and the Fourth to
the Emperor Claudius.

CAENIS,
the Daughter of Elatheus, one of the Lapithae, who was beloved by Neptune, and
changed into a Man that was invulnerable. He fought against the Centaurs for
the Lapithae, and received no Wound, but he was crushed by the Fast of some
great Trees. Virgil informs us that she resumed her Sex after his Death, but
Ovid will have her changed into a Bird.

CAERUS,
was called by the Greeks the God of Opportunity, and by the Latins, of
Occasion. The Elians consecrated an Altar to him. Callistratus the famous
Carver has represented this God under the Form of a fair young Man, having his
Hair loose, and blown about by the Gales of the Wind, and holding a Rasor in
his Hand. A certain Poet also calls him the youngest of Saturn's Children.
Phaedrus in his witty Fables has described him in the Shape of a Man with
Wings, having Hair on the fore part of his Head, but being bald behind, that
none can regain him when he has suffered him once to pass him, because he went
so swift, that he could run upon the edge of a Razor without hurting himself.

CAESA
and PORRECTA, these are the Entrails taken out of a Sacrifice, when it is
opened, which the Sacrificer considers attentively, before he casts them into
the Fire, to observe whether there be any Blemish, which may interrupt the
Sacrifice, or cause it to be renewed, and from hence arises the Proverb used by
Cicero, Epist. 18. lib. 5. ad Atticum. Multa imo omnia, quorum (...) ne quid
inter Caesa and porrecta, ut aiunt, oneris mihi addatur, aut temporis. You see
all that is in my Letters, refer to this Head, That being upon the point of
learning my Office and relinquishing my Government, none shall involve me
against my Intention and Design in new Affairs, and so oblige me to remain in
my Office.

CAESA, and RUTA,
some understand by these Words, Things moveable, which are not fastened either
by Hooks or Nails to the Foundation, or any part of the Building, as belonging
neither to the Mason, or Carpenter's Work. Cum aedes Paternas venderes, ne in
rutis quidem, and caecis solium tibi paternum recepisti. When you sold your
Fathers House, you did not reserve so much to your self out of all his
movables, as the Chair wherein he sat.

CAESAR,
Caius Julius, who was the first Roman Emperor.

He was the Son of Lucius Julius Caesar, a Roman Consul and Praetor.

This Word Caesar, was the Surname of the Julian Family, either because the
first of them was cut out of his Mothers Belly, or because he was born with
much Hair; or lastly, because the Grandfather of Caius slew an Elephant, which
in the Punick Language is called Caesar.

CAIUS JULIUS CAESAR,
was of a good Stature, he had a pale Complexion, brisk Eyes, a large Nose,
something rising, all Marks of a great Soul; a lover of Honor and Command.
Being made Consul he went into Gallia, and subdued it by Force. He first
crossed the Sea, and made old Albion, now England, to pay tribute to the People
of Rome. He made Pompey and Crassus Friends, by marrying his Daughter Julia to
the former; but afterward they quarrelled in such a manner, as begat a civil
War, which had almost overturned the Roman Empire. Caesar was ever the
Conqueror, and utterly routed all Pompey's Forces in Egypt, and in the
Pharsalian Field, and so he got the Government into his Hands,

He marched from thence into Syria, and into the Kingdom of Pontus, where he
conquered Pharnaces, vanquished Juba with Scipio, and Cato in Africa. Returning
to Rome he triumphed Four Times together, viz. over the Gauls, Egypt, Pontus,
and Africa, and further a fifth Time for subduing Pompey the younger in Spain.

After all these Victories he was chosen perpetual Dictator, and proclaimed
Emperor, which so stirred up the Hatred and Envy of the Noblemen of Rome, that
they conspired against him and slew him in the Senate House, having given him
Twenty Three Wounds with their Daggers, of which he died. Brutus and Cassuis
were among the Conspirators. He was Fifty Six Years old at his Death. Dr.
Andreas an Italian, a Scholar of the famous Argoli, has given an excellent
description of him in writing upon the Medal of this Emperor. It is my Opinion,
says he, that Julius Caesar being of a tall Stature, and having brisk Eyes, and
of a pale Skin, was of a passionate Disposition, but a little melancholy; his
large Nose a little rising between the Eyes, his Nostrils turning something
upward, and flat on the top, make his Nose something like an Eagle's, which
denotes great Courage, a lover of Glory and Empire. His brisk and black Eyes,
his Forehead a little sinking in the middle, show, that he was a Man of great
Designs, and constant in his Undertakings; his Head was well shaped with Two
risings behind and before, and his Forehead lean, all which joined together
discover his Fitness for Study and Eloquence. He was bald on the fore part of
his Head, which signifies his Inclination to love, from whence it became a
common saying of his Soldiers which they sang at his Return from the East, O
ye Romans, we have brought you the bald Adulterer.

There never was any Man, who had more Valor, fearless Boldness, and Courage,
than he, nor greater Experience in warlike Affairs, or the Art of governing, by
which he subdued 300 Nations, took 800 Cities, and conquered 3 Millions of Men
in several Battles.

He was very resolute and daring, which made him to cross the Rhine and the
Ocean to attack Germany and England, though the Wars of the Gauls, were not yet
finished.

He showed his Magnificence in his Preparations of Plays, and Triumphs, in
which he exceeded all that had been before him, and swallowed up, if I may so
say, in that prodigal Expense, all the Roman Bravery, and Wealth. The large
Reach of his Wit was proved by his Reformation of the Time and Laws, the former
of which is an hard Work still, and the other his Death prevented him from
finishing, as also his Eloquence in his learned Commentaries, which he has left
of the Civil Wars, and the War with the Gauls.

He was the mildest Prince in the World, and we may say, that his whole Life
was nothing but a continual Example of Mercy and Bounty; for he not only
pardoned his Enemies through the Greatness of his Mind, but he restored them to
their Dignities, and often heaped new Honors upon them; which made Cicero say,
that he had conquered Victory, because he freely deprived himself of that which
she had given. Wherefore 'twas nothing but Justice to him, that the Senate
decreed, that in grateful Acknowledgment, a Temple should be built to Clemency,
his Device was, Veni, Vidi, Vici, i. e. I came, I saw, I conquered.

CAESAR OCTAVIUS,
surnamed Augustus, the Nephew of Julius, and adopted by him: His Stature was
tall and proper, he had a comely Face, a sweet and modest Look, a Nose gently
rising near the Forehead, his Hair somewhat cur^'d. He succeeded Julius Caesar,
and was Heir to his Name as well as his Virtues, and happily finished those
Designs of Monarchy the other had laid. He revenged his Death upon his
Murderers, who died all a violent Death, and some of them by the same Dagger
wherewith they had assassinated him. This Prince had a generous Soul, and a
charming and insinuating Wit. He was prudent and brave without Ostentation. His
Eyebrows joining over his Nose, according to some Physiognomists, signified
his Inclination to Virtue; others thought that this was a Sign of his
Inclination to Study, because it denotes Melancholy, and there must be a little
of that or Study: He was a Lover of Learning, and had a pleasant Way of Writing
both in Prose and Verse, from whence it was that in his Time there were such
able Men, as Virgil, Horace and Mecanas.

The Teeth of this Prince being small and thin set, according to Suetonius,
prog^osticated short Life, in the Judgment of Hippocrates, and some Physicians:
But, perhaps, his Sobriety made amends for this Defect, since he lived to 76
Years of Age, although he was often troubled with Rheum, the Se^^tica, the Gout
and Gravel.

Suetonius also remarks, that he commonly fell sick about his Birthday. See
Augu^lus.

CAESTUS,
a large Gantlet made of a raw Hide, adorned with Lead, which the ancient
Wrestlers made use of when they fought at Fifty-cuffs in the public Games.
Calepin is mistaken, when he says that it was a kind of Club, for it was only a
Strap of Leather, strengthened with Lead, or Plates of Iron, wherewith, after
the Manner of Chains lying across, they encompassed the Hand, and also the
Wrist and part of the Arm to guard them from Blows, left they should be broken,
or dislocated by them.

CAESTUS or CESTUM,
a Girdle which the Poets and Painters have given to Venus and Juno: Thus
Pallas in Lucian advises Paris to take away Venus's Girdle, that he might the
better judge of the Beauty of the Three Goddesses; because, adds she, Venus is
a Magician, who keeps some Charm concealed within her Girdle. This Word comes
from the Greek (...), which signifies a Girdle, or any other Work embroidered
with the Needle, which was commonly were by Women. It was a large Strap, which
served for a Girdle, made of Wool, and which the Husband untied for his Spouse
the first Day of their Marriage, before they went to Bed; as we learn from
Homer, (...); and Ovid, Castaque fallaci zona recincta manu. And this relates
to the Girdle of Venus, which Juno borrowed of her to entice Jupiter to Love;
for this Girdle, says Homer, B. 14. Of the Iliads, contains the Passion, Wishes
and Charms, by which Venus unites the Hearts of new-married People; which made
Martial say, Vt Martis revocetur amor summique Tonantis,
A te Juno petat ceston, and ipsa Venus.
Lib. 6. Epig. 13. Some Authors say, that this Caestus of Venus was a little
^illet or Diadem, wherewith the Heads of Deities were encompassed, which had a
Point in the middle.

CAEYX,
King of Taracinia, the Son of Lucifer, or the Morning Star, and Husband of
Alcione; who going to consult the Oracle about the Government of his Kingdom,
was Shipwrecked at Sea; which so sensibly touched his Wife, that for Grief she
threw her self Headlong into the Sea: But the Gods having Compassion on them,
changed them both into Birds, called Haleyons, (i. e. Kingsfishers) who make
the Sea calm when they harth their young ones in the Sea-rushes, during the
sharpest Storms of Winter.

Lucian in his Dialogue, entitled, Alcyon, relates the Fable after another
manner, for he introduces Socrates, speaking thus to Cherephon, whose pleasant
Sound had struck his Ear from the other side of the River:

It Is Alcyon, says Socrates to him, who is so much ex^oll'd, of whom this Fable
is told: That the Daughter of Eolus having left the brave Caeyx her Husband,
the Son of the Morning Star, wasted her self with fruitless Complaints, until
the Gods moved with Compassion, changed her into a Bird, which still searches
on the Waters for him, whom she cannot meet with upon Earth. And to recompense
her Love, while she makes her Nest and hatches her Young, the Winds are still,
and the Sea is calm, even in the sharpest Weather of Winter: And so to this
Day, these fine Days are called from her Name Halcyon-Days.

CAIUS or GAIUS,
a Surname given to many illustrious Romans, upon the Account of the Joy their
Parent felt at their Birth, a gaudio parentum.

CAIUS,
surnamed Octavius, the Father of the Emperor Augustus, who defeated the
Fugitive Slaves, and destroyed those that remained of Catiline's Conspiracy.

CAIUS MEMMIUS,
a Curule, Edile, who first celebrated the Feast Cerealia, or the Festival of
Ceres, as appears by this Motto, Memmius aedilis Cerealia primus fecit.


CALABRA CURIA,
the Calabrian Court, built by Romulus upon Mount Palatine, near his own
Habitation, according to Varro; or according to others, near the Capitol, in
the Place where the Magazine of Salt now is. It was called Calabra, from the
Latin Word Calare, which signifies to call together; because Romulus designed
this Place for the general Assemblies of the People; but since that time, the
Rex sacrorum summons the Senate and People to meet there, to give them Notice
of the Days for Games and Sacrifices. You may consult Macrobius about this
Word, Lib. 1. Saturnal. and Festus.

CALANTICA,
a Kerchief, the ancient Head-dress of the Roman Women.

CALARE,
from the Greek Word (...) Voco, signifies to call together, or assemble the
People, from whence comes the Word Calendae, which is as much as to say, the
first Day of each Month, because he who presided at the Sacrifices, assembled
the People in the Capitol, after he had observed the New Moon, to signify to
them the Feasts and Games of that Month.

CALATA COMITIA,
an Assembly of the People, who were called together for the Election and
Consecration of Priests, and for Wills which were made in the most ancient
Times of the Commonwealth, in the Presence of the People, as Theophilus says,
in Book 2. Instit. See Comitia.

CALCEAMENTUM,
the Shoe of the Ancients, which was different from ours both in Matter and
Form: It was made at first of a raw Hide, with all the Hair on, which they
called Carbatinas crepidas: But in succeeding Times, the Hides were prepared,
curried, and steeped in Allom-water. Shoes were made of the Skins of Cows,
Calves, Deer, Goats, etc. from whence comes the Raillery used by Martial, of
one who had a Cap of fine Leather, to whom he says, that his Head was shod.
They made use also of the Bark of a Tree, which they wove or knit, as Martianus
Capella tells us, Calceos praeterca ex papyro textili subligavit; which are
also mentioned by Benedictus Balduinus, in Book 3. de Calceis antiquis. These
sort of Shoes were especially used in Egypt, for the Priests wore them when
they sacrificed to the Gods: They made them also of Broom and Rushes, and they
were called spartei and juncei calcei, which Fashion came from Foreign
Countries; and these the Spanish Peasants wore, as Pliny testifies. They made
them also of Flaxen Cloth very white, embroidered and enriched with Pearls and
Diamonds. History informs us, that the Emperor Antoninus, surnamed Philosophus,
and his Successors till Constantine's Time, wore Shoes of this sort. They made
use also of Metals to make Shoes, as Iron, Brass, Gold and Silver. Empedocles
wore Shoes or Slippers of Brass; which gave occasion to that Apostrophe of
Lucian, in his Dialogues to him, God preserve you good Master Slip-shoe. The
Romans had Shoes of Iron, but they were used for the Punishment of Christians,
during the Persecutions. They put great Nails into them, which they caused to
be made red-hot, as was done to St. Basil, ferreas crepidas ignitis clavis
confixas calceatus. They wore also Shoes of massy Gold, and others which were
only gilt. Plautus, in his Bacchides, speaks of a very rich Man who wore Shoes,
whose Soals were of Gold; Etiam rogas qui soccis babeat auro suppactum solum.
Julius Caesar wore Shoes of Gold, and others which were only gilt, according to
the Testimony of Seneca, Qui excusant eum, nigant id insolentiae factum, aiunt
socculum auratum, imo aureum margaritis distinctum ostendere eum voluisse. They
made use also of Wood, whereof they made Wooden Shoes, and Sandals or
Galloches, which were the Shoes of the Poor, and of Parricides when they were
shut up in a Sack, as Cicero tells us, Si quis parents occiderit vel
verberavit, ei damnato obvolvatur or folliculo lupino, soleae ligneae pedibus
inducantur. Here follow the Names of the several sorts of Shoes which were used
by the Ancients.

CALCEI,
Mullei, Soleae, Sandalia, Cothurni, Caligae, Gallicae, Crepidae, Socci,
Perones, Ocreae; to which we may add those which were introduced by Custom,
borrowed for the most part from the strange Fashions of diverse People; which
are the Campagi, Phaecasia, Sicyonia, Alcibiadae, Amiclaidae, Anaxyrides,
Arpides, Laconicae, Lymphides, Persicae, Scythicae, Iphicratides: Of each of
which we shall speak according to the Order of the Alphabet.

CALCEUS,
which we now call a Shoe, was different from ours in this, that it covered
half the Leg, and was open in the Forepart, and was tied with Thongs or
Straps, which they called corrigias calceamenti: This may be easily observed
from the Passage of Sidonius Apollinaris, -- Etconcurrentibus anfis
Vinclorum pandas texunt per crura catenas.
This Shoe was extreme close upon the Foot, when they had a mind to be
handsomely shod, and thence it was called tersum calceum or tentipellium, and it
was a Sign of Carelessness or Poverty, to have a Shoe too big, and your Feet
loose in it and bagging out, laxum calceum, follentem, or follicantem, which
made Ovid caution his Mistress to take heed that her Shoe was not too big. Nec
vagas in laxa pes tibi pelle natet.
Thus St. Jerome says, that all the Care of worldly Men was to be handsomely
clothed and shod, Omnis bis cura in vestibus, si been oleant, si pes in laxa
pelle non folliat. To shun this, they took care to tie their Straps close, as
Tibullus tells us, Ansaque compressos alligat arcta pedes, and to stuff them
with Locks of Wool, and such like Things, as we learn from Tertullian,
Stipabant tomento; upon which Words Rhenanus says, Stipant ne follicet calceus,
they stuff it with Wool for fear left it should have Wrinkles and the Foot turn
about in it.

The Toe of the Shoe ended in a Point bending a little backwards, which they
called calceum rostratum, repandum, uncinatum, and those who wore them so were
called uncipedes, as Tertullian tells us in his Book de Pallio C. 5. Such were
the Shoes of Juno, as Cicero informs us, cum ^^lceis repandis.

The common Citizens wore black Shoes, and the ordinary Women wore white: And
therefore Lipsius seems to be mistaken, when he endeavors to prove that the
Shoes of the Romans were white, and grounds his Opinion upon a Passage of
Martial, where it is said, Calceus candidior sit prima nive. But this learned
Man doubtless did not take Notice, that in this Place Martial blames Cecinna,
because he had a very nafty Gown, and wore Shoes as white as Snow: What is
a^hrm'd by Horace and Juvenal is more probable therefore, that they wore black.
Nevertheless it is true, that some Men wore white Shoes under the Emperors, for
we read in Spartianus, that Alexander Severus forbad Men to use them, and
permitted the Use of them only to Women, who wore also some that were red, and
some of other Colors, which made Persius caution a young Man to take heed lest
his Mistress should cuff him with her red Patten, solea objurgabere rubra.

The Shoes of Senators, Patricians and their Children, had something like a
Crescent at the End, which made the Figure of a C, to show, that they were
descended of the Number of the first 100 Senators or Fathers which Romulus
instituted after the building of his new City; Plutarch gives other Reasons for
it, Resides, this Crescent was upon the Instep, and served to tie the Shoe
close, as now our Buckles do, if we will believe Balduinus, who pretends to
prove it by this Verse of Statius,

Primaque patricia clausit vestigia luna.
And by the Authority of Triaguellus upon the fifth Book of Alexand. Neap.
Lunulae, says he, in calceis erant fibulae eburneae ad instar Lunae
corniculantes. These Crescents were made of different Matter, as Gold, Silver
and Ivory adorned with Diamonds and other precious Stones.

The chief Roman Magistrates wore commonly red Shoes, on Days of Ceremony and
Triumphs. The greatest part of Writers will have the Emperor Dioclesian to be
the first who wore precious Stones upon his Shoes, and that he presented them
to be kissed by those who did him Reverence. Yet we find that Heliogabalus wore
them before him, as also Alexander Severus; and Pliny speaks of this Custom as
an Abuse very common in his Time.

The Slaves wore no Shoes, but went barefoot, and for that Reason they were
called cretati, or gypsati from their dusty Feet. There were also some Freemen
that went barefooted, and Tacitus observes, that Phocion and Cato Vticensis and
many others walked without Shoes; but these Examples are rare, and generally
speaking all Persons that were of a free Condition walked always shod, except
at some religious Solemnity, or in the Time of some public Calamity; for we
learn from History, that when the great Mother of the Gods was washed, the
People went in Procession barefooted, and that the Roman Dames put off their
Shoes at the Sacrifices of Vesta. Tertullian relates, that the Pagan Priests
very often ordered Processions to be made barefooted in a Time of Drought: Cum
tupet caelum and aret annus, nudipedalia denuntiantur. The principal Roman
Knights at the Death of Julius Caesar gathered up his Ashes, and being clad in
white Tunicks they walked barefoot, to signify at once both their Respect and
Sorrow. Lycurgus and the Lacedemonian young Men went always barefoot, and the
Aetolians and Hernicians, a People of Italy, had one Foot shod and the other
naked, as also the Magicians in their Magical Mysteries: Virgil and Ovid tell
us, Vnum exuta pedem vinclis. 4. Aeneid. Horace speaking of Canidia that famous
Magician, acquaints us that she went barefooted, -- Pedibus nudis, passoque
capillo.


CALCULUS,
this Latin Word signifies a Stone, because the Ancients made use of little
Flint-stones instead of Counters, for reckoning up any Sums whether multiplied
or divided in their Computations, either in Astronomy or Geometry. The Kings of
Lacedemonia gave their Suffrages with Two small Stones, and the Romans marked
their fortunate Days with a white Stone, and unfortunate with a black Stone, --
Albo aut nigro notanda lapilio.


CALENDAE,
the Calends. The Romans called the first Day of each Month by this Word, which
comes from the Greek Word (...), voco, because reckoning their Months by the
Moon, there was a Priest appointed to observe the New Moon, who having seen it,
immediately gave notice to him who presided over the Sacrifices; and he
presently called the People together in the Capitol, and declared unto them how
they must reckon the Days until the Nones, pronouncing Five times this Word
(...), if they happened on the Fifth Day, or Seven times if they happened on
the Seventh Day. These Calends, or first Day of each Month, were consecrated to
Juno, upon which Account she was surnamed Calendaris Juno.

The Greeks had no Calends as the Romans had, and therefore when one would
signify a Time that should never happen, they made use of that Expression, ad
Graecas Calendas, i. e. at latter Lammas, or never. Augustus was the first who
brought this way of Speaking into Fashion, as Suetonius relates, upon the
Occasion of certain Debtors, who were become insolvent, Cum aliquis nunquam
exsoluturos significare vult, ad Calendas Graecas soluturos ait. Instead of the
Name of Calends, the Geeeks made use of the Word (...), i. e. the Day of the
New Moon, which was the same thing with the Calends among the Romans, as this
Passage of Plutarch in the Life of Galba plainly proves, (...).

The Calends of January were more considerable than the Calends of the other
Months, because they were particularly consecrated to Juno and the God Janus;
upon which Account the Romans then never failed to offer Vows and Sacrifices to
these Two Deities; and the People being clad in new Gowns, went in Crowds to
the Tarpeian Mount where Janus had an Altar. Although the Calends of January
was a Festival Day for them, yet they did not fail then to begin any new Work,
every Man according to his Profession, that they might never be idle the rest
of the Year, having begun it with Working.

The Magistrates entered upon their Office on this Day, and Feasts were kept
everywhere, and Presents exchanged between them in Token of Friendship.

The Feasts of the Calends, says Matthew Balastris, was kept on the first Day
of January, and there was great Rejoicing, because the New Moon happened on
that Day, and it was commonly believed, that if they diverted themselves well
at the Beginning, they should pass the whole Year the more merrily. This Day
brought no Sorrow to any but only to Debtors, who were obliged to pay their
Interest and Arrears, upon which Account Horace calls them tristes Calendas.

CALENDARIUM,
a Calendar; an Almanac which contains the Order of the Days, Weeks and
Months, and shows the Festivals which happen during the Year. The Roman People
at first had no Calendar, for it was only in the Hands of the Priests, from
whom they learned the Festivals, and the other Solemnities of a civil Life.
They took great care to write down in it every Thing that happened each Year,
and marked moreover the Days on which there were Pleadings and on which there
were none: And therefore this Calendar was called Fastus, or in the Plural
Number, Fasti, and also Annals publici, because in it were set down the most
considerable Actions of the Great Men of the Commonwealth: And from hence come
these ordinary Forms of Speech, Conscribere nomina fastis, or Refer in fastos
and in annals publicos, i. e. to transmit your Memory to Posterity. Cn.
Flavius, Secretary to Appius Clandius, gave the People a Calendar in Despite of
the Priests and Senate.

Romulus was the first who divided Time by certain Marks, to serve for the Use
of the People that were subject to him, and being much more skilful in Military
Affairs than in Astronomy, he made the Year commence with the Spring, and gave
it only Ten Months, whereof the first was the Month of March, and next after
that was April, May, June, Quintilis, Sextilis, September, October, November,
December. He gave 31 Days to each of these Four Months, March, May, Quintilis
and October, and only 30 to each of the other Six, so that they made altogether
304 Days, which was that Duration of Time wherein, as he imagined, the Sun run
through all the differed Seasons of the Year, as may be seen in the following
Calender. But as to the Division of Months into Calends, Nones and Ides, and
the Manner of reckoning their Days, see hereafter the Seventh Paragraph before
the Calendar of Julius Caesar.

The CALENDAR of Romulus, containing 10 MONTHS, and consisting of 304 DAYS.
March. April. May. June. Quintilis. Sextilis. September. October. November.
December. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1.
Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 2. VI 2. IV 2. VI 2. IV 2. VI 2. IV 2.
IV 2. VI 2. IV 2. IV 3. V 3. III 3. V 3. III 3. V 3. III 3. III 3. V 3. III 3.
III 4. IV 4. Pride. 4. IV 4. Pride. 4. IV 4. Pride. 4. Pride. 4. IV 4. Pride. 4.
Pride. 5. III 5. Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5. Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5.
Non. 6. Pride. 6. VIII 6. Pride. 6. VIII. 6. Pride. 6. VIII 6. VIII 6. Pride. 6.
VIII 6. VIII 7. Non. 7. VII 7. Non. 7. VII 7. Non. 7. VII 7. VII 7. Non. 7. VII
7. VII 8. VIII 8. VI 8. VIII 8. VI 8. VIII 8. VI 8. VI 8. VIII 8. VL 8. VI 9.
VII 9. V 9. VII 9. V 9. VII 9. V 9. V 9. VII 9. V 9. V 10. VI 10. IV 10. VI 10.
IV 10. VI 10. IV 10. IV 10. VI 10. IV 10. IV 11. V 11. III 11. V 11. III 11. V
11. III 11. III 11. V 11. III 11. III 12. IV 12. Pride. 12. IV 12. Pride. 12. IV
12. Pride. 12. Pride. 12. IV 12. Pride. 12. Pride. 13. III 13. Id. 13. III 13. Id.
13. III 13. Id. 13. Id. 13. III 13. Id. 13. Id. 14. Pride. 14. XVIII 14. Pride.
14. XVIII 14. Pride. 14. XVIII 14. XVIII 14. Pride. 14. XVIII 14. XVIII 15. Id.
15. XVII 15. Id. 15. XVII 15. Id. 15. XVII 15. XVII 15. Id. 15. XVII 15. XVII
16. XVII 16. XVI 16. XVII 16. XVI 16. XVII 16. XVI 16. XVI 16. XVII 16. XVI 16.
XVI 17. XVI 17. XV 17. XVI 17. XV 17. XVI 17. XV 17. XV 17. XVI 17. XV 17. XV
18. XV 18. XIV 18. XV 18. XIV 18. XV 18. XIV 18. XIV 18. XV 18. XIV 18. XIV 19.
XIV 19. XIII 19. XIV 19. XIII 19. XIV 19. XIII 19. XIII 19. XIV 19. XIII 19.
XIII 20. XIII 20. XII 20. XIII 20. XII 20. XIII 20. XII 20. XII 20. XIII 20.
XII 20. XII 21. XII 21. XI 21. XII 21. XI 21. XII 21. XI 21. XI 21. XII 21. XI
21. XI 22. XI 22. X 22. XI 22. X 22. XI 22. X 22. X 22. XI 22. X 22. X 23. X
23. IX 23. X 23. IX 23. X 23. IX 23. IX 23. X 23. IX 23. IX 24. IX 24. VIII 24.
IX 24. VIII 24. IX 24. VIII 24. VIII 24. IX 24. VIII 24. VIII 25. VIII 25. VII
25. VIII 25. VII 25. VIII 25. VII 25. VII 25. VIII 25. VII 25. VII 26. VII 26.
VI 26. VII 26. VI 26. VII 26. VI 26. VI 26. VII 26. VI 26. VI 27. VI 27. V 27.
VI 27. V 27. VI 27. V 27. V 27. VI 27. V 27. V 28. V 28. IV 28. V 28. IV 28. V
28. IV 28. IV 28. V 28. IV 28. IV 29. IV 29. III 29. IV. 29. III 29. IV 29. III
29. III 29. IV 29. III 29. III 30. III 30. Pride. 30. III 30. Pride. 30. III 30.
Pride. 30. Pride. 30. III 30. Pride. 30. Pride. 31. Pride. 31. Pride. 31. Pride. 31.
Pride.

It Is true, there needed no long time to discover that this Account was too
short, and that his Year must begin long before the Solar Year, and therefore
to reduce these things into Order, he ordained that all the Days which were
over and above what he had reckoned in this Calendar, should be inserted
amongst the rest without any Name, by way of Intercalation, which was done with
little Care. But under the Reign of Numa Pompilius the Calendar was first
reformed. This Prince had private Conferences with Pythagoras, from whom he
learned many things concerning Astronomy, which he chiefly applied to this
Purpose; and he followed very near the same Order which the Greeks then
observed in the Division of Time. It Is true, that instead of 354 Days, which
they gave to their common Years, he gave to his 355, because he would have the
Number to be odd, out of a superstitious Opinion which he learned from the
Egyptians, who had an Aversion to even Numbers which they accounted
unfortunate: And therefore he took away one Day from each of these Six Months,
April, June, Sextilis, September, November and December, to which Romulus had
given 30 Days, that they might have but 29, and left to the rest 31 Days which
they had before; and then adding these Six Days to the 51, which Romulus's Year
of 304 Days wanted, to make up his own Year of 355; he made them in all 57
Days; which Number he divided into Two to make of it Two other Months, which he
placed before the Month March, viz. January consisting of 29 Days, and February
of 28, which Month he designed for the Sacrifices which were offered to the
Infernal Gods, to which this even Number as being unfortunate seemed most
properly to belong.

Thus he made the Month of January, which he placed at the Winter-solstice, the
first Month of the Year, instead of March which was the first before, and which
Romulus had placed at the Vernal Equinox: And to make this Institution
everlasting, he made use of the Intercalation of 90 Days every Eight Years,
which Number was made up of the Eleven Days and a Quarter, which the Lunar Year
consisting of 354 Days wanted of the Solar Year consisting of 365 Days and Six
Hours. Of these the Greeks made Three Months, each whereof had 30 Days, which
they called (...), and which they intercalated after the Third, the Fifth and
the Eigth Years; but Numa made Four Months of them, and intercalated one every
Two Years, after the Feast called Terminalia, which happened on the Sixth of
the Kalends of March, i. e. on the 24th of February; and the first Month
intercalated he made to consist of 22 Days, and the next of 23, that so the
whole Intercalation in the Space of Four Years might make up the Number of 45
Days, which was equal to that used among the Greeks in their Olympiads. This
Month intercalated every Two Years was called Mercedonius, and the Intercalary
February.

The Year of Numa which consisted of 355 Days, ending one Day later than the
Greek Year, it was easy to observe, that since their Beginnings were so far
from agreeing together, they would in a little time recede very far from one
another: And therefore the same Numa, to obviate this Inconvenience, ordained,
that in the Space of Eight Years the whole 90 Days should not be intercalated,
according to the Custom of the Greeks, but only 82 Days, which were to be
inserted in this Order: At first in the Space of Two Years an Intercalation was
made of 22 Days, next after that, an Intercalation was made of 23 Days, at the
Third time an Intercalation was made of 22 Days, and at the Fourth an
Intercalation was made of 15 Days only, in lieu of 23 which should have been
inserted, this Deduction was necessary to take off in Eight Years time, the
Eight superfluous Days he had added to his Year.

Numa's Year therefore consisted of Twelve Months, viz. January, February,
March, April, May, June, Quintilis, Sextilis, September, October, November and
December, whereof Seven had 29 Days, and the rest 31, except February which had
only 28, which may be seen in the following Account of his Calendar. But as to
the Division of Months into Calends, Nones and Ides, and the Manner of
reckoning Days. See hereafter the Paragraph before Caesar's Calendar.

The CALENDAR of Numa Pompilius, containing 12 MONTHS, and consisting of 355
DAYS.
January. February. March. April. May. June. Quintilis. Sextilis. September.
October. November. December. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1.
Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1. Kalend. 1.
Kalend. 2. IV 2. IV 2. VI 2. IV 2. VI 2. IV 2. VI 2. IV 2. IV 2. VI 2. IV 2. IV
3. III 3. III 3. V 3. III 3. V 3. III 3. V 3. III 3. III 3. V 3. III 3. III 4.
Pride. 4. Pride. 4. IV 4. Pride. 4. IV 4. Pride. 4. IV 4. Pride. 4. Pride. 4. IV 4.
Pride. 4. Pride. 5. Non. 5. Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5.
Non. 5. III 5. Non. 5. Non. 6. VIII 6. VIII. 6. Pride. 6. VIII 6. Pride. 6. VIII.
6. Pride. 6. VIII 6. VIII 6. Pride. 6. VIII 6. VIII 7. VII 7. VII 7. Non. 7. VII
7. Non. 7. VII 7. Non. 7. VII 7. VII 7. Non. 7. VII 7. VII 8. VI 8. VI 8. VIII
8. VI 8. VIII 8. VI 8. VIII 8. VI 8. VI 8. VIII 8. VI 8. VI 9. V 9. V 9. VII 9.
V 9. VII 9. V 9. VII 9. V 9. V 9. VII 9. V 9. V 10. IV 10. IV 10. VI 10. IV 10.
VI 10. IV. 10. VI 10. IV 10. IV 10. VI 10. IV 10. IV 11. III 11. III 11. V 11.
III 11. V 11. III. 11. V 11. III 11. III 11. V 11. III 11. III 12. Pride. 12.
Pride. 12. IV 12. Pride. 12. IV 12. Pride. 12. IV 12. Pride. 12. Pride. 12. IV 12.
Pride. 12. Pride. 13. Id. 13. Id. 13. III 13. Id. 13. III 13. Id. 13. III 13. Id.
13. Id. 13. III 13. Id. 13. Id. 14. XVII 14. XVI 14. Pride. 14. XVII 14. Pride.
14. XVII 14. Pride. 14. XVII 14. XVII 14. Pride. 14. XVII 14. XVII 15. XVI 15. XV
15. Id. 15. XVI 15. Id. 15. XVI 15. Id. 15. XVI 15. XVI 15. Id. 15. XVI 15. XVI
16. XV 16. XIV 16. XVII 16. XV 16. XVII 16. XV 16. XVII 16. XV 16. XV 16. XVII
16. XV 16. XV 17. XIV 17. XIII 17. XVI 17. XIV 17. XVI 17. XIV 17. XVI 17. XIV
17. XIV 17. XVI 17. XIV 17. XIV 18. XIII 18. XII 18. XV 18. XIII 18. XV 18.
XIII 18. XV 18. XIII 18. XIII 18. XV 18. XIII 18. XIII 19. XII 19. XI 19. XIV
19. XII 19. XIV. 19. XII 19. XIV 19. XII 19. XII 19. XIV 19. XII 19. XII 20. XI
20. X 20. XIII 20. XI 20. XIII 20. XI 20. XIII 20. XI 20. XI 20. XIII 20. XI
20. XI 21. X 21. IX 21. XII 21. X 21. XII 21. X 21. XII 21. X 21. X 21. XII 21.
X 21. X 22. IX 22. VIII 22. XI 22. IX 22. XI 22. IX 22. XI 22. IX 22. IX 22. XI
22. IX 22. IX 23. VIII 23. VII 23. X 23. VIII 23. X 23. VIII 23. X 23. VIII 23.
VIII 23. X 23. VIII 23. VIII 24. VII 24. VI 24. IX 24. VII 24. IX 24. VII 24.
IX 24. VII 24. VII 24. IX 24. VII 24. VII 25. VI 25. V 25. VIII 25. VI 25. VIII
25. VI 25. VIII 25. VI 25. VI 25. VIII 25. VI 25. VI 26. V 26. IV 26. VII 26. V
26. VII 26. V 26. VII 26. V 26. V 26. VII 26. V 26. V 27. IV 27. III 27. VI 27.
IV 27. VI 27. IV 27. VI 27. IV 27. IV 27. VI 27. IV 27. IV 28. III 28. Pride.
28. V 28. III 28. V 28. III 28. V 28. III 28. III 28. V 28. III 28. III 29.
Pride. 29. IV 29. Pride. 29. IV. 29. Pride. 29. IV 29. Pride. 29. Pride. 29. IV 29.
Pride. 29. Pride. 30. III 30. III 30. III 30. III 31. Pride. 31. Pride. 31. Pride.
31. Pride.

And to add the greater Weight and Authority to this Law, he appointed the
Highpriests to put it in Execution, and enjoined them to signify to the
People the Time and Manner in which this Intercalation of extraordinary Days
must be made: But these Priests, either through Ignorance or Malice, brought the
Account of Time and other Matters depending upon it into so great Confusion,
that the Festivals happened at such Seasons as were directly opposite to the
Times of their Institution, and the Feasts of Autumn fell out in the Spring,
and those of Harvest in the Middle of Winter.

This Disorder came to so great a Height, that when Julius Caesar was Dictator
and High Priest, after the Battle of Pharsalia, he thought the Reformation of
the Calendar to be a Thing well worthy of his Care, and necessary for the good
Government of the Empire: And for this purpose he fetched one Sosigenes from
Alexandria, who was esteemed the best Astronomer of that Time, and he by the
Order of the Emperor, after he had several times corrected it himself, declared
that the Destribution of Time in the Calendar could never be settled as certain
and unalterable, unless a principal Regard was had to the Annual Course of the
Sun, and that it was necessary for the Future, by a Method contrary to that
which had been hitherto practiced, to adjust the Lunar Year by the Motion of
the Sun, rather than accommodate the Course of the Sun to the unequal Laws of
the Moon's Motion. And because it passed then for a thing certain among A
stronomers, that the Annual Period of the Sun's Course was predsely 365 Days
and Six Hours, therefore he resolved to give the whole Time of 365 Days to the
Year in his Calendar, reserving the Six Hours to the End of Four Years, when
they made a whole Day, which he then added to the rest by way of Intercalation;
so that this Year did not consist of 365 Days, as the other Years did which he
called common, but of 366 Days. And since according to the Institution of Numa
Pompilius, the Intercalation of the Month Mer^edonius was made toward the End
of February, the same Sosigenes by order of the Emperor, used the same Time for
the Intercalation of this Day, which happened to fall out on that Day which
they called Regifugium, because the Romans in ancient Times had drove their
Kings out of Rome on that Day, and on the Day which follows another Festival
called Terminalia, i. e. on the 24th Day of February, or to speak in the
Language of the Romans, on the Sixth of the Calends of March; and because this
Day was called the second Sixth of the Calends, which in Latin is Biss^xius,
therefore the Year in which this Intercalation was made, was called Bissextile
or Intercalary.

He changed nothing in the Order nor Names of the Months, nor yet in the Number
of Days in these Four, viz. March, May, Quintil is and October, which had each
31 Days in Numa's Calendar; but to make room for the Ten Days, whereby the
Solar Year exceeded that of Numa, he added Two Days to each of these Three
Months, January, Sextilis and December, which had only 29 Days before, and so
he made them equal to the other Months which had 31, but he added only one Day
to these Four Months, April, June, September and November, and so made them
consist of 30 Days, and to the Month of February he left 28 Days for the common
Years, and 29 for the Year called Bissextile, that so there might be no Change
made in the Ceremonies of the Sacrifices, which were offered in this Month to
the Infernal Gods.

As soon as these Things were thus ordered, and Sosigenes had finished his
Work, the Emperor published an Edict, wherein he set forth the Reformation he
had made of the Calendar, and commanded it to be used through all the Roman
Empire.

And because of the Negligence of those to whom the Care was committed of
distributing the Intercalatory Months, the Beginning of the Year was then found
to anticipate its true Place 67 whole Days, therefore this Time must be some
way spent to restore the first Day of the next Year to its due Place at the
Winter-^o^stice, and to this end Two Months were made of these 67 Days, which
were ordered to be intercalated between the Months of November and December,
from whence it came to pass, that the Year of the Correction of the Calendar by
Julius Caesar, which was called the Julian Correction, consisted of 15 Months
and of 445 Days; and upon this Account it was called the Year of Confusion,
because in it that great Number of Days was to be absorbed which brought so
great Confusion into the Account of Time.

But to accommodate the Matter in some measure to the Genius of the Romans, who
had been so long accustomed to the Lunar Year, the Emperor would not begin his
Year precisely on the Day of the Winter solstice, but only on the Day of the
New Mood which followed next after it, which happened by Chance at the time of
this Correction of the Calendar, to be about Eight Days after the Solstice,
from hence it comes to pass, that the Julian Year in all succeeding Times has
still preserved the same Beginning, i. e. the first Day of January, which is
about Eight Days after the Solstice of Capricorn.

Julius Caesar drew a great deal of envy upon himself by this Correction of the
Calendar, of which we have an Instance in that picquant Ra^llery of Cicero upon
this Occasion; One of his Friends discoursing with him, happened to say, that
Lyra was to set to Morrow, Cras Lyra occidit, said he, to whom Cicero
immediately reported, Nempe ex Edicto, yes, quoth he, by virtue of an Edict.
Yet this did nowise hinder this Reformation from being generally received and
observed after the Death of Caesar, which happened the next Year after it. And
to give the greater Authority to this Usage, it fell out also, that Marcus
Antonius in his Consulship ordered, that the Month called Quintilis, which was
that in which Julius Caesar was born, should bear his Name, and for the Future
be called Julius; as it happened afterward to the Month Sextilis, to which was
given the Name of Augustus, both which Names are still continued down to our
Time.

It Is true, the Priests by their Ignorance committed a considerable Error in
the Observation of the first Years, for not understanding this Intercalation of
a Day was to be made every Four Years, they thought that the Fourth Year was to
be reckoned from that wherein the preceding Intercalation was made, and not
from that which followed next after it, by which means they left only Two
common Years instead of Three between the Two Intercalary Years, from whence it
came to pass, that they intercalated Twelve Days in the Space of 36 Years,
whereas Nine only should have been intercalated in that Space, and so they put
back the Beginning of the Year Three Days: Which being observed by Augustus,
Successor to Julius Caesar, he presently caused this Error to be amended, by
ordering that for the first Twelve Years no Intercalation should be made, that
by this means these Three superfluous Days might be absorbed, and Things might
be restored to their first Institution, which continued eversince without any
Interruption, until the End of the last Age, when some thought themselves
obliged to take Pains in making another Correction of the Calendar.

Here follows the Copy of an ancient Roman Calendar which some curions
Antiquaries have gathered together out of diverse Monuments that it might be
published. There are Six different Columns in it; the first contains the
Letters which they called Nundinales, the Second notes the Days which they
called Easti, Nefasti and Comittales, which are also signified by Letters; the
Third contains the Number of Meto, which is called the Golden Number; the
Fourth is for the Days in Order, which are marked with Arabic Figures or
Characters, the Fifth divides the Month into Calends, Nones and Ides, according
to the ancient Way of the Romans; and the Sixth contains their Festivals and
diverse other Ceremonies, of which we shall treat more largely hereafter.

In this Calendar, to which we have given the Name of the Calendar of Julius
Caesar, although it appears to have been made since Augustus's Time, is to be
seen,

1. The same Order and Succession of the Months which was instituted by Numa
Pompilius, and such as we have set down before.

2. These Seven Months, January, March, May, Quintilis or July, Sextilis or
August, October and Decembor have each of them 31 Days, and these Four April,
June, September and November have only 30, but February for the common Years
has only 28 Days, and for the Intercalary or Bissextile it has 29.

3. This Series of Eight Letters which we have called Literae Nundinales, is
continued without Interruption from the first to the last Day of the Year that
there might always be one of them to signify those Days of the Year on which
those Meetings were held that were called by the Romans Nundinae, and which
returned every Ninth Day, to the end that the Roman Citizens might come out of
the Country to the City to be informed of what concerned either Religion or
Government: These Letters are so placed, that if the Nundinal Day of the first
Year was under the Letter A, which is at the 1st, the 9th, the 17th, the 25th
of January, etc. the Letter of the Nundinal Day for the next Year must be D,
which is at the 5th, the 13th, the 21st of the same Month, etc. for the Letter
A being found at the 27th of December, if from this Day we reckon Eight
Letters, besides the Letters B, C, D, E, which remain after A in the Month of
December, we must take Four other Letters at the Beginning of January in the
next Year, A, B, C, D, and so the Letter D, which is first found in the Month
of January will be the 9th after the last A in the Month of December
preceding, and consequently it will be the Nundinal Letter, or that Letter
which notes the Days set apart for these Meetings, which may be also called by
the Name of Faires or public Markets. Thus by the same way of Calculation the
Nundinal Letter of the Third Year will be G, that of the Fourth B, and so on of
the rest, unless their happens some Change by the Intercalation.

4. To understand aright what is set down in the second Column, we must know,

That to sue one at Law, (which we call trying of Causes or sitting of Courts,)
was not allowed among the Romans on all Days, neither was the Praetor permitted
on every Day to pronounce these Three solemn Words, or this Form of Law, Do,
Dico, Addico; but these Days were called Fasti, on which the Courts sat to
administer Justice, quibus fas esset jure agere, and these were called Nefasti,
on which this was not permitted, quibus nefas esset, as we learn from these Two
Verses of Ovid,

Ille Nefastus erit, per quem tria verba silentur;
Festus erit, per quem jure licebit agi.
i. e. That Day was Nefastus on which these Three Words were not pronounced,
Do, Dico, Addico, as who should say among us, The Court does not sit to Day,
and that Day was called Fastus, on which it was lawful to sue at Law, or try a
Cause.

Besides, there were certain Days which they called Comitiales, which were
marked with a C, on which the People met in the Campus Martius, for the
Election of Magistrates, or treating about the Affairs of the Commonwealth, and
these Days were so called because the Assemblies of the People held on them,
were named Comitia. There were also some set Days on which a certain Priest,
(who was called among them Rex Sacrorum) was present at these Assemblies: And
lastly, on a certain Day of the Year they were wont to cleanse the Temple of
Vesta and carry off all the Dung in it, which was done with so much Ceremony,
that it was not lawful on that Day to try Causes.

This being supposed, it is no wise difficult to understand what is contained in
this Column, for wherever we meet in it with the Letter N, which signifies
Dies Nefastus, this denotes a Day on which Justice could not be administered, or
if we meet in it with the Letter F, or Fastus, that signifies a Court-Day; or
if we meet with F. P. or Fastus prima part diei, that signifies that the Court
sits on the former part of the Day; or if we meet there with N. P. or Nefastus
prima part diei, that signifies the Court does not sit on the former part of
the Day; or if we meet there with E. N. or Endotercisus seu intercisus, that
signifies the Court sits some certain Hours of the Day, and not at other Hours;
or if we meet there with a C. that denotes that these Assemblies were then held
which were called Comitia, or if we meet there with these Letters Q. Rex. C. F.
or Quando Rex comitiavit, fas, they signify, that the Court does sit after the
Priest called Rex has been present at the Comitia; or lastly, when we see these
other Letters Q. ST. D. F. or Quando stercus delatum, fas, they signify, that
the Court does sit immediately after the Dung is carried out of the Temple of
the Goddess Vesta.

5. The Third Column is for the 19 Figures of the Numbers of the Lunar Cycle,
otherwise called the Golden Number, which signify the New Moons through the
whole Year, according to the Order in which they were thought to happen in the
Time of Julius Caesar, when these Figures were thus disposed in his Calendar.

6. The Fourth notes the Succession of the Days of the Months, by the Numbers
of the Arabic Figures or Caracters; but then we must not imagine that they
were thus disposed in the Tables of the Fasti, i. e. in the Calendar used by
the Ancients, for they had no Knowledge of any such thing: Yet we thought it
convenient to place them here, that we might the better compare the Manner of
naming and reckoning Days that was used by the Ancients with ours at present,
and discern what are the Days as we now reckon them, to which the Festivals and
other Days of the Romans might correspond.

7. The Fifth Column contains that famous Division of the Days of the Months
into Calends, Nones and Ides, which was in use among the Romans; and though
this Division was not into equal Parts, as were the Decads used by the Greeks,
but into very different Portions of Time, yet this Variety is well enough
expressed in these Two Verses.

Sex Maius Nonas, October, Julius and Mars,
Quatuor at reliqui. Dabit Idus qui libet octo.
i. e. These Four Months, March, May, July and October, have Six Days of Nones,
and all the rest have only Four; but in every one of them there are Eight Days
of Ides. This must be understood after this Manner, that the first Day of each
Month was always called the Calends of that Month; after that in Four Months,
March, May, July and October, the Seventh Day of the Month was called the
Nones, and the Fiftenth the Ides, whereas in other Months in which the Nones
lasted but Four Days, the Fifth was called Nonae the Nones, and the Thirtenth
Idus the Ides; the other Days are reckoned backward from the Beginning of the
next Month, and the Number always lessens as you come nearer to it.

The Days which are after the Calends until the Nones take their Name from the
Nones of the Month current, the following Days which are between the Nones and
the Ides, take their Name from the Ides of the same Month; but all the rest
from the Ides until the End of the next Month, take their Name from the Calends
of the next Month: All which we shall explain more at large under the Word
Mensis.

Besides, you may observe, that the Tables of the Fasti, by which the Romans
described their Months and their Days throughout the Year, in Process of time
were called by the Name of Calendar, because this Name of Calends is found
written in great Characters at the Head of each Month.

8. The last Column contains those Things which chiefly belong to the Religion
of the Romans, such as the Festivals, the Sacrifices, the Games, the
Ceremonies, the fortunate or unfortunate Days, as also the Beginning of the
Signs, the Four Cardinal Points of the Year, which make the Four Seasons; the
Rising and Setting of the Stars, etc. which were very much much observed by the
Ancients who made use of them for a long time, to denote the Difference of the
Seasons, instead of a Calendar; at least, until it was reduced into a more
regular Form by the Correction of Julius Caesar. We find in most of the ancient
Books, that they governed themselves wholly by the Observation of the Rising
and Setting of the Stars, in Navigation, in tilling the Ground, in Physic, and
in the greatest Part of their Affairs both public and private.

The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. JANUARY. Under the Protection of the Goddess
Juno.
Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number. A F I 1 Kalen. Sacred to Janus, to
Juno, to Jupiter and Aesculapius. B F 2 IV An unfortunate Day. Dies Ater. C C
IX 3 III Cancer sets. D C 4 Pride. E F XVIII 5 Non. Lyra rises. Aquila sets at
Night. F F VI 6 VIII G C 7 VII H C XIV 8 VI Sacrifices to Janus. A III 9 V The
Agonalia. B EN 10 IV The middle of Winter. C NP XI 11 III The Carmentalia. D C
12 Pride. The Compitalia. E NP XIX 13 Id. The Trumpeters make Publications through
the City in the Habit of Women. F EN VIII 14 XIX Wicked Days by Order of the
Senate. G 15 XVIII To Carmenta, Porrima and Postverta. H C XVI 16 XVII To
Concord. Leo begins to set in the Morning. A C V 17 XVI The Sun in Aquarius. B
C 18 XV C C XIII 19 XIV D C II 20 XIII E C 21 XII F C X 22 XI G C 23 X Lyra
sets. H C XVIII 24 IX Festi Sementini, or the Feast of Seed-time. A C VII 25
VIII B C 26 VII C C XV 27 VI To Castor and Pollux. D C IV 28 V E F 29 IV
Equiria in the Campus Martius. The Pacalia. F F XII 30 III Fidicula sets. G F I
31 Pride. To the Dii Penates.

The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. FEBRUARY. Under the Protection of Neptune.
Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number. H N IX 1 Kalen. To Juno Sospita, to
Jupiter, to Hercules, to Diana. The Lucaria. A N 2 IV B N XVII 3 III Lyra sets,
and the Middle of Leo. C N VI 4 Pride. The Dolphin sets. D 5 Non. Aquarius
rises. E N XIV 6 VIII F N III 7 VII G N 8 VI H N XI 9 V The Beginning of the
Spring. A N 10 IV B N XIX 11 III Genialic Games. Arcturus rises. C N VIII 12
Pride. D NP 13 Id. To Faunus and Jupiter. The Defeat and Death of the Fabii E C.
XVI 14 XVI The Rising of Corvus, Crater and the Serpent. F NP V 15 XV The
Lupercalia. G END 16 XIV The Sun in the Sign Pisces. H NP XIII 17 XIII The
Quirinalia. A C II 18 XII The Fornacalia. The Feralia to the Gods Manes. B C 19
XI C C X 20 X D F 21 IX To the Goddess Muta or Laranda. The Feralia. E C XVIII
22 VIII The Charistiae. F NP VII 23 VII The Terminalia. G N 24 VI The
Regifugium. The Place of the Bissextilo. H C XV 25 V Arcturus rises at Night. A
EN IV 26 IV B NP 27 III Equiria in the Campus Martius. C C XII 28 Pride. The
Tarquins overcome.

The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. MARCH. Under the Protection of Minerva.
Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number. D NP I 1 Kalen. The Matronalia; to
Mars, the Feast of Ancylia. E F 2 VI To Juno Lucina. F C IX 3 V The second
Pisces sets. G C 4 IV H C XVII 5 III Arcturus sets. Vindemiator rises. Cancer
rises. A NP V 6 Pride. The Vestaliana. On this Day Jul. Caesar was coeated
High Priest. B F 7 Non. To Ve-Jupiter in the Wood of the Asylum. Pegasus rises.
C F XIV 8 VIII Corona rises. D C III 9 VII Orion rises. The Northern Pisces
rises. E C 10 VI F C XI 11 V G C 12 IV H EN XIX 13 III The Opening of the Sea.
A NP VIII 14 Pride. The second Equiria upon the Tyber. B NP 15 Id. To Anna
Parenna. The Parricide. Scorpio sets. C C XVI 16 XVII D NP V 17 XVI The
Liberalia, or Bacchanalia. The Agonalia Milvius sets. E C 18 XV The Sun in the
Sign Aries. F N XIII 19 XIV The Quinquatria of Minerva, which last 5 Days. G C
II 20 XIII H C 21 XII The 1st Day of the Century. Pegasus sets in the Morning.
A N X 22 XI B NP 23 X The Tubilustrium. C QR XVIII 24 IX D C VII 25 VIII The
Hilaria, to the Mother of the Gods. The Vernal Equinox. E C 26 VII F NP XV 27
VI On this Day Caesar made himself Master of Alexandria. G C IV 28 V The
Megalesia. H C 29 IV A C XII 30 III To Janus, to Concord, to Salus and Pax. B C
I 31 Pride. To the Moon, or Diana upon the Aventine Mount.

The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. APRIL. Under the Protection of the Goddess
Venus.
Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Letters. C N IX 1 Kalen. To Venus with the
Flowers and Myrtle. To Fortuna Virilis. D C 2 IV The Pleiades set. E C XVII 3
III F C VI 4 Pride. The Megalesian Games to the Mother of the Gods, for the
Space of 8 Days. G 5 Non. H NP XIV 6 VIII To Fortuna publica primigenia. A N
III 7 VII The Birth of Apollo and Diana. B N 8 VI Plays for Caesar's Victory.
Libra and Orion set. C N XI 9 V D N 10 IV Cerealia. Ludi Circensis, the
Circensian Games. E N XIX 11 III F N VIII 12 Pride. The Mother of the Gods
brought to Rome. Plays in honor of Ceres for 8 Days. G NP 13 Id. To Jupiter
Victor, and Liberty. H N XVI 14 XVIII A NP V 15 XVII Fordicidia, or Fordicalia.
B N 16 XVI Augustus saluted Emperor. The Hyades set. C N XIII 17 XV D N II 18
XIV Equiria in the Circus Maximus. The Burning of the Foxes. E N 19 XIII
Cerealia. The Sun in the Sign Taurus. F N X 20 XII G NP 21 XI Paliliana, or
Pariliana. The Nativity of Rome. H N XVIII 22 X The second Agoniana, or
Agonalia. A NP VII 23 IX The first Vinalia to Jupiter and Venus. B C 24 VIII C
NP XV 25 VII Robigalia. Aries sets. The middle of the Spring. D F IV 26 VI The
Dog Star rises. The Goat rises. E C 27 V Latinae Feriae on the Mons sacer. F NP
XII 28 IV The Floralia for the Space of 6 Days. The Goat rises in the Morning.
G C I 29 III The Dog Star sets at Night. H F 30 Pride. To Vesta Palatina. The
first Larentalia.

The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. MAY. Under the Protection of Apollo.
Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number. A N IX 1 Kalen. To Deu bona. To Lares
praestites. Ludi Floria for the Space of the 3 Days. B F 2 VI The Compitalia. C
C XVII 3 V The Centaar and the Hyades rise. D C VI 4 IV E C 5 III Lyra rises. F
C XIV 6 Pride. The Middle of Scorpio sets. G N III 7 Non. Virgiliae rises in the
Morning. H F 8 VIII The Goat rises. A N XI 9 VII Lemuria at Night for the Space
of 3 Days. The Luminaria. B C 10 VI C N XIX 11 V Orion sets unfortunate Days to
marry on. D NP VIII 12 IV To Mars The Avenger at the Circus. E N 13 III
Lemuria. The Pleiados rise. The Beginning of Summer. F C XVI 14 Pride. To
Mercury. Taurus rises. G NP V 15 Id. To Jupiter. The Feast of the Merchants.
The Birth of Mercury. Lyra rises. H F 16 XVII A C XIII 17 XVI B C II 18 XV C C
19 XIV The Sun in Gemini. D C X 20 XIII E NP 21 XII The Agonalia, or Agoniana
of Janus. F N XVIII 22 XI To Vejupiter. The Dog Star rises. G NP VII 23 X The
Feriae of Vulcan. The Tubilustrium. H Q. REX 24 IX C. F. A C XV 25 VIII To
Fortuna publica. Aquila rises. B C IV 26 VII The second Regifugium. Arcturus
sets. C C 27 VI The Hyades rise. D C XII 28 V E C I 29 IV F C 30 III G C IX 31
Pride.

The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. JUNE. Under the Protection of Mercury.
Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number. H N XVII 1 Kalen. To Juno. To Moneta To
Tempestas. To Fabaria. Aquila. rises. A F VI 2 IV To Mars, to the Goddess
Carna. To Hyades rise. B C 3 III To Bellona. C C XIV 4 Pride. To Hercules at the
Circus. D N III 5 Non. To Fides. To Jupiter Sponsor, or Deus fidius, holy half
Father E N 6 VIII To Vesta. F N XI 7 VII The Piscatorian Days in the Campus
Martius. Arcturus rises. G 8 VI To Intellectus, at the Capitol. H N XIX 9 V
Vestaliana. The Altar of Jupiter Pistor. The Crowning of Asses. A N VIII 10 IV
Matralia, of Fortuna fortis. The Dolphin rises at Night. B N 11 III To Concord.
To Mother Matuta. C N XVI 12 Pride. D N V 13 Id. To Jupiter Invictus. The lesser
Quinquatrus. The Beginning of Heat. E N 14 XVIII F Q. ST XIII 15 XVII The
Carrying of the Dung out of the Temple of Vesta. The Hyades rise. D. F. G C II
16 XVI H C 17 XV Orion rises. A C X 18 XIV The whole Dolphin rises. B C 19 XIII
C C XVIII 20 XII To Minerva upon Mount Aventine. The Sun in the Sign Cancer. D
C VIII 21 XI To Summanus. Serpentarius rises. E C 22 X F C XV 23 IX G C IV 24
VIII To Fortuna fortis. The Summer Solstice. H C 25 VII A C XII 26 VI The
Girdle of Orion rises. B C I 27 V To Jupiter Stator and Lar. C C 28 IV D F IX
29 III To Quirinus on the Quirinal Mount. E F 30 Pride. To Hercules and the
Muses. The Poplifugia.

The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. QUINTILIS, or JULY. Under the, Protection of
Jupiter.
Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number. F N XVII 1 Kalen. Removing from one
House to another. G N VI 2 VI H N 3 V A NP XIV 4 IV Corona sets in the Morning.
The Hyades (...) B N III 5 III The Poplifugium. C N 6 Pride. Ludi Apollinares
for the Space of 8 Days. To Fortuna Feminina. D N XI 7 Non. The Nonae
Caprotinae. The Feast of Maidservants. Romulus disappeared. E N 8 VIII
Vitulatio, or wanton Rejoycings. The Middle of Capricorn sets. F EN XIX 9 VII
Cepheus rises at Night. G C VIII 10 VI The Etesian Winds begin to blow. H C 11
V A NP XVI 12 IV The Birth of Julius Caesar. B C V 13 III C C 14 Pride. To
Fortuna Feminina. The Merkatus, or Mercuriala for 6 Days. D NP XIII 15 Id. To
Castor and Pollux. E F II 16 XVII The foremost Dog rises. F C 17 XVI The fatal
Day of the Battle of Allia. G C X 18 XV H NP 19 XIV Lucaria, Games lasting 4
Days. A XVIII 20 XIII Plays for Caesar' s Victory. The Sun in the Sign Leo. B C
VII 21 XII Lucaria. C C 22 XI D XV 23 X The Games of Neptune. E N IV 24 IX F NP
25 VIII Furinalia. The Circensian Games lasting 6 Days. Aquarius sets. G C XII
26 VII The little Dog Star rises. H C I 27 VI Aquila rises. A C 28 V B C IX 29
IV C C 30 III Aquila sets. D C XVII. Pride.

The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. SEXTILIS, or AUGUST. Under the Protection of
the Goddess Ceres.
Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Letters. E N VI 1 Kalen. To Mars. To Hope. F C
XIV 2 IV Feriae, upon the Account of Caesar's subduing Spain. G C III 3 III H C
(...) 4 Pride. The Middle of Leo rises. A F XI 5 Non. To Salus on the Quirinal
Mount. B F 6 VIII To Hope. The Middle of Arcturus sets. C C XIX 7 VII The
Middle of Aquarius sets. D C VIII 8 VI Soli Indigeti on the Quirinal Mount. E
NP 9 V F C XVI 10 IV To Opis and Ceres. G C V 11 III To Hercules in the Circus
Flaminius. Lyra sets. The Beginning of Autumn. H C 12 Pride. The Lignapesia. A
NP XIII 13 Id. To Diana in the Sylva Aricina. To Vertumnus. The Feast of
Slaves, and Servant-maids. B F II 14 XIX The Dolphin in the Morning. C C 15
XVIII D C X 16 XVII E NP 17 XVI Portumnalia to Janus. F C XVIII 18 XV
Consualia. The Rape of the Sabine Virgins. G FP VII 19 XIV The last Vinalia.
The Death of Augustus. H C 20 XIII Lyra sets. The Sun in the Sign Virgo. A NP
XV 21 XII Vinalia Rustica. The Grand Mysteries. Consualia. B EN IV 22 XI
Vindemiator rises in the Morning. C NP 23 X Vulcanalia in the Circus Flaminius.
D C XII 24 IX The Feriae of the Moon. E NP I 25 VIII Opi Consivae in the
Capitol. F C 26 VII G NP IX 27 VI Volturnalia. H NP 28 V To Victory in the
Court. Sagitta sets. The End of the Etesian Winds. A F XVII 29 IV B F VI 30 III
The Ornaments of the Goddess Ceres are shown. C F 31 Pride. Andromeda rises at
Night.

The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. SEPTEMBER. Under the Protection of Vulcan.
Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number. D N XIV 1 Kalen. To Jupiter Maimactes.
Feasts to Neptune. E N III 2 IV To the Victory of Augustus Feriae. F NP 3 III
Dionysiaca, or Vindemiae. G C XI 4 Pride. Roman Games for the Space of 8 Days. H
F 5 Non. A F XIX 6 VIII To Erebus a Ram and a black Sheep. B C VIII 7 VII C C 8
VI D C XVI 9 V The Goat rises. E C V 10 IV The Head of Medusa rises. F C 11 III
The Middle of Virgo rises. G N XIII 12 Pride. The Middle of Arcturus rises. H NP
II 13 Id. To Jupiter. The Dedication of the Capitol. The Nail fixed by the
Praetor. A F 14 XVIII The Trial of Horses. B X 15 XVII The Grand Circensian
Games, dedicated for 5 Days. The Departure of the Swallows. C C 16 XVI D C
XVIII 17 XV E C VII 18 XIV Spica Virginis rises in the Morning. F C 19 XIII The
Sun in the Sign Libra. G C XV 20 XII The Merkatus for the Space of 4 Days. The
Birth of Romulus. H C IV 21 XI A C 22 X Argo and Pisces set. B NP XII 23 IX The
Circensian Games. The Birth of Augustus. The Centaur rises in the Morning C C I
24 VIII The Autumnal Equinox. D C 25 VII To Venus, Saturn and Mania. E C IX 26
VI F C 27 V To Venus the Mother, and Fortuna redux. G C XVII 28 IV The Last of
Virgo's rising. H F IV 29 III A F XIV 30 Pride. A Feast to Minerva. The
Meditrinalia.

The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. OCTOBER. Under the Protection of the God Mars.
Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number. B N III 1 Kalen. C F 2 VI D C XI 3 V E
C 4 IV Boots sets in the Morning. F C XIX 5 III The Ornaments of Ceres shown.
G C VIII 6 Pride. To the Gods Manes. H F 7 Non. A F XVI 8 VIII The bright Star
Corona rises. B C V 9 VII C C 10 VI Ramalia. D XIII 11 V Meditrinalia. The
Beginning of Winter. E NP II 12 IV Augustalia. F NP 13 III Fontinalia. To
Jupiter Liberator. Games lasting for 3 days. G NP X 14 Pride. H NP 15 Id. The
Merchants to Mercury. A F XVIII 16 XVII Popular Games. Arcturus sets. B C VII
17 XVI C C 18 XV To Jupiter Liberator. Games. D NP XV 19 XIV Armilustrium. E C
IV 20 XIII The Sun in the Sign Scorpio. F C 21 XII Plays lasting 4 Days. G C
XII 22 XI H C I 23 X To Liber Pater. Taurus sets. A C 24 IX B C IX 25 VIII C C
26 VII D C XVII 27 VI Plays to Victory. E C VI 28 V The lesser Mysteries.
Virgilia set. F C 29 IV G C XIV 30 III The Feria of Vertumnus. Games
consecrated. H C III 31 Pride. Arcturus sets.

The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. NOVEMBER. Under the Protection of the Goddess
Diana.
Nundinal Letters. Days. Golden Number. A N 1 Kalen. The Banquet of Jupiter.
The Circensian Games. The Head of Taurus sets. B F XI 2 IV Arcturus sets at
Night. C F 3 III The Fidicula rises in the Morning. D XIX 4 Pride. E F VIII 5
Non. Neptunalia. Games lasting 8 Days. F F 6 VIII G C XVI 7 VII A Show of
Ornaments. H C V 8 VI Scorpio rises with a clear Light. A C 9 V B C XIII 10 IV
C C II 11 III The Shutting up of the Sea. Virgiliae set. D C 12 Pride. E NP X 13
Id. A Feast commanded. The Lectisternia. F F 14 XVIII The Trial of Horses. G C
XVIII 15 XVII Popular Games in the Circus for 3 Days. H C VII 16 XVI The End of
Seed-time for Corn. A C 17 XV B C XV 18 XIV The Merkatus for 3 Days. The Sun in
the Sign Sagittarus. C C IV 19 XIII A Supper of the Priests, in Honor of
Cybele. D C 20 XII The Horns of the Bull set. E C XII 21 XI The Liberalia.
Lepus sets in the Morning. F C I 22 X To Pluto and Proserpina. G C 23 IX H IX
24 VIII Bruma or Brumalia, for the Space of 30 Days. A C 25 VII The little
Dog Star sets. B C XVII 26 VI C C VI 27 V Funeral-Sacrifices to the Gauls dug
up, and to the Greeks, in the foro boario. D C 28 IV E C XIV 29 III F F III 30
Pride.

The CALENDAR of Julius Caesar. DECEMBER. Under the Protection of the Goddess
Vesta.
Nundinal Letters Days. Golden Number. G N XI 1 Kalen. To Fortuna Feminina. H 2
IV A XIX 3 III B VIII 4 Pride. To Minerva and Neptune. C F 5 Non. The Faunalia.
D C XVI 6 VIII The Middle of Sagittarius sets. E C V 7 VII Aquila rises in the
Morning. F C 8 VI G C XIII 9 V To Juno Jugalis. H C II 10 IV A NP 11 III
Agonalia. The 14 Halcyonian Days. B EN X 12 Pride. C NP 13 Id. The Equiria, or
the Horse-Races. D F XVIII 14 XIX Brumalia. Ambrosiana. E NP VII 15 XVIII
Consualia. All Cancer rises in the Morning. F C 16 XVII G XV 17 XVI The
Saturnalia, lasting 5 Days. H C IV 18 XV Cygnus rises. The Sun in the Sign
Capricorn. A NP 19 XIV Opaliana. B C XII 20 XIII Sigillaria lasting 2 Days. C
NP I 21 XII Angeronalia. The Divalia. To Hercules and Venus with Wine mixed
with Honey. D C 22 XI Compitalia. Feriae dedicated to the Lares. Games. E NP IX
23 X The Feriae of Jupiter. Larentinalia, or Quarentinalia. The Goat sets. F C
24 IX Juvenalia. Sports. G C XVII 25 VIII The End of the Brumalia. The Winter
Solstice. H C VI 26 VII A C 27 VI To Phoebus for the Space of 3 Days. The
Dolphin rises in the Morning B C XIV 28 V C F III 29 IV Aquila sets at Night. D
F 30 III Canicula sets at Night. E F XI 31 Pride.

It was not difficult for the Romans, when they were now become Masters of the
World in the Time of Augustus, to cause this Correction of the Calendar made by
Julius Caesar, to be everywhere received, and to introduce the Use of it among
all Nations, even those which were most remote, at least so far as concerned
the Political Distribution of Time. For this Reason the Greeks did no longer
make use of a Lunar Year, nor make their Intercalation of a Month and a Half to
each Olympiad. The Egyptians also were obliged to fix their Thot to the first
Day of their Year, which moved before through all the Seasons, and to fix it
for ever to a determinate Point. In like manner did the Jews, for they quite
left off their way of intercalating of a Month in the Space of 120 Years, as
they had been used to do, and submitted to the Intercalation of a Day once
every Four Years.

It Is true, the Observation of the Julian Calendar brought no other Alteration
into these Countries, but each of them still retained the free Use of their own
Customs and Traditions for Divine Worship. Thus the Jews continued in the
ancient Observation of the Law, without changing any thing as to their Sabbath,
Festivals, or Ceremonies; and herein the other Nations of the World did imitate
them, although they were subject to the Roman Empire.

The primitive Christians made use of the Division of Tune according to the
Custom of the Romans, to whose Power they were subject, except such Customs as
were peculiar to the City of Rome, or savoured of their blind Superstition and
Idolatry. They kept therefore the same Names of the Months, the same Number of
their Days, the same Division of these Days into Calends, Nones and Ides, and
the same Intercalation of a Day every Four Years, in the Year which was called
Bissextile or Leap-year. They left out the Nundinal Letters which were used in
the Calendar of the Romans, and in their stead placed other Letters to signify
every holy Sunday throughout the Year. They took no Notice of their Dies Fasti,
Nefasti or Comitiales, because they were employed only for some Uses peculiar
to they City of Rome; but they rejected with Abhorrence the Festivals and Games
of the Romans, as being Ceremonies consecrated to the Devil, and in their stead
introduced the Feasts and Ceremonies of the true Religion.

CALIGA,
a Boot or Buskin, a sort of Shoes that were worn by a common Roman Soldier in
time of War, from whence the Word Caligatus comes to signify a common Soldier:
And thus we must understand that Passage of Suetonius, in the Life of Augustus,
Coronas murales sape etiam caligatis tribuit, that he often gave the Mural
Coronet to common Soldiers who first scaled the Walls of the Enemies Cities;
and also that Proverb which Seneca uses, speaking of Marius, that from a common
Soldier he arrived at the Consulship, a caliga ad consulatum pervenisse: Thus
Agrippina caused her Son Caius to be named Caligula, because he being born in
the Army, she caused him to wear these Buskins like a common Soldier, to gain
their Good Will by this Complaisance.

These sort of Shoes came up as high as the Middle of the Leg, and had at the
Top the Figure of the Head of a Lion or Leopard, or only of the Muzzle of these
Animals: It was garnished with little Nails of Iron, and sometimes even of Gold
and Silver, and had a Sole of Wood. There was a Fund set apart for providing
these Nails for the Soldiers, which was called Clavarium, and the Officers that
distributed it were called Clavarii, of which Number was the Father of
Suetonius.

The Soldiers did very often desire of the Emperors the Clavarium, i. e. the
Money of this Fund, for buying Nails to adorn their Shoes; so they did of
Vitellius according to the Relation of Tacitus, in L. 3. of his History.

Justin tells us, that all the Soldiers of Antiochus's Army caused their
Buskins to be adorned with Nails of God, Argenti certe aurique tantum, ut etiam
gregarii milites caligas auro suffigerent.

CALIGULA CAIUS,
the Fourth Roman Emperor, the Son of Germanicus and Agrippina, he succeeded
Tiberius in the Empire. He was surnamed Caligula from the Military Shoes which
his Mother caused him to wear in the Army, and which were called Caliga. He had
an ill-shaped Body, a small Neck, a large Forehead and slender Legs; he
affected sometimes, says Suetonius, to put on a terrible Countenance, to strike
a Dread into the Minds of those who came near him; his Chin turned up, which
was a Sign of Cruelty, but he would put on a modest Look, which was only a Copy
of his Countenance, says Tacitus, to cover his naked Designs. He gave an
Example of all sorts of Vices, and committed the most enormous Crimes. He
endeavored to gain the Good Will of the People by Largesses and Shows of
extraordinary Expense and Magnificence. He caused a Bridge to be built upon the
Sea a Mile long with Moles, upon which he erected Towers and built Houses, out
of a foolish and ridiculous Fancy, that by this means he had subdued this
Element. He caused many of the Statues of the Gods to be maimed, breaking off
their Heads, that he might place his own in the Room of them. In fine, he was a
Monster of Cruelty and Prodigality. His own Servants killed him after he had
reigned Four Years.

CALLIOPE,
who was the Mother of Orpheus, and the first of the Nine Muses, according to
the Poets, who presided over Harmony, and the Hymns made in Honor of the Gods.

CALLISTO,
the Daughter of Lycaon, King of Arcadia, and a Nymph of Diana who suffered her
self to be debauched by Jupiter; whereupon the Goddess being angry, changed her
into a Bear: But afterward her Lover placed her in the Heavens; and this is
that Constellation which is called the Great Bear.

CALUMNIA,
Calumny, of which the Athenians made a Deity, and to which they built a
Temple. Lucian has given us an Emblem of Calumny, in a Dialogue under the same
Title. Apelles, says he, being accused by a Painter jealous of his Glory, that
he had conspired against Ptolomy, and caused the Revolt of Tire, and the taking
of Pelusium, and being acquitted from this Accusation by one of the Painter's
Accomplices, Ptolomy was so sensibly touched with Sorrow for what was done,
that he gave Apelles 100 Talents, and delivered up the Accuser into his Hands,
to do with him as he should think fit. Apelles therefore to be revenged on
Calumny which had done him such an ill turn, made the following Picture. He
painted a Prince with large Ears, as commonly Midas's are painted, sitting upon
a Throne encompassed with Suspicion and Ignorance, and while he is in this
State, he reaches out his Hand a great Way off to Calumny, which advances
toward him, having a Face very bright, and sparkling with extraordinary Charms
and Enticements: She holds in her Left Hand a sorch, and with the other drags
an innocent young Man by the Hair, who holds up his Hands to Heaven and
implores its Assistance: Before her marches Envy with a pale Face and squinting
Eyes, which set off and dress up Calumny to make her the more acceptable: After
her comes Repentance under the Figure of a Lady in Mourning-Habit, with her
Garments rent, which turns her Head toward Truth, who weeps for Sorrow and
Shame.

CALYPSO,
was one of the Nymphs, the Daughter of Oceanus and Tethys: She reigned in the
Isle of Ogygia, where she entertained Ulysses kindly, when he was cast upon it
by a Storm. They lived together for Seven Years in great Privacy: But Ulysses
at last forsook it, and preferred his own Country and his dear Penelopy to his
new Mistress.

Lucian in L. 2. of his true History says, That as he was going out of the Isle
of the Blessed, Ulysses took him aside and gave him a Letter to Calypso,
without the Knowledge of his Wife, and that he arriving within Three Days after
in the Isle of Ogygia, broke open this Letter for fear lest this crafty Knare
should put so me Trick upon him, and he found written in it what follows: I
should not have left you before, but that I inffer'd Shipwreck, and hardly
escaped by the Help of Leucotheus in the Country of the Phaeaces. When I
returned home, I found my Wife courted by a sort of People who consumed my
Goods; and after they were killed, I was assassinated by Telemachus whom I had
by Circe. At present I am in the Isle of the Blessed, where I remember with
Grief the Pleasures we enjoyed together, and wish that I had always continued
with you, and had accepted the Offer you made me of Immortality. If I can
therefore make an Escape, you may rest assured that you shall see me again.
Farewell. He delivered this Letter to Calypso, whom he found in a Grotto, such
as Homer describes, where she was working Hangings with Figures in them.

CHAM, or CHAMESES,
the Son of Noab, who brought upon himself his Father's Curse by his
Reproaches; although he had for his Share the rich Countries of Syria and
Egypt, and all Africa, as we read in Genesis, yet he made Inroads into the
Countries possessed by his Nephews, and planted there such Vices as were not
known before. He continued Ten Years in Italy, and was driven thence by Janus.
Fuctius does not reckon him among the first Founders of the Italians.

CAMILLA,
the Queen of the Volsci, who was much addicted to Hunting, and was never so
well pleased as in shooting with a Bow. She came into the Help of Turnus and
the Latins against Aeneas, and signalized herself by many brave Exploits: She
was treacherously killed by Arontius, as we learn from Virgil, in L: 11. of the
Aeneids.

CAMILLUS,
Camillus Furius, an illustrious Roman, who was called a second Romulus for
restoring the Roman Commonwealth. He vanquished the Antiatae in a Naval Fight,
and caused the Prows of the Ships to be brought into the Place of the
Assemblies at Rome, which were afterward called Rostra, being the Tribunal for
Orations. When the Capitol was besieged by the Gauls, he was chosen Dictator,
although he had been banished by his ungrateful Countrymen. As Soon as he heard
this News, he solicited the Ardeatae to come in to the Assistance of Rome, and
invited all Italy to oppose the Invasion of the Gauls. He arrived at Rome in
that very Moment when the Citizens were weighing 2000 Pounds of Gold in
Performance of a Treaty they had made with the Gauls to oblige them to raise
the Seige: But he charging them on a sudden, forced them by this Surprise to
draw off with Shame and Loss.

After this Defeat and Deliverance of Rome, he made a Model of a Temple for
that Voice which had given Notice to the Romans of the Arrival of the Gauls,
and which they had slighted: He instituted Sacrifices to it under the Name of
Deus Locutius. He caused also a Temple to be built to Juno Moneta, and the
Goddess Matuta. The Romans in Acknowledgement of so many Benefits, erected to
him an Equestrian Statue in the Marketplace of Rome, which was an Honor that
was never done to any Citizen before. He died of the Plague at Eighty Years of
age.

CAMILLUS, or CASMILLUS,
was the Minister of the Gods Cabiri: Thus Plutarch says, that the Romans and
Greeks gave this Name to a young Man, who served in the Temple of Jupiter, as
the Greeks gave it to Mercury: Ministrantem in ade Jovis puerum in flore
aetatis dici Camillum; ut and Mercurium Graecorum nonnulli Camillum a
ministerio appellavere. Varro thinks that this Name comes from the Mysteries of
the Samothracians. Macrobius informs us, that the young Boys and Maids, who
ministered to the Priests and Priestesses of the Pagan Deities were called
Camilli and Camillae: Romani quoque pueros puellasve nobiles and investes,
Camillos and Camillas appellant, Flaminicarum and Flaminum praeministros.
Servius says, that in the Tuscan Tongue Mercury was called Camillus, as being
the Minister of the Gods. This Word Camillus obtained among the Tuscans,
Romans, Greeks, Samothracians, and the Egyptians; and came from the East into
the West. Bochart thinks that this Word might be derived from the Arabic
chadamae, i. e. ministrare: And it is well known, that the Arabic has much
Affinity with the Phoenician and Hebrew Tongues. Grotius derives Camillus from
Chamarim Writings wherein this Term signifies Priests or Augurs.

CAMOENAE,
the Nine Muses, the Daughters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne, so called from the
Sweetness of their Singing.

CAMPANA SUPELLEX,
an Earthen Vessel which was made in Campania.

CAMPANA,
alone, or NOLAE, Bells. Pancirollus says expressly, that they were not invented
until about the Year of J. C. 400, or 420, when they were first found out by
the Bishop of Nola in Campania, called Paulinus: And that for this Reason they
were called Campanae from the Country, or Nolae from the City where they were
first used: But Salmuth upon this Passage of Pancirollus tells us, that it was
an ancient Error to think that Paulinus first invented the Use of Bells, since
they were in use from the Times of Moses; for the High Priest among the Jews
had a great many little Bells of Gold at the lower part of his Garment, to give
Notice to the People when he entered into, and when he came out of the
Sanctuary. The Priest of Proserpina among the Athenians, called Hierophantus,
rung a Bell to call the People to Sacrifice. The Romans likewise had a Bell in
the public Baths, to give Notice of the Time when they were opened and shut
up; as may appear from these Verses of Martial, L. 14. Epigr. 163.

Read pilam: sonat aes thermarum: ludere pergis?
Virgin vis sola lotus abire domum.
Plutarch in his Book of Symposiacks speaks of certain Greeks who assembled at
the Ringing of a Bell, to go and sup together.

Adrianus Junius assures us, that the Ancients used Bells for the same End as
we do, that they rung them at the Death of any Person, as is done to this Day,
out of a superstitious Opinion, which was then generally received, that the
Sound of Bells drove away Devils. They made use of them also against
Enchantments, and particularly after the Moon was eclipsed, which they thought
came to pass by Magic: Thus we must understand these Verses of Juvenal,

-- Jam nemo tubas atque era fatiget,
Vna laboranti poterit sucurrere Lunae.
CAMPESTRE,
the Lappet of a Gown, or lower part of a Cassock, that went round the Body; a
sort of Apron, wherewith they girded themselves, who performed the Exercises in
the Campus Martius, which reached from the Navel down to the middle of their
Thighs, to cover their Privy Parts.

CAMPUS MARTIUS,
a large Place without Rome, between the City and the River Tiber. Some Authors
affirm, that Romulus consecrated it to the God Mars, from whom he said he was
descended, and that he devoted it to the Exercises of the Roman Youth. Others,
as particularly Titus Livius, think that Tarquinius Superbus challenged to
himself the Use of it; and that when he was driven away upon the Account of his
Cruelty, and the impudent Rape of his Son committed on the Body of the chaste
Lucretia, the Romans confiscated all his Goods, and particularly a great Field
covered with Corn without the City, which they consecrated to the God Mars, by
throwing all the Corn into the Tiber; Ager Tarquinius qui inter Vrbem and
Tiberim fuit consecratus Marti, Martius deinde campus fuit. Live.

This Field contained all that great Plain which reaches to the Gate called
Popolo, and even as far as the Pons Milvius, or Ponte-mole, according to the
Topography of Cluverius. It had on one side the Tiber, and on the other the
Quirinal Mount, the Capitol and the little Hill of Gardens. Its lowermost part
was called Vallis Martia, which reached from the Arch of Domitian as far as the
Gate Popolo. Strabo speaking of the Beauties of the City of Rome, takes
particular Notice of the Field of Mars, which was of a prodigious Compass, and
much longer than it was broad.

In this Field the People assembled to choose Magistrates; Review was taken of
the Armies, and the Consuls listed Soldiers. This Place served also for the
Exercises of the Youth, as to ride the Horse, to Wrestle, to shoot with the
Bow, to throw the Quoit, or Ring: And after these Exercises they bathed
themselves in the Tiber, to refresh themselves, and to learn to swim.

In this Place the People beheld the Naumachiae, or Sea Fights, which were
shown there for their Pleasure and Diversion. Here also were to be seen the
Statues of illustrious Men, and a vast Gallery built by Antoninus Pius,
together with that Pillar 70 Foot high, whose Ascent was 106 Steps, that were
enlightened by 36 Windows. Here also was the Obelisk, which Augustus fetched
from Egypt, that supported a Sun-dial: Moreover, in this Place were to be seen
the Arch of Domitian, the Amphitheatre of the Emperor Claudius, the Naumachia
of Domitian, the Mansoleum of Augustus, the Sepulcher of Marcellus his Nephew,
the Trophies of Marius, and a vast Number of Sepulchers and ancient Monuments
all along the Riverside.

At one End of this Place there was a little rising Ground, called Mons
Citorius, or Citatorum, on which the People mounted to give their Votes at
Elections. Very near to this was the Townhouse, where Foreign Ambassadors were
received, lodged and entertained at the Charge of the Commonwealth, during the
Time of their Embassy, as Titus Livius relates upon occasion of the Macedonian
Ambassadors, Macedones deducti extra Vrbem in villam publicam, ibique eis locus
and lautia praebita. In this Place also the Censors made the first Assessment,
and the Enrolment of the People and their Estates in the Year 319.

In Cicero's Time C. Capito made a Proposal to build the Campus Martius, and
enclose it within the City. He offered to make the Septa or Enclosures, into
which the People entered one by one to give their Votes, of Marble, which before
were only of Wood: But the Civil Wars which fell out unexpectedly, hindered the
Execution of this great Design.

CAMPUS FLORAE,
the Field of Flora, a Place consecrated to that Goddess, wherein were shown
the Games called Floralia, instituted to her Honor.

CAMPUS SCELERATUS,
a Place which was near the Porta Collina, where the Vestal Virgins, which were
lewd Prostitutes, were enterr'd alive.

CAMPUS RIDICULI,
a Place where Hannibal encamped when he besieged Rome, which he might easily
have taken, if he had not been frighted with vain Dreams and Fancies, which
kindred him from continuing the Siege; for the Romans perceiving the Siege to
be raised, and their City by this means to be delivered, upon this occasion
burst out into a very loud Laughter, and henceforth erected an Altar to the God
of Laughter.

CANCELLARIUS;
he who went by this Name in the Roman Empire, had neither the Dignity nor the
Power of him whom we now call Chancellor in England; for he was only a little
Officer of very small Esteem among the Romans, who sat in a Place shut up with
Grates or Bars, to write out the Sentences of the Judges and other Judicial
Acts, very much like our Registers or Deputy-Registers. They were paid by the
Roll for their Writing; as Salmasius has observed when he relates a Passage out
of the Laws of the Lombards: Volumus ut nullus Cancellarius pro ullo judicio
aut scripto aliquid amplius accipere audeat, nisi dimidiam libram argenti de
majoribus scriptis; de minoribus autem infra dimidiam libram. Doubless this
Officer was a very inconsiderable Person, since Vopiscus tells us, that
Numerianus made a very shameful Election, when he preferred one of these
Officers to be Governor of Rome, Praefectum Vrbi unum e Cancellariis suis
fecit, quo ^oedius nec cogitari potuit aliquid, nec dici. Mons. Menage says,
that this Word comes a Cancellis, from the Bars or Lattice, within which the
Emperor was when he administered Justice, because the Chancellor stood at the
Door of that Apartment, which separated the Prince from the People. M. Du Cange
following herein the Opinion of Joannes de Janua, thinks that this Word comes
from Palestine, wherein the Tops of Houses were flat, and made in the Form of
Terrass-walks, having Bannisters with cross Bars, which were called Cancelli;
and that those who mounted upon these Tops of Houses to repeat an Oration, were
called Cancellarii; and that this Name was extended to those who pleaded within
the Bars, which were called Cancelli forenses; and that afterward those were
called Chancellors, who sat in the first Place between these Bars. The
Register in Sea-Port-Towns, i. e. in the Maritime Places in the Levans, was
also called Chancellor.

CANDELA BRUM,
a Candlestick. The Candlestick of the Temple at Jerusalem which was of Gold,
which weighed 100 Minae, i. e. Pounds, differed from the Candlestick of the
Romans, in this, that the latter had but one Stem with its Foot, and one Lamp
at top, whereas the Candlestick of the Temple of Solomon had seven Branches,
three on each side and one in the middle, together with seventy Lamps, as
Josephus says. Du Choul, in the Religion of the ancient Romans, has given seven
Branches to their Candlestick, as Joseph did to that in Solomon's Temple; but
then he allows to it only seven Lamps, whereof that in the middle is greater
than the rest, and represents the Sun, as the six other do the Planets. This
Candlestick with the Vessels and other Rarities of the Temple at Jerusalem,
served for Ornaments to the Triumph of Titus and Vespasian, after the Sacking
of Jerusalem; and it was laid up in the Temple of Peace, together with the
Sacred Vessels of the Temple of the true God.

CANDIDATI,
the Candidates, or such as aspired to Offices in the Commonwealth; were so
called from the white Garment they were obliged to wear during the two Years of
their soliciting for the Place. This Garment was to be wore singly without any
other Clothes, according to the Relation of Plutarch, in the Life of
Coriolanus, to avoid any Suspicion the People might have of concealed Money for
purchasing Votes, and also that they might the more easily show to the People
the Scars of those Wounds they had received in fighting for the Defense of the
Commonwealth.

In the first Year of their Canvassing, they asked leave of the Magistrate to
harangue the People, or to make a Speech to them by some of their Friends. At
the End of these Speeches they declared to them, that they desired to obtain
such an Office by their good Opinion of them, and prayed them to have regard to
their Ancestors, and the Services they had done, of which they gave a large
Account: This was called profiteri nomen suum, and this Year was called annus
professionis, which was wholly employed in making Friends among the Grandees,
and Populace, either by Games and Feasts, or by building some Work for the
Public, or by defending at the Bar such as were sued. At the Beginning of the
second Year they returned to the Magistrate with the Recommendation of the
People, which was commonly expressed in these Terms, rationem illius habe, and
they prayed him to set down their Names in the List of Candidates, which they
called, Edere nomen apud Praetorem aut Consulem: And there was this difference
between profiteri apud populum, and profiteri apud Magistratum, i. e. Between
declaring their Intention to the People, and petitioning them for an Office,
and being admitted by the Magistrate to petition for it; that no Person was
ever hindered from desiring a Favor of the People, but every one was not
admitted by the Magistrate to put in his Petition in public on the Day of
Election. For, as soon as the Magistrate had seen the Petition of the Candidate
together with the Recommendation of the People, he called together the Ordinary
Council of Senators; and after they had examined the Reasons he offered for
desiring such an Office, and informed themselves of his Life and Behavior, the
Magistrate gave him leave to put in for the Place, in these Terms, rationem
habebo, renuntiabo; or else he rejected him, and answered, rationem non habebo,
non renuntiabo, i. e. I will have no regard to you. We have an infinite Number
of Examples to this purpose: Asconius-Pedianus writes, that Catiline desired
the Consulship of the People at his return from Africa; and yet the Consul
Volcatius, having called the Senate together, declared, that he was by no means
to be admitted. C. Martius Rutilius put in for the Office of Censor, but the
Consuls protested that they would have no regard at all to his Name, non
renuntiabo. This Opposition was so powerful, that it prevailed above the Favor
of the People, and even above the Authority of the Tribunes. It was never known
that any Man did more powerfully solicit, or had greater Favor shown him
than Pelicanus had for obtaining the Consulship, for he was supported by the
Tribunes, and favored by the People; and yet the Consul Piso declared with a
loud Voice, in the Presence of the People, as Valerius Maximus relates it, that
he would not name him at all, non renunriabo.

The Tribunes also very often opposed the Candidates, when the Magistrate
appeared not to be sufficiently informed of their Defects, or plainly
dissembled his knowledge of them, for then the Tribunes would exclude them.

The most general and essential Defect which excluded any Person from Offices,
was his bad Life and wicked Actions: A second Defect which rendered any Person
incapable, was the want of that Age which was prescribed by the Laws to every
one that should obtain the Offices of the Commonwealth. Tacitus informs, that
at the Beginning of the Commonwealth the Person's Age was not at all
considered, but any one was admitted indifferently to Dignities, and even to
the Consulship, the Young as well as the Old; but in succeeding Times they were
forced to make Laws, which prescribed a certain Age for Offices. One must be 27
Years of Age to be Quaestor, 30 to be Tribune; and the Office of the Major or
Curule Edile could not be administered by any one under the Age of 37 Years; nor
of Praetor under 39, nor of Consul under 43 Years of Age: But according to the
Opinion of Justus Lipsius none could be Quaestor until he was 25 Years old, nor
Tribune or Edile Major until he had entered upon the 27th or 28th Year of his
Age; nor Praetor until he was 30 Years old, nor Consul until he had entered upon
the 43th Year of his Age. Nevertheless they did very often dispense with the
Rigor of these Laws; for Scipio was made Consul at 24, and Pompey at 34 Years
of Age.

There was also a third Defect which rendered them incapable of Offices, and
that was when they endeavored to obtain the greater Offices before they had
passed through the lesser: Thus it was forbidden that any one should put in for
the Office of a Consul, until he had first passed through the other inferior
Offices: Upon which account Cicero in his Book, entitled, Brutus, calls the
Petition of Caesar for the Office of Consul, An overhasty and unusual
Petition, Extraordinariam and praematurum petitionem; because he had been
formerly no more than Edile: And we learn from History, that Sylla testified so
great a Zeal for the Observation of this Law, that he killed Q Lucretius Osella
with his own Hand, for deliring the Consulship, before he had exercised the
Office of Quaestor or Praetor. The Reader may consult the Word Annus, where we
have given an Account of the Years which were prescribed for the several
Offices.

The Magistrate having admitted the Pretender to put in a Petition for the
Office, he made it his Business to find out Friends, which were of great Credit
and Authority among the Grandees of Rome, and the Populace, that by their
Interest he might obtain it. To this end they made use of all manner of
Civilities, and the little Arts of pleasing, to gain the Good Will of the
Voters; they courted private Persons, not only with Complements but Gifts, and
in the corrupt Times of the Commonwealth, they came at last to that pass, as to
purchase openly the Votes of the Tribes: For buying their Votes, they made use
of three sorts of Persons, who were called Interpretes, Divisores, Sequestres
Interpretes, i. e. Brokers who helped to make the Bargain, per quos pactio
inducebatur, says Asconius Pedianus; Divisores, Distributers, who divided the
Money among the Tribes, and Sequestres, Persons in whose Hands the Money was
deposited, to give it to the Voters, in case they did not fail to give their
Votes according to Agreement. To remedy this Disorder, many Laws were made,
which were called leges de ambitu; but still they found out from time to time
several ways to evade them.

The time of Election being come, the Magistrate appointed an Assembly to be
held three several Market days, that so those in the Country, who lived in the
Municipal Cities and Colonies, and had the Right of Voting, might have time to
come to the City. When the Day of Election was come, the Candidates or
Pretenders to Offices, being clothed in white, were present very early in the
Morning, accompanied with those who befriended them, at the Quirinal Mount, or
upon the little Hill of Gardens, called Collis Hortulorum, which overlooked the
Campus Martius, that so being upon a high Place, the People might the better
see them. From thence they descended into the Campus Martius, where they
continued their Solicitations and Canvassings; as Horace informs us in these
Verses,

-- Hic generosior
Descendat in Campum petitor;
Moribus hic meliorque fama
Contendat; illi turba clientium
Sit major.
Odar. L. 3. Od. 1. Then the President of the Assembly after he had named aloud
the Pretenders to the Offices, and related the Reasons which every one had to
stand for them, called the Tribes to give their Votes; and these being counted,
he who had most was declared Magistrate, who after this Declaration never
failed immediately to return Thanks to the Assembly, and from thence he
ascended to the Capitol, there to say his Prayers to the Gods.

This good Order was a little changed under the Emperors. Augustus canvass'd
for his first Consulship, after a Manner something new, being no more than 20
Years old; for he caused his Army to march near to Rome, and sent a famous
Embassy, to desire the Office for himself, in the Name of the Legions; and the
Captain of this Embassy, called Cornelius, perceiving that the Answer to his
Petition was delayed, laid his Hand upon the Hilt of his Sword, and had the
Boldness to speak these Words, Hic faciet, si non feceritis.

In process of Time, when Augustus was advanced to an absolute Power, he
himself canvass'd for those whom he had a Mind to favor, until he went to give
his Voice in his Tribe, and these Candidates were called Candidati Casaris.
Suetonius adds, that afterward he left to the People only the Power of naming
the Inferior Magistrates, reserving to himself the Right of naming to the
greater Offices, Caesar comitia cum populo partitus est, ut exceptis Consulatus
competitoribus, de catero numero candidatorum pro part dimidia, quos populus
vellet, renuntiarentur. Moreover, he encroach'd upon the People's Power of
electing to Offices, which he had granted them, by making them disperse Tickets
in his Name among the Tribes, who by this means were forced to choose such as he
recommended to them, and edebat per libellos circum Tribus missos scriptura
brevi, Caesar Dictator illi tribui: commendo vobis illum and illum, ut vestro
suffragio suam dignitatem teneant.

Tiberius, Successor to Augustus, took away the Right of Election from the
People, and transferred it to the Senate: Nero restored it to them again, yet
they never made use of it afterward; and the Senate did only take care to
proclaim in the Campus Martius such as were chosen to Offices, thinking by this
means still to retain some Shadow of the ancient Manner of Elections.

Of all the Magistrates which were chosen, none but the Censors entered
immediately upon the Discharge of their Office, the other Magistrates continued
some Months before they entered upon it, in which time they were instructed in
the Duties belonging to them; for they were chosen in the Beginning of August,
and they did not enter upon their Office till the First of January, and so they
had the Space of Five Months for Instruction.

CANEPHORIA,
a Feast of Diana among the Greeks, at which all the Maids that were to be
married, offered to this Deity Baskets full of little Pieces of Work wrought
with the Needle, and by this Offering signified that they were weary of their
Virginity, and had a Desire to taste the Pleasures of Matrimony. The Athenians
also celebrated a Feast to Bacchus, during which the young Women carried
Baskets, or little Chests of Gold full of Fruit, from whence this Feast was
called Canephoria, and the Women Canephorae, Basket-carriers. Suidas speaks of
these Baskets consecrated to Bacchus, Ceres, and Proserpina; as also the Poet
Theocritus in his Idyllia. They had a Cover to preserve the Mysteries of
Bacchus, and conceal them from the Eyes of those who were not initiated into
them, and who upon that account were treated as profane.

CANIS,
the Celestial Dog, is a Constellation, of which there are two sorts; the
Great Dog called Sirius, which is a Constellation consisting of Eighteen Stars,
according to Piolomy, of the Nature of Jupiter and Venus, the principal Star
whereof is held to be greater than any other Star, nay, than the Sun it self:
The little Dog, which is otherwise called Canicula, or Procyon, has only Two
Stars, whereof one is of the first Magnitude, and of the Nature of Mars, which
is the Cause of the great Heats in Summer.

CANIS,
a Dog, an Animal which was kept in the Temple of Aesculapius, and which was
consecrated to the God Pan. The Romans never failed to crucify one of this
Kind every Year, because the Dogs had not given Notice by their barking, of the
Arrival of the Gauls, who besieged the Capitol; which was intended for a
Punishment to the Species; whereas on the contrary, to do Honor to a Goose,
they carried one of Silver in an Elbow-Chair, laid upon a Pillow, because she
had advertised them of the Coming of the Gauls by her Noise. Aelian relates,
that the Egyptians held the Dog in great Veneration, because they looked upon
it as a Symbol of the Celestial Dog, whose rising gives increase to the Nile.
This Author says elsewhere, that there was a Country in Ethiopia, where they
had a Dog for their King, and they took his Fawnings or Barkings to be Signs of
his Good Will; and for his Authors he cites Hermippus and Aristotle. Plutarch
also speaks of this Dog which some of the Ethiopians held for a King, and to
whom all the Nobility paid Homage.

CANICULARIS PORTA,
a Gate at Rome, according to Festus, where Dogs of Red Hair were sacrificed to
the Dog Star, to ripen the Corn.

CANOPUS,
the Sovereign Deity among the Egyptians, of whose Original Suidas gives the
following Account: There arose, says he, one Day a great Controversy between
the Egyptians, Chaldeans, and the Neighboring Nations, concerning the
Supremacy of their Gods; and while each Nation maintained that their own God
was Supreme, it was at last decreed, that he among the Gods who should conquer
the rest, should be acknowledged for Sovereign over them all: Now the Chaldeans
adored the Element of Fire, which easily melted down or consumed all the other
Gods, made of Gold, Silver, and other fusile or combustible Matter; but when
this God was about to be declared the Sovereign Deity over all the rest, a
certain Priest of Canopus, a City of Egypt, stood up, and advised them to take
an Earthen Pot that had many little Holes made in it, such as the Egyptians
used for purifying the Water of Nile; then having stopped up those Holes with
Wax, he filled it with Water, and placed it over the Head of the God which they
adored, whereupon the Contest was presently begun between it and the Fire,
whose Heat having melted the Wax, the Water run out immediately and
extinguished the Fire; whereupon the God of Canopus was acknowledged for the
Sovereign over all the Gods among these Nations.

CANOPUS,
is also a Star, which we have no knowledge of, says Vitruvius, but by the
Relation of those Merchants who have traveled to the uttermost Parts of Egypt,
as far as these Countries which are at the End of the World, (and in the other
Hemisphere) because it turns round about the South-Pole, and so is never
visible to us, since it never rises above our Horizon.

CAPENA,
a Gate so called at Rome, according to Festus, from a Neighboring City near
the Fountain Egeria: It was also called Appia, because it was the Gate through
which they went to the Via Appia; and Triumphalis, because the Generals to whom
a Triumph was decreed, made their Entrance into the City through this Gate, and
Fontinalis from the Aquaeducts which were raised over it; whence Juvenal calls
it madida Capena, and Martial, Capena, grandi porta quae pluit gutta.

CAPETIS SILVIUS,
King of Alba-Dionysius calls him Capetus: Eusebius, Titus Livius, Messala and
Jacobus, of Auzol, call him barely Atis; and Cassiodorus names him Egyptus. He
reigned 24 Years.

CAPIS SILVIUS,
King of Latium: He is said to have laid the Foundation of Capua in the Terra
Laboris, though others attribute this Foundation to the Trojan Capis, the Father
of Anchises; but without any probability. Suetonius speaks of certain Plates of
Brass, which were found at Capua, in the Tomb of Capis, in that Year that
Julius Caesar was killed, on which Greek Letters were engraved, which
signified, that at such time as the Bones of Capis should be discovered, one of
the Posterity of Julius should be killed by his own People; from whence we may
draw an uncontestable Proof that Capis was not a Trojan, for if he had, it is
very probable, that Greek Characters would not have been used in his Monument.

CAPITOLIUM, or MONS CAPITOLINUS,
the Capitol, or the Capitoline Mount, which was called at first Saturnius,
because Saturn dwelt there; afterward it was called Tarpeius from the Vestal
Virgin Tarpeia, who was smothered there under the Bucklers of the Sabines; at
last Capitolinus, from the Head of a Man called Tolus, which was found by the
Workmen when they were digging the Foundation of the Temple of Jupiter, who
upon this Account was called Jupiter Capitolinus. This Mountain was the most
considerable of all those that were at Rome, as well for its Extent, as for the
Buildings that stood upon it, which were one Fortress and Sixty Temples,
whereof the most famous was that dedicated to Jupiter under this Title, J. Opt.
Max. which was begun by Tarquinius Priscus, finished by Tarquinius Saperbus,
dedicated by Horatius Pulvillus. It was burnt 424 Years after its Dedication:
Sylla begun to rebuild it, and Quintus Catulus finished it, and consecrated it
anew. 330 Years being expired after the Renewing of this second Consecration,
the Soldiers of Vitellius set it on fire, and Vespasian caused it to be built
again. In this Temple Vows were made and solemn Oaths, here the Citizens
ratified the Acts of the Emperors, and took the Oaths of Fealty to them, and
lastly, hither the Magistrates and the Generals that kept a Triumph came to
give Thanks to the Gods for the Victories they had obtained, and to pray for
the Prosperity of the Empire.

CAPRICORNUS,
Capricorn, one of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, into which the Sun enters at
Winter-solstice. The Poets feign that Capricorn is the God Pan, who to avoid
the Pursuit of the Giant Typhon, changed himself into a He-goat, whose lower
Parts were of Fish. Jupiter admiring his Cunning placed him in the Heavens
under this Figure. Others think that Capricorn was the Foster-brother of
Jupiter; for Amalthea to whom he was put out to nurse having no Milk of her
own, suckled him with the Milk of a Goat, which Jupiter in Acknowledgment for
the Kindness placed among the Signs of the Zodiac.

CAPROTINA JUNO, and CAPROTINAE NONAE;
the Occasion of giving this Name to Juno, and to the Nones of the Month of
July, which were called Caprotinae, was a follows. The Gauls having drawn off
their Army after they had sacked Rome, the Latins had a mind to make an
Advantage of this Misfortune, of their Neighbors, and therefore entered into a
League with the Gauls, and resolved utterly to destroy the Roman Empire; and
that they might give some Color to their Design, they sent to desire of the
Romans all their Maids to be given in Marriage, which they refused to grant,
and thereupon the Gauls presently declared War against them. This War happening
just after their late Misfortune mightily perplexed the Senate, and put the
Romans in great Trouble and Consternation, who could not resolve with
themselves thus to abandon their Daughters. While they were in this
Consternation, a certain Woman-slave called Philotis or Tutola proposed to the
Senate, that she and the other Female Slaves should be sent to the Latins
instead of the young Roman Maids, being dressed up in Clothes like them. This
Design was approved and presently put in Execution, for those Female Slaves
resorted to the Enemies Camp, who upon their Arrival presently fell a drinking
and rejoicing. When Philotis perceived that they were plunged into an Excess of
Riot, she climbed up a wild Fig Tree, and having from thence given a Signal to
the Romans with a lighted Torch, they came presently and fell upon the Latins,
and finding them buried in Wine and Luxury, they easily destroyed them. In
Memory of this Victory the Romans ordained that every Year a Festival should be
kept at the Nones of July to Juno, who was called Caprotina from the wild
Fig Tree, which in Latin is called Caprisicus. These Female Slaves having by
this Stratagem preserved the Empire, were set at Liberty; and on this Day they
give always a Treat to their Mistresses without the City, where they sport and
jest with them, and throw Stones at one another to represent the Stones
wherewith the Latins were overwhelmed.

CAPULUS,
a Bier, on which the Bodies of the Dead were carried to the Grave, from whence
it comes to pass that old Men who are on the Brink of the Grave and just ready
to die, are called Capulares senes; and those Criminals who are condemned to
die, are called Capulares rei.

CARACALLA,
Antoninus, the Son of Septimius Severus and Marcia: He was declared Caesar,
and made Partner in the Empire with Geta his Brother by the Father's Side. In
his Youth he had sucked in the Principles of Christianity, having Evodus for
one of his Governors, whose Wife and Son were instructed in the Christian
Religion. Thus at first he gave good Signs of a very sweet Disposition, which
procured him the Love of every Body: But his Father having removed from his
Person those that inspired him with a Relish of true Piety, choked that good
Seed he had received, and made a Monster of him when he thought to make him a
great Prince; for he intended to have usurped the Sovereign Power by Parricide,
having laid his Hand upon his Sword on purpose to draw it and kill his Father,
when he was one Day coming behind him on Horseback, and had certainly done it
if those who were about him had not cried out and hindered him. The Horror of
an Action so black brought Severus into such a deep Melancholy, that he died in
it within a Year after. Car^calla being thus advanced to the Empire, killed his
Brother Geta in his Mother's Bosom, that he might reign alone without any
Partner upon the Throne. He cut off the Head of Papinian a celebrated Lawyer,
because he would neither excuse nor desend the Murder of his Brother; which
Example of a generous Courage in this Lawyer, who was then Praefectus
Praetorio, should make Christians blush, who so easily excuse the Crimes of
Kings when they have Hopes of rising at Court. We have some Medals of this
Prince, which represent to us what kind of a Person he was after he came to be
Emperor. For when we observe in his Medal, the Space between his Eyebrows
knit, his Eyes sunk in his Head, and his Nose a little turned up at the End,
these Marks make up the Countenance of a Man who is thoughtful, crafty and
wicked, and indeed he was one of the cruellest Men in the World: Besides, he
was addicted to Wine and Women, fierce, insolent, hated by the Soldiers, and
even by his own domestic Servants, insomuch that at last he was killed by one
of his own Centurions called Martialis, in the 43 Year of his Age, and the
Sixth Year of his Reign. It might seem wonderful that so wicked a Prince should
be placed among the Gods, as we learn that he was by the Title of Divine, which
was given him, and by the Consecration we see in his Medal, but that we have
this to say in the Case, that Macrinus who succeeded him, and was the Cause of
his Death, had a mind by doing him this Honor to clear himself of all
Suspicion of this Murder, or rather, that this was an Age of Slavery, and the
People being enslaved bestowed the most sordid Flatteries upon the worst of
Princes.

CARIATIDES,
Statues in the Shape of Women without Arms, habited genteelly, which served
for Ornament and Support to the Chapiters of Pillars in Edifices. Vitruvius in
L. 2. C. 1. of his Architecture, relates the Story of them thus, That the
Inhabitants of Caria, which was a City of Peloponnesus, in former times had
joined with the Persians when they made War against the People of Greece; and
that the Greeks having put an End to that War by their glorious Victories,
declared afterward to the Cariates, that their City being taken and ruined,
and all their Men put to the Sword, their Women should be carried away Captive;
and that to make the Disgrace the more remarkable, their Ladies of Quality
should not be suffered to put off their Garments, nor any of their usual fine
Dresses. Now to make the Cariates an everlasting Monument of the Punishment
they had endured, and to inform Posterity what it was, the Architects of that
Time instead of Pillars, placed this sort of Statues in public Buildings. Some
remains of this sort of ancient Statues are still to be seen at Rome.
Montiosius, who had much ado to find out some Signs of these Cariatides, which
Pliny says were placed by Diogenes, an Athenian Architect to serve for Pillars
in the Pantheon, relates that he saw Four of them in the Year 1580, which were
buried in the Ground as high as the Shoulders on the Right-side of the Portico,
in Demi-relief, and which sustained upon their Heads a kind of Architrave of
the same Stone. This kind of Cariatides is still to be seen at Bourdeaux in a
very ancient Building which they call Tuteles; as also in the old Louvre at
Paris in the Hall of the Swiss Guards: They are Statues Twelve Foot high, and
support a Gallery enriched with Ornaments which are very well cut, done by
Goujon, Architect and Engraver to Henry II.

CARITES,
or the Three Graces, which were Three Sisters, the constant Companions of
Venus, viz. Aglaia, Euphrosyne and Thalia. They are painted young and
beautiful, with a smiling Countenance, clad in fine thin Stuff, without a
Girdle, and holding one another by the Hand.

Seneca explains to us this Picture. He says, They are painted young and
beautiful, because their Favors are always agreeable for their Novelty, and
the Memory of them can never be lost. They are clad in fine thin Stuff, because
the Kindness they do you ought to be without Dissimulation or any Disguise, and
should proceed from the Bottom of the Heart: Their Garment is not girt about,
because Benefits ought to be free and unconstrained: They hold one another
interchangable by the Hands, to show that Favors should be reciprocal.

We ought to believe that the Graces were only Moral Deities. Pausanias has
written a large Discourse about them, wherein he says, that Eteocles was the
first who consecrated Three of them in Boeotia; that the Lacedaemonians knew
but Two of them, Clita and Phaenna; that the Athenians also held Two of them in
Veneration, Auxo and Hegemo; that Homer marries one of the Graces to Vulcan
without giving her any other Name, though he elsewhere calls her Pasitbae:
Lastly, that Hesiod named the Three Graces, Euphorsyne, Aglaia and Thalia, and
makes them the Daughters of Jupiter and Eurynome.

CARMENTA,
the Mother of Evander, and one who was a Prophetess, from whence she had her
Name Carmenta, a carminibus, because the ancient Sibyls gave their Oracles in
Verse. A Temple was built to her at Rome, wherein Sacrifices were offered to
her: A Festival also was instituted to her, which from her Name was called
Carmentalia.

Carmenta, says Father Thomiain, answers pretty well to Themis; for Servius
says, that she was called Nicostrata, and that she assumed the Name of
Carmenta, because she gave her Oracles in Verse, that she was the Mother of
Evander, the Son of Pallas, King of Arcadia; and lastly, that she was killed by
her own Son, or according to others, she instigated her Son to kill his Father
Pallas; which forced Evander to fly away into Italy: Evander patrem suum
occidit, suadente matre Nicostrata, quae etiam Carmentis dicta est, quia
carminibus vamcinabatur. Ovid relates this History after such a manner as is
something more to the Advantage of Evander, in his L. 1. V. 461. He makes him
an innocent Fugitive, and one that was always maintained by the Prophecies of
his Mother, whom he made a Goddess of in Italy. Virgil says as much in L. 2.

Me pulsum patria, pelagique extrema sequentem,
Fortuna omnipotens and ineluctabile fatum
His posuere locis, matrisque egere tremenda.
Carmentis Nymphae monita, and Deus aucto Apollo.
Dionyfim Halicarnassaeus says, that Evander made this Voyage into Italy Sixty
Years before the War of Troy, and that Evander was the Son of a Nymph who was
named or surnamed Themis, because she foretold Things to come. Nymphae
Arcadiaefilius Evander, quam Graeci Themin fuisse dicunt, and divino afflatu
instinctam, i. e. That Evander imposing upon the Simplicity of the Aborigines,
who were still wild and incivilized, made his Mother pass among them for a
Prophetess and for the Themis of Italy, and so obliged them to pay her Divine
Honors. Plutarch also in his Roman Questions says, that Carmenta was named
Themis; and he adds that she was surnamed Carmenta, as who should say, Carens
mente, because the Livine Spirit of Prophecy assumed the Place of the Humane
Spirit; and that Verses are called Carmina from her Name Carmenta, because she
prophesied in Verse.

CARMENTALIA,
Feasts instituted in Honor of Carmenta, which are solemnized twice in the
Month of January, viz. the first time on the Eleventh (or the Third of the
Ides, as may be seen in the Roman Calendar,) because then this Deity persuaded
her Son Evander to leave Arcadia, and to go and dwell at Italy; the second time
this Festival is celebrated on the 15th of the same Month, the Occasion whereof
is variously reported.

Some say, that when a Present was to be made to Apollo of Delphor, of the
Tithe of the Plunder of the City of Veii, there being a Deficiency of what was
necessary to make it up, the Roman Dames assembled together, and brought in to
the Magistrates their Ornaments of Gold and Silver; which was so pleasing to
the Senate, that they granted them the Privilege of being carried in a Litter
to the Shows and into the City. Plutarch thinks, that for this Largess they had
only the Privilege of having Funeral-Orations after their Death. Yet we read
in History, that the Right of the Litter was taken from them, which provoked
them so much that they would no longer keep Company with Men. This is what Ovid
and Plutarch tell us. Upon this Account the Senate to appease them, was forced
to restore their ancient Privilege unto them; and then they caused a Temple
immediately to be built to Carmenta, called by the Greeks Themis and
Nicostrata, at the Bottom of the Capitol, and appointed a Priest for it called
Flamen Carmentalis, and hence the Gate of the City which leads to this Temple
was also called Porta Carmentalis.

CARMA or CARNA,
a Deity which presided over the good Habit of the Body. A Sacrifice was
offered to her on the first of June, together with a Potrage made of the Meal
of Beans and with Bacon.

CARON,
the Ferry-man of Hell, who ferried over the Souls of the Dead in his Boat,
according to the Fable, that they might afterward be judged by Rbadamantbus
and Minos the Judges of Hell. He received an Obolus from all the Dead for their
Passage, and for this Reason the Ancients put always this Piece into the Mouth
of the Dead, that they might have wherewithal to pay the Ferry-man. Virgil
describes him to us as very ancient and fat, having a long Beard and very
bushy. The Souls of those who had no Burial, were to wander for the Space of a
Hundred Years on the Side of the River, and then they were to be ferried over.

CARTHAGO,
Carthage, the Capital City of all Africa and the Rival of Rome. It was founded
by a Tyrian called Charcedo, which confounds the Measures of Virgil, who had a
mind that Dido should be the Foundress of it. Perhaps this Difference may be
accommodated by saying, that Dido founded Byrsa the Castle of Carthage, and so
the Poet without any great Crime might stretch this to the City. But how to
reconcile what Vigenere says with what Velleius Paterculus and Justin say, I
know not, for the former says, that Carthage was built 45 Years, and the
latter, that it was built 72 Years after Rome; whereas, if we may believe
Vigenere, Rome was founded after Carthage more than 200 Years. This City bore
the Brunt of Three great Wars against the Romans, which were called the Punick
or Carthaginian Wars. The first lasted 24 Years according to Polybius, and 22
according to Eutropius: The second under the Conduct of Hannibal lasted
Eighteen Years, in which the Roman Empire was so shocked, that it was reduced
to the very Brink of Ruin. But at last Hannibal their formidable Captain was
overcome by the soft Pleasures of Capua, and thereby gave the Romans such a
time of Respite, that they repaired the Losses they had suffered. In the third
War Carthage was utterly destroyed by the Grandson of Scipio Africanus. There
went out of the City no more than 5000 Persons, who were the only sad Remains
of this magnificent City, which had with so much Vigor disputed the Empire of
the World with Rome. It lasted only 660, or 700 Years.

CARTHAGINENSES,
the Carthaginians, or the Inhabitants of Carthage, who are accounted a sort of
faithless People in the World, to whom no Credit is to be given; from whence
came the Proverb, Punica fides, Punick Faith, to signify Knavery, or a
deceitful Promise.

They sacrificed their Children to their Deities in the Presence of their
Mothers, who were to behold this cruel Spectacle with a Stoical Constancy, and
without any Compassion.

CASSANDRA,
the Daughter of Priamus King of Troy, who was courted by Apollo for her
extraordinary Beauty. This God bestowed upon her the Gift of foretelling Things
to come, in hopes that she would grant him her greatest Favors; but she not
keeping her Word with him, Apollo was very angry with her, and so ordered the
Matter, that though she spoke the Truth in what she predicted, yet she never
was believed: And this was the Cause of the Ruin of her Country, as Virgil
tells us, L. 2. of the Aeneids, V. 246. Tunc etiam fatis aperit Cassindra
futuris
Ora, Dei jussu, non nunquam credita Teucris.
She was ravished at the Sacking of Troy by Ajax the Locrian, although she had
embraced the Statue of Pallas.

The Greeks having divided among them the Booty of the City of Troy, Cassandra
fell to the Share of Agamemnon, by whom she was carried away into his own
Country, and by the Way she gave him Notice, that he was to be assassinated by
his Wife Clytemnestra, and her adultrous Keeper Aegistbus: He gave no Credit at
all to this Prediction of his own Misfortune; but after he was come to his
Palace, when he was going out of the Bath to sit down at Table, his Wife
Cly^emnestra clave his Skull with the Blow of an Ax, having first entangled him
in a Shirt without a Bosom; and afterward falling upon Cassandra, she killed
her after the same manner: But Orestes the Son of Agamemnon, coming in by
Stealth, killed his own Mother, and her adulterous Lover, as also the Murderer
of his Father.

CASSIDARIUS,
He who had the Care and Oversight of the Salades and the Armor for the Head,
which were kept in the Arsenals at Rome.

CASSIOPEA,
the Wise of Cepheus, King of Ethiopia, who incurred the Indignation of the
Nereides for being accounted more beautiful; which was the Cause why her
Daughter Andromeda was exposed to a Sea Monster, that so the Mother might be
punished in the Daughter: But Perseus at his Return from Libya, rescued her
from the Jaws of this Monster, when it was just ready to devour her; and in
Acknowledgment of this Kindness, Cepheus gave her to him in Marriage. Cassiope
was taken up into Heaven by the Favor of her Son-in-law, where the Astronomers
represent her to us as sitting upon a Chair in the Milky-way, between Cepheus
and Andromeda, who touches our Summer Tropic with her Head and Hand. Vitruvius
has given us the following Description of these Constellations.

Perseus leans with his Right Hand upon Cassiope, holding with the Left, which
is over Auriga the Waggoner, the Head of Gorgon by the Crown, and placing it
under the Feet of Andromeda: The Right Hand of Andromeda is over the
Constellation of Cassiope, and the Left over the Northern Pisces. Cassiope is
in the Middle, and Capricorn has the Eagle and Dolphin above it, which are
dedicated to them.

CASTALIUS FONS,
the Castalian Fountain in Phocis, situate at the Foot of Mount Parnassus,
which the Poets feigned to be dedicated to Apollo and the Muses, which from
thence were surnamed Castalides.

CASTITAS,
Chastity, which the Romans made a Goddess of, and which they represented in
the Habit of a Roman Lady, holding a Scepter in her Hand, and having Two white
Doves at her Feet.

CASTOR,
the Son of Tyndarus, King of Laconia, and of Leda the Daughter of Thestius.
The Fable gives us an Account, that Jupiter being smitten with the Beauty of
Leda, transformed himself into a Swan to enjoy her Embraces, who growing big
with Child, was at length brought to Bed of Two Eggs, in each of which there
were Two Twin-Children: In the first Pollux and Helena were included of
Jupiter's getting; and in the other, Castor and Clytemnestra of Tindarus's: All
these Children though gotten by different Fathers, were nevertheless called
from the Name of one of them Tyndarides.

Castor and Pollux were brave and of great Courage, for they cleared the Seats
of Pirates, carried off their Sister Helena by Force, when she was ravished by
Theseus, and they went with Jason to the Conquest of the Golden Fleece. Castor
being descended of a Mortal Father was killed by Lynceus; but Pollux his
Brother being descended of Jupiter, was Immortal. They were placed in the
Number of the Dil Indigetes, or Genitales, by the Greeks and Romans, because
they descended originally from the Country.

Diodorus Siculus relates, that the Argonauts being destressed with a great
Tempest, Orpheus made a Vow to the Gods of Samothracia, whereupon the Storm
immediately ceased, and Two Celestial Fires appeared over the Heads of Castor
and Pollux, who were amongst the Argonauts; from whence comes the Custom of
invoking the Gods of Samothracia in a Tempest, and or giving the Names of
Castor and Pollux to those Two Celestial Fires.

Lucian in the Dialogue of Apollo and Mercury bring in Apollo speaking thus
upon the Occasion of these Two Brethren. Apoll. Can you learn to know Castor
from Pollux, for I am always deceived upon the accont of their Likeness. Merc.
He who was Yesterday with us is Castor. Apoll. How can you discern them, they
being so like one another?

Merc. Pollux has a Face black and blew by a Blow he received in fighting, and
particularly at Bebryx in his Voyage with the Argonauts. Apol. You Will oblige me
to tell me of Things particularly, for when I see their Eggs-shell, white
Horse, Spear and Stars, I always confound them together, but tell me why these
Two Brothers never appear in the Heaven at the same Time. Merc. Because it
being decreed that these Two Sons of Leda should one be Mortal, and the other
Immortal, they divided their good and bad Fortune like good Brethren, and so
live and die by Turns. Apoll. This is a great Impediment to their Love; for, so
they can never see, or discourse one with another. But what Art or Trade do
they profess? For every one of us has his Business: I am a Prophet, my Son is
a Physician, my Sister a Midwife, and thou art a Wrestler. Do they do nothing,
but eat and drink? Mer. They succor Mariners in a Tempest. Apol. That Is a
necessary Employment, provided they perform it well.

Arrian says, that Alexander, while he was carrying on his Victories in Persia,
sacrificed one Day to Castor and Pollux, instead of Hercules, to whom that Day
was dedicated by the Macedonians; and that while the Feast lasted after the
Sacrifice was over, he talked sometimes of the great Actions of Castor and
Pollux, and at other times of Hercules.

Cicero relates a wonderful Judgment, which befell Scopas, because he had spoken
contemptibly of these two Brethren Dioscorides, being crushed to Death by the
Fall of his Chamber, whereas Simonides, who wrote their Encomium was called out
of them by two unknown Persons Phoedrus recites this History more at large in
the 4th Book of his Fables, Fab. 22. The Greek and Roman History is filled with
the miraculous Appearances of these two Brethren, either to obtain a Victory,
or publish it when it was gained, for they were seen fighting upon two white
Horses at the Battle, which the Romans fought against the Latins near the Lake
Regillus.

But Cicero tells how we must credit these Relations: He says, that Homer, who
lived a little after these two Brethren, assures us, that they were buried in
Macedonia, and consequently could not come to declare a Victory obtained by
Vatienus.

The Romans did not omit building them a magnificent Temple, where they
sacrificed to them white Lambs, and appointed a Feast to be kept in Honor of
them, at which a Man sitting upon one Horse and leading another, runs full
speed, and at the End of the Race leaps nimbly upon the Horse which is in his
Hand, having a bright Star upon his Hat, to show that only one of the Brothers
was alive, because, indeed, the Stars of Castor and Pollux are to be seen above
our Horizon, and sometimes not.

CATA PULTA,
a Warlike Engine so called, with which the Ancients used to throw Javelins
twelve or fiftten Foot long. The Description of a Catapulta, says M. Perrault
in his Notes upon Vitruvius, is understood by no Body, though many great Persons
have applied themselves to it very carefully, as Justus Lipsius has observed.
The Descriptions which Athenaeus, Ammianus Marcellinus, and Vegetius have given
of it; the two Figures, which are in the Book of a nameless Author, entitled,
Notitia Imperii; that which Will. de Choul says, he took out of an ancient
Marble, that which Lipsius saw in the Arsenal at Brussels, and those which are
drawn on Trajan's Pillar do none of them agree with the Description of
Vitruvius. Caesar Cisaranus, who is the first who after Jocundus drew the
Figures of Vitruvius with the greatest Exactness, has not attempted to draw a
Catapulta, but when he had translated and explained Vitruvius as far as that
place, he leaves the Work, and Benedictus Jovius finished it. Jocundus
declares, when he gives us his Figure of it, that he did it not to explain the
Text of Vitruvius, because it did not agree with it, and he owns that he did
not understand either his own Figure, nor the Text of Vitruvius.

All that we know in general of the Catapulta is this, that they were made to
cast Javelins, as Balistae were used to cast Stones, though this Distinction is
not observed by latter Latin Authors, who have always expressed both these
Engines by the Word Balista. Lucan tells us, that a Catapulta cast Javelins
with so great a Force, that they would pass through several Men one after
another, and would carry them quite cross the Danube.

CATO,
the Surname of the Porcian Family, who came from the City Tusculum, from
whence was their Original.

M. CATO, the Censor, named at first Priscus, and after Cato from his excellent
Wisdom, and strictness of Manners. He executed all the Offices in the Roman
Commonwealth with Reputation and great Integrity. In fine, he was very learned.
He has left us his Books of Husbandry, which are written in pure Latin. He died
very old.

CATO UTICENSIS.
Cato of Vtica, and Nephew's Son of Cato the Censor, lived a very strict and
severe Life like his Great Uncle. He reformed diverse Abuses which were crept
into the Management of the Revenues of the Commonwealth, and the Military
Discipline. He refused at first to join with Pompey, but at length united with
him against Caesar. After the Battle of Pharsalia, were Pompey was defeated, he
fled to Vtica, which was in King Juba's Dominion, but not being able to bear
his great Misfortunes, he slew himself in a Fit of Despair, being 48 Years of
Age, after he had read Plato's Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul.

CATULARIA,
the Name of one of the Gates of Rome, so called from the Red Dogs, which were
sacrificed there to appease the Heats of the Dog Star.

CATULUS,
the Surname of the Luctatian Family, from the Word Catus, crafty and judicious.

Q. LUCTATIUS CATULUS, was the first of that Family, who conquered the
Carthaginians in a Sea Fight, in which they lost 600 of their Ships. There was
a Poet of that Name born at Verona, whose Poetry is elegant and soft, but very
lewd and satirical. He composed some Elegies and Epigrams, which still remain.

There was another of that Name, and of the same Family, who was Consul with
Marius in his fourth Consulship, whom he forced to kill himself by eating live
Coals. Sylla revenged his Death upon Marius, Junior.

CAUCASUS,
a Mountain in the Northern Parts of the Indies, near the Caspian Ports, where
Jupiter bound Prometheus, according to the Fable, to punish him for making Man,
and imposing upon him at a Feast, by giving him Bones covered with Fat.

CEBUS,
a certain Monster which had the Face of a Satyr, and the Body of a Dog and
Bear.

CECROPS,
the first King of Athens, who lived in the Times of Moses. He built the City
of Athens, which was first called Cecropia from his Name. He was the first that
worshipped Jupiter in Greece, and was the Author of Idolatry. He began to reign
at Athens 375 Years before the Siege of Troy. The Flood of Deucalion happened
in his Reign, who was King of the Neighboring Country by Mount Parnassus. This
Deluge overflowed only Greece; as that which happened before under Ogyges, did
Egypt only. He was the Author of Idolatry in Greece, and the first that
acknowledged Jupiter for a God, appointing him Sacrifices: He brought up the
Custom of burying the Dead, as Cicero observes in his 2d Book de Legibus.

CELENO,
one of the Seven Pleiades, the Daughter of Atlas, and the Nymph Pleione. She
was also one of the Harpyes, the Daughter of Jupiter and Terra, of whom Virgil
has given us a Description in the 3d Book of his Aeneids. See Harpyiae.

CELERES,
were 300 young Men, whom Romulus chose to attend his Person, that they might
be at hand always to defend him, and execute his Commands. He called them
Celeres, i. e. ready and active. This Body of Men guarded him in all Commotions
of the People, and made him able at all times to oppose any Attempts of his
Enemies.

The Captain of this Guard was called Tribunus Celerum, and he was the second
Officer of State, for he had the Command of all the Soldiery, which he ordered
as he pleased: He also had a Power to summon all the People together into the
Campus Martius.

CELMIS, or CELMES,
one of the Favorites of Jupiter, who saying that that great God was a Mortal
Man, was changed by him into a Diamoud, as Ovid tells us in his 4th Book of
Metamorphoses, v. 280. Te quoque, nunc Adamas, quondam fidissime parvo Celme
Jovi.
This Word comes from Chalamis, which in Hebrew signifies a very hard Stone.

CENSOR,
a Roman Magistrate, which numbered the People of Rome, and who was the
Correcter of their Manners. The Occasion of making this Officer in the
Commonwealth of Rome was this: The Consuls seeing themselves wholly taken up
with Affairs of State, and not being able to attend so many different
Businesses, the Senate to ease them propounded to make Censors in the Year
after the Building of Rome 311, in the Consulship of M. Geganius Macrinus, and
T. Quintius Capitolinus, whose chief Office it should be to take an exact View
of the People of Rome, and value the Estate of every Citizen. First they
created Two Censors of the Patricians, viz. Papyrius and Sempronius. Censui
agendo populus suffragiis praefecit Censores, abs re appellati, etc. Live.

They continued in their Office five Years, and were chosen by the great
Council called Comitia Centuriata, as the Consuls were, Censores quinto quoque
anno creari solabant, says Asconius Pedianus.

This length of Time became a Grievance to the Consuls at last, and the
Dictator Mamercus Emilius shortened it, and brought it to Eighteen Months. The
Censors hating Mamercus for shortening their Time, blotted him out of his
Tribe, and put him among the Cerites, or those who pay Tribute.

To attain this Dignity, it was at first required, that they should be Noblemen
born, but this continued only 100 Years; for, after the People were allowed to
be made Consuls, and other great Officers, we see, that Caius Martius Rutilius,
who was the first Dictator chosen from among the People, was also created
Censor with Manlius Naevius; and at length the Dictator Q. P. Philo made a Law,
by which he ordained, that one Censor should be chosen out of the People. It Is
also observable in History, that Q. Pompeius, and Q. Metellus were both taken
from among the common People.

Before the second Punick War, it was not necessary to have executed any great
Office before to be a Censor, because we learn from Livy, that Publius Licinius
Crassus, who never had been any thing but an Aedile, was chosen Censor and
High Priest at the same time, but afterward they never chose any to that
Office but such as had been Consuls.

This Office was never executed more than once by the same Person, and we read
in Valerius Maximus, that M. Rutilius being made Censor a second time, reproved
the People sharply for having so little Respect to the Laws of their Ancestors,
who had thought it convenient to shorten the Time of that Office, because it
made them too powerful, and so they acted contrary to them, in choosing a Man a
second time.

Plinius Junior, did the same in refusing it, because he judged it not for the
Advantage of the State to execute that Office twice.

If any of the Censors happened to die in the time of their Office, or would
voluntarily resign it, his Colleague was obliged also to resign it, although there
was no Law which commanded it, but a Custom established by a Religious Scruple:
For when Lucius Papyrius, after the Death of his Colleague C. Julius had put M.
Cornelius Meleginensis into his Place, that he might retain his own Office, it
happened that Rome was taken by the Gauls, which was imputed to that Action of
Papyrius; whereupon all those that succeeded him, left their Office if their
Colleague happened to die, or would resign. It Is true, that Appius Claudius
Caecus and Aemilius Scaurus would have kept it, but the ^^^bunes imprisoned the
latter, and no Body would follow the Example of the former.

When the Censors were chosen in the Campus Martius, they immediately seated
themselves in their Sellae Curules, or Chairs of State, which stood by Mars's
Altar, and thanked the People for the Honor they had done them. Then they went
up to the Capitol, were they took Possession of their Office, and received the
Ensigns of it. They took an Oath to do nothing either for Hatred or Favor in
their Places; but in all things to follow exactly the Rules of Equity and Right.

Their Office had two Parts: The first consisted in taking the Number of the
Citizens, and their Estates, and the other in reforming Manners, and rectifying
Abuses.

They kept an exact Register of the Name and Estate of every Person, as also of
their Children and Slaves, being very careful to place every Citizen in his
Tribe or Century according to his Estate, removing them every five Years,
either higher or lower, according as their Estate was increased or lessened.

They punished a single Life with heavy Fines, chiefly since the Law of Furius
Camillus, who forbad it, that the City of Rome might be again peopled, which
the Civil Wars had consumed.

They also regulated the Expenses of the public Sacrifices, and caused
consecrated Geese to be kept in the Capitol.

The other part of their Office was to reform Manners, populi mores regunto;
and to that end they took a View of the three Degrees of Men, which made up the
Commonwealth, viz. Senators, Knights and People. They had a Power to put those
out of the Number of the Senators whom they judged unworthy through their corrupt
Manners, and place others in their room. They could take their Horses from the
Knights, and deprive them of their Pay, which they received from the Treasury,
when they lived not like Persons of Honor. They could remove the Citizens from
their Tribe, by turning them down from an higher to a lower, depriving them of
a Right of Voting, and making them pay Taxes as Strangers.

Although their Power was very large, yet they were obliged to give an Account of
their Actions to the Tribunes, and the great Aediles; and we read in Livy, that
the Tribune Appius Metellus imprisoned both the Censors M. Furius Philus, and
M. Artilius Regulus, because when he was Quaestor in the foregoing Year they
had removed him from his Tribe, and made him pay Taxes. A Law then was made to
oblige them to give their Reasons, why they had degraded a Citizen, and branded
him with Disgrace, by deriving him of his Privileges.

But this Office decreased in its Power with the Declention of the
Commonwealth. Under the Emperors it was wholly laid aside, because they assumed
to themselves all those Functions; for Suetonius relates, that Augustus took a
View of the People with Ten Men, which he required of the Senate, which was
practiced by the other Emperors as far down as Theodosius, who endeavored to
restore it, but the Senate opposed him, and from that time the Censorship was
inseparably annexed to the Imperial Power.

CENSURA.
The Censorship, the Office or Dignity of Censor. We may judge how considerable
this Dignity was at Rome by Plutarch's Words, in the Life of Marcus Cato, That
he demanded the Censorship ten Years after he had been Consul, as the
Perfection of Honor, and the highest Degree to which a Roman Citizen could be
preferred, because this high Station was the Crown of all Offices, and of all
the Authority which could be had in the Government of their Commonwealth.

CENSUS,
the general Survey of the People of Rome, which was performed every five Years
by the Censors. King Servius appointed this Survey, and he was the first that
caused the People to be numbered, that he might know exactly how many fighting
Men he was able to raise, and what Sums of Money he could raise from them.

Every Citizen of Rome, or he that had the Right of Freedom, was obliged to
give a true Acconnt of all his Estate, Children, Slaves and Freemen, upon pain
of having their Goods confiscated, which he concealed.

The Censors on their part were obliged to keep a perfect Register of all these
Matters, and to be very careful that no Stranger should be registered unawares,
Ne quis in censorias tabulas irreperes.

This Survey was made every five Years through all the Orders of the
Commonwealth, viz. the Senates, Knights and People. The first was Lectio and
recitatio Senatus; the second, Censio, recensio and recognitio; and the third,
Census, or Lustrum. For the Censor being set in his Chair of State commanded
the Pur^vant to call over the Senators by their Names, legebant or recitabant
Senatum. They rased out of the List the Names of those whom they intended to
depose for their ill Manners, and put others in their Place taken out of the
Knights, which they expressed by these Words, legere in Senatum.

Then they took a Survey of the Knights, whom they called over one by one, and
if they had nothing to object against their Behavior, the Censor said to every
one, praeteri and tradus equum; but if on the Contrary he had any thing to
blame him for, they took away his Horse and his Pay. Equus adimebatur. After
this they went on to survey the People, not only of the City of Rome, but also
of other free Cities, which had a Right to the Roman Freedom, whose Names were
sent to the Censors: If they had any thing to object against their Manners,
they deposed them, deprived them of their Right of Voting, and made them
subject to Taxes, aerarios fieri and in Caeritum tabulas referri, (because the
Inhabitants of that little City Caeres gained indeed the Title of the Roman
Citizens, but had not obtained a Right to vote.)

The Survey being thus ended, an Assembly was appointed upon a certain Day in
the Campus Martius to be present at the Sacrifice of Lustration. The People
came in Armies and were divided into Classes or Centuries, according to the
Appointment of Servius, and offered a Sacrifice called Suovetaurilia, because
they sacrificed a Boar, a Sheep and a Bull, to implore the Gods to be pleased
with the Survey they had made, and that they would preserve the Commonwealth in
its Splendour and Honor. And with this Ceremony the Survey ended, Lustrum
conditum, i. e. the Survey finished.

CENTAURUS,
a Centaur, half a Man and half an Horse, which had its Female Centaur, half a
Woman and half a Mare. This is a fabulous Monster feigned by the Poets, who
have applied that Shape to those who invented Riding, or the Art of
Horsemanship, so when it is said, that Chiron the Centaur was the Master of
Achilles, no more is meant but that he was the Man who taught him to ride an
Horse; and the Fight of the Centaurs is a Battle of Horsemen. The Word comes
from the Greek (...), which is compounded of (...) pungo, and (...), taurus.

Lucian describes the Picture of a Centaur drawn by Zeuxes, of which he
affirms, that he saw a Copy at Athens, the Original having been carried away by
Sylla.

It is a Female Centaur lying upon the Grass, of which, the Part like a Beast
is stretched out on the Ground, and that like a Woman is half raised and
supported by her Elbow. She lays her Hind-feet at length, and folds up her
Fore-feet, bending the one and leaning on the Ground with the other, as Horses
do when they are about to rise. She inclines a little to one Side that she may
let her young Ones suck, of which she holds one in her Arms which she suckles
with the Breast of a Woman, and the other hangs upon those which she has like a
Mare. Upon the Top of the Picture stands an He Centaur, as Sentinel, who
appears but half, and show them a Lyon's Whelp which he has taken. Although he
seems to smile, yet he has a fierce Aspect, and a terrible Head of Hair,
besides that, he is all hairy, but his Wife is as lovely as he is savage, and
has one half of her Body like the fine Mares of Thessaly, which were never yet
tamed, and the other half like the finest Woman in the World, save that her
Ears are straight and sharp, as a Satyr is painted. Of her Two young Ones, one
is savage and hairy like the Father, and the other more tame and humane.

Lucretius would never believe that there were ever any Centaurs, nor
Hippocentaurs, nor Onocentaurs, that is to say, half a Man and half an Ass.
Lucian also is of the same Opinion, but speaks more plainly than Lucretius,
when he says, Et populum Pholoe mentita biformem.
For it is certain, that it is a Lie or Fable that there were ever any such
monstrous People.

What Ovid speaks of the Nation of Centaurs, and of their Battles, is but a
Fable built either upon the Idea of some such Monster, or upon some new
Invention of Fighting on Horseback, in which these People did excel all others.

Plutarch says in his Banquet of the Seven Wisemen, that a Shepherd brought
them in a Basket, a Child which a Mare had brought forth, having the upper
Parts of the Body like a Man and the lower like an Horse.

Pliny also affirms the same Things, and says, that he himself had seen an
Hippocentaur, which was brought from Egypt to Rome, embalmed after the manner
of those Times with Honey. Phlegon the Trallian relates the same Story, and
Tacitus seems to allude to it, when he says, that the Birth of some Monsters
did foreshew the Death of the Emperor Claudius.

St. Jerome gives us a Description of an Hippocentaur which St. Anthony met in
the Desert, when he went to seek for Paul the Hermit. The same St. Jerome
writing against Vigilantius, begins his Discourse with a Distinction of Two
sorts of Monsters, of which the one was really produced, and the other feigned
by the Poets, and puts the Centaurs among the Creatures that were true, but
monstrous.

The Truth is, that the People of Thessaly called Centaurs, were either the
first or the most expert at taming Horses, or fighting on Horseback, which is
the Reason that they bare the Name of Hippocentaurs. Their King named Centaurus
was the Brother of Pirithous the famous Friend of Theseus, and fought with the
Lapithae which were commanded by Polypaeces the Son of Pirithous at the Seige
of Troy. In Times of Peace these People exercised themselves in hunting on
Horseback, but chiefly in casting Bulls upon the Ground by taking them by the
Horns.

Julius Caesar was the first that introuced this sort or Hunting into Rome in
the Shows, as Pliny testifies, and was imitated in it by Nero, as we learn from
Suetonius.

Lucian tells us also, that Ixion, King of Thessaly, whom Jupiter invited to a
Feast of the Gods, because he was a very brave Man and good Company, fell in
Love with Juno, and that Jupiter to deceive him formed a Cloud into the Shape
of Juno to gratify his Passion in some measure, and by these Embraces a
Centaur was produced. But Palephatus tells the Thing otherwise, that Ixion,
King of Thessaly, being one Day upon Mount Pelion, saw several mad Bulls which
he durst not come near, and which made a Destruction in the Country round
about; he promised a great Reward to him that could drive away these mad
Creatures, and immediately some young Men of a little Village, in the Mountain
called Nephele, i. e. a Cloud, getting upon their Horses, offered themselves to
fight these Bulls, and did it with so great Success that they killed them all,
and from this Victory they were called Centaurs, from (...) and (...), as much
as to say, Bullfighting. Isaac Tzetzes is of Opinion, that this Jupiter who
loved Ixion was a King, who had a Wife of very great Beauty, with whom Ixion
fell passionately in Love, and she discovering Ixon's Kindness to her Husband,
he put one of her Chamber-maids named Nephele, or a Cloud in her Place, by whom
he had a Son named Imbrus and surnamed Centaurus, of (...) and (...), that is
to say, pricking a Slave.

Mr. Abbot Feuretiere relates this Story otherwise:

A King of Thessaly, says he, having sent some Horsemen to seek his Bulls,
that were gone astray, they that saw them on Horseback (it being a Thing new
and extraordinary at that Time) thought them to be made up of a double Nature,
a Man and an Horse, which was the Original of the Fable of the Centaurs and
Hippocentaurs.

CENTENARIA COENA,
a Feast wherein the whole Expenses could be no more' than an Hundred Asses,
which was a Piece of Roman Money. See As.

CENTESIMA USURA,
The Hundredth Penny, One per Cent.

CENTONARII;
it was a Military Trade, and they were such as provided Tents and other
Equipage for War, called by the Romans Centones, or else those whose Business
it was to quench the Fires which the Enemies Engines kindled in the Camp.
Vigetius in his Fourth Book speaking of an Engine used in the Camp to make a
close Gallery or Fortification, says, that for fear it should be set on Fire,
they covered it on the Outside with raw or fresh Hides or Centones, i. e.
certain old Stuffs fit to resist Fire and Arrows: For Julius Caesar in the
Third Book of his Commentaries of the Civil War, says, that the Soldiers used
these Centones to defend themselves from their Enemies Darts The Colleges of
the Centonarii were often joined with the Dendrophori, and the Masters of the
Timber-works, and the other Engines of War, called Fabri, as may be seen by an
Inscription of a Decurion of that College. AUR. QUINTIANUS DEC.

That is to say, Aurelius Quintianus, Decurion of the College at the Masters of
the Engines and Centonaries.

CENTUM,
a Numeral Word, a square Number made up of Ten multiplied by it self. This is
the Number which begins the Third Column of the Arabian Characters set in an
Arithmetical Order, 100.

CENTUM-VIRI,
may be called the Court of 100 Judges, which were Roman Magistrates chosen to
decide the Differences among the People, to which the Praetor sent them as to
the highest Court made up of the most learned Men in the Laws. They were
elected out of 35 Tribes of the People, Three out of each, which makes up the
Number of 105, and although at length the Number was increased to 180, yet they
still kept the Name always of the Court of 100 Judges, and their Judgments were
called Centumviralia Judicia. These Magistrates continued a long time in the
Commonwealth, as also under the Emperors Vespasian, Domitian and Trajan: Under
the last of these they were divided into Four Chambers each having 45 Judges.

CENTURIA,
a Century, a Part of a Thing divided or ranked by Hundreds. The People of Rome
were at first divided into Three Tribes, and these Tribes into 30 Curiae, but
Servius Tullius contrived the Institution of a Cense, i. e. a numbering of the
Citizens of Rome with an Account of their Age, Children, Slaves and Estates, as
also in what Part of the City they dwelt, and the Trade they followed.

The first Cense was made in the Campus Martius, where were numbered 80000 Men
able to bear Arms, as Livy tells us, and Fabius Pictor, an ancient Historian
tell us, or 84700, according to Dionysius Halicarnassaeus,

This Roll coming into the Hands of Servius, he divided all his People into Six
Classes, each containing several Centuries, or Hundreds of Men, with different
Arms, and Liveries according to the Proportion of their Estates.

The first Class was made up of 80 Centuries or Companies, of which 40 were
appointed to guard the City consisting of Men of 45 Years and upwards, and the
other 40 were of young Men from 16 to 45 Years old, who bore Arms. Their Arms
were all alike, viz. the Headpiece, the Back and Breast-plates, a Buckler, a
Javelin, a Lance and a Sword. These were called Classici in the Army, and were
more honorable than those which were said to be infra Classem, as we learn
from Aulus Gellius. They were to have 100000 As's in Estate, which make about
1000 Crowns of French Money. Asconius Pedianus makes their Estate to amount to
2500 Crowns.

The Second, Third and Fourth Classis were made up each of them of 20
Centuries, of which Ten were more aged Men, and Ten of the younger sort: Their
Arms were different from the first Classis, for they carried a large Target
instead of a Buckler, a Pike and Javelin. The Estate of those of the Second
Classis was to be 700 Crowns a Year, of the Third 500, and of the Fourth 200.

The Fifth Classis contained 30 Centuries, which had for their Arms Slings and
Stones to throw out of them, and Three of them were Carpenters and other
Artificers necessary for an Army. They were to have 125 Crowns Estate.

The Sixth was a Century made up of the Rabble or such as were exempted from
Service in War and all Charges of the Republic: They were called Proletarii,
because they were of no other use to the Republic but to stock it with
Children: They were also named Capite Censi, because they gave their Names only
to the Censor.

CENTURIATA COMITIA.
Those Comitiae or Assemblies of the People of Rome by Centuries, where every
one gave his Vote in his Century.

These sorts of Assemblies were first instituted by Servius Tullius, who
divided, as is above said, the People into Six Classes and each Classis into
Centuries.

These Assemblies had a great Share in ordering of all State Affairs, for they
were summoned together to make great Officers, to approve any new Law, to
proclaim War against any People, and to implead any Citizen of Rome after his
Death.

They also chose the Consuls, Praetors, Censors, and sometimes the Proconsuls
and Chief Priests.

Livy tells us, that P. Cornelius Scipio was sent Proconsul into Spain by one
of these Assemblies.

It belonged to the Consuls only to summon them together by the Authority of
the Senate, who allowed or forbad them as they pleased, and the Dictator and
Chief Priest had no Power to do it in the Absence of the Consuls but only by
Commission.

These Assemblies were held without the City of Rome in the Campus Martius, and
one Part of the People were armed during their Meeting for fear of any sudden
Invasion, and a Standard was set up on the Capitol which was not taken down
till they had ended.

When the Senate had ordered this Assembly, the Consuls appointed it to meet
after Three free Fairs or Markets, which made 27 Days, that such as had any
Right of Voting might have sufficient Notice: This they called edicere comitia
in trinundinum. This Appointment was published by Bills set up in all the great
Towns, or in the great Streets of Rome on the Three Market days next following:
In them the Matters to be treated of were set down and the lesser Officers were
forbidden in the Conclusion of them to make any Presages upon the Day of their
Meeting: In edicto Consulum, quo edicunt quis dies comitiis Centuriatis futurus
fit, sic scribitur ex veteri formula; Ne quis Magistratus minor de caelo
servasse velit.

When any Law was to be approved in these Assemblies, this was the Order
observed: He that propounded it, who was called Rogator legis, made a Speech to
the People, or caused another to make one, showing them the Necessity and
Advantage of the Law, which they termed Concione declarare; if the People
declared their Approbation of the Law, it was hung up in Public Three
Market-days, the Preamble of it being in these Words, Quod bonum, faustum,
felixque Reipublicae, populo, liberisque eorum esset: And thus the Laws of the
Twelve Tables were propounded.

While it hung thus in Public for Three Market-days, he that proposed it,
either himself or by some able Orator distinctly explained all the
Circumstances and Advantages of it. This Action was called promulgatio legis
per trinundinum; and discovers to us the Difference between these Two Latin
Expressions, proponere legem, which is to set up, and promulgare legem, to
explain it viva voce, as also between these two Phrases, Lator legis, and Author
legis; the first was he that barely propounded the Law, and the other was he
that persuaded the People to accept it, after he had proved the Benefit, and
Usefulness of it to them.

The Day appointed for the Meeting of the Assembly being come, the Consul went
early in the Morning into the Capitol, or some other high Place, being attended
with the Augur, whom he ordered to observe the Signs of the Heavens, which is
expressed by these Latin Words, Jubebat sibi in auspicio esse. After he had sat
sometime looking round about him to see what appeared in the Air, the Consul
spoke to him in these Words, Dicito si silentium esse videtur: Tell me whither
there be nothing that prevents this Assembly; to whom the Augur answered,
Silentium esse videtur; nothing hinders it, but if the contrary happened,
obnuntiabat, he said, that the Signs did not approve of that Assembly.

This first Ceremony being finished, this Magistrate set up his Pavilion, or
Tent in the Campus Martius, where he made a Speech to the People to exhort them
to respect the Good of the Commonwealth only, and to do nothing through Humor or
Interest in the Matters that should be proposed to them, and then sent them
every one to their own Century to give their Votes, Secediti in centurias
oestras, and de iis deliberate. Then the Centuries separated themselves one
from another, and gave their Votes viva voce, till the Year DCXV, after the
Building of Rome, when Balots or Tickets were commanded, which they put into an
Earthen Pot or Urn, made for that purpose. Every Century had its President,
named Rogator, who gathered their Votes. After they had consulted a while, the
Consul called the first Classis to give in their Votes. If they were all of a
Judgment, he called none of the other Classes, because the first had a greater
Number of Men than all the rest, and so their Voices carried it: But if their
Votes were divided, he called the second Classis, and all the rest in their
Order, till he had the full Number of the Votes given according to the Laws.

The Advantage which the first Classis had above the other was often the Cause
of Tumults, because they could not endure that their Votes should be at any
time ineffectual. To prevent which they contrived this expedient: They made all
the Classes to draw Lots who should be accounted first, and that upon which the
Lot fell was called the Prerogative Tribe, because their Judgment was first had
in all Matters.

This way of giving their Votes was strictly observed till the Year DCXV, when
Gabinius the Tribune of the People made a Law, that they should for the Future
do it by Balots or Tickets; this Law was called lex Tabellaria. The People much
liked this Change, for before they could not give their Votes freely, left they
should incur the Displeasure of their Great Men whom they were afraid to
disoblige. Grata est tabella, says Cicero in his Defense of Plancus, quae
frontem operit, bominum mentes tegit, datque eam libertatem, ut quod velint
faciant; and in his second Book of the Agrarian Law, he calls this way of
Voting, vindex libertatis and principium justissimae libertatis. Yet, even this
had its Inconveniences, as Cicero himself owns in his third Book of Laws: Non
fuit lacebra danda populo, in qua bonis ignorantibus, quid quisque sentiret,
tabella vitiosum occultaret suffragium.

When the Consul had taken out of the Earthen-pot the Prerogative Classis, he
ordered the Herald to pronounce it with a loud Voice, and then they went into
an enclosed Piece of Ground, over very narrow Bridges, and as they entered,
certain Persons called Diribitores, gave each of them Two Tickets, which they
put into the Urn or Earthen-Pot set on the farther Side for that end.

This done, the Consul numbered the Votes, and declared the Officer chosen in
these Words, Quod bonum faustum, fortunatumque sit mihi, Magistratuique meo,
populo, plebique Romans talem Consulem, aut Praetorem renuntio. I publish, that
such an one is chosen Consul or Praetor by Plurality of Voices.

Notwithstanding, all these wise Cautions, foul ^ealings could not be
prevented, for such as had Interest, and would have a Law rejected or a Person
condemned, contrived, that no Ticket should be given to absolve a Man or
receive a Law, as it fell out in the Case of Clodius, who had profaned the
Religious Rites of Bona Dea.

CENTURIO,
a Centurion, a Roman Officer which commanded an Hundred Soldiers; there were
Six Centurions in one Cohors and Sixty in a Legion.

CEPHALUS,
the Son of Aeolus, and Husband of Procris, the Daughter of Erichtheus King of
Athens. He was carried away by Aurora who was fallen in Love with him: She
could not persuade him to a Compliance, yet Procris was very jealous of him,
and contriving to watch him as he returned from Hunting, she hid herself in the
Bushes, but Cephalus supposing it had been some wild Deer, shot his Dart at it
and killed his Wife Procris.

CERA PUNICA,
white Wax, which was whitened by dipping it several times in Seawater and
laying it in the Sun upon the Grass in the Spring time, that it might be often
moistened with the Dew, for want of which it must be continually sprinkled with
Water. All this was done to refine the Wax, by driving out the Honey which was
mingled with it and made it yellow.

CERAMICUS,
a Place in Athens enclosed with Walls, which was used to walk in, in it were
the Tombs of those famous Men who died in Defense of their Country, and many
Statues erected in Memory of them with Inscriptions, which published their
great Actions, and the Praises they deserved for them.

CERASTIS,
the Isle of Cyprus, it was anciently inhabited by a very cruel People, which
Venus changed into Bulls, as Ovid say: in his Tenth Book of his Metamorphosis.
Cerastis signifies in Greek, bearing Horns, and this Isle was so called from
the great Number of Mountains in it, whose Tops something resembled Horns.

CERBERUS,
Pluto's Dog, who had Three Heads and as many Necks. The Poets feign him to be
the Keeper of the Gate of Pluto's Palace in Hell, and suppose him to be
produced from the Giant Typho and Echidna. He was bound in Chains by Hercules,
and brought out of Hell, as Homer says.

CERCYON,
the Arcadian, a famous Robber, who infested all the Country of Attica with his
Robberies and Murders, and forcing all Travelers to fight with him, and then
killed them when he had conquered them. Theseus slew him in the City Eleusina.
Ovid Lib. 7. Metamorph.

CEREALIA,
and CEREALES LUDI, Feasts and Plays appointed in Honor of Ceres. Memmius
Aedilis Curulis was the first Institutor of these Feasts, as appears on a Medal
on which is the Effigies of Ceres holding in one Hand Three Ears of Corn, and
in the other a Torch, and having her Left-Foot upon a Serpent with this
Inscription, Memmius Aedilis Cerealia pri^^s fecit. The Athenians long before
had kept Feast to her, which they called Thesmophoria and Eleusia, upon this
Occasion. Ceres searching all Places for her Daughter Proserpina, came to
Eleusina, where she undertook to be the Nurse of Triptolemus, the Son of King
Elusius, and when he was grown up she taught him the Art of sowing Corn and
making Bread. In Requital for so great a Benefit he appointed her a Feast, and
Priests called Eumolpides from his Son Eumolpus. Crowns of Flowers were not
used in this Feast, but of Myrtle and Ivy, because Proserpina was stolen while
she was gathering of Flowers; they carried light Torches, calling Proserpina
with a loud Voice, as Ceres had done, when she was searching for her upon Mount
Ida.

The Priests of this Goddess were called Taciti Mystae, because they might not
discover their Religious Rites. The Sacrifice offered to her was without Wine,
as we learn from Plautus in his Aulularia Act 11. Scen. VI.

Staph. Cererine, mi Strobile, has sunt facturi nuptias? Strob. Qui? Staph.
Quia temeti nihil aliatum est.

Sta. Are you celebrating the Marriage of Ceres? Strob. Why ask you that?
Staph. Because you have brought no Wine.

Yet Cato seems to affirm the Contrary, and will have Wine to be used in the
Sacrifices of Ceres: Postea Cereri exta and vinum dato. Lambinus is much
perplexed with these Two Authorities opposite one to the other, and to free
himself, flies to the Distinction of the Greeks and Romans, and says, that the
Greek Women sacrificed without Wine, but the Romans used it: Yet Plautus, who
was a Roman, is against offering Wine to Ceres. After the Sacrifice was over,
they made a magnificent Feast where every one diverted themselves as far as was
convenient, in seeing the Sports of Fencers and Horse-races, over which the
Aediles presided. Nevertheless, the Roman Women being clothed in White,
expressed the Sorrow and Complaints of Ceres's Mourning for the taking away of
her Daughter Proserpina, holding Torches in their Hands.

CERES,
the Daughter of Saturn and Rhea. Varro says, that Ceres was so named from the
Word Geres, because she bore all sorts of Fruits; quae quod gerit fruges,
Ceres. Others derive her Name from creare, because she raised Fruits. Vossius
thinks, that the Name Ceres comes from the Hebrew Word cheres, that is to say,
arare. In Scripture we meet with the Word Geres to signify the Fruits of the
Earth, from whence comes the Greek Word (...), which is one of the Names of the
Earth in Hesychius. It Is probable that from this Hebrew Word Geres and the
Greek (...), the Name of Ceres is derived.

Ceres is called the Lawgiver, legifera, because before Men had the Use of
Corn they lived upon Acorns in the Woods without Law or Government; but after
Corn was found out, they divided and tilled the Land, which was the Original of
Government and Laws, as Servius assures us. Leges Ceres dicitur invenisse, nam
and sacra ipsius Thesmophoria, id est, legum latio vocantur; sed hoc ideo
fingitur, quia ante frumentum inventum a Cerere, passim homines sine lege
vagabantur: Quae feritas interrupta est, postquam ex agrorum discretione nata
sunt jura.

Ceres was the Mother of Proserpina, and yet both of them are the Earth. Rhea
is the Mother of Ceres, and yet neither of them are any thing but the Earth.
Truths are real and natural, but Genealogies are poetical and figurative. Some
consider the Earth in diverse Respects, and will have Rhea to be the Globe of
the Earth, Ceres the Surface, which is sown and reaped, and Proserpina is the
Hemisphere of our Antipodes. This is the Opinion of Vossius.

Diodorus Siculus relates, that the Egyptians from Tradition believe, that
Isis is the same with Ceres who found out Tillage and the Use of Corn, and
published most just Laws, from whence she became an Egyptian Goddess: But
because he could not quite conceal the Truth he owns that it was Erectitheus,
who sailed out of Egypt into Greece with a great Quantity of Corn to relieve
it in a Time of Famine, and the Grecians in Requital of so great a Benefit made
him their King, and he appointed the Rites of ^eres at Athens, according to the
Usages and Ceremonies of Egypt. This Historian says also in the same Place,
that the coming of Ceres to Athens was nothing but the Transportation of Corn
from Egypt into Greece: Deam illo tempore in Atticam venisse traditur, quo
fruges ejus nomine insignes Athen is sunt importatae, quarum semina tum Cereris
beneficio quasi denuo reperta videantur. There is the same Reason to believe,
that the Wandering of Ceres through all the World, was nothing else but the
Transportation and Giving of Corn to all the World, either the first time when
it was first sown, or in Process of time when Famine had made the Land barren.
For if there were some Places which imparted their Corn to other Countries, and
by Consequence were affirmed in a Poetic Style to be the Country of Ceres,
they were without doubt Egypt and Sicily, but chiefly Egypt, because of the
Overflowing of the Nile. The true History thereof is this, that Isis, Queen of
Egypt is the same with Ceres, and that she communicated Corn and the Art of
Tillage to other Parts of the Earth. Finally, in Confirmation of what has been
said, the same Author adds, that the Ceremonies and Antiquites of the
Egyptians are alike. I pass over other Places in the same Author where he
endeavors to answer the Reasons which Sicily, Attica and the Isle of Crete and
Egypt had produced to challenge to themselves the Glory of having been the
Places of the Birthplace of Ceres, which was the Inventor of Corn.

Herodotus confesses, that the Rites of Ceres, whom he calls the Lawgiver,
were brought out of Egypt into Greece.

The Cities of Greece, as Pausanias says, but chiefly Athens and Argos disputed
together, as the Egyptians and Phrygians did, about the Beginning and
Antiquity of the Rites of Ceres and the Gift of Corn. He tells us, that the
Mysteries of Ceres and Isis were so secret, that it was not permitted to any to
see her Statue except her Priests, and he adds elsewhere, that it was not
allowed to any who were not admitted to those Religious Rites to inquire into
them, much less to be present and Spectators at them. He speaks also of another
Temple of Ceres, into which only Women might enter, assuring us, that the
Mysteries and Sacrifices of Ceres Eleusina were the most sacred that Greece
had. Some distinguish the great Mysteries, which they call (...) from the
lesser, which they call (...). The great Ones were observed every Year in
Argos, and the lesser once in Five Years at Eleusis, the former in the Spring
and the latter in Autumn, as if they had a Respect to the Approaches or
Departure of the Sun. The lesser lasted Nine Days, and after it they celebrated
several sorts of Combats.

Cicero tells us, that at Catanea in Sicily Ceres was honored, as she was at
Rome and in other Parts of the World, where she had a Statue which no Man ever
knew more of than if there never had been any; Men never went into her Temple,
but only Women and those Virgins who performed all the Offices of Priests.
Sacrarium Cereris est apud Catanenses eadem religione qua Romae, qua in
caeteris locis, qua prope in toto orb terrarum. In eo sacrario intimo fuit
signum Cereris per-antiquum, quod viri non solum cujusmodi esset, sed ne esse
quidem sciebant. Aditus enim in i^ sacrarium non est viris: sacra per mulieres
and virgins consici solent.

If we will find out the Original of the Mysteries of Ceres Eleusina, we must
remember that the Invention of Plowing is attributed by some to Ceres, who
taught it Triptolemus, by others to Bacchus. For the great Mystery of Bacchus
instituted by Isis or Ceres, who came in aftertimes out of Egypt into Greece,
was the Worship of a Phallus, or the Privy-member of Osiris, which could not be
found by Isis after Typhon had put him to Death, and to which Ceres or Isis
gave those infamous Honors.

St. Augustine in his Seventh Book de Civitate Dei, speaks thus of Ceres:
Amongst the Mysteries of Ceres, the most famous are those of Ceres Eleusina,
which the Athenians celebrated with much Pomp.

All that Varro says respects the Invention of Corn, which he attributes to
her, and the Stealing of Proserpina by Pluto, fignifies only the Fruitfulness
of the Earth. This Fruitfulness, adds he, failing for some time, and the Earth
becoming barren, gave Occasion to this Opinion, that Pluto had stolen the
Daughter of Ceres and kept her in Hell, i. e. Fruitfulness it self; but after
this Calamity, which had caused public Grief, when Fruitfulness returned,
Pluto was thought to restore Proserpina, and so public Feasts were appointed
to Ceres.

We have several Medals upon which Ceres is represented to us. That of Memmius
Edilis Curulis shows her to us sitting, holding Three Ears of Corn in her
Right Hand and a light Torch in her Left. Another of C. Volteius represents her
in a Chariot drawn by Two Serpents, having Torches in her Hands, and setting
her Foot upon a Sow, which is ordinarily offered in Sacrifice to her, because
that Beast destroys the Corn. Her Statue also is carved in the Habit of a Roman
Matron with a Crown of Garlands and Ears of Corn, holding in her Hand a Crown
of Poppies, and riding in a Chariot drawn with Two flying Dragons.

CERTES,
a People of Italy, inhabiting the City Caere, who entertained the Vestal
Virgins when they fled from Rome in the Invasion of the Gauls. The Romans
acknowledged this Benefit, and granted the Freedom of the City of Rome to these
People, yet without any License to vote in their Assemblies or to execute any
Office in their Commonwealth, and from hence arises the Proverb, In Ceritum
tabulas refer aliquem, to deprive a Citizen of his Right of Voting.

CEROMA,
a Mixture of Oil and Wax, a Sear-cloth, with which the Wrestlers rubbed
themselves. It not only made their Limbs more sleek and less capable of being
laid hold of, but more pliable and fit for Exercise.

CEROSTROTA,
In-laying: Salmasius thinks it should be read Cestrota, as coming from the
Greek Word (...), which signifies an Iron-Spit, because the Divisions in the
Wood are burnt with an Iron-Spit, which is still done in our In-laying, when by
the Help of Fire the little Pieces of Wood which make up the Figures, are made
black to represent the Shadows. This Author is yet of Opinion, that we might
still retain the Word Cerostrata, because for the more easy burning of the
Wood, it is rubbed with Wax. Philander derives this Word from (...), which
signifies an Horn, which is much used in In-laying, being died of several
Colors.

CHALCIDICA,
Banqueting-houses; some are very cautious, says Mr. Perrault, to know what
this Word signifies. Philander thinks, that this Greek Word signifies the
Places where Money-matters were decided, or the Office for the Mint, supposing
that Word comes from (...), Brass, and (...), Justice, Some will have it read
Causidica, as much as to say, an Hall for pleading. Festus informs us, that
Chalcidica was a sort of Building first found out in the City of Chalcis;
Arnobus calls Chalcidica the fine Halls, where the Poets feigned, that the
Pagan Gods supped. Barbaro and Baldus think it a proper Name for that sort of
Buildings, which Dion says, was erected by Julius Casar in Honor of his
Father. Palladio follows Barbaro in his Design, and draws this Building in the
Fashion of the Judgment Seat, described by Vitruvius in the Temple of Augustus,
which was joined to the great Church of Fano. But Ausonius interpreting a Verse
in Homer, where he speaks of an old Woman who went up into an high Place, makes
use of Chalcidicam to express (...), which signifies in Greek an upper Room,
Cisaranus and Caporali think also, that Chalcidica is a Noun Adjective, and
say, that in longitudine Chalcidica implies, that a Palace built in a spacious
Place, ought to have the same Proportion with the great Churches of the City of
Chalcis; but the true Construction of the Text will not bear that
Interpretation. Let us then take the Opinion of M. Perrault upon these Words:
Being assured by the Testimony of Ausonius, that Chalcidica was a lofty Place,
which we call the first Story, I think, that these Chalcidica's were large and
lofty Halls, where Justice was administered, erected at the End of their
Palaces, even with the Galleries through which they went out of one Room into
another, and where the (...) leaders walked.

CHALDAEI,
the Chaldaeans, a People of the greater Asia, who above all others practiced
the Art of Astrology. The Prophet Daniel was instructed by them. They
worshipped the Fire. The Jews likewise affirm, as Jerome says, that these Words
of Scripture, which say, that Abraham came out of Vr of the Chaldees show, that
he was miraculously delivered out of the Fire, into which the Chaldaeans had
cast him because he refused to adore it. It Is credible that these Chaldaeans
did worship the Sun and Stars, which they looked upon as Eternal Fires, and
that in keeping a perpetual Fire burning upon their Altars, they desired to
keep and preserve a Resemblance of them continually before their Eyes.

CHAOS,
Confusion, a Mixture of all the Elements, which the Poets feign was from all
Eternity, before the Stars were placed in that Order in the which they now
appear.

Manilius confesses, that Hesiod makes the World to be produced out of this
Chaos in his Theogonia, where after he has prayed the Muses to teach him what
was the Original and Beginning of the Earth, the Gods, Rivers and Seas, he
brings in the Muses answering, that Chaos was the first Being, that the Earth
followed, then Hell and Love; Darkness and Night came out of the Chaos, and the
Heaven and Day sprung out of the Bosom of Night.

Although this Chaos of Hesiod is very confused, yet it is no hard thing to
find that it is a counterfeit Description of that of Moses in Genesis. The
Chaos which was a confused Heap of all Things, was before all other Beings in
their proper and distinct Nature. The Holy Spirit which rested upon the Chaos,
was that Love which Hesiod mentions. The Darkness covered the Chaos, and this
is what the Poet calls Erebus and the Night, for the Greek Word (...) comes
from the Hebrew Harah, which signifies Darkness. The Day as well as the Heaven
proceeded from the Chaos or the Earth, because the Stars were really in the
Chaos, as were also the Heaven and Firmament before God took them out of it.
Hell also itself rose out of the Chaos, and kept its Name, for so Orpheus calls
it in Ovid. Per chaos hoc ingens, vastique silentia regni.
Metam. 10. Oppian assures us, that it was Jupiter, that dwells in the Highest
Heavens, who raised all these Bodies and all the Parts of this vast Universe
out of the confused Chaos, (...), Jupiter beat, in te omnia, and ex te orta
sunt. We may explain that of Love, which Oppian speaks of the Agreement of
second Causes. The Spirit, which according to Moses, animated the Waters of the
Chaos and covered them in some measure, according to the Hebrew Text, to make
them fruitful, may be accounted for Love.

Diodorus Siculus mixing Fable, History and Philosophy together, makes the
World to proceed from Chaos, as also do Euripides and Plutarch.

Ovid among the Latin Poets speaks very distinctly of the Chaos, which was
before the Creation of the World.

Ante mare and terras, and quod tegit omnia coelum,
Vnus erat toto naturae vultus in orb,
Quem dixere Chaos, rudis indigestaque moles,
Nec quidquam nisi pondus iners; congestaque eodem
Non been junctarum discordia semina rerum.
Metam. 1. He then observes, that it was God who gave Order, Distinction and
Light to this dark Chaos. We may say, that this Poet follows Moses closely,
since he separates first the Heaven and Air from the Earth, makes the Waters to
fall into the hollow Places of the Earth, out of which he causes Trees and
Plants to spring; after this he forms the Stars, produces Fishes, Fowls, and
the Beasts of the Earth, and concludes his Six Days Work with the Creation of
Man, for Ovid exactly follows this Order in God's Works, as they were all
performed in the Six Days. Lastly, He describes the Creation of Man as the
chief Piece of his Workmanship, in whom he put some Rays of his Holiness,
Divinity, Dominion and Sanctity, yea, his own Image, that is to say, an
Understanding penetrating into Heavenly Truths and Eternal Love.

Sanctius his Animal, mentisque capacius altae,
Deerat adhuc, and quod dominari in caeter a posset,
Natus homo est. Sive hunc divino semine fecit
Ille opifex rerum, mundi melior is origo, etc....
Finxit in essigiem moderantum cunctae Deorum:
Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque tueri
Jussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
Metam. 1. These Verses clearly express that the History of Genesis teaches,
that Man was created an holy and religious Creature, with whom God conversed,
that he gave them Dominion over all the World, being of a Divine Original
animated by his Spirit, honored with his Image, and governed by his Laws.

When Seneca in common Speech gives the Name of Chaos to Hell, noctis aeternae
chaos, aversa Superis regna; he shows us, that that Part of the World still
retains the Name of Chaos, as having in it Darkness, and Confusion of all
Things.

CHARISTIA, or DIES CHARAE COGNATIONIS,
The Kinsmens Feast. This Feast was to be kept in the Month of February in the
Rustic Calendar, which still remains at Rome upon an ancient Marble, but in
Constantine's Time this Feast was called Charistia, which signifies the same
thing. Valerius Maximus, L. 2. C. 1. N. 8. teaches us what it was: Our
Ancestors, says he, appointed a solemn Feast, which they called Charistia, in
which none met but Kinsmen and near Relations, that if there were any
Difference among them it might be ended most easily in the Mirth of a Feast,
Convivium etiam solemn majores instituerunt, idque Charistia apellaverunt, eui
praeter cognatos and assines nemo interponebatur; ut si qua inter necessarios
querela esset orta, inter sacra mensae and inter hilaritatem animorum
fautoribus concordiae adhibitis tolleretur. Ovid also may be consulted about
this Day.

CHARITES.
See Carites.

CHARMIS,
a Physician of Marseilles, who being ambitious to outdo others, condemned
warm Baths, and bathed his sick Patients in cold Water, even in the Winter.

CHARON.
See Caron.

CHARIBDIS,
a Gulf in the Sicilian Sea near Messina, now called commonly Galofaro, into
which Ships being driven by Tempests, are wrecked by the Rocks that lie hidden
under Water; which has given an occasion to the Poets to feign that Charybdis
and Sylla were two terrible Sea Monsters, which swallowed up Ships; and that 2
Women having robbed Hercules of his Oxen were stricken with Thunder by Jupiter,
and changed into that Gulf, which is situated in one of the Streights, upon
the Coasts of Sicily.

The Hebrew Original of these two Names discovers plainly enough, who were the
Authors of them, for Scylla comes from Secol, which signifies exitium, and
Charybdis comes from chor obdem, i. e. foramen perditionis.

Strabo gives the Name of Charybdis to a Place in Syria, between Apamaea and
Antioch, where the Orontes sinks into the Ground, and runs 40 Stadia, before it
rises again. These Words, Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charybdin, are
become a Proverb, to express, To fall from a less into a greater Mischief; or
as we speak commonly, Out of the Drying Pan into the Fire.

CHIMAERA,
a fabulous Monster, which has, as the Poets feign, the Head of a Lion, the
Belly of a Goat, and Tail of a Serpent, which, they say, Bellerophon subdued
riding upon the Horse Pegasus. The Original of this Fable is taken from a
Mountain of Lycia of the same Name which casts out Flames, the Top of it was a
Desert where nothing but Lions inhabited, the Middle had good Pastures, which
fed Plenty of Goats, and the Foot of it, which was marshy, was full of
Serpents. So Ovid tells us, -- Mediis in partibus hircum,
Pectus and ora leae, caudamque serpentis habebat.
And because Bellerophon was the First that dwelt upon that Mountain, 'twas
feigned, that he slew the Chimaera. Pliny says, that the Fire of that Mountain
was nourished with Water, and could not be extinguished but with Earth or Mud.
Some say, that this Monster had Three Heads, the one of a Lion, the second of a
Goat, and the third of a Dragon, because that Mountain had Three Tops or Three
Points, which resembled the Shapes of these Creatures.

Hesiod in describing a Chimaera, says, that this Monster had the Parts of
Three Creatures, a Lion, a Goat, and a Dragon, Ante leo, retroque draco,
medioque capella.
This Monster was nothing else but a Chiming of Words, for there were Three
Captains which Bellerophon subdued, Ayrus, Arzalus and Tosibis, whose Names
signify these Three sorts of Creatures, Ayrus comes from ari, which signifies
a Lion, Arzalus from arzal, which is a kind of Wild-goat, and Tosibis is as
much as to say, a Serpent's Head.

Strabo says, it was a Mountain of Lycia which cast out Fires, upon the Top of
which there were Lions, and in the Middle Goats, and at the Foot Serpents.

Plutarch will have it to be the Name of an Arch-pirate who robbed in a Ship
that had the Figure of a Lion in the Forepart or Bow, of a Dragon on the Poop,
and of a Goat in the Middle, whom Bellerophon conquered.

CHIRON,
a Centaur, the Son of Saturn and Phillyra. Cato tells us, that Saturn being
very much in Love with that Nymph, was afraid left Rhea his Wife should
surprise him in the Pursuit of his Amors, and therefore changed himself into
an Horse that he might enjoy her, which was the Cause that Chiron who was
begotten of her, was born half a Man and half an Horse. Others makes him the
Son of Ixion and the Cloud he embraced instead of Juno. He became an excellent
Physician, and very skillful in the Knowledge of Simples, Music and Military
Discipline. Achilles was educated by him, and was made a skillful Wariour, for
he fed him only with the Marrow of Lions and Bears, that he might put into him
the Strength and Courage of those Creatures, and taught him to ride an Horse
and hunt, as Preparatives for War. He learned Physic of Aesculapius and
Astrology of Hercules. Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, that Chiron taught Men to
worship the Gods, and sacrifice to them, the Method of administering Justice one
to another, and the Form of Oaths.

He was wounded by Hercules with an Arrow dipped in the Blood of Hydra, which
fell by Chance upon his Foot, and put him to so great Pain by that Poison, that
he could not endure to live, although he was Immortal, whereupon the Gods in
Compassion made him one of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, called Sagittarius.

Lucian in his Dialogues of the Dead, wherein he brings in Chiron and Menippus
speaking, places him in Hell.

Menip. I have heard, O Chiron, that though you were Immortal you wished for
Death, how could you desire a Thing so little to be loved?


Chir. 'Twas because I was weary of Life.


Menip. But were you not satisfied and pleased to see the Light?


Chir. No, because I did every Day the same thing, eat and drink and Sleep, and
the Pleasure of Life consists in Change.


Menip. But how did you bear Death after you had left Life for it?


Chir. Without any Trouble, because there is such an Equality among the Dead as
I like well, as in a popular State where one is not greater than his Neighbor;
and it is not material to me whether it be Day or Night, and besides, there is
this Advantage here below, that we are not troubled with Hunger or Thirst, or
other Inconveniences of Humane Life.


CHLORIS,
a Goddess of Flowers, called by the Romans Flora, who was married to the Wind
Zephyrus. Ovid in his Fifth Book of Fasti. See Flora.

There was another of that Name, the Daughter of Amphion and Niobe, who was
slain with an Arrow by Apollo and Diana, because her Mother preferred her self
before Latona. Ovid, Lib. 6. of his Metamorphosis.

CHORUS,
the Chorus in a Comedy was but one Person only, who spoke in the ancient
Composures for the Stage; the Poets by Degrees added to him another, then Two,
afterward Three, and at last more: So that the most ancient Comedies had
nothing but the Chorus, and were only so many Lectures of Virtue, for as Horace
says, they ought to encourage the Good, reconcile Enemies, pacify the Enraged,
applaud the Just, and command Frugality, Justice, Laws, Peace and Fidelity in
keeping Secrets; entreat the Gods to debase the Proud, and pity the Miserable.

Ille bonis faveatque, and concilietur amicis,
Et regat iratos, and amet pacare timentes.
Ille dapes laudet mensae brevis; ille salubrem
Justitiam, legesque, and apertis otia portis.
Ille tegat commissa, deosque precetur, and oret,
Vt redeat miser is, abeat fortuna superbis.
De Art Poet. V. 195. CHRYSAOR,
the Son of Neptune and Medusa, who had Gerion by Callirhoe, according to
Hyginus; but Hesiod in his Theogonia makes him to be born without a Father, of
the Blood of Medusa, after that Perseus had cut off her Head.

CICERO, M. TULLIUS, M. F. M. N. COR. CICERO;
Marcus Tullius, Marci Filius, Marci Nepos, Cornelia tribu Cicero. Thus was
Cicero, the Prince of Roman Eloquence, called: Marcus was his Praenomen,
because he was the elder Brother: Tullius was the Name of his Family, because
he was descended of the ancient Family of the Tullii, who were of the Kings of
the Volsei, as we read in Eusebius's Chroniton. Plutarch derives his Pedigree
from Tullus Attius, King of the Volsci; which is confirmed to us by these
Verses of Silius Italicus.

Tullius aeratas raptabat in agmina turmas,
Regia progenies, and Tullo sanguis ab alto:
Indole prob quanta Juvenis, quantumque daturus
Ausoniae populis ventura in secula civem!
Ille super Cangem, super exauditus and Indos,
Implebit terras voce; and furialia bella
Fulmine compescet lingue, nec deinde relinquet
Par decus eloquii cuiquam sperare nepotum.
MARCI FILIUS,
his Father was called Marcus Tullius, who being a Man of a weak Constitution,
spent his Life for the most part at Arpinum in Learning. Q. Calenus falsely
asserts, that he exercised the Trade of a Fuller, and that he dressed Vines,
and Olive Trees.

MARCINEPOS,
the Grandson of Marcus, who dwelt at Arpinum, and who opposed M. Gratidius the
Author of the Lex tabellaria, to give Vote by Scrutiny.

CORNELIA,
of the Cornelian Tribe, which was one of the 35 Tribes of Rome into which all
the People were divided, and which included the Inhabitants of Arpinum.

CICERO,
because he had a Wart like a Chick-pea upon his Face. He was born on the Third
of the Nones of January in the Consulship of Servilius Cepio, and C. Attilius
Serranus, 103 Years before Jesus Christ, and in the Year of the Building of
Rome 647. His Father was named M. Tullius and his Mother Helvia and not Olbia,
as some falsely read it in Plutarch, as Eusebius and Paulus Diaconus in the
Supplement to Eutropius prove.

He came very young to Rome, where he spent his first Years in studying the
Greek Learning, as he informs us himself in his Epistle to Titinnius. I
remember, says he, that in my Childhood one Plotius taught Latin at Rome, I
was troubled that I was not one of his Scholars, because he was an ingenious
Man and taught very well, but I was diverted from him by the Opinion of very
learned Men, who thought that the Greek Learning improved the Mind better:
Equidem memeria teneo pueris nobis primum Latin docere coepisse L. Plotium
quendam: Ad quem cum fieret concursus, quod studiosissimus quisque apud eum
exerceretur, dolebam mihi idem non licere. Continebar autem doctissimorum
hominum auctoritate, qui existimabant Graecis exercitationibus ali melius
ingenia posse. He studied Philosophy under Philo the Academick, Law under
Scaevola, Rhetoric under Apollonius Molo. He traveled into Greece, and
tarried Three Years at Athens, where he applied himself to Phoedrus and Zeno
Two Epicurean Philosophers, and Antiochus of Ascalon, a Person of rare
Eloquence. He married Terentia, and divorced her afterward, although he had
Children by her, viz. a Son named Tullius, and a Daughter called Tullia and
Tulliola, and married Popilia, who was very young, rich and handsome. Terentia
said, he married her for her Beauty, but Tiro, Cicero's Freeman tells us, that
it was for her great Estate, with which he paid his Debts.

The great Desert of this excellent Man being joined with his Eloquence, raised
him to the chief Offices of the Commonwealth; he was first Praetor, then
Quaestor and Consul, and in his Consulship he dissipated the Conspiracy of
Catiline by his Vigilance and Care, for which he gained the Name of Pater
Patriae. He accused Clodius, and prosecuted him vigorously, but at length he
was forced to yield to the prevailing Interest and the Fierceness of Clodius,
and fly from Rome into Exile. But the Senate and all good Men bore his Absence
so impatiently, that they caused him to be recalled soon. At his Return he
found a Civil War kindled between Caesar and Pompey, and although at first he
embraced Caesar's Party, yet at last he turned to Pompey, but after the Battle
of Pharsalia he was reconciled to Julius Caesar, who was slain a little after
in the Senate. Octavius Caesar, surnamed Augustus, succeeded him, and when that
cruel Triumvirate of Antonius, Lepidus and Caesar was formed to the Ruin of
the Commonwealth and all good Men, Cicero was abandoned by Octavius Caesar to
the Resentment of Antony, whom he had made his Enemy by his Philippicks; so
that he was banished, and pursued to Death by Popilius Lanatus, whose Life he
had saved a little before. He cut off his Head and his Right Hand, having taken
him as he was flying in his Litter toward the Sea of Cajeta. His Head and Hand
were brought to Rome, and laid by Antony upon the Orators Bench, from whence he
had often spoken to the People, and delivered his eloquent Orations for the
Defense of the public Liberty. Fulvia the Wife of Antony, having uttered a
thousand Reproaches against these sad Relics, pulled his Tongue out of his
Mouth, and pricked it several times through with her Bodkin. He was slain in the
63d Year, 11 Months and 5 Days of his Age, upon the Ides of December, in the
Year of the Building of Rome 710.

We have several of his chief Pieces of Oratory, but many are lost through the
Injury of Time, of which he gives us a Catalogue in his second Book de
Divinatione. His Epistles are inimitable.

His Brother Quintus came to the same unhappy End as himself, for he was also
one of those that were banished with him, and being betrayed by his own
Servants, he was killed at the same time with his Brother Cicero.

CIMMERII,
a certain People of Scythia, which inhabited a Part of the Kingdom of Pontus
near the Bosphorus, called after their Name the Cimmerian; because they dwelt
in a Country compassed about with Woods and always covered with thick Clouds,
which caused a great Darkness, it gave an Occasion to the Proverb, which calls
great Darkness Cimmeriae Tenebrae, such as were in Egypt. Festus and some
Authors with him say, that there were certain People of that Name in Italy
between Bajae and Cumae near the Lake Avernus, who dwelt in Caves under Ground,
never saw the Sun, and never came out but in the Night.

CINCINNATUS,
a Roman Captain born in a mean Place, but great for his Virtue and Courage; as
he was plowing a Field of Four Acres the People of Rome made him Dictator,
which they had not done but that the Affairs of their Republic were in a
desperate Condition? He accepted of that Dignity unwillingly, and having
settled the Public Affairs in Seventeen Days, he left it freely, and returned
to his Plough as before.

CINCIUS,
a Senator of Rome, who caused the Lex Fannia to be received, by which he
moderated the superfluous Expenses of public Feasts. He was also the Author of
the Law which was called Lex Muneralis, made against such as bribed the People
with Money to obtain any Office; it forbad those who canvassed for any Office
to come clad in Two Garments into the Assemblies, to prevent their hiding of
Money they used to bring to buy Votes.

CINERARIUM,
an Earthen-pot to gather the Ashes and Bones of burnt Bodies.

CINERES and RELIQUIAE,
the Ashes and Remnants of the Bodies burnt at Rome. When a Body was burnt, the
Mother, Wife, Children, or other Relations of the Dead, clothing themselves in
Mourning, gathered the Ashes and Bones that were not consumed by the Fire. They
began it by in^ocating the Dii Manes and the Soul of the Deceased, praying him
to accept that pious Duty which they were about to pay him, then washing their
Hands and pouring Milk and Wine upon the Fire, they gathered the Ashes and
Bones and sprinkled them with Wine and Milk. The first Bone which they gathered
was called Os rejectum, according to Va^^o, or exceptum, because it was made
use of to finish the Remainder of the Funerals. The Relics being thus
sprinkled, they put them into an Vrn made of different Materials and wept over
it; they catched their Tears in small Glasses, called Lacrymatoria, which they
put at the Bottom of the Urn, then the Priest sprinkled the Urn and all present
to purify them with a Branch of Rosemary, Laurel or Olive, (as Aeneas did at
the Funeral of the Trumpeter Misenus) and dismissed the Assembly with these
words, I licet, you may go, or depart.

Here we might observe the Difficulty, how the Ashes and Bones of the Dead
could be gathered when they were mixed with so many Animals and other Things,
which were burnt with the Body, but we may find this Difficulty cleared under
the Word Cadaver.

CINNA,
a Roman Captain who was Consul Four Times in the Days of Sylla and Marius. He
was expelled out of Rome by Cneus Octavius, because he endeavored to recall
the banished Slaves and make them free. He joined with Marius and the banished
Slaves, and invading Rome made a great Slaughter among the Citizens.

He exercised so much Cruelty and Rapine, that he became intolerable among his
own Soldiers in his Army who thereupon slew him at Ancona.

There was another of this Name who was much beloved by Caesar Augustus, and
preferred by him to the great Offices of the Commonwealth; when he died he left
all his Goods to Augustus, as an Acknowledgment of his Favor. Some reckon a
Third of the same ^^ame, who was pulled in Pieces by the People at the Funeral
of Julius Casar, because he was suspected to have been one of the Conspirators
against him.

CINTHIUS,
an Epithet given to Apollo from a Mountain of the same Name in the Isle of
Delos, where he was brought up, and where he had a Temple. -- Cinthius aurem
Vellit and admonuit.
Virg. Bucol.

Apollo pulled me by the Ear and admonished me.

CINXIA,
an Epithet which the Poets give Juno, because they make her the Goddess that
presides over Marriages, when the Husband takes away the Girdle from his Spouse
in the first Night of their Marriage.

CINYRA,
is an Hebrew Word, which was after used both by the Greeks and Latins. The
Fable makes Cinyras King of Cyprus, and will have him to be the Inventor of the
Instrument called Cinyra, as Suidas says, in Cinyra, at the Time of the Trojan
War. Lastly, It says, that he contended with Apollo about the Excellency of
Singing and Music, which was his Ruin. But the Truth of Scripture and of
History show the Falsehood of this Fable, deducing the Antiquity of Music and
of the Musical Instrument Cinyra from the Ages before the ^loud. Laban who was
several Ages before the Trojan War, makes mention of this Instrument in
Genesis, C. 31.

CINYRAS,
King of Cyprus, who committed Incest with his own Daughter Myrrha, which he
had by Adonis. He was a Man so rich, that he gave Rise to the Proverb, The
Riches of Cinyras, to signify a very rich Man.

CIPPUS,
a Roman Praetor, who returning Victorious to Rome, seemed to have Horns upon
his Head. The Diviners being consulted about this Prodigy, they said, it
foretold his Regal Power as soon as he entered into the City. But that Great Man
scorning to enslave his Country would never go into Rome, but chose rather to
live in voluntary Exile than to be so injurious to the Commonwealth.

CIRCE,
the Daughter of the Sun, and Perseis the Daughter of Oceanus, who married the
King of the Sarmata. She was famous for Magic and Poisoning, if we may believe
the Poets, she poisoned her own Husband that she might reign alone, as also
several of her Subjects to try the Strength and Effects of her Poisons, which
caused them to revolt from her, and drive her out of the Kingdom in Disgrace.

She went and dwelt in an Isle near Tuscany, upon a Promontory which was called
by her Name, The Cape of Circe; there she fetched down the Stars from Heaven by
her Charms, and miraculously changed Scylla the Daughter of Phorcus into a
Sea Monster, as also Picus, King of the Latins into a Bird called a
Wood-pecker: The Navy of Ulysses being cast upon these Coasts, she by her
Enchantments, changed all his Companions into Hoggs, which he sent to view the
Country, upon which he was cast by a Tempest.

Mercury kept Ulysses from falling into the same Misfortune, having given him
the Herb Moly to preserve him from her Charms, and at the same time admonishing
him, that when she struck him with her Red he should draw his Sword and
threaten to kill her till she should offer to be Friends with him, and
entertain him, and engage her self by the Great Oath of the Gods not to hurt
him in any thing. Ulysses followed Mercury's Advice exactly, and Circe restored
his Companions to their former Shape.

CIRCENSES LUDI,
the Plays of the Circus much used at Rome, in Imitation of the Olympic Games
in Greece; these last were dedicated to Jupiter, and the former to the God
Consus or the God of Counsels. They were vowed on the Seventeenth of the
Calends of October, (i. e. Sept. 15.) and shown the 9th of the same Calends (i.
e. Sept. 23.) These Games continued Five Days.

Five sorts of different Games were shown: The first was the Race of Chariots,
which was the most ancient and chief of the Roman Exercises and Divertisements,
as it was of the Greeks. The second was Leaping, who should leap best and
highest. The third was Quoits, which was a Piece of Stone or Plate of Iron,
which they cast as far as they could. The fourth was Wrestling, in which Two
Wrestlers naked and their Bodies all anointed with Oil, laid hold upon on
another, and endeavored to throw each other upon the Ground, by tripping up
one another's Heels. The fifth was Fighting at Fifty-cuffs, at which they armed
their Hands with great Straps of a raw Ox-hide with Bosses of Lead, which they
called Cestis, with these they struck each other smartly, and often killed one
another.

Upon the Day appointed for these Plays they went in the Morning to the
Capitol, where all the Furniture for the Plays was ready, from whence they
returned in good Order, and passed through the public Places and principal
Streets of Rome, and from thence to the Circus, where they took several Turns
to show the Pomp of the Plays the better.

Before them went the Chariots which carried the Images of the Gods, and of the
most illustrious Romans; then came other Chariots, in which the Roman Ladies
most finely dressed rode, and several other Chariots after them.

After this the Statues of the Gods were brought into the Circus, and the Roman
Ladies took their Places to see the Sports.

Those, who were to fight, appeared in the Starting-place for the Race, riding
upon their Chariots drawn with Two, Four or Six Horses a Breast, who expected
nothing but the Signal to enter the Lists.

There were usually Four Companies of Fighters, or Four Squadrons distinguished
by the Colors of their Garments. The First Squadron was called the Green, the
Second the Blew, the Third the Red, and the Fourth the White. The Emperor
Domitian added the Gold Color and Purple to make Two other Squadrons who bore
the Name of their Color.

The Spectators were divided into Parties for the Combatants, some wagering for
one Squadron, and others for another.

The Names of the Combatants were drawn by Lot, and matched after this manner:
They took an Urn into which they cast Balots of the Bigness of a Bean, on which
was written an A or a B, or some such like Letter, and always Two of a Sort:
Then the Champions came up one after another and made their Prayer to Jupiter,
and after that they put their Hand into the Urn; immediately one of the Judges
took every ones Balot, and matched those that had Letters alike: If the Number
of the Fighters was unequal, he that had the odd Letter was to fight the
Conqueror, which was no small Advantage, because he came fresh to fight against
one who was already tired. This done, the Lists were opened at the Sound of the
Trumpet, and when the last Signal was given by the hanging out a white Flag,
they entered the List, and they run who should get first to the End of the Race:
They were to turn first seven times, and afterward five times about certain
Posts without touching them, in which they showed great Art. This is what
Horace tells us in these Verses:

-- Metaque fervidis
Evitata rotis.
Od. 1. Lib. 1. I will explain the other Plays of the Cirque, in an
Alphabetical Order.

CIRCIUS.
See after Circus.

CIRCUS,
a great Building of a Round or Oval Figure, erected by the Ancients to exhibit
Shows to the People. There are some Ruins of the Circus's yet to be seen at
Rome, Nismes, and other Places. The Romans were great Lovers of the Circensian
Games, as this Verse of Juvenal testifies,

-- Atque duas tantum res anxim optat,
Panem and Circenses.
Some will have the Name to come from Circus, to whom Tertullian attributes the
Invention of them. Cassiodorus says, that Circus comes from circuitus. The
Romans at first had no other Circus for their Races, than the Shore of Tiber,
with the Bank on the one side, and a Pallisade of Swords standing upright on
the other, which made these Races dangerous, as Servius observes: From hence it
is, that Isidore says, that these Sports were called Circenses, from circum
enses: But Scaliger laughs at this Etymology. Tarquin was the first that built
a Circus at Rome between the Aventine and Palatine Mounts, as Dionysius
Hallcarnassaeus tells us. It was 2205 Foot long, and 950 Foot broad, which was
the Reason it was called the Great Circus.

Julius Caesar adorned it with rich and magnificent Buildings, which he
encompassed about with fine Canals of Water, called Euripi, to represent
Sea Fights in them. The Spectators, though very numerous, could see the Sports
conveniently, for they sat on Benches one above another, in the Form of an
Hill, so that they which sat before did not hinder those behind from seeing.
Augustus enlarged the Circus, and erected a great Obelisk of 125 Foot high. The
Emperor Claudius built Ornaments of Marble for the Dens of wild Beasts,
designed for the Pleasures of the People, which till that time were made only
of Earth or Wood. Caracalla caused diverse parts of it to be painted and gilded,
And lastly, Heliogabalus covered the Floor with Gold, and Silver-Dust or Sand,
and was troubled he could not do it with Ivory; likewise by an excessive Luxury
he filled the Pits with Wine, and represented a Sea Fight on it, as an ancient
Historian relates.

Some say, there were Eight Circus's in Rome, of which several were either
through Vanity or Devotion built for the Ornament of the City: That of
Flaminius was the most famous for Plays, and for the Glass-house, where they
had the Secret to harden Crystal, so as to resist Fire. Those of Antoninus and
Aurelian were adorned with curious Obelisks, and diverse other Ornaments.

CIRCUS FLAMINII,
the Circus of Flaminius was a large Place compassed about as other Circus's
were, with several rows of Benches one above another, Galleries, Porches,
Shops, and other Buildings: It bore the Name of the Consul that built it. The
Senate often met there when they came down from the Capitol. It was appointed
for some Sports, as the Apollinarics, and Horse-races, and for the Assemblies
of the People by their Tribes, which was the most general way of meeting,
because the 35 Tribes, with the Inhabitants of the City included all the People
of Italy, which met there.

CIRCIUS,
the Wind, which is about the Caurus, and is called North-West. Augustus built
a Temple to the Wind Circius among the Gauls, who were much troubled with it,
because it blew down their Houses; yet these People thought themselves much
benefited by it, because it cleared the Air. Hear what Seneca says of it;
Galliam infestat Circius, cui aedificia quassanti tamen incolae gratias agunt,
tanquam salubritatem coeli sui debeant ei. Divus certe Augustus templum illi,
cum in Gallia moraretur, and vovit and fecit.

CISIA,
Coaches with two Wheels. The Ancients had these Coaches with two Wheels, which
they called Cisia, which they used for greater Convenience and Expedition.
Cicero calls them Flying Chairs.

CITHAERON,
a Mountain in Baotia, at whose Bottom the River Asopus runs. It was
consecrated to Bacchus, and his Orgiae were celebrated there, as Ovid tells us,
Lib. 3. of his Metamorphosis.

CLAROS,
a small City of Ionia, heretofore famous for the Oracle of Apollo, who from
them was surnamed Clarins. There was a certain Fountain, whose Water inspired
Men to deliver Oracles, when it was drank, but it also shortened their Lives.

Strabo informs us, that Calchas the Diviner returning home by Land, after Troy
was taken with Amphilocus, the Son of Amph^^raus, passed through Claros, where
he found much more expert Diviners than himself; for, when Calchas to try one
of them, asked him, How many Pigs a Sow, that was big, should bring forth;
Mopsus, who was the Diviner, answered, That she should have but three, two
Males, and one Female, which proved true. But Calchas not being able to give an
Answer in his turn to this Question, How many Figs a Fig Tree had, and Mopsus
telling him how many, he was so discontented, that he died of Grief to see
himself outdone in his own Art. Nearcbus derives this Word Cl^ros from (...),
a Lot, because it fell to Apollo in the Division. Some Authors say, it comes
from (...), to weep, because Manto the Daughter of Tiresias the Diviner, to
whom the Foundation of that City is attributed, flying from Thebes after the
Epigoni had destroyed it, landed in those Parts, where pouring out her Tears,
she made a Fountain, which gave Name to that Place.

It is also an Isle in the Archipelago, between Tenedos and Soio, dedicated to
Apollo, as Callimachus testifies in these Verses,

(...),
(...), etc.
CLAUDIA,
a Vestal Virgin, who taking too much Care in dressing her self, caused her
Behavior to be suspected, and her Chastity to be questioned; but she deared
her self by a Prodigy, that happened thus: For she seeing the Ship, which
brought the Statue of Cybele the Mother of the Gods, sticking in the Sand, so
that it could not be got ashore by all the Arts and Labor they could use,
prayed to the Goddess to clear her in Public, and immediately casting her
Girdle upon it, she pulled it to Land without any trouble, which undeceived the
People, Ovid, L. 4. Fastorum.

CLAUDIANA;
the Claudian Family, very illustrious amongst the Romans, from which several
of the Emperors were descended, as Claudius and Nero. It came from Appius
Claudius, King of the Sabines, from whom came Appius Claudius, who paved the
Way called from his Name, Via Appia, and made the Conduit at Rome; as also
Appius Claudius Caecus, and Appius Claudius Crassinus, who made himself
Dictator. See Appius.

CLAUDIUS PULCHER,
who lost the Battle against Asdrubal, at the Seige of Lilibaum. His Defeat is
attributed to the Contempt, which he cast upon a Presage made from the Holy
Poultrey; for when the Coop was brought before him, that he might take the
Augury himself, he perceived, that the Poultrey were not at all moved by the
Corn they gave them, whereupon he cast the Coop and holy Poultrey into the Sea,
saying these Words in Raillery: Let them drink, since they will not eat.

CLAUDIUS,
the Roman Emperor, who was the Son of Drusus, the Nephew of Tiberius, and
Uncle of Caligula, whom he succeeded after his Death. Seneca has given us a
Description of the Person and Intellects of this Emperor Claudius in his
Apocolocyntosis, where he imputes to him all imaginable Defects. Suetonius
tells us, that he was not ill made. It is true, that he had weak Legs, and a
Trembling in his Head, but these Defects were caused by Poison given him when
he was young, which made him simple, forgetful and timorous, so that he gave
himself up to be governed by his Freemen: He had a fat Neck, and his Lips were
always foaming with Spittle, which, some think, is represented upon his Medals,
as well as mentioned by Historians, with all other Signs of Weakness, which
betrayed the Defects of his Mind. Nevertheless he seemed desirous to make
amends for these Imperfections by his Study, for he applied himself closely to
the Greek Tongue, History and Grammar. He likewise composed a Book before his
Reign, to prove the Necessity of adding Three Letters to the Latin Alphabet,
and when he was Emperor he put them into it with ease, but they died with him,
for we find them only in the Inscriptions of his Time. He executed the Office
of a Censor with great Severity, and restrained the Liberties of the Theater by
most rigorous Edicts: He was exasperated by the Insolence of the People, who
publicly affronted the most eminent Roman Ladies; and Publius Pomponius, who
had been Consul, because he had made a Play which was acted. He forbad also
lending Money to the Children under Age, because to save themselves from the
Hands of their Creditors, they were tempted to seek the Lives of their Fathers.
Afterward he finished the Aquaeducts, begun by Caligula, which brought the
Water from the Simbruin Fountains into the City, and made some Regulations in
the Science of foretelling Things to come by the Entrails of Beasts.

He put his Wife Messalinae to Death, who was one of the lewdest Princesses
that ever lived, for she was married to Silius in public, while her Husband
was alive. He after married Agrippina the Daughter of Germanicus, and his own
Niece, who poisoned him some Years after with a Dish of Mushrooms by the Help
of Locusta, a Woman famous for Poisoning, and the Emperor's Physician, named
Xenophon, who pretending to help his Vomiting, put a poisoned Feather into his
Throat, of which he died.

CLAUDIANUS,
Claudian, a Poet known over all the World, whom all learned Men agree to come
nearest the Majesty of Virgil of any that have endeavored to imitate him, and
to have been least infected with the Corruptions of his Age. His Invectives
against Ruffinus and Eutropius are the best Pieces he has written, and perhaps
nothing can be more complete in their kind. Scaliger in his Treatise of Poetry,
says, that he was tired with the meaness of his Matter, but he supplied all
Defects by his Readiness of Wit, for his Fancy is happy, his Expression
apposite, his Verse unaffected, his Judgment accurate and his Ornaments
pleasant for their Ingenuity.

CLAVUS,
a Nail. In the Consulship of L. Genutius and L. Aemilius Mamercus, in the Year
4352. according to the Julian Account, 3690 of the World, and 362 before Jesus
Christ, the Plague continuing to lay waste Rome, compelled the Romans to fly
to the Ceremony of driving a Nail, which had never been done before but to keep
an Account of the Years, according to an ancient Law, That the Great Praetor
should drive a Nail on the Third Day of September. From this Time this
Political Ceremony was turned into Superstition, and simple People were made to
believe, that this Action would be effectual to avert public Calamities, and
to fasten them, as I may say, with this Nail.

This Nail was made of Brass, and it was driven into the Wall behind the
Chapel of Minerva, in the Capitol, on the Right Hand of the Temple of Jupiter
Capitolinus; and to perform this Ceremony a Dictator was made.

LATUS-CLAVUS, or LATI-CLAVIUM, or TUNICA-CLAVATA; and ANGUSTUS-CLAVUS, or
ANGUSTI-CLAVIUM,
a Gown or Coat, which the Roman Senators and Knights and Highpriests wore,
upon which were set Buttons having Heads like Nails, more or less wide,
according to the Quality of the Persons or Offices. This Coat thus adorned with
Buttons in the Shape of Nail-heads was a Mark of Distinction, Senators wore
them large, and so were called Laticlavii instead of Senatores, as Suetonius
calls them Bini Laticlavii, for Two Senators, and when they were degraded this
Coat was taken from them; on the Contrary, Knights wore a Coat with Buttons
more narrow, and from thence were called Angusticlavi.

The Senators did not gird this Coat, and from thence it was called Tunica
recta, whereas the Knights wore a Girdle about it. The Priests likewise might
wear the Coat with large Buttons when they sacrificed, called from thence
Laticlavus Sacerdotalis.

In the Times of the Emperors the Coat with large Buttons was bestowed as a
Mark of Honor and Distinction upon the Governors of Provinces and such as had
served the Emperor faithfully, as the blew Garter and Marshal's Staff is in
France.

They laid aside this Ornament in Times of public Mourning or Calamity as a
Sign of Sorrow.

CLELIA,
whom Dionysius Halicarnassaeus names Valeria, and makes her the Daughter of
the Consul Valerius, being delivered for an Hostage to King Porsenna for the
Security of a Truce, she cast her sell into the Tiber and swam over on
Horseback. King Prosenna, when she was brought back to him by the Consul
Valerius, admiring her Courage, gave her an Horse finely equipped, and this is
the Reason of the Statue on Horseback, which the Romans have consecrated to
Clelia's Virtue in the via Sacra.

CLEMENTIA,
Clemency, which the Ancients made a Goddess, and which they pictured holding a
Branch of Laurel in one Hand and a Spear in the other, to show that Gentleness
and Pity belonged only to victorious Wariours. The Romans dedicated a Temple to
her by the Order of the Senate, after the Death of Julius Caesar, as Plutarch
and Cicero relate. The Poet Claudian describes her as the Guardian of the World.
The Emperors Tiberius and Vitellius caused her to be stamped upon their Moneys.

CLEOBIS and BITO,
the Children of the Priestess of Argos, who died both at the same time after
they had drawn their Mother upon her Chariot to the Temple. And these are the
Men which Solon calls the most happy, in his Answer to Croesus in Charon, or
the Contemplator. See Bito.

CLEOPATRA,
Queen of Egypt, Daughter of Ptolomy, surnamed Dionysius, the last King of
Egypt. She was first beloved by Julius Caesar, who gave her that Kingdom again
after he had conquered it, and by him she had a Son named Caesario, but after
Mark Antony fell so passionately in Love with her, that he was not content to
give her the Provinces of the lower Syria, Phoenicia, the Isle of Cyprus, etc.
but promised to give her the whole Roman Empire in Requital of the Pleasures he
had with her: For Love of her he divorced his Wife Octavia the Sister of
Augustus, which so much incensed that Prince that he declared War against him.
Antony, though he had the Assistance of the Egyptian Army, fell by the
Victorious Arms of Caesar near the Promontory of Actium: Cleopatra fled to
Alexandria in Egypt, and seeing that she could not gain Caesar's Favor to her
Children, and being unwilling to be made use of as a Captive to the Conqueror's
Triumph, she killed her self by the biting of an Asp upon the Tomb of Antony
her Lover.

CLEPSYDRA,
an Hourglass made with Water. The Use of Clepsydrae was very ancient among
the Romans, and there were several sorts of them which had this in common to
them all, that Water ran by gentle Degrees through a narrow Passage from one
Vessel to another, in which rising by little and little lifted up a Piece of
Cork which showed the Hours in different Ways.

They were all subject to Two Inconveniences, the first is that which Plutarch
takes notice of, that the Water passed through with more or less Difficulty,
according as the Air was more or less thick, cold or hot, for that hindered the
Hours from being equal; the other is, that the Water ran faster at first when
the Vessel from whence the Water came was full than at last; and to avoid this
Inconvenience, it was, that Orontes found out his Clepsydra, which is a small
Ship flotting upon the Water, which empties it self by a Siphon which is in the
Middle of it, for the Ship sinketh according to the Quantity of the Water which
comes out of the Siphon, which makes it always run with the same Force, because
it always receives the Water near the Surface. We make use of Hour-glasses of
Sand instead of the Clepsydrae of the Ancients.

Clepsydrae were more especially used in Winter, because the Sun-dials were not
useful in that Season.

The second sort of Clepsydrae was such, as without changing the Dial made the
Hours sometimes longer and sometime shorter by the Inequality of the Index or
Hand, which depended upon the Management of the Water, as Vigruoius says. This
was performed by making the Hole through which the Water passed larger or
smaller; for in the long Days when the Hours were longer, the Hole being made
narrower, it conveyed but a little Water in a longer time, which caused the
Water to rise and fall slowly, and so made the Counterpoize which turns the
Axle-tree, to which the Index or Hand is fastened, to more slowly.

CLIENS,
a Client, among the Romans was a Citizen who put himself under the Protection
of some Great Man, who in Respect of that Relation was called a Patron. This
Patron assisted his Client with his Protection, Interest and Goods, and the
Client gave his Vote for his Patron, when he sought any Office for himself or
his Friends. Clients owed Respect to their Patrons, as they did owe them their
Protection.

CLIENTELA,
the Protection which the great Roman Lords allowed the poor Citizens. This
Right of Patronage was appointed by Romulus to unite the Rich and Poor together
in such Bonds of Love, as the one might live without Contempt, and the other
without Envy.

CLIMA,
or INCLINATIONES MUNDI, and INCLINAMENTUM, a Climate, which comes from the
Greek Word (...), that is to say, to decline; it is intended to mark the
Difference there is between the Countries of the World according to the
Distance they bear from the Pole or Aequinoctial Line, by reason of the Idea
which the Material Sphere gives us of this Distance, for the Countries which
are distant from the Pole or Aequinoctial seem to decline or bend some more,
and others less toward the Aequinoctial or Poles.

The Ancients knew but Seven Climates, which passed through Meroe, Siena,
Alexandria, Rhodes, Rome, Pontus and the Mouth of the Boristhenes. Paris is in
the Sixth Climate, Averroes who lived under the Fifth Climate preferred it
before all others. The Moderns, who have sailed much farther toward the Poles,
have made 23 Climates of each Side of the Equator, according to the Number of
Twelve Hours by which the longest Day is increased from the Equator to the
Polar Circle, for they allowed the Difference of Half an Hour between one Place
and another to make a different Climate, and so reckoned 24 Climates; and
beyond the Polar Circle the Length of Days increases so fast that they reckoned
no Climates there. The common People call the Country that differs from
another, a Climate either for the Change of Seasons or Nature of the Soil, or
People that inhabit it, without any Relation to the long Days of Summer.

CLIO,
one of the Nine Muses who teaches to sing the Encomiums of Illustrious Men.
She has taken her Name from the Greek Word (...), which signifies Glory or
Renown. She is said to be the Daughter of Jupiter and Mnemosyne, the Goddess of
Memory.

CLOACA,
a Sink, or Gutter under Ground, by which the Fifth of the City of Rome was
carried away. Tarquinius Superbus finished the great Sink, which Tarquinius
Priscus had begun, which reached as far as the Senators Bridge, and emptied it
self into the Tiber. The Channel was very wide, and to make it, he was forced
to dig through the Mountains, and Vaulted it over in several places of the City.
It was built of great Stones in the Form of an Arch, so well fastened and
cemented together, that the continual running of Water and Filth had not
endamaged it in the Space of Seven Hundred Years. There were many other Sinks
in the City, which all fell into this Common-sewer. M. Cato and Val. Flascus
Censors built one upon Mount Aventine. There were Officers appointed to take
Care of these Works, and to have them repaired, who were called Curatores
Cloacarum Vrbis.

CLODIUS PUBLIUS,
a Noble Roman of the ancient Family of the Clodii, a very debauched Man, who
committed Incest with his Sisters, and fell in Love with Pompeia the Wife of
Caesar. He was found one Day in the Palace in the Habit of a singing Woman,
among the Roman Ladies, who celebrated the Mysteries of Ceres, of which he was
accused by the Tribunes, but he escaped the Rigor of the Law by causing
himself to be chosen Tribune. He was one of Cicero's greatest Enemies, who so
persecuted him, as to cause him to be banished, and sell his Goods. He was
slain by Milo sometime after; and Cicero undertook the Defense of Milo, and was
successful in it.

CLOTHO,
One of the Three Destinies, who spin the Life of Man according to the old
Fables. Clotho holds the Spindle and draws the Thread. She is represented in a
long Gown of diverse Colors, having a Crown on her Head set with Seven Stars,
holding in her Hand a Spindle. Lucian places Clotho in Hell with Charon, and
makes her to keep the Register of all the Dead, that Charon brings over in his
Boat.

Clotho. So it is, O Charon, ship this Crowd, and in the mean time I will take
my Register, and standing at the Wharfs, I will ask every one his Name, House
and Town. Mercury shall take Care to put them in Order, according as they come
in. Let us begin with little Children, who have nothing to answer me, as I have
nothing to ask them.


CLYPEUS,
and CLYPEUM, a Buckler, a piece of defensive Armor which the Ancients used,
and carried upon their Arm to secure them from the Blows of their Enemies: The
Figure of it was Round, Oval, or Sexangular. In the middle of it was a Boss of
Iron, or of some other Metal with a sharp Point.

CLYPEI, and CLUPEI VOTIVI,
Devoted Bucklers, which were designed to represent a memorable Action of some
ancient Hero, and to preserve the Memory of it in a Temple of the Gods, where
it was hanged. The Names which the Latins gave these Bucklers were, Clypea,
Clypes, Clypei votivi, because they were like the Bucklers used in War. Some
ancient Grammarians, that they might seem more accurate than others, say, that
Clypeus in the Masculine Gender signifies a Buckler for the War; and Clypeum in
the Neuter, a consecrated Buckler; or rather Clypius with an i is a Buckler for
fighting; and Clypeum, or Clupeum, one of those Bucklers vowed to the Gods: But
Pliny, and others of the Ancients laugh at these Niceties.

Trebellius Pollio uses these two Words, in a complaisant way, in his Life of
Claudius the Goth. The Senate, says he, decreed this Emperor a Golden Buckler,
which they ordered to be set up in the Palace of the Capitol, and upon which
this Emperor was drawn as far as his Breast. Illi Clypeus aureus, sive, ut
Grammatici loquuntur, Clypeum aureum Senatus totius judicio in Romana curia
collocatum est, etiam nunc videtur, expressa thorace ejus vultus imago.

Salmasius upon this Passage shows, that these consecrated Bucklers were also
called by the Greeks, Disci, Cycli, Aspides, which signifies properly the
Bucklers used in War; Pinaces, which is Tables; Stylopinakia, Tables hung upon
Pillars; Protomata, the upper Parts of a Man; Opla, among the Thebans, Arms;
and Stetharia, among the Moderns, Busts or Pictures as far as the Waste.

The ancient Heathens were very desirous to leave the Memory of their brave
Actions to their Posterity, and to that end contrived to have the History of
their Ancestors graven upon Bucklers. Homer speaks of several made by the most
curious Artists, and among others Achilles's and Ajax's; from whence came the
Custom of making them of Metal, that they might hang them in their Temples as a
Monument of their Victories and other remarkable Actions, or at least to leave
their Effigies to their Posterity.

Livy tells us, that at the Conquest of the Carthaginians under the Command of
L. Martius, the Romans got much Spoil, among which was found a Silver Buckler
which weighed One Hundred and Thirty Eight Pound, upon which the famous
Asdrubal of Barcha, one of the chief Commanders of that War was drawn, and that
Buckler, which was called Clypeus Martius, was put into the Temple of the
Capitol, to leave the Memory of that Conquest to Posterity, and remained there
till the Capitol was burnt.

The same Author relates, that in the Triumph, which Titus Quintius obtained
for the Victory, which he had gained over Philip, King of Macedon, the Father
of Demetrius, Ten Silver Bucklers, and one of solid Gold, which were found
among the Spoils of the Enemies, were carried before him.

Some Years after in the Consulship of Marcus Tuccius, and P. Junius Brutus
Twelve gilt Bucklers were dedicated and sent to the Capitol. Suetonius in the
Life of Domitian, relates, that the Senate to show how odious the Memory of
that Tyrant was, commanded that his Bucklers should be taken out of the Temples.

Antoninus Pius dedicated a very noble Buckler to his Predecessor Adrian.

These Bucklers did not only represent the Portraitures or Busts of these
Eminent Persons, but all their History was engraven on them. Of this sort there
were many at Cyzicum in the Temple of Apollonides the Mother of Attalus and
Eumenes, upon which were engraven Histories in Relievo. Upon one of these
Bucklers Pelias and Neleus, the Sons of Neptune, were drawn, who delivered
their Mother from Imprisonment, as Plutarch assures us. Some Medals show us,
what Fashion these consecrated Bucklers were of, and among others the Reverse
of a Medal of the Emperor Augustus, to whom the Senate and People of Rome had
consecrated a Buckler, in Remembrance that Phraares, King of the Parthians had
sent him again the Ensigns of War which he had taken in his Victory over
Crassus and Mark Antony, supposing that Augustus had not obliged him by Force
to restore them: This pleased him so much, that he built a Temple to Mars the
Revenger in the Capitol, where these Military Ensigns were consecrated with
this Buckler.

Vespasian also has made another Medal with a consecrated Buckler fastened to a
Pillar between Two Lawrel-Trees, by the Order of the Senate; which is signified
by these Letters Ex S. C. Ex Senatus consulto. These Two Laurels referred to
those that were planted at the Emperor's Gate the first Day of the Year, or
when they had obtained some Victory.

Dio speaking of the Honors which the Senate bestowed upon Augustus, says,
that they ordered Laurels to be planted before his Palace, to show that he was
always victorious over his Enemies; whence it is that Pliny very properly calls
a Laurel Caesar's Porter, the only Ornament and faithful Guardian of their
Palaces: Gratissima dominibus janitrix Caesarum, quae sola and domos exornat
and ante limina excubat.

There remains still another sacred Buckler, on which is represented that
victorious Action which Scipio Africanus did at the taking of New Carthage in
Spain; it is related at large in Livy: But, says he, Scipio calling the Spanish
Hostages, whom he had taken Prisoners, comforted them in their ill Fortune, and
told them, that they were come into the Power of the People of Rome, who took
more Delight in gaining Hearts by Kindness than in making them Subjects through
Fear, and who loved more to have Foreign Nations for their Allies and Friends
than to lay upon them an heavy Bondage. Then having taken the Names of all
their Cities, he caused a List to be made of all the Prisoners, inquiring of
them their Name and Country, and sent out Posts all Ways, that every Family
concerned should come and receive his own, surrendering up to the Governors of
the Cities that were present, their Citizens, and advising Caius Flaminius the
Treasurer to treat the rest with all imaginable Civility. At the same time a
very aged Matron crowded through the Throng of Hostages to cast her self at his
Feet; (she was the Wife of Man donius the Brother of Indibilis, King of the
Illergetae.) Her Petition mixed with Tears and Sobs was, that Scipio would
please to recommend the Care of the Ladies to his Guards, and when Scipio
answered, they should want nothing convenient for their Subsistence, she
replied, it is not that that I am concerned for, for in this Disgrace we ought
to be contented with any thing, but that which disturbs me is the Youth of
these my Daughters, for as for my self Age secures me from all the Insolences
which they may justly fear. (They were the Daughters of Indibilis, young and
fair.) Then Scipio answered her, I cannot but follow the Custom of the People
of Rome, and the exact Discipline which is observed in my Troops, that does not
suffer any Man in the least manner to violate the Respect which is due to your
Sex, but your Virtue and Constancy, which even ill Fortune cannot triumph over,
oblige me to take a more particular Care of your Persons. Then he committed
them to the Keeping of a Man whose Fidelity was well known, and gave him a
Command to show as much Respect and Favor to them, as if they were the Wives
of his best Friends.

A little after, there came to him a young Woman from among the Prisoners, of
such a perfect Beauty, that she drew Respect from all the Spectators. Scipio
being informed of her Country and Family, found that she was betrothed to a
young Prince among the Celtiberi named Allucius, with whom she was passionately
in Love. At the same time he called her Parents and the Husband designed for
this beautiful Virgin, with whom he had this Discourse. Young Man, my Soldiers
having discovered your Espousals to me, and having learned that you love her
affectionately, which her Beauty easily persuades me to believe, I am willing
to favor your Passion, although to speak freely to you, if I were permitted to
enjoy the Pleasures of Youth, especially in a lawful Love, and the Cares of the
Commonwealth were not wholly Masters of my Heart, I should desire your Spouse,
who so very well deserves the Affections of a fine Gentleman; but you know that
she has been treated by me with the same Respect, as if she were with her
Father in Law or her own Parents; I have kept her carefully for you, that I
might return her to you a Present worthy both of you and me; all the Requital I
desire of you is, that you will be Friends to the Commonwealth, and if you have
as much Esteem for me, as the People of your Nation had for my Father and
Uncle, satisfy your selves, that all the Romans equal us in Virtue, and that
as there is no People in all the World whom you ought to fear more for an
Enemy, so there is none that you can wish more for a Friend. This young Prince
being astonished at this exceeding Bounty, and transported with Joy, took
Scipio by the Hand and prayed all the Gods to reward this Action, whose Merit
he could never sufficiently acknowledge. In the mean time, the Parents of this
fair Lady seeing that he would free them without Ransom, brought him a
considerable Sum, and offering it to him prayed him to accept of it as a
Testimony of their Gratitude, assuring him, that it would be as great a Favor
to them to accept it, as it was to release his Prisoner to them without using
the Right of insisting upon Conquest. Scipio pretending that he was overcome
with their urgent Entreaties, ordered the Money to be laid at his Feet, and
turning himself to Allucius, said unto him, I give you this over and above the
Portion which your Father in Law will give you, take it from my Hand as a
second Portion with which I present you. So he ordered the Sum which had been
presented him to be carried to him, and him to lead away his Mistress. In fine,
This young Prince being loaded with the Presents and Honors he laid upon him,
returned home, and there extolled the Merits of Scipio, who was more like a God
than a Man, and knew not only how to conquer by Arms, but by Kindness and
Favors.

Polybius who lived in the Time of this famous Roman, and was particularly
acquainted with him, relates this Action in a fewer Words: He adds these
remarkable Ones, which he spoke to those Soldiers who presented this fair Lady
to him: If my Fortune were limited to that of a private Person, you could not
offer me a more acceptable Present, but being, as I now am, the General of an
Army, you could not bring me one more disagreeable.

CLYTFMNESIRA,
the Daughter of Tyndarus, and Wife of Agamemnon, having heard from her Brother
Palamedes that her Husband had brought a Concubine with him, which was
Cassandra, she conspired immediately with Aegysthus the Son of Thyestes, who
was her Gallant, to put them both to Death; and so while he was sacrificing to
the Gods for his Return, C^^temnestra slew her Husband Agamemnon and Cassandra
with an Ax, but her Son Orestes revenged the Death of his Father Agamemnon by
slaying the Debaucher of his Family and Murderer of his Father.

CLYTIA,
a Nymph, and the Daughter of Oceanus, who was loved by Apollo and afterward
forsaken by him, because through Jealousy to Orcania she discovered the Love
of that God with his Daughter: This Desertion was such a Grief to her, that she
died of Sorrow, and was turned into a Flower called the Heliotrope, which
remembering the Love which she bore to him, turns it self always on the Side he
is of to see him.

CNEUS,
a Name given to such among the Romans as were born with some Blemish on their
Bodies, or some other natural Defect, which the Latins call Naevus.

CNIDOS,
a Sea-Town on the utmost Borders of the Chersonesus, which joins to Carias,
famous for the Temple where is the Venus of Praxiteles of white polished
Marble; whence it is that Horace calls her Venus Cnidiana.

COCLES,
the Surname of a Roman Citizen named Horatius, who alone opposed the Invasion
of the Tuscans when they were ready to enter into Rome over the Bridge
Sublicius, till it was broken down; and then he cast himself immediately into
the Tiber, being much wounded in the Thigh, and escaped to the other Side. The
Consul Publicola in Gratitude erected his Statue of Copper in Vulcan's Temple.

COCYTUS,
one of the Rivers of Hell according to the Poets, which comes from these Greek
Words (...), to weep, lament and Groan. Homer places this River in the
Cimmerian Country, and will have Hell to be this very Country of the
Cimmerians, one Day's Journey from Circe, which is a Mountain in the Country of
the Latins.

CODRUS,
the last King of Athens, who lived in the Days of Samuel. He devoted himself
to Death for his Country, for going in Disguise into the Midst of his Enemies,
they slew him unknown, and by his Death his Countrymen got the Victory over the
Peloponesians, to whom the Oracle had promised it, if they did not slay their
Enemies King. The Athenians being Conquerors would not have another King, that
they might honor his Memory the more. So ended the Kingdom of the Heraclidae,
who were descended of Hercules, and their Commonwealth was governed by yearly
Magistrates to the Time of Solon the Lawgiver.

There was also a very bad Poet of that Name, of whom Horace speaks.

-- Rumpantur ut ilia Codro.
COELIUS,
a Mountain which was first, called Quercetulanus, because of a Forest of Oaks
which was upon it. It was afterward called Coelius from Coelius Vibenna, who
brought an Aid of Tuscans to one of their Kings, (either to Tarquinius Priscus,
or some other, for Historians do not agree about it,) and received this
Mountain for his Habitation with the adjoining Fields as far as the Place where
there is now a Market, because his Soldiers were very numerous; and the Street
is still called by their Name, The Tuscan-Street.

This Mountain was built and made one of the Divisions of Rome: It was burnt in
the Reign of Tiberius, but he rebuilt it, and ordered that instead of Mount
Coelius, it should be called Augustus's Mount, because the Statue of Tiberius,
which was at a Senator's House named Junius, was the only Preservative of it
from so great a Conflagration.

COELUS, or COELUM,
the Heaven, which the Greeks call (...), either from (...) video, to see; or
from the Hebrew Word Or, that is to say, Lucere, to shine, or our, which is
urere, to burn in Flame, from whence the Latins have also derived Aurora.

This Heaven was the first Object of false Worship, and Men took it for an
Universal Nature, which it contains; whence it bears the Name of Jupiter, as if
Jupiter were the Soul, and the Heaven, the Body of the whole Universe. This was
the Opinion of Ennius when he said, Aspice hoc sublime candens, quem invocant
omnes Jovem.

Phurnutus makes (...) to come from (...), that is to say, a Guardian or
Conservator, because the Heavens and the Stars were the first false Gods, who
were honored as the Conservators of the World.

COELUM,
the most ancient of the Gods, had for one of his Children Time named Saturn,
who with a Cut of a Sickle deprived his Father of his Genitals, which he cast
into the Sea, and by the Froth which came of the Stirring of the Waves Venus
was born.

It Is no hard thing to guess why Coelum is said to be the first of the Gods,
and the Father of Saturn or Chronos, since it is evident that the Motions of the
Heavens make and measure the Duration of Time. When Saturn is said to have
deprived his Father Coelus of his Generative Faculty by castrating him, it is
because in Time the Fruitfulness of the Heavens ceased to produce new Beings,
learing the Propagation and Multiplication of Creatures once formed to Venus,
and so it is feigned that Venus was born of the natural Parts of Coelus and the
Froath of the Sea; as Macrobius, Aiunt Saturnum abcidisse patris pudenda,
quibus in mare projectis, Venerem procreatam, quae a spuma unde coaluit, (...)
nomen accepit.

COENA,
Supper from (...) or (...), i. e. communes, because the Ancients usually
supped together in Companies, but dined alone: Supper was the best Meal. They
broke their Fast in the Morning very lightly with a Piece of Bread dipped in
pure Wine, which Meal they called Jentaculum, and in Greek (...) and (...),
from (...), which signifies pure Wine, The second Meal was the Prandium or
Dinner from (...) the Morning and (...), or from (...), which signifies plain
and very moderate. They had a Fourth Meal, which they made sometimes, which
they called Commissatio or Commessatio, a Collation or a Meal after Supper.
Suetonius makes mention of these Four Meals in his Life of Vitellius, Epulos
trifariam semper, interdum quadrifariam dispertiebat: in jentacula, and
prandia, and coenas, commessationesque, etc.

These Suppers were made after different Manners. There was one called Coena
recta, a Splendid Supper, with which the Roman Nobles treated their Mistresses
and Friends, who had attended them in their Visits, or in the Execution of
their Offices. They that would avoid the Expense and Trouble of these Suppers,
gave them Bread and Meat instead of them, and this Distribution was called
Sportula. Domitian took away these Allowances, and restored the Feast called
Coena recta; for Suetonius tells us, sportulas publicas sustulit, revocata
coenarum rectarum consuetudine.

COENA DAPSILIS,
a plentiful Feast, whether this Word comes from dapes, which signifies
Daintles, or the Greek Word (...), Abundance of all Things.

COENA ACROAMATICA,
from the Greek (...), which signifies pleasant and merry Discourse. It was a
Supper at which many witty Jests were spoken for Diversion.

There was moreover, COENA ADVENTITIA, INTERVALLATA, NOVEMDIALIS, and
DUODENARIA, called by the Greeks (...), because the Guests were Twelve in
Number, clothed like Gods and Goddesses. There was also another Supper called
Pontificalis, which the High Priest made upon the Day of his Consecration.

They supped usually about the Ninth Hour in the Daytime, that is, about Four
a Clock in the Afternoon, but in the Spring and Autumn about Three a Clock, and
in Winter at Two; for the Romans, as well as Greeks, often changed their Time,
supping sometimes at one Hour and sometimes at another, as we may observe in
their Authors. They put on a Garment when they sat down to Table called Vestis
caenatoria, or Pallium coenatorium, of which Martial makes mention.

There was then a Table spread between Three Beds, upon which they eat; another
which they used for a Cup-board called Abacus, upon which they set Glasses,
Fruits, etc. Varro speaks of Four sorts of Tables, that on which they eat,
another square one called Vruarium, on which they set their Pots, Dishes,
Flagons and Basins; a Third called Cylibantium, from the Greek (...), which
signifies a Drinking-Cup or Bowl, and the Fourth called Cartibulum, whereon
they cut the Meat, which was after served up in Portions to each Guest. Round
about the Beds and Tables was a kind of Bench a little raised, upon which they
set their Children who eat with them, as Suetonius testifies in the Life of the
Emperor Claudius, C. 32. Adhibebat omni coenae and liberos suos cum pueris,
puellisque nobilibus, qui more veteri ad fulcra lectorum sedentes vescerentur.
They used no Table-cloaths, they had Servants which were employed to wipe the
Table when they took away the Dishes and set on another Service, and others
were appointed to sweep away what fell from the Table and the Spittings, others
held great Fans to cool them or drive away the Gnats, and others gave them
Drink and Meat; as Horace tells us.

His ubi sublatis, puer alte cinctus, acernam
Gausape purpureo mensam pertersit, and alter
Sublegit quodcunque jaceret inutile, quodque
Posset coenantes offendere.
Sat. 8. Lib. 11. They were served usually with Three Courses; The first Course
when they sat down to Table was called Antecoena, or Gustatio, at which they
set on Mulberries, Eggs, or such like Things; the second was called Coena, or
Caput Coenae, when they set on more dainty Meats, and the third was the Disert,
called Bellaria, Mensa pomorum; as we read in Suetonius, Coenam ternis ferculis
praebebas, speaking of Augustus. At the Beginning of their Meal they drunk a
Glass of Greek Wine, but Caesar at the Feasts which he made for the People had
Four sorts of Wines brought, viz. of Chios, Lesbos, Falernum and Memertinum. At
the Beginning and End of the Supper they made Libations of Wine to their Gods,
and then drank every one out of a very large Bowl which was filled with Wine,
having made their Libations out of it, according to Sil. Ital.

Nec prius aut epulas aut muneragrata Lyaei
Fas cuiquam tetigisse fuit, quam multa precatus
In mensam...... sacrum libavit honorem.
Virgil speaks of the Libations made at the End of that Treat which Dido gave
Aeneas, Lib. 1. Aeneid, V. 727.

Postquam prima quies epulis, mensaeque remotae
Crateras magnos statuunt, and vina coranant....
His Regina gravem gemmis auroque poposcit,
Implevitqne mero pateram.
-- Tum facta silentia tectis.
Jupiter (hospitibus namre dare jure loquuntur)..
Dixit, and in mensa laticum libavit honorem:
Primaque libato summo tenus attigit ore:
Tum Bitiae dedit increpitans,.....
Post alii proceres, etc.
We have the Description of a Wedding by Lucian, in a Dialogue, entitled, the
Lapithae.

The Guests being all come, and it being time to go to Supper, the Women who
were many, and the Bride in the midst, covered with a Vail, took the
Right Hand, and the Men sat down quite opposite to the Ladies: At the upper End
the Banker Lucritus, then Aristaenetus; afterward Zenothemis and Hermo: After
them sat down the Peripatetick Clodimus, then the Platonist, and afterward the
Bridegroom, then my self, Zeno's Tutor after me, then his Pupil.

We eat our Meat pretty peaceably at first; for there were a World of Dishes,
and those well dressed. After having indulged our Appetite for some time, came
in Alcidamas the Cynick: The Master of the House bid him Welcome, and wished
him to take a Seat by Dionysodorus, You would think me very effeminate, said
he, should I sit down at Table, or lie almost along on a soft Bed, and Purple
Cushions, as if one went to sleep, and not to eat. I will stand, and feed my
self here and there after the Manner of the Scythians, etc. In the mean while
the Healths went merrily round, and they entertained one another with various
Discourses. The Servants delaying to serve up a new Course, Aristaenetus
unwilling a Moment should be lost without Divertisement, had a Buffoon
introduced to make the Company merry. He began to show a Thousand extravagant
Postures, with his bald Head and Body all disjointed, and to chaunt Verses, in
Egyptian Dialect, after which he fell to breaking his Jests upon the Company,
every Man laughing at what was said, and taking all in good part. The last
Service was brought up, which was to every Man a Fowl and a piece of Venison,
Fish and the Disert; in a word, every thing that might be honestly eat or
carried away.

COGNOMEN,
a Surname. It was properly the name that distinguished the lines of a Pedigree
in the same race in eadem gente. For example, when Livy said that the race of
the Potitians was divided in twelve Families; for Gens and Familiae, were as
the whole, and its parts. Those that were of the race were called Gentiles; and
those of the same Line or Family were called Agnati: As we may observe in the
Royal Race of France, often divided in several Branches, as Valois, Bourbon,
Orleans, Montpensier, etc. so when it is said the Family of the Caesar's was of
the Julian Race, Julian is the general Name of the Race, nomen gentis, and
Caesar is the Name of the Family, cognomen familiae.

The word Cognomen includes also the Sirnames given upon some particular
account, as when Salust says of Scipio; Massinissa in amicitiam receptus a
Publio Scipione, cui postea Africano cognomen fuit ex virtute; and Tully
speaking to Pomponius, who was Surnamed Atticus, because he had been brought up
a Scholar at Athens, tells him; Teque non cognomen Athenis solum deportasse,
sed humanitatem and prudentiam intelligo.

If we consider this, we shall find that there are no Sirnames that we call
cognomina, and distinguish the Families, but were given at first upon some
particular occasion, seeing the proper Names themselves, praen^mina, were at
first given upon some like account.

These Sirnames were hereditary to all the posterity of the same Family;
however, they might change them, or add some other new Name to them; and
sometimes, besides the Name of the private Family, they took the Name of the
Race, or the Tribes in the Ablative case, as C. Verres Romalea; Servius
Sulpitius Lemonia; that is, ex Romulea ex Lemonia Tribu.

The Romans placed sometimes the Surname of the private Family before the
general Name, cognomen antenomen gentis, says Manucius; and so Tully said
Gallo, Balbi Cornelii, Papum Emilium; and Livy, Paulus Aemilius Cos, and the
like; though Gallus, Balbus, Papus and Paulus were the Sir-names of a Family, and
not the Forenames. And sometimes the Sirnames became Names, as Valerius Maximus
tells us.

COLISEUM,
it is the Amphitheater that Vespatianus built in Rome, and his Son Titus
Dedicated. Philander's opinion is, that this word Coliseum, is said, quasi
coloseum, because of Nero's Coloss that was near it; though that Name be neither
general nor common to other Amphitheaters, but particular to that famous
Amphytheater, the remainders whereof are yet seen at Rome.

COLLATINUS,
Surnamed Tarquinius, Lucretia's Husband, the first Man that was made Consul
with Junius Brutus, after the Kings were driven away out of Rome, for the Rape
committed on Lucretia, by the Son of Tarquinius Superbus. But Collatinus being
of the Tarquinian Family, abdicated his Consulship, and retired to Alba, that
all called by the Name of Tarquinius might be banished out of Rome.

COLLEGIUM,
College, A Name given to the Assembly of some Societies and Corporations. The
Romans had Companies of Workmen, Tradesmen and other Callings, formerly called
Colleges, that had their Patrons and Governors. They were Instituted by Muma.

COLLEGIUM
AURIGARIORUM and AURIGARUM, The College of the Coachmen, who in the public
Games of the Circle, disputed with their Adversaries, the Prize proposed to the
best Drivers. They composed Colleges or Societies, that were distinguished one
from another by Colors: Gruter in his Inscriptions mentions four principal
colors, Russatam the red; Prasinam the green; Venetam the blue; Albatam the
white. It Is thought the Ancients would represent by these colors, the four
Seasons of the Year, in which Nature puts on new clothes; each Party
representing a Season by his color: The Green represented the Spring, the Red
the Summer, the Blue the Autumn, and the White the Winter, covered with Ice and
Snow.

COLLEGIUM AUGURUM,
The College of the Augurs: Romulus was the first Institutor of this College,
which was composed of three Men, to whom Servius Tullius added another; and it
continued so till the Year 454, for then, during the Consulship of Q. Apuleius
Pansa and M. Valerius Corvinus, the Tribunes of the People created five Men
more, taken out of the people: And now this College was composed of nine
persons till the time of Sylla, who increased their number to fifteen according
to Florus, or twenty four according to Alexander ab Alex.

COLLEGIUM AESCULAPII and HYGIAE,
The College of Aesculapius and Health, It was a Society or Congregation of 60
persons, who at certain days in the Year met at an appointed place to offer
Sacrifices, in the behalf of those that were willing to implore the help of
Aesculapius and Health, and there they entertained one another.

COLLEGIUM
DENDROPHORORUM, The College of the Dendrophori. This College is often recorded
in the Ancient Inscriptions upon Marble, and yet it is hardly known what sort of
people these Dendrophori were. The Learned are divided upon this point.
Salmasius in his Commentaries upon the life of Caracalla, written by Sparsianus
says, that the Dendrophori were those Men, who in the processions made in the
honor of the Gods, carried Branches of Trees, according to the Aetymology of
the word Dendrophores (...), which signifies, he that carries a Tree; wherefore
the Epithet of Dendrophoros was given to Silvanus, in an ancient Inscription
recorded by Gruter, because this God is commonly represented carrying a Branch
of a Pine Tree, or some other tree.

The title of the Theodosian Codex, concerning the Heathen and their Temples,
seems to favor this opinion in the 20th Law. It Is just, says the Text, that
all the places, that the Dendrophori, and other Heathen Professions have
possessed, and were appointed for the keeping of Feasts and distribution of
Money, be applied to the Revenues of our House, having first banished the Error
that had given birth to them.According to this opinion Dendrophori was not the
name of a Trade, but of Religion or Superstition.

However, the contrary opinion, which most part of the Learned hold, is not
unlikely, for they say that the Dendrophori were Timber-Merchants, who dealt
especially for the use of the War and Engines. Wherefore they were commonly
joined in the same College, with those that had the care of the Engines and
necessary Timber for the Camp, called Fabri, and even with those called
Centonarii, which was a Trade for the War. These Centonarii were joined
together with them, in the 8th Title of the Theodosian Codex, by which the
Emperor Constantine commands, that in all the Towns where the Dendrophori shall
be found, they shall be received into, and reunited to the Corporation of the
Centonarii and Master Builders, called Fabri. It Is true, that from hence we
cannot certainly know what was their Trade. but it seems that it was a Society
of Workmen, who had a near relation with those that supplied the things
necessary for the Camp; wherefore they were created by the Senate, or were
under the direction of a Quindecim-Vir, or one of the Fifteen Men, whose Office
is fully described in another place.

The College of the Centonarii, which was a Military Trade, were those Men who
furnished the Army with Tents, and other train of War, called by the Romans
Centones.

The College of the Masters of the Timber and warlike Engines, called Fabri and
Tignarii, was a Body of Workmen, who furnished the Timber necessary for the
Army both by Sea and Land.

COLLINA PORTA,
the Gate Collina at Rome upon Mount Quirinal, near the Temple of Venus Ericina.

COLONIAE,
Colonies; they were made up of some Inhabitants of Rome, who were sent into
the conquered Towns, built without the City of Rome. These Colonies were called
after the Names of the Emperors that founded them, not only by the general Name
of Caesar or Augustus, for these Titles were common to all the Emperors; but
were also called by their proper Names that distinguished them from their
Ancestors; so the Colony of Patras is called Neroniana, in a Medal that we have
of Nero, on the reverse whereof we read Genio Coloniae Neronianae Patrensis.

COLOPHON.
A Town very famous in Ionia, especially for the ancient Temple of Apollo
Clarianus, which (if we except that of Ephesus) was the most remarkable of all
Ionis, tho it was not quite finished, as Pausanias tells us, in his Achaicks,
but yet very famous for the Oracles that Apollo pronounced there. The Temple
was not built in Colophon itself, but in Claros, a little Town in the Territory
of Colophon. There was also a Mountain and a Wood dedicated to Apollo Clarianus.

COLOSSUS,
A Coloss, a statue of a Prodigious size, and the shape of a Giant. The Coloss
of Rhodes was a statue of Apollo, so high, that Ships past with full Sails
betwixt its Legs. It was the workmanship of Chares, a Disciple of the renowned
Lysippus; he was 12 years about it, and it was overthrown by an Earthquake 56
years after it was erected; they loaded 900 Camels with the Brass this Coloss
was made of. The basis that supported the statue, was of a Triangular Figure,
its extremities were sustained with 60 Pillars of Marble. There was a winding
Staircase to go up to the top of it; from that place one may discover Syria,
and the Ships that went into Egypt, in a great Looking-glass that was hung
about the neck of the statue.

COLUMNA,
Around Pillar to bear up a Building, or adorn it. There are Pillars made of
Wood, Stone, Marble, Brass, Jasper, Lapis Lazuli, etc. There are some wreathed,
channelled, detached, etc. to make them appear bigger, or more agreeable to the
sight. The diversity of these Pillars give the name to the five orders of
Architecture; the Tuscan, Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian and Composite. In the
Temple of Diana of Ephesus, there was 127 Pillars all of a piece, and 60 Foot
high, which had been erected at the charges of so many Kings.

COLUMNA TRAJANI,
The Pillar of Trajan. This Pillar was set up in the middle of a place that the
Emperor Trajan had adorned. It was 128 Foot high; they went up to it by a
Staircase of 185 Steps, and 45 Windows. There were represented round about it
in basso relievo, the noble Acts of that Prince. The Senate set up this Pillar
in honor of Trajan, in the time of the War against the Parthians; and after
his death they brought his Ashes in a Golden Urn from Seleucia, a Town in
Syria, where he dyed, and placed the Urn on the top of the Pillar.

COLUMNA ANTONINI,
The Pillar of Antoninus. This Pillar was in the Field of Mars, and was 176
foot high, with a Staircase of 106 steps, and 56 Windows, and a statue at the
top of it representing Antoninus.

COLUMNA MILLIARIS,
A milliary Pillar; the Ancients made use of this Pillar to mark out the Miles
or the Leagues from one place to another.

COLUMNAE HERCULIS,
The Pillars of Hercules. These Pillars are two Mountains situated at the mouth
of the straight of Gibraltar, one called Calpe, the other Abyla, both opposite
one to another. The fabulous Antiquity thought that Hercules himself had set up
these 2 Pillars to serve for limits of his exploits.

COLUMNA AUGUSTI,
The golden Milliary, a pillar that Augustus set up in Rome, where the Highways
of Italy met.

COMES.
This word Comes signified at first those persons who waited on the Magistrates
in Provinces, as Treasurers, Lieutenants, Secretaries, Provosts, Registers, and
all other inferour Officers, whereof we have many instances, even in the time
of the Commonwealth. In the Emperor's time this word was employed to express
those that were of the Family, or the attendance of the Prince; according to
this signification, the Councillors of State were called COMITES CONSISTORIANI.

COMES ORIENTIS,
The Governor of the East. This Governor had 15 Provinces under his
Government, and the particular Governors gave him an account of their
respective administration, and if any of their had prevarricated, he punished
them according to their misdemeanour.

COMES REI MILITARIS,
He commanded the Soldiers in the Armies, and had an equal authority with the
Captains of the Provinces.

COMES STABULI,
The Great Master of the Horse. He was to take care that the Provinces should
deliver the Horses, that they did owe every year to the Emperor, wherefore
these Horses were called Equi Canonici. This Officer was very much respected in
the Roman Empire, as the Great Constable was formerly in France, or the Master
of the Horse is now in England.

COMES SCHOLARUM.
This Officer was an inspector over all the subaltern Officers of the Emperor:
there were eleven classes of them, that were employed about the Affairs of the
Prince, in the Provinces and the Armies. Each classis had his chief Commander,
who was called Comes or Caput Scholae.

COMES SACRARUM LARGITIONUM,
The Treasurer of the gifts and liberalities or alms of the Prince, which he
distributed among the Soldiers and the people. In the time of the Commonwealth
these Treasurers were called Questors. Some Emperors suppressed them, and some
others restored them again; but Constantine the Great instituted two Treasurers
to manage his Revenues, and both were called Comites.

The fond of this grant or bounty money was raised in the Provinces, and sent
into the Prince's Coffers, called Arcae Largitionum; the collectors established
to collect this money were called Exactores, Canonicarii.

COMES PRIVATARUMRERUM DOMUS DIVINAE,
The Treasurer of the casual forfeitures: He gathered the money that fell to
the Prince by chance, as forfeitures, and other escheats, or goods of mortmain.

COMES DOMESTICORUM EQUITUM and PEDITUM,
A Colonel of the Archers of the Emperors guards, established by the young
Gordian. There were before the Emperor Gordian's time some companies of Guards,
but he raised some more, both horse and foot, for his own guard, to attend
always his person, wherefore they were called Protectores domestici
praesentales. They were in all 3500 chosen and strong men, born in Armenia.
Justinianus added to that number 2000 more, who were called Supernumerarii.
They were commanded by three Officers, the first was Comes, the second Tribunus
Protectorum, and the third Primicerius Protectorum.

COMES PATRIMONIJ,
Treasurer of the Demesne, he received the money for the maintenance of the
Prince.

COMES CASTRENSIS BALATIJ,
The Lord High Steward of the Princes Household. He took care of the Prince's
Table, and commanded all the Officers and waiting Gentlemen of the House,
called in general Mensores, i. e. Mensa Regis Servientes; he commanded also the
Lampadorij, i. e. those that looked after and carried the Lamps, etc.

COMITIA.
Assemblies of people, which were threefold; for either they were made up by
Wards or Curiae, and then were called Comitia Curiata, or by Tribes Comitia
Tributa, or by hundreds, Comitia Centuriata, according to the division of the
Roman people. In the first Assembly, where they choose the inferior
Magistrates, no man was allowed to vote but the Citizens of Rome. In the two
other Assemblies, not only the Citizens of Rome had a right to vote, but also
the Inhabitants of the Colonies and Municipal Towns. In these great Assemblies
they chose the great Magistrates, and took into consideration the most
important affairs of the Commonwealth. Vide infra Centuriata, Curiata, and
Tributa.

COMITIUM,
The place where the Assemblies met at Rome. It was one side of the Forum
Romanum, or the place of Rome. This place was covered, and there was a kind of
Scaffold or High and spacious Theater called the place for Orations, adorned
with Bows, or four Decks of Ships taken from the Antiates, in the first
memorable Sea Fight the Romans were engaged in. From this place they
administered Justice, made Speeches, proposed Laws to the people, and generally
made all their deliberations with them. There they did choose also most part of
their Magistrates, wherefore the Candidates when they came to this place, used
to lay aside all their grandeur, and showed themselves familiar with all sorts
of people, caressing and entreating some of them, bribing the others, and
making their best to get a vote, being accompanied in these occasions by such
of their friends and relations who had the greatest interest.

COMMODUS.
See after the following article.

COMOEDIA,
a Comedy, a Play composed with art, either in prose or verses, to represent
some humane action, agreeable and not cruel. The Comedy was first acted in some
Villages, as it appears by the word (...), and Susarion was the first Author of
it, as Thespis of the Tragedy, according to Suidas, Polydorus Virgil and
Ludovicus Vives affirm that the Romans had their Comedy from the Greeks. The
first representation of Comedy at Rome was under the Consulship of Caius
Sulpitius Peticus, and Caius Licinius Stolon, 390 years since the foundation of
Rome, and 364 before the coming of our Savior. They were acted for the first
time in the Island of the River Tiber, and afterward upon Stages, Messala and
Cassius, one of Caesar's Murderers, being then Censors; as it is related by
Valerius Maximus Appianus, and St Austin, l. 1. de civitate Dei.

Aristophanes has excelled in Comedies; in that which is entitled Plutus, he
tells us, that that God, having at first a clear sight, did look only upon just
men, but that Jupiter having blinded him, Riches since that time are
indifferently shared among good and bad men. It was some time after attempted
to recover his sight, but Penia, which is poverty itself, opposed it, showing
that Poverty being the Mistress of Arts, Sciences and Virtues, they would be in
danger of being lost if all men were rich. They would not hearken to her
wholesome advice, Plutus recovered his sight in the Temple of Aesculapius, and
from that time the Temples and the Altars of the Gods, even of Jove himself,
were forsaken, all men sacrificing to the only Plutus.

The ancient Comedy was a Satyr, to banish vice, and countenance virtue.

When Horace says that Comedy should be kept within the bounds of Laws, lege
regi, he does not say that it should be suppressed.

Donatus assures us, in his Book concerning Comedy, that ancient Poets did not
bring in Fictions as the Modern have done since, but represented the dealings
of men, not sparing even the names of persons.

COMMODUS,
Son to Marcus Aurelius, a Roman Emperor. The Inclinations of his mind were
worse than the Shape of his Body; for he had nothing of his Fathers good
nature, tho his Face had something of his features. His cruelties and
debaucheries, so opposite to the clemency, sobriety and wisdom of Marcus
Aurelius, persuaded the people that he was not his legitimate Son, ad that his
Mother had got him by a Gladiator, whom she loved: and really he pretended to
be a skilful Gladiator himself, a good Coachman, and a good Player. Some
Authors give this description of him, that he had a wild look, sparkling eyes,
and an ill composed discourse, like a Drunkard, whose actions he was imitating.
Marcus Aurelius took notice of his ill nature, and used all his endeavors to
correct it, having provided the best Masters for him, but nature prevailed upon
education. He took after Fanstina his Mother's debaucheries, and as soon as his
Father was dead, he removed all the good men about him, because their presence
and care were troublesome to him, and a bridle to his loose way of living. His
vanity was brought to such an excess, that he would be called the young
Jupiter, and the Roman Hercules, affecting with an unparallelled Foppery to
dress himself in a Lions Skin, and to wear a massy Club like Hercules. At last
Commodus became so incommodious to all Mankind, that he was killed by his own
Servants, they not being able to bear any longer his extravagancies. The Senate
and the people did express an extraordinary joy for the same, seeing themselves
delivered from a Monster, and an enemy to all men.

During his life, they flattered him with a thousand Encomiums, so far, that
they called his Reign the Golden Age, and bestowed upon him the Epither of
Hercules, calling him the invincible and the Peacemaker of Mankind. There
remains still a Medal of this ambitious Prince stamped at Nicca, with these
words written in the Ring thereof. (...), i. e. All the world was happy under
the Empire of Commodus.

We have besides on the reverse of a Golden Medal, and of another great one of
Brass, both stamped for the same Emperor, these words, PROVIDENTIAE AUG. with
two standing Figures, one representing Commodus like Hercules (for he affected
to be dressed in a Lions Skin, and called Hercules Commodianus, and to have
Sacrifices offered unto himself as if he had been a God) his right Foot upon
the fore Deck of a Ship, in remembrance of some exploit he had performed at
Sea; the other Figure represents a Woman, whose head is dressed in an Elephants
Skin, with a Serpent at her Feet, which was the ordinary emblem, the Romans
used to represent Africa abundant in Elephants. She presents Commodus with a
handful of Ears of Corn, to show the vigilance of that Prince in sending to
Africa and Egypt for the Corn that Italy and the whole Empire might stand in
need of. Wherefore Lampridius says in the life of Commodus, that he fitted out
a Fleet every year for Africa, that in case the Corn of Alexandria fell short,
they might be supplied from Africa. Before the Reign of Commodus, they sent out
of Italy to fetch Corn from Africa, but there was neither a Company of Corn
Merchants settled, nor a Fleet appointed for that purpose, as there has been
one for Alexandria ever since the time of Augustus.

There was also Gold, Silver and Brass stamped by the order of Commodus, whereon
his Head is represented covered with a Lions skin, and on the reverse appear a
Bow and Arrows, and a Quiver, with this motto HERCULI ROMANO AUGUSTO.

He designed to change the name of the City of Rome, and have her called after
his name Commodiana, and therefore in his Letters he took the following titles,
Imperator Caesar Lucius Aelius Aurelius Commodus Augustus, Pius, Felix,
Sarmaticus, Germanicus, Maximus, Britannicus, Paccator orbis terrarum,
Invictus, Romanus Hercules, Pontifex Maximus, Tribunitiae potestati XVIII.
Imperator VIII. Consul VII. Pater Patriae; Consulibus, Praetoribus, Tribunis
Plebis Senatuique Cummodiano felici salutem.

COMPITALIA.
The Feasts instituted by Servius, which were commonly kept in January, the day
before the Ides (which is the twelfth day of the month) and in May the sixth
day before the Nones (which is the second day according to the old Roman
Calendar.) This word Compitalia, comes a compitis, for at such days in all the
cross ways both of the Town and Country they offered Sacrifices to the Gods
Lares, which were certain Demons, or Domestic Gods, protectors or keepers of
the families. Macrobius tells us in his Saturnalia, that they Sacrificed
formerly young children to these Lares and Mania their mother, for the
conservation of the whole family. But Brutus, having expelled the Kings out of
Rome, interpreted otherwise this Oracle of Apollo, ordering that instead of the
heads demanded by the Oracle, they should take Poppy's heads, and in this sense
he would have the Oracle to be interpreted. And the same Author tells us, that
instead of children, that were before immolated to these Gods, they made
effigies of men and women with straw, which they did offer in Sacrifice, with
some round woollen balls, for so many slaves as there was in the family: as
Festus reports, Quibus tot pilae, quot capita servorum; tot effgies, quot
essent liberi, ponebantur, ut vivis parterent, and essent his pilis and
simulacris contenti; they offered them as many Balls as there was Slaves, and
as many Effigies as there were free Persons in the Families, that they might
not hurt the Living, and be contented with these Offerings.

Dionysius Halicarnasseus tells us in his Antiquities, that this Feast was
celebrated after the Saturnalia, viz. at the beginning of January, and that it
was proclaimed in these words, Die nono post Kalend. Jan. Quiritibus Compitalia
erunt. This Peast was kept by the Slaves, according to the Institution of
Servins, in remembrance of his Fortune, that being born a Slave, yet he became
King of the Romans. And Tully says, in the 7th Book of his Epistles to Atticus,
that he would not go into the House of Albus, lest he should be troublesome to
his Slaves, who were about Solemnizing the Compitalia, Ego quoniam
Compitalitius dies est, nolo eo die in Albanum venire molestus Familiae.

COMUS,
the God of rejoicing and feasting, and President at Dances and Debaucheries.
Philostratus in the third Book of his Pictures, represents him young and fair,
with a red face by too much drinking, a lighted Flamboy in his hand, which he
holds down to the very ground, and seems to burn his Legs with it. He is
crowned with Garlands of Flowers, among Feastings and Pleasures.

CONCORDIA,
Concord; a Divinity much respected among the Romans. Tiberius dedicated her a
Temple in Rome, which he built by order of Livia his Mother. On the Coin or the
Medals of the Emperors, there is the figure of Concord, holding up a Cup with
one hand, and the Cornucopia, or Horn of Plenty with the other, to show that
plenty of all things attends a State, where the People live in good
correspondency and concord. She is also represented by two Images holding one
another by the right hand. On the Medals of Marc-Anthony, we see Concord under
the Emblem of two Serpents tied below, and raising up in the figure of a Bow,
to compass an Altar, on which lies the head of Augustus, to represent the
concord of the Triumvire. On the Medals of Caesar Augustus, Concord holds with
one hand the Horn of Plenty, and with the other she presents some Fruits to
Lepidus, Anthony, and young Caesar Trium-vits, with this Motto, Salus Generls
Humani. The Crow was particularly consecrated to Concord, as Aelianus relates,
for he tells us, that it was the custom among the ancient Romans, when they
married to call upon the Crow; that is to say, the Concord that should be
between married People. Policianus in his Miscellaneous Works confirms this
opinion, and tell us, that he has a Medal of the young Faustina, Marcus
Aurelius's Daughter, on the reverse whereof was represented a Crow, the Symbol
of Concord, with the word Concordia.

CONFARREATIO,
the Ceremony of the Confarreation was observed in certain Marriages, by eating
together a Cake of Wheat. Tacitus tells us, It was the custom to Name three
Persons of a Patrician Family, whose Fathers had observed in their Marriages
the ceremony of the Confarreation, but that cannot be practiced now, because
this Ceremony was neglected, or is too hard to be practiced, or rather out of
the little care they took of things belonging to Religion, or in fine, because
Priests and their Wives had a right to be emancipated from the Paternal
Authority, in consequence of that Dignity.

CONGIARIUM,
a certain Sum of Money, which the Roman Emperors distributed from time to time
among the People, and this Liberality was called among the Latins Congiarium;
but the largesses that the Emperors bestowed among the Soldiers were called
Donativum. Tacitus speaking of young Caesar tells us, that he gave the
Congiarium to the People, and the Donativum to the Soldiers, Congiarium populo,
Donativum Militibus dedit. During his Reign he bestowed often this Liberality
upon the People, and gave them thirty little Sesterces to each of them,
sometimes 40, and sometimes 150, as it is recorded by Suetonius. Children were
not excluded of this Liberality in the Reign of Augustus, though before that
time, Children that were not above twelve Years old, had no share in it.

CONGIUS,
a kind of Measure containing six Sextaries, the Sextary two Hemines, and the
Hemine nine Ounces, and was about our Gallon.

CONISTERIUM,
(...) in Greek signifies Dust. There was some dust kept in this place for the
Wrestlers, who were used to spread some upon one another, that they might take
a better hold upon the anointed Bodies of their fellow-wrestlers.

CONSECRATIO,
a Consecration of the Roman Emperors by the Senate and the People after the
Emperor was dead. These are the Ceremonies observed at this Consecration or
Deification, as they are related by Herodianus.

The Emperor being dead, the whole City sad and mornful was complaining of her
loss. They set a waxen Statue of the Emperor upon a Bed of State, at the entry
of the Imperial Palace; The Senators were at the left hand dressed in Mourning
Clothes, and on the Right stood the Roman Ladies dressed in white Clothes,
keeping all a sad and mournful silence for seven Day together. During that
time, the Physicians came from time to time to feel the Pulse of the Patient,
saying that his Illness was worse and worse. The seventh day being expired,
they published his Death, and all things being prepared for his Obsequies, the
chief among the Knights and Senators carried the Bed upon their shoulders along
the Holy Street, as far as the Old Marketplace, (where Magistrates used to
resign their Offices) attended with mournful Songs, and the noise of
Instruments. Afterward they carried him out of the Town into the Field of
Mars, where was a Funeral Pile, dressed and prepared with sweet Perfumes. The
outside of the Funeral Pile was adorned with Joiners Work, and rich Stuffs
embroidered with Gold, with Ivory Statues and several Pictures. This sumptuous
Monument was divided in three Stories, and the Corpse was laid in the middle
one; then they began the Horse-Race, and the Fights of the Gladiators in Honor
of the Dead. And after the Games were over, the Successor to the Empire,
holding in his Hand a burning Torch, set the Funeral Pile on fire, and
immediately after an Eagle was seen flying up from the top of it, in the middle
of the Fire and Smoke; This Eagle carried away the Soul of the Dead into the
company of the Immortal Gods (as they thought) and then presently they
worshipped him, erected Altars to his Honor, and ordained Priests and
Sacrifices for him at Rome, and the other Cities of the Empire. Seneca makes a
pleasant Jest upon the Apotheosis or Deification of Claudius, which deserves to
be the Readers curiosity.

CONSECRATIO
PONTIFICUM, The consecration of the Roman Pontiffs. Prudentius relates in what
manner the highest Priest was consecrated among the Pagans. They let him down
into a hole, dressed in his Priestly habit, and covered the hole with a plank
bored through in many places; then the Victimarius, or the Butcher-priest, and
the other Ministers attending the Sacrifices, brought upon the plank a Bull
adorned with Garlands of Flowers, and having thrust the Knife into his Throat,
his blood was shed, poured upon the plank, and dropped down through the holes of
it upon the Pontiff, who did rub his Eyes, Nose, Ears, and his Tongue itself
with it. After this ceremony, they took him out of the hole allover bloody, and
saluted him with these words, Salve Pontifex Maxim^; and having changed his
clothes, conducted him to his House, where was a great Feast ready for them,
the description whereof we have from Macrob.

Summus Sacerdos nempe sub terram scrobe
Acta in profundum consecrandus mergitur,
Mire insulatus festa vittis tempora
Nectens, corona tum repexus aurea
Cin^tu Gabinio Serica fultus toga:
Ta^ulis superne strata texunt pulpita,
Rimosa rari p^gmatis compagibus,
Scin^^^t subin^e vel terebrant aream,
Crebroque lignum perforant acum^^^,
Pateat minutis ut frequens hiatibut:
Huc taurus ingens front torva and bispidi
Sertis revinctus aut per armos floreis,
Aut impeditus cornibus, deducitur:
Hic ut statuta est immolanda bellua,
Pictus sacrato dividunt venabulo,
Eructat amplum vulnus undam sanguinis
Ferventis, inque texta pontis subditi
Fundit vaporum flumen and late aestuat.
Tam per frequentes mill rimarum vias
Illapsus imber tabidum rorem pluit,
Defossius intus quem sacerdos excipit
Guttas ad omnes, sturpe subjectans caput,
Et vest and omni putrefactus corpore:
Qui nos supinat, obvias offert genas,
Supponit aures, labra, nares objicit,
Oculos and ipsos proluit liquoribus,
Nec jam palato parcit, and linguam rigat;
Postquam cadaver sanguine egesto rigens
Compage ab illa Flamines retraxerint,
Procedit inde Pontifex visu horridus,
Ostentat udum verticem, barbam gravem,
Omnes salutant atque adorant emi^us.
CONSENTES DIJ.
They were Gods which the Heathens thought Members of the Councils of the Gods,
and principally of Jupiter, St August lib. 4. de civit. Dei. cap. 23.

CONSTANTINUS,
surnamed MAGNUS. Constantine the Great, Son to Constantius and Helena. He
defeated Maxentius the Tyrant with the standard of the cross, the sign whereof
appeared to him in the air, with these words written upon it, (...), in hoc
vince. He was instructed in the Christian Religion, and baptized by Silvester
Bishop of Rome. He gave liberty to the Christians, built many Churches, and
endowed them very richly. He gave to Pope Silvester and his Successors the City
of Rome to be their own, with all the Imperial Badges, after he had transferred
the Seat of the Empire to Constantinople, called the New Rome He died in the
sixty sixth year of his Age, and the 31st of his Reign.

CONSUALIA.
Feasts instituted by Romulus, according to Livy, when he stole the Sabine
Virgins; for he had found an Altar under ground, says Plutarch, dedicated to
God Consus, or the God of Counsel; and this Altar was always kept covered till
the Feast of Consualia, when they had Horse-races in Neptune's Honor.

CONSUL,
a Sovereign Roman Magistrate, that was created upon this occasion. Lucretia,
Collatinus his wife, having been ravished in a country house by the son of
Tarquinius Superbus in the absence of her husband, came to Rome, and cast
herself at the feet of Spurius Lucretius her father, and entreated him to call
his friends, before whom she plainly related how she had been abused by the son
of Tarquinius: and withal told them, It Is for you to revenge your honor, for
mine shall be washed preseutly with my own blood, which I will shed pure to the
Gods. After she had spoken these words, she thrust a Dagger into her breast,
and expired in the presence of the whole assembly. This tragic death
exasperated the people, and encouraged them to attempt the recovery of their
liberty, and to shake off the Royal Authority. Wherefore they established a
kind of Government mixed of Aristocracy and Democracy: the people chose every
year two Magistrates, whom they called Consuls, because they took care of their
Country, and gave counsel to their Countrymen. They entered upon this public
office the thirteenth day of December. Their garments were enriched with
Purple, like those of the Kings: and were attended like them with Lictors or
Sergeants, who carried bundles of Rods or Axes; they owned no Superiors but
the Gods and the Laws; but when the time of their Magistracy was expired, they
were liable to be impeached before the people, and to give an account of their
administration. The Senate was the Council of Consuls, and judged of all sorts
of affairs, but without prejudice to the right of appealing to the people.

The first Authors of the Roman Liberty, viz. Lucius Junius Brutus, and Lucius
Tarquinius Collatinus, were created Consuls in the year of the creation of the
world 3545, Julian Period 4205, before the birth of our Savior 509, and from
the foundation of Rome 244. Tarquinius Collatinus was put out of his Office
before the year of his Consulship was expired, Brutus forced him to leave it
off, because he was of the Tarquinian Family, and Publius Valerius was chosen
in his room to fulfill his time.

The Consuls were chosen every year in the Field of Mars, by the Roman people
assembled by hundreds. In the first times of the Commonwealth, no man could
pretend to this dignity, but such as were of the Patrician Family, viz.
Noblemen; but afterward the people obtained that one of the Consuls should be
taken out from among them, and Sextius was the first Consul chosen out of the
people, notwithstanding the opposition of the Nobility, as it is related by
Livy. Comitia Consulum adversa nobilitate habita, quibus L. Sextius de plebe
primus Consul factus est, in the year 388. Plinius Junii tells us, that Licmins
Stolo who had been Tribune with Sextius, was the first Consul taken out of the
people; but all other Authors are of a contrary opinion.

This Magistrate wore a Gown edged with purple; he had the privilege of
sitting upon the Sella Curulis, or a chair of State made of Ivory, carrying in
his hand a Royal Staff of Ivory, called Scipio Eberneus, with an Eagle at the
top of it, as a Badge of his dignity and power. Twelve Mace-bearers went before
him for a months time, (for the Consuls had agreed among themselves, that the
Twelve Mace-bearers should go only before one of them, lest they should fright
the people) which time being expired, there should be then but a Sergeant
walking before him, and the Mace-bearers should follow him, carrying neither
bundles of Rods nor Axes, as Suetonius relates, Antiquum retulit morem, ut quo
mense fasces non haberent, Accensus ante cum iret, lictores pone sequerentur.
Which was only practiced when the Consuls were both at Rome: for in the
Provinces each of them kept the badges of his Power.

A Consul was commonly chosen, at Forty three Years of Age, which was called
Tompus legitimum; but this was not always observed, for Valerius Corvinus was
but three and twenty Years old when he was chosen; Scipio Africanus was chosen
at four and twenty, as also Marius, Pompey and Augustus, all before they were
forty three Years old.

Besides, it was requisite he should have exercised other Offices, as that of
Quaestor, Aedilis, and Praetor, which was no better observed than the first
required condition, for Pompey had never had been a Quaestor nor Praetor, when
he obtained the Consulship.

Their Authority and Power was of a very great extent, so long as the
Commonwealth subsided; as it appears by these words of the Law of the twelve
Tables, REGIO IMPERIO DUO SUNTO: IIQUE PRAEEUNDO, JUDIC ANDO, CONSULENDO,
PRAETORES, JUDICES, CONSULES APPELLANTOR: MILITIAE SUMMUM JUS HABENTO: NIMINI
PARENTO. This gives them a Royal Power, as Tully calls it in the third Book of
the Laws; viz. a supreme Authority above all the other Magistrates; fastigium
dignitatum, says Livy, and the same Author calls also their Power Immoderata
and Infinita potestas, an infinite and unlimited Power.

But this authority was much lessened under the Emperors, who took upon
themselves the whole Sovereign Power, leaving only to the Consuls the badges of
their dignity, and the power of calling the Senate, and administering justice to
private men.

In the last times of the Commonwealth, and under the Emperors, they entered
upon their Magistracy the first day of January, beginning with it the year,
which was called after their name. The Senate in a Body, and the people, came
very early to their Houses to wa^^^^ them, then accompanied them to the
Capitol. Spartianus calls that ceremony Officium novorum Consulum, and
Auspiciis interesse, because being arrived at the Capitol, they took the
Augure, and each of them sacrificed an Ox to Jupiter, Consulibus, quo die
Magistratus iniere, immolantibus singulis Jovi bovem, ut solet. The Sacrifice
being over, they came down to the Senate with the same attendance, where, in
the time of the Emperors, they gave thanks to the Emperor, and took the Oath of
Allegiance; and few days after thanked the people from the place appointed for
public Speeches. This ceremony ended with a largess of Money or Provisions,
which they bestowed upon the people, and sent some presents to their Friends,
which were called Nunera Consularia, and Sportulas Consulares, says
Cassiodorus. Afterward the Emperors Zeno and Leo, forbad these liberalities,
and instead of it, ordered they should pay a certain sum for the repairing of
the Aqueducts. They used also to entertain the people with Shows, Fights of
Gladiators, Wild Beasts, and other Spectacles, of which the Romans were fond
almost to folly.

After they had drawn Lots about the Provinces where they should govern, or
that the Senate and the people had appointed them without drawing Lots, (which
was sometimes practiced) they went to the Capitol to make their vows and
prayers, nuncupabat vota, for the prosperity of the Armies of the
Commonwealth, then went out by the Gate through which they were to repair to
their respective Provinces, having put on their Armor, and attended by their
Mace-bearers, and other Officers likewise with their Armoury on. At their going
away, the Commonwealth furnished them with all things necessary for their
Journey, Houshold-goods, Furnitures, Cooks, etc. Augustus paid them a Sum of
Money, to furnish themselves with all these things. They were not allowed to
leave their Province, nor the command of the Armies, without an express order
from the Senate, neither before their Successors were arrived there. At their
return they made a Speech to the people, which ended by a protestation that
they had done nothing, neither against the Laws nor the good of the
Commonwealth in all the time of their administration. Itaque abiturus
Consulatu, jurasti te nibil contra leges fecisse, says the younger Pliny to
Emperor Trajan.

CONSULATUS,
The Consulship, the office or dignity of a Consul. During the time of the
Commonwealth, the Consulship was annual, except in case of death or some
misdemeanour of the Consul; for Quintius Cincinnatus being Dictator, forced
Lucius Mi^^tius then Consul, to quit his office, becausebe did not prevent the
Enemies from besieging him in his Camp.

He who succeeded the deposed Consul, continued no longer in it, than the time
his Predecessor was to enjoy it; and sometimes there was none chosen to fill up
his place; for when Cinna was killed, Carbo his Colleague served out his time;
as also Sextus Caesar in the room of Rutilius his Colleague, killed in the War
of the Confederates.

Under the Reign of the Emperors the time of the Consulship was not fixed, it
lasted often but two or three months, and sometimes longer. Dion tells us, that
Julius Caesar made this alteration in the year DCCVIII. of the foundation of
Rome: for having quitted his Consulship before his year was out, to finish what
remained of it, he created Q. Fabius and C. Trebonius: and the first of them
being dead the last day of his Consulship, he put in his room Caninius, for the
remainder of that day: and this gave occasion to Tully, to say of him in a
joking way, that he had shown so great a vigilance in his Consulship, that he
never slept all the while he was Consul.

Augustus followed the example of his Predecessor, that he might gratify many
people, as Suetonius says in his life; for of his six Consulships, some lasted
nine months, some six, some others four or three months. Tiberius and Claudius
shortened yet this time, and the Emperor Commodus made five and twenty Consuls
in one year.

Yet, to keep something of the ancient custom, they chose always a Consul at
the Calends of January, and the year was called after his name. He was called
Consul ordinarius, the others were called Suffecti. This explains us what
Suetonius says in the life of Domitianus, In sex Consulattbus unum ordinarium
tantum gessit; and what Symmachus says, Delatus est a clementissimis
Principibus ordinarius consulatus, he was made Consul the first of January.

Constantine the Great restored the ancient custom, and ordered that the
Consulship should be for a whole year, making yet some titular Consuls, as
Julius Caesar had done, according to Suetonius.

Cassiodorus relates a formular made use of by the Emperors in conferring the
dignity of a Consul, which may be seen lib. 6. Ep. 21.

A Catalogue of the Roman Consuls. And an Abridgment of all the memorable
deeds, that were transacted during their respective Consulate.
THe Romans having driven away Terquinius Superbus, resolved never to suffer
any more the Government of Kings, and established a kind of Government mixed of
Aristocracy and Democracy; the people chose every year two Sovereign
Magistrates, called Consuls, because they bestowed their Counsels and care upon
their Country. Their authority was equal, and had no other limits, but the
time. They were clothed with purple like Kings, and had Sergeants as well as
they, or Mace-bearers, carrying bundles of Rods with an Ax bound up in the
midst of them, owning no Superiors but the Gods and the Laws. The Senate was
the Council of the Consuls, and judged of all sorts of affairs; but there was
appeal from them to the people. They had also other Judges and inferior
Magistrates, of whom we shall speak in the sequel of this Book. This change
happened in the year of the creation of the world 3545. of the foundation of
Rome 244. and before the birth of our Savior 509.

The first Consuls were the Authors of the public liberty, viz. LUCIUS JUNIUS
BRUTUS, and LUCIUS TARQUINIUS COLLATINUS; This last was not only forced to quit
his Consulship, but also to go out of Rome, because his name was the same with
that of the banished Tarquinius, and PUBLIUS VALERIUS was chosen Consul in his
room, to make an end of the year.

Brutus having called the people together, and caused them to take an Oath,
that they should never submit themselves to the Royal Authority; afterward he
increased the Senate with three hundred new Senators, and was killed at the
head of the Horse, fighting against Aruns Tarquinius his Son. The Ladies
mourned a whole year for him, because they looked upon him as the Revenger of
violated chastity in the person of Lucretia. Valerius chose for his colleague
in the room of Brutus, either Titus Lucretius, as Livy says, or Spurius
Lucretius Tricipitinus Father to Lucretia.

Anno Mundi 3547. Romae 246. M. HORATIUS PULVILLUS, P. VALERIUS. Horatius
dedicated the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, which Tarquinius had built: he
signalized his courage at the Siege that Porsenna King of Tuscany had laid
before Rome; who having seized upon Janiculum Castle attacked the Sublician
Bridge which had a communication with the Town, and had almost got possession
of it, but Horatius alone made head against the Enemies at the entry of the
Bridge, whilst his own men were cutting it down behind him, and then threw
himself down into the Tiber, and got safe into the Town, having received no
wounds in the very midst of the Darts his Enemies flung at him.

A. M. 3548. R. 247. M. VALOR VOLUSIUS, PUBLIUS POSTHUMOUS TUBERTUS. The
Calendars of the Capitol record two Consuls after these; viz. Spur. Largius
Flavus or Ruus, and T. Herennius Aquilinus: and instead of Marcus, the Roman
Calendars record T. Valerius; Cassiodorus, P. Valerius. Plutarch agrees with
Livy, and adds the Surname of Tubertus to that of Posthumous, which Livy does
not mention. These two Consuls got two great Victories over the Sabines, for
which they obtained the Honor of publiek Triumph.

A. M. 3550. R. 249. Publius Valerius, Publicola, Titus Lucretius Plutarch
records this Consulship as the fourth of Valerius, and Dionysius Halicarnasseus
puts M. Horatius in the room of Iucretius. During this Consulship, Appius
Clausus a Sabine, who was afterward named Claudius, came to shelter himself at
Rome, with those of his Party to the number of five thousand: He was received
in the Senate, where he took a place as Senator, and the freedom of Citizens
was bestowed upon the other Men that came along with him, with two Acres of
Ground to each of them, upon the Banks of Anio.

A. M. 3551. R. 250. MENENIUS AGRIPPA LANATUS, PUBLIUS POSTHUMOUS TUBERTUS.
Valerius Publicola died in the beginning of the following Year, crowned with
Glory and Blessings; the Roman Ladies mourned for him as they did for the death
of Brutus. The Sabines made an Irruption into the Roman Territories, Posthumous
the Consul made head against them; but they forced him to retire to a
disadvantageous place, where they besieged him; yet Agrippa's Colleague got him
off, and vanquished the Sabines. The great Triumph was decreed to Agrippa, and
the lesser called Ovatio to Posthamius.

A. M. 3552. R. 251. VIRGINIUS OPITER TRICOSTUS, SPUR. CASSIUS VICELLINUS.
These Consuls defeated the Aruntians, and cut off the Head of all their
Generals, after they had led them in Triumph. The Lands of the Aruntians were
distributed to the People, to punish them for the plunder they had committed in
the Roman Country.

A. M. 3553. R. 252. POSTHUMOUS CAMINUS ARUNCUS, T. LAERTIUS. Cassiodorus
reckons two Years less; but this supputation agrees with Eutropius. Upon the
rumor that Manilius, Tarquiniu's Son-in-law, was making a powerful League
against the Romans to restore Tarquinius, the Senate reunited the authority of
the Consuls, in the person of one Magistrate whom they created, and called him
Dictator. He had power of life and death over the Romans, and had four and
twenty Lictors walking before him. The first that was honored with this
Office, was T. Largius.

A. M. 3554. R. 253. SERVIUS SULPITIUS, M. TULLUS or TULLIUS LONGUS. There was
nothing considerable done this year, during which all things were quiet.

A. M. 3555. R. 254. T. AEBUTIUS HELLUA, C. or L. or P. VETURIUS GEMINUS. The
Consuls besieged Fidenas, and proclaimed war against the Latins, who had sided
with all the Enemies of Rome.

A. M. 3556. R. 255. CLELIUS SICULUS, T. or LAERTIUS FLAVUS. The Latins having
made a Confederacy with the people called Volcae, the Romans made Aulus
Posthumous Dictator, to resist them. The Armies did encounter near Lake
Regillus, where there was a bloody and obstinate Fight, and it was reported
that Castor and Pollux had fought for the Ro-mans under the shape of two young
Horsemen, and that they had themselves brought to Rome the news of the Victory
obtained by the Romans. The Senate ordered the honor of Triumph to the
Dictator.

A. M. 3557. R. 256. AULUS SEMPRONIUS ATTRATINUS, M. MINUTIUS AUGURINUS. They
dedicated the Temple of Saturn, and instituted the Feasts called Saturnalia for
the 17th day of December. Tarquinius and Manilius engaged seventeen
Commonalties of the Latins against Rome.

A. M. 3558. R. 257. AULUS POSTHUMOUS ALBUS REGILLENSIS, T. VIRGINIUS
TRICOSTUS. A War was proclaimed against the Volcae.

A. M. 3559. R. 258. APPIUS CLAUDIUS SABICUS, M. or P. SERVILIUS PRISNUS. This
Year was very fortunate to the Commonwealth. The Latins, weakened by many
frequent losses, banished out of their Country Tarquinius Superbus, being then
fourscore and ten years old, as being the author of their Misfortunes. This
unfortunate Prince retired to Cumae at the Court of Aristodemus, where he died
few days after. All the Roman people were reduced to thirty one Tribes. The
Sabines renewed the War. The Senate created a Dictator to maintain it, viz.
Aulus Posthumous. A Company of Merchants was settled at Rome, and the Temple of
Mercurius their Patron was dedicated. The Honor of this Dedication was
contested by the two Consuls, the Senate to bring them to an Agreement,
appointed the People to decide their Quarrel, who bestowed that honor upon M.
Lectorius a private ancient Centurion.

A. M. 3560. R. 259. AUL. or C. VIRGINIUS COELIMONTANUS, T. VETUSIUS or
VETURIUS GEMINUS. The Sedition raised by the indebted persons was renewed, and
became so strong, that a Dictator was created to quell it. Upon the rumor of
this domestic disorder, the Sabini, the Aequi, and the Volcae confederated
themselves, and took the Field; and as the Consuls would raise Forces to march
against their Enemies, the People refused to list themselves, and retired in a
body upon the Mounts Esquilinus and Aventinus. The Soldiers likewise refused to
take the Oath: Upon this the Senate was forced to create M. Valerius Dictator,
Publicola his Brother, who pacified all things, being extremely loved by the
People and Soldiers; he raised ten complete Legions, which was the greatest
Army that ever Rome had on foot, and defeated the Volcae.

A. M. 3561. R. 260. SPURIUS CASSIUS VICELLINUS, POSTHUMOUS CAMINUS ARUNCUS.
The people in a mutiny against the Senate, went out of Rome, and encamped in a
tumultuous manner upon the sacred Mountain, four Miles from Rome: Menenius
Agrippa, a very eloquent man, went to the sacred Mountain, where he represented
to the people, that the whole Commonwealth was but one Body, whereof the Senate
was the Head and the Stomach, which alone seemed to swallow down all that the
strength and the skill of the other parts could get, but that it was only in
order to destribute the same to all the rest of the Body, to nourish and
strengthen it; but if the Members should cease to afford the usual aliments,
they would shortly be deprived themselves of strength, heat, and life it self.
The People having hearkened to this just comparison, yielded to the proposals
of agreement that were made to him, whereof the chiefest was, that popular
Magistrates should be created, who were called Tribunes of the People, and that
they should be sacred and inviolable. They had power to oppose themselves to
the deliberation of the Senate, and the orders of the Consuls. Nothing could be
concluded without their consent, which they notified by putting a T below the
order; and on the contrary, when they opposed themselves to it, they did write
this word l'eto. Their power is more fully described under the word Tribunus

A. M. 3562. R. 261. T. GEGANIUS MACERINUS, P. MINUCIUS AUGURINUS. Rome was
afflicted with great Dearth, which grew still more raging by the injustice of
Aristodemus, Tyrant of Cumae, who seized upon the Corn that the Roman
Magistrates had bought in Sicily.

A. M. 3563. R. 262. M. MINUTIUS AUGURINUS, AULUS SEMPRONIUS ATTRATINUS. The
People grumbled at the unequal distribution of the Corn that was brought to
Rome. C. Marsius surnamed Coriolanus from the taking of Corioli, endeavoring
to suppress the murmuring and complaining of the people, was banished out of
Rome. Coriolanus retired into the Country of the Volcae, and made war against
his own Country, which he brought very near to its ruin. He would neither be
persuaded by the Ambassadors that were sent to him, nor hearken to the advice
of the Pontiffs; but only was prevailed with by the Prayers of Veturia his
Mother, and Volumnia his Wife. Wherefore he brought the Volcae again into their
Country; but a while after they put him to death, because he had betrayed them,
in quitting their Conquests, and giving over the sacking of Rome.

A. M. 3564. R. 263. SPUR. NAUTIUS RUTILIUS, SEXTUS FURIUS MEDULLINUS. The
Calendars of the Capitol reckon two Consuls before these, and mention Q. P.
Sulpitius Camerinus, Spurius Largius or Laertius Flavus: C. Julius Julus, and
P. Pinarius Mamertinus, for the years of the World 3565 and 3566.

A. M. 3567. R. 266. T. SICCINIUS ABINUS, C. AQUILIUS TUSCUS. The first Consul
made war against the Volcae, but got no great advantage over them, says Livy,
though Dionysius Halicarnasseus affirms that he thoroughly defeated them; the
Roman Cavalry having fought on foot at the head of the Infantry. Siccinius
obtained the great Triumph, and Aquilius the Ovation for the advantages
obtained over the Heruici.

A. M. 3568. R. 267. SPURIUS CASSIUS VICELLINUS, PROCULUS VIRGINIUS TRICOSTUS.
Cassius proposed the Agrarion-Law, which was the cause of a World of Divisions
at Rome. This Law ordered that all the Lands gained from the Enemies, should be
divided among the People; but it was rejected. The Roman Civil Law mentions two
Agrarian Laws, one made by Julius Caesar, the other by the Emperor Nerva; but
they concern the limits of the Lands, and have no regard to the Divisions
thereof.

A. M. 3569. R. 268. SERGIUS CORNELIUS MALLUGINENSIS or COSSUS, Q. FABIUS
VIBULLANUS. The Quaestors Fabius Caeso and Lucius Valerius sued Cassius, and
impeached him for high Treason; which was proved against him, and he was thrown
headlong from the Tarpeian Rock at the end of his Consulship: Some were for
punishing his Crime even in the persons of his Children, but they could not
carry it; and this moderation passed afterward for a Law at Rome, that the
Crimes of the Fathers should not be punished in the persons of their Children,
till the time of the Wars of Sylla and Marius. The Estate of Cassius was
forfeited, and applied to the setting up a a Statue in the Temple of Ceres.

A. M. 3570. R. 269. CAESO FABIUS, L. AEMILLIUS MAMERCUS. Cassiodorus denotes
by a K. what Livy expresses by a C. Caeso. The Temple of Castor and Pollux was
dedicated, which had been devoted after the Battle on the Lake of Regillus.
Livy tells us, that some Authors before his time, affirmed that this Battle was
fought in the tenth Consulship, though he related it himself in the ninth.

A. M. 3571. R. 270. M. FABIUS VIBULLANUS S. VALERIUS POTITUS VOLUTIUS. The
Vestal Oppia was buried alive, being convicted of Incontinency. The War of the
Volcae, obliged the Consuls to raise Forces, but the Tribunes of the people
opposed them: whereupon by an order of the Senate, the Ivory chair of the
Consuls were carried out of the Town, where they listed Soldiers, confiscating
the Estates of the Citizens who refused to obey. The Tribunes alleged the Laws
agreed upon on the Sacred Mountain, but it was to no purpose, for by the very
same Laws their power had no further extent than the compass of the Walls of
Rome, so that their Veto was of no effect.

A. M. 3572. R. 271. Q. FABIUS VIBULLANUS, C. JULIUS JULUS. The War against the
Volcae was carried on. The Veientes made incursions into the Campania of Rome.

A. M. 3573 R. 272. K. FABIUS VIBULLANUS, SPUR. FURIUS FUSCUS or FUSUS. This
year Xerxes went into Greece, according to what Dionysius Halicarnasseus
relates, but Diorus Siculus reports, that it was under the Consulship of
Spurius Cassius, and Proculus Virginius Tricostus, which was the 24th
Consulship; and according to his supputation the last year of the seventy third
Olympiad.

A. M. 3574. R. 273. M. FABIUS VIBULLANUS, CNEUS MANLIUS CINCINNATUS. The War
of the Volcae, the Veientes, and the Aequi, became more dangerous by the
conjunction of the Tuscans. The Consuls to oppose them joined both their
Armies: they engaged them, and got the victory, but with a considerable loss;
wherefore the Consuls refused the Triumph, that the Senate had ordered them,
being too sensibly moved for the loss the Commonwealth had suffered, to be
desirous of the glory of a Triumph.

A. M. 3575. R. 274 K. FABIUS VIBULLANUS, T. VIRGINIUS TRICOSTUS RUTILUS. This
year the Fabian Family alone made War against the Veientes under the command of
Caeso.

A. M. 3576. R. 275. L. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS, C. or Q. SERVILIUS STRUCTUS AHALA.
The Fabians continued the War against the Veientes, while the Romans were
engaged with the Tuscans.

A. M. 3577. R. 276. C. or M. HORATIUS PULVILLUS, T. MENENIUS LANATUS. The
Veientes having drawn the Fabians into an Ambuscado, gave them such an
overthrow, that of all that numerous Family only a child of fourteen years of
age, Son to M. Fabius, remained alive.

A. M. 3578. R. 277. AULUS VIRGINIUS TRICOSTIUS, SPURIUS RUTILIUS SERVILLIUS
STRUCTUS. The Veientes were driven out of the Janiculum, and by these means the
people of Rome were eased of the want of Provisions, they had suffered by
reason of their troublesome Neighborhood. The Tribunes of the people renewed
their instances to obtain the Agrarian Law. Menenius resisted them, but they
impeached him of Misdemeanour in his Office, where upon he was fined twenty
Crowns, but he was so sensibly concerned at this affront put upon him, that he
died a while after with grief.

A. M. 3579. R. 278. L. or C. NAUTIUS RUTILIUS, P. VALERIUS PUBLICOLA. The
Tribunes, encouraged by the misfortune of Menenius, attempted to impeach
Servilius at the end of his Consulship, but he cleared himself of their
accusation.

A. M. 3580. R. 279. L. FURIUS MEDULLINUS, C. or A. MANLIUS VOLSO. The Veientes
bought a Truce of forty years, and parted upon that account with a great deal
of Gold and Corn. Manlius received the honor of the Ovation. An account of the
people was taken, and Rome had a hundred and three thousand heads of Families

A. M. 3581. R. 280. L. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS, OPITER, VIRGINIUS, or VOPISCUS, or
C. JULIUS JULUS. The Tribunes renewed their accusations against the Patricians,
and Genutius one of them impeached Manlius and Furius, and they had been
condemned, had not the Senate ordered Genutius to be stabbed in the night in
his own house. The people highly resented this assassination, and rose in an
open sedition, and made Volero Tribune in the room of Genutius.

A. M. 3582. R. 281. L. PINARIUS MAMERTINUS, P. FURIUS FUSUS, or MEDULLINUS.
The new Tribune Volero endeavored to procure a Law to be made, for the
election of the Tribunes of the people by the votes of the Tribes, but the
Senate opposed it, with one of the Tribunes, whom they had got on their side so
that the Law did not pass.

A. M. 3583. R. 282. APPIUS CLAUDIUS SABINUS, T. QUINTIUS CAPITOLINUS. The
Tribune Victorius according to Livy, or Lectorius, according to Dionysius
Halycarnasseus, accused Claudius as a most violent man against the Plebeians:
and this accusation obliged the Senate to consent, that the election of the
Tribunes should be made in the assembly of the people by Tribes; but Piso got
three Tribunes to be added to the two former.

A. M. 3584. R. 283. L. or T. VALERIUS POTITUS, T. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS. The
Tribunes accused Appius Clauaius for despising the Roman people, and abetting
the murder of the Tribun: Genutius. Claud. us appeared in the Assembly, where
nothing was determined, and a while after he died of a sickness. His Obsequies
were performed in the usual manner, for persons of his rank; with a Funeral
Speech, in spite of the opposition of the Tribunes.

A. M. 3585. R. 284. T. MINUTIUS PRISCUS, AULUS VIRGINIUS COELIMONTANUS. The
Sabini and the Volcae made an irruption into the Roman Territories, but were
repulsed with loss.

A. M. 3586. R. 285. T. or P. QUINTIUS CAPITOLINUS, Q. SERVILLUS PRISCUS. The
Consuls chased the Sabini and the Volcae, and Quintius took Actium, the Senate
came out to meet him, and ordered him the triumph.

A. M. 3587. R. 286. T. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS, Q. FABIUS VIBULLANUS. The first
obtained this Magistracy, being yet but four and twenty years of age, because
of his rare merit. He gave to the people the Town of Actium with his Territory,
and all his dependencies thereof.

A. M. 3588. R. 287. Q. SERVILIUS PRISCUS, SPUR. POSTHUMOUS ALBUS REGILLENSIS.
The Romans were in peace both in Country and in Town, because of an Epidemical
Disease that raged amongst them.

A. M. 3589. R. 288. Q. FABIUS VIBULLANUS, T. QUINTIUS CAPITOLIN US. The City
was purified, and the Citizens were numbered, who were found to be one hundred
and twenty four thousand two hundred and fourteen heads of Families without the
Orphans, and those that had no Children, who were not numbered.

A. M. 3590. R. 289. AULUS POSTHUMOUS ALBUS, SPURIUS FURIUS MEDULLINUS FUSCUS.
The people called Aequi fought Furius, routed his Army, wounded him, and
obliged him to retire upon a hill with the rest of his Army, where they
besieged him. T. Quintius Capitolinus chosen Pro-consul, came to the assistance
of the Consul, and brought him off, but there was a great slaughter on both
sides.

A. M. 3591. R. 290. L. AEBUTIUS HELLUA, P. SERVILIUS PRISCUS. The plague raged
at Rome, the two Consuls died thereof, with many other persons of note.

A. M. 3592. R. 291, L. LUCRETIUS TRICIPITINUS, T. VETURIUS GEMINUS, or SPURIUS
VETURIUS CRASSUS. The Tribune Tarentillus proposed the famous Law called by the
name of the Author Tarentilla. This Law ordered the creation of five
Magistrates, according to Livy, or ren according to Dionysius Hallicarnasseus,
to moderate the authority of the Consuls; but this Law was rejected, tho it was
very acceptable to the people.

A. M. 3593. R. 292. P. or T. VOLUMINOUS GALLUS SEXTUS, SERVIUS SULPITIUS
CAMERINUS AVENTINUS. Rome was frighted by several prodigies, a Cow spoke, it
rained Flesh, which was seen during some days upon the ground without being
corrupted.

A. M. 3594. R. 293. APPIUS CLAUDIUS SABINUS, L. VALERIUS PUBLICOLA. Four
thousand five hundred slaves got into a Body, and took up Arms against the
Romna people. The Consuls would raise Forces to oppose them, but the Tribunes
kept the people from listing themselves, so that they were forced to have
recourse to the Confederates. The Slaves chose for their General Appius
Ardonius, a Sabine by Birth, and under his command, they seized upon the
Capitol, which they stored with Arms and Provisions. Valerius the Consul came
thither to attack them, but was killed. The Senate sent in his room Lucius
Quintius Cincinnatus, Father to Caeso, who disarmed the slaves, and made a
cruel example of them, by the horror of their punishments.

A. M. 3595. R. 294. C. FABIUS VIBULLANUS, Q. L. CORNELIUS MALUGINENSIS. They
made an end of the tenth account of the people, which began the foregoing year,
and found a million three hundred thirty two thousand four hundred and nineteen
heads of Families.

A. M. 3596. R. 295. L. MINUTIUS AUGURINUS, L. or C. NAUTIUS RUTILIUS. The
people called Aequi forced the Consul Minutius to quit the Field, and besieged
him in his Camp. The Senate in this sad conjuncture, durst not call back the
other Consul Nautius from the Frontiers of the Sabines, wherefore they made
Dictator L. Quintius Cincimatus, whom they took from ploughing in a little
Field, having lost the rest of his Estate by the injustice of the people. He
chose for General of the Horse a brave man, oppressed like himself, called L.
Tarquinius. These two illustrious poor men raised an Army in sixteen days, lead
it against the Enemies, whom they defeated, and brought the vanquished under
the Yoke; they triumphed, and deposed Minutius from his Consulship, and Q.
Fabius, who had got so much glory during his former Consulship, was appointed
in his place.

A. M. 3597. R. 296. Q. or P. MINUTIUS AUGURINUS, M. or C. HORATIUS PULVILLUS.
Ten Tribunes of the people were created instead of five. Livy says, that this
alteration was made two and thirty years after the creation of the first
Tribunes; and Saballicus says six and thirty years.

A. M. 3598. R. 297. L. or M. VALERIUS MAXIMUS, SPURIUS VIRGINIUS,
COELIMONTANUS. A great dearth of Provisions kept the Romans at rest. Dionysius
Halicarnasseus mentions here a Sedition raised at Rome, occasioned by a violent
Plebeian called Icellius, whom a Lictor had used too roughly. The Senate gave
Mount Aventinus to any man that would build there, ('it is a Hill within the
compass of Rome, containing about twelve Furlongs or fifteen hundred paces of
Ground.)

A. M. 3599. R. 298. T. ROMILIUS VATICANUS, C. VETURIUS CICURINUS or CIMINUS.
The Tribunes renewed the Law Tarentilla, but to no purpose.

A. M. 3600. R. 299. SPURIUS TARPEIUS CAPITOLINUS, AULUS ATERINUS FONTINALIS.
Romilius who was Consul the foregoing year, was accused for having commanded to
a dangerous post the Tribune Siccius, and was fined for the same. A Law was
made, giving leave to every Magistrate to impeach the other Magistrates, who
should be convicted of having done any thing, either against the Law or the
Discipline. Three Deputies were sent into Greece, to fetch the Laws of Solon,
and instruct themselves in the Customs of the Republic of Athens, and other
most famous Commonwealths of Greece. These Deputies were Posthumous Albus,
Aulus Manlius, P. or Servius Sulpitius.

A. M. 3601. R. 300. P. CURIATIUS or HORATIUS TERGEMINUS, SEXTUS QUINTILIUS
VARUS or QUINTIUS. The Plague and the Famine raged so much in the Town and in
the Country, that the Consul Quintilius, three Tribunes, an Augure, and the
Priest of Quirinus died of it.

A. M. 3602. R. 301. L. or T. MENENIUS LANATUS, P. SEXTIUS CAPITOLINUS. The
Deputies who were sent to Greece came back again and brought the Laws of Solon.

A. M. 3603. R. 302. APPIUS CLAUDIUS CRASSINUS, T. GENUTIUS AUGURINUS. Livy,
Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Cassiodorus, and Sabellicus make no mention of these
Consuls, they are only recorded in the Calendars of the Capitol. The People
took a distaste of the Consulary Government; whereupon the Senate created ten
Sovereign Magistrates called Decemviri to govern the Commonwealth, and to
examine the Laws of Solon, which were called the Laws of the twelve Tables,
because they were engraven upon twelve Tables of Brass. They were at first
chosen out of the number of Patricians. Appius Claudius President of the
Assembly, got himself to be one of the Decemviri. These new Magistrates
exercised their Magistracy with all sorts of violence and ryranny, during three
years together, says Cassiodorus, or during two years, according to Sabellicus
and Dionysius Halicarnasseus: Whereupon Valerlus and Horatius prevailed upon
the People to agree, that first of all, the Decemviri should quit their Office,
and the Ancient Consulary Government should be restored: which was performed,
and the Mediators of the Peace, were made Consuls.

A. M. 3606. R. 305. L. VALERIUS POTITUS, M. HORATIUS BARBATUS. Appius and
Oppius Decemviri killed themselves, to avoid the shame of their Condemnation;
one for being the cause of the death of Virginia, and the other for having
ordered a Veteran Soldier to be whipped beyond all measure, and without cause.
The other Decemviri banished themselves. The Consul Horatius routed the Sabini.
The Senate would deny him the honor of Triumph out of hatred, but the
triumphed against their will.

A. M. 3607. R. 306. SP. or L. HERMINIUS EXQUILINUS, T. VIRGINIUS COELIMONTANUS
TRICOSTUS. There was nothing considerable done this year against the Enemies;
only the Tribunes grew hot against the Patricians.

A. M. 3608. R. 307. M. GEGANIUS MACERINUS, C. JULIUS JULUS. All things
continued quiet within and without.

A. M. 3609. R. 308. T. QUINTIUS CAPITOLINUS, AGRIPPA FURIUS FUSUS. The Volcae
and the Aequi took opportunity from the civil Divisions of the Romans, to
advance as far as the Esquilinian Gate, destroying all that they met in their
way, but Consul Quintius drove them back to their own Frontiers.

A. M. 3610. R. 309. M. GEGANIUS AUGURINUS, P. CURIATIUS, or C. FURIUS FUSUS,
or C. QUINTIUS, or CURTIUS PHILO. Canuleius Tribune, of the People proposed,
that it might be lawful for the Patricians to Marry into Plebeian Familes, and
that the people might choose the Consuls out of the body of the Senate and their
own. The Senate was forced to pass this Law, but in ambiguous words; for it was
ordered that Marriages should be free, and that the Plebeians should be
admitted to the Military Tribunate, with the same Authority as the Consuls had.

Military Tribunes. With the Authority of Consuls.
ANNO Mun 3611. R. 310. AULUS SEMPRONIUS ATTRATINUS, L. ATTILIUS, T. CECILIUS.
These three Tribunes were Patricians, and kept their Office but three Months,
because the Auspices at their Election were found defective, whereupon they
made an Inter-rex to preside in the Assemblies, in which they created two
Consuls for the remaining part of the Year; viz. Papyrius Mugillanensis, L.
Sempronius Attratinus.

A. M. 3612: R. 311. M. GEGANIUS MACERINUS, T. QUINTIUS CAPITOLINUS. The first
Censors were created this year, who were at first very little reputed, but
afterward became the first Magistrates of Rome. The Consul Geganius assisted
the Ardeates against the Volcae, whom he brought under their yoke, and
Clavilius General of the Volcae followed his triumphal Chariot.

A. M. 3613. R. 312. M. FABIUS VIBULLANUS, POSTHUMOUS OEBUTIUS HELLUA CORNICEN.
A Colony of Romans and Rutili was sent into Ardea, and the Lands that were
conquered in the time of the Consulship of Quintius were restored to the
Ardeates.

A. M. 3614. R. 313. C. FURIUS PACILLUS, L. PAPYRIUS CRASSUS. The Tribune
Petilius proposed the Agrarian Law, but to no purpose.

A. M. 3615. R. 314. PROCULUS GEGANIUS MACERINUS, LUCIUS MENENIUS LANATUS. Rome
was afflicted with Famine, and a very dangerous Sedition was fomented by
Spurius Melius, an ambitious rich Man, who bribed the favor of the People, by
distributing Corn and Money amongst them.

A. M. 3616. R. 315. TITUS QUINTIUS CAPITOLINUS, MENENIUS AGRIPPA LANATUS. The
Famine grew more raging than the foregoing year, and gave an opportunity to
Melius to exercise his liberality, and advance his ambitious practices.
Minutius Commissioner for the Provisions acquainted the Senate with it, who
created L. Quintius Cincinnatus Dictator: He called Melius to answer for the
same, but being checked by his Conscience, he fled away. Servilius pursued him,
and killed him in the place of the Assembly. The Tribunes exasperated so highly
the people, under pretense of the death of Melius, that the Senate was forced
to name Military Tribunes.

MILITARY TRIBVNES.
A. M. 3617. R. 316. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS, TITUS QUINTIUS Son to CINCINNATUS, L.
JULIUS JULUS. The Town of Fidena rebelled, and delivered up-herself to the
Volcae. The Senate sent some Deputies to Fidena, to know the reason of such a
sudden alteration; but the Fidenates killed the Deputies; whereupon Consuls
were created.

CONSVLS.
A. M. 3618. R. 317. M. GEGANIUS MACERINUS, L. SERGIUS, who was afterward
called FIDENAS. The Consul Sergius won a Battle over the Fidenates, the Volcae
and the Falisci on the Bank of the River Anio; but the Romans suffered so great
a loss in this Engagement, that they created Aemilius Mamercus Dictator, who
got the Victory over these three Nations, after Cossus a Military Tribune
killed Voluminous King of the Volcae in single Combat. The Dictator triumphed,
and Cassus obtained the Ovation, or lesser Triumph, wherein he appeared loaded
with Spoils called Opima, the first that were seen in a Triumph since the time
of Romulus.

A. M. 3619. R. 318. M. PAPYRIUS or CORNELIUS MALUGINENSIS, L. PAPYRIUS
CRASSUS. The Plague raged at Rome, and the people was so frighted by several
prodigies, that they did not enquire into the impeachment against Spurius
Melius, nor the murder committed in his person by Servilius.

A. M. 3620. R. 319. C. JULIUS JULUS, L. VIRGINIUS TRICOSTUS. The Plague was
still violent, and gave an opportunity to the Fidenates and the Veientes to
enter into the Roman Territories, and came as far as the Gate called Collina,
but the Dictator Aulus Sirvilius Structus, or Priscus drove them away, and
pursued them to Fidena, which he besieged, and took it by force of Arms.

A. M. 3621. R. 320. M. MANILIUS CAPITOLINUS, Q. SULPITIUS COSSUS, or CAIUS
JULIUS JULUS, L. VIRGINIUS TRICOSTUS. The Vientes frighted by the taking of
Fidena, sent Deputies to the twelve Commonalties of Tuscany, to make themselves
sure of their assistance against the Romans, who chose Aemilius Mamercus
Dictator for the second time. He ordered that the Censors should be but one
year and a half in their Office; The Censors, out of a revenge for this Order,
taxed Mamercus as soon as he had laid down the Office of Dictator, the people
grumbled at it, and would not approve of what the Censors had done.

TRIBVNES.
A. 3622. R. 321. M. FABIUS VIBULLANUS, M POLLIUS, L. SERGIUS FIDENAS. The
plague, and the fears of a Famine secured the tranquillity of the City.

A. M. 3623. R. 322. L. PINARIUS MAMERCUS, L. FURIUS MEDULLINUS, SPUR.
POSTHUMOUS ALBUS. The most considerable among the Plebeians persuaded the
Tribunes to propose a Law, by which it should be forbidden to all men standing
for offices to be dressed in white Gowns. Cassiodorus mentions nothing of what
was transacted since the third Consulship of C. Julius and L. Virginius, not so
much as the name of any Magistrate till the following Consulship.

CONSVLS.
A. M. 3624. R. 323. T. QUINTIUS POENUS, CINCINNATUS, CNEUS JULIUS MENTO. The
Volcae and the Veientes having joined their Forces together, obliged the Romans
to name for Dictator Posthumous Tubertus, who defeated the Enemies, took their
Camp and spoils, which he carried in his triumph. The Consul Julius dedicated
the Temple of Apollo.

A. M. 3625. R. 324. L. PAPYRIUS CRASSUS, L. JULIUS JULUS. The people called
Aequi desired to enter into alliance with the Roman people, but they were
denied. The Senate prevented the Tribunes of the people in the design they had
to demand the release of Fines, for they released them to get the affection of
the people, without being asked for by the Tribunes.

A. M. 3626. R. 325. L. SERGIUS FIDENAS, HOSTILIUS LUCRETIUS TRICIPITINUS.
There was nothing worth observation transacted this year.

A. M. 3627. R. 326. AULUS SORNELIUS COSSUS, T. QUINTINUS POENUS CINCINNATUS.
An extreme dry weather occasioned a sort of itch in Rome, of which few people
were free, some new superstitions were taking ground among the people, but they
were suppressed.

A. M. 3628. R. 327. C. SERVILIUS HALA STRUCTUS, L. PAPYRIUS MUGILLANENSIS. The
Senate sent some Heralds to Veii to ask of the Veientes satisfaction for the
goods they had plundered in the Roman Territory; and upon their refusal, a War
was proclaimed against them.

MILITARY TRIBVNES.
A. M. 3629. R. 328. T. QUINTIUS POENUS CINCINNATUS, C. FURIUS, MARCUS
POSTHUMUS, AULUS CORNELIUS COSSUS. The last of them staid in the City to manage
the affairs, and his three colleagues went against the Veii, but they were
vigorously repulsed. Upon this misfortune Aemelius Mamercus was made Dictator,
who went to rescue the Military Tribunes. The rumor of this success filled the
Fidenates with hopes of recovering their liberties, therefore they killed all
the Romans in their Colony, and joined themselves to the Veii. The Dictator
fought them, routed, and pursued them so closely, that the Romans got
promiscuously with them into Fidena; took it, and put the Inhabitants thereof
to death. The Dictator made an end of this War in sixteen days.

A. M. 3630. R. 329. AULUS SEMPRONIUS ATTRATINUS, L. QUINTIUS CINCINNATUS, L.
FURIUS MEDULLINUS T. HORATIUS BARBUSUS. A Truce of twenty years was granted to
the Veii.

A. M. 3631. R. 330. C. CLAUDIUS CRASSUS, SPUR. NAUTIUS, SERGIUS, RUTILIUS
FIDENAS, SERTUS JULIUS TULLUS or JULUS. There was magnificent games celebrated
at Rome.

CONSVLS.
A. M. 3632. R. 331. C. SEMPRONIUS ATTRATINUS, Q. FABIUS VIBULLANUS. Sempronius
was like to lose the Roman Army in the fight against the Volcae, had not the
valor of Sextus Tarpeius a Brigadeer saved it, for having possessed himself of
a rising ground, he gave opportunity to the Consul to get off with the Army.

TRIBVNES.
A. M. 3633. R. 332. L. MANLIUS CAPITOLINUS, Q. ANTONIUS MERENDA, L. PAPYRIUS
MUGILLANENSIS. Hortensius Tribune of the people, charged Sempronius with the
ill success against the Volcae, but his colleague sopposed him.

CONSVLS.
A. M. 3634. R. 333. Q. FABIUS VIBUILANUS, T. QUINTIUS CAPITOLINUS. Fabius
defeated the Aequi, and the Senate granted him the lesser triumph. The Tribunes
proposed to choose Quaestors out of the commonalty of the people; but the Senate
would not consent to it. The whole year was spent in insignificant
contestations, so that the following year they made no Consuls, but only an
Inter-rex, who was L. Papyrius Magillanus, who obtained from the people that
Military Tribunes should be elected.

MILITARY TRIBVNES.
A. M. 3636. R. 335. L. QUINTIUS CINCINNATUS, SEXTUS FURIUS MEDULLINUS, AULUS
SEMPRONIUS ATTRATINUS, M. MANLIUS. The Tribunes of the people renewed the
Agrarian Law, but Sempronius opposed it. The Vestal Posthumia was accused of
incontinency, because she was too wanton and too nicely dressed; but she
cleared herself of that accusation.

A. M. 3637. R. 336. AGRIPPA MENENIUS LANATUS, P. LUCRETIUS TRICIPITINUS, SPUR.
NAUTIUS, C. SERVILIUS. The people was busied about suppressing a conspiracy of
many Slaves, who had resolved to set on fire several parts of the City, and
then seize upon the Tarpeian Rock, while the Citizens should be busied about
putting out the fire. The two Slaves who had discovered the conspiracy were
made free, and those who were found guilty were put to death by several
torments.

A. M. 3638. R. 337. L. SERGIUS FIDENAS, M. PAPIRIUS MUGILLANENSIS, C.
SERVILIUS PRISCUS. The Aequi shamefully defeated the Tribunes. The Senate made
Q. Servilius Dictator, who marched presently against the enemies, and whilst
they were proud of their Victory, he attacked them so briskly, that after
having routed them he took Lavicum, and afterward entered triumphing into
Rome. A Colony of fifteen hundred Romans was sent to Lavicum.

A. M. 3639. R. 338. AGRIPPA MENENIUS LANATUS, L. SERVILIUS STRUCTUS, L.
LUCRETIUS TRICIPITINUS, SPUR. VETURIUS COSSUS. Rome was very quiet all this
year.

A. M. 3640. R. 339. AULUS SEMPRONIUS ATTRATINUS, M. PAPYRIUS MUGILLANENSIS,
SPUR. NAUTIUS RUTILIUS Q. FABIUS VIBULLANUS. The Tribunes renewed the Agrarian
Law; but in order to disappoint their design, the Senate found means to sow
division among them.

A. M. 3641. R. 340. C. or L. CORNELIUS COSSUS, P. VALERIUS POTITUS, Q. FABIUS
VIBULLANUS, M. POSTHUMOUS REGILLENSIS, QUINTIUS CINCINNATUS. The people Aequi
took the field, and seized upon the Town Vola, but a while after Posthumous
took it again. The Tribunes proposed to send a Colony to Vola to supply it with
inhabitants, but Posthumous opposed it, with the whole Senate; and being
retired into the Camp to avoid the fury of the people, he was stoned to death
by his own soldiers, who were angry, because he had sided with the Senate in
this affair. This disorder occasioned the creation of new Consuls.

CONSVLS.
A. M. 3642. R. 341. AULUS CORNELIUS COSSUS, or P. POSTHUMOUS REGILLENSIS, L.
FURIUS MEDULLINUS. The enquiry after the accomplices of the murder committed
on the person of Posthumous went on but slowly. The Tribunes complained of it,
and the people grumbled thereat, but all was pacified.

A. M. 3643. R. 342. Q. FABIUS AMBUSTUS, C. FURIUS PACILLUS. Livy does not
mention these two Consuls, but Cassiodorus speaks of them.

A. M. 3644. R. 343. M. PAPYRIUS ATTRATINUS, or MUGILLANUS, C. NAUTIUS
RUTILIUS. There was a very great want of Provisions, and a contagious Distemper
in the City, that swept away a great many people.

A. M. 3645. R. 344. M. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS, C. VALERIUS. The Aequi plundered the
Country, and came to the very Gates of Rome. The Consul Valerius repulsed them,
and got great spoils from them. The Ovation or lesser triumph was decreed for
him.

A. M. 3646. R. 345. C. or CN. CORNELIUS COSSUS, L. FURIUS MEDULLINUS. The
Volsci besieged Carvertana. The Tribunes would not allow the people to take up
arms, but upon condition that they would choose Military Tribunes instead of
Consuls. The Senate consented to it, upon condition that none of the Tribunes
then in Office should be elected.

MILITARY TRIBVNES.
A. M. 3647. R. 346. C. JULIUS JULUS, C. or P. CORNELIUS COSSUS, C. SERVILIUS
AHALA. The Volsci and the Aequi took the Field with a dreadful Army, against
the Romans, who immediately created P. Cornelius Dictator, who defeated the
Enemies.

A. M. 3648. R. 347. L. FURIUS MEDULLINUS, C. VALERIUS POTITUS, CN. FABIUS
VIBULLANUS, C. SERVILIUS AHALA. The Vosci took the Fort Verugo, the Tribunes
armed tumultuosly, and routed all the Enemies they met in the Field, but were
not able to re-take the Fort.

A. M. 3649. R. 348. P. CORNELIUS COSSUS, CN. CORNELIUS, COSSUS, FABIUS
AMBUSTUS, L. VALERIUS POTITUS. Fabius besieged and took Auxur, now called
Torracina. The Senate ordered, that for the time to come the Soldiers should
receive their pay out of the public Treasury.

A. M. 3650. R. 349. T. QUINTIUS CAPITOLINUS, AULUS MANLIUS, L. FURIUS
MEDULLINUS, C. JULIUS JULUS, M. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS. The War was continued
against the Volsci, but with little success. Some Authors rank in this place
the Consulships of Aulus Manlius Volso, and L. Furius Medullinus, but Livy
mentions nothing of it.

A. M. 3652. R. 351. C. VALERIUS POTITUS, M. SERGIUS FIDENAS, P. CORNELIUS
MAGULLINENSIS CN. CORNELIUS COSSUS, Q. FABIUS AMBUSTUS, SPUR. NAUTIUS RUTILIUS.
The Town of Artana belonging to the Vosci was taken, and razed down to the
ground.

A. M. 3653. R. 352. M. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS, L. VALERIUS POTITUS, APPIUS CLAUDIUS
CRASSUS, M. QUINTIUS VARUS M. JULIUS JULUS, M. POSTHUMOUS, M. FURIUS CAMILLUS,
M. POSTHUMOUS ALBINUS. The Town of the Veii was besieged, and blocked up during
the whole winter, a practice unusual among the Romans, who made War only in
summer time. The Tribunes and the people grumbled at this new practice; but
Claudius Crassus represented to them in a Speech, that Enemies were to be
attacked at all times and seasons.

A. M. 3654. R. 353. C. SERVILIUS AHALA, Q. SERVILIUS, L. VIRGINIUS, Q.
SULPITITUS, AULUS MANLIUS, M. SERGIUS. The Volsci seized upon Anxur and
fortified it. The Falisci and Fidenates attacked the Romans who besieged Veii.
The attack begun with Sergius's quarters, who suffered his Forces to perish,
rather than to ask a relief of Virginius his colleague, with whom he was then
at variance. This misunstanding was prejudicial to the State, and thereupon the
Senate ordered, that some other Tribunes should be created, tho it was then but
the fifteenth day of July, whereas they used to proceed to their Election upon
the thirteenth day of December. Servilius Ahala was named for the remainder of
that year

A. M. 3655. R. 354. L. VALERIUS POTITUS, M. FURIUS CAMILLUS, M. AEMILIUS
MAMERCUS, CN. CORNELIUS COSSUS, C. FABIUS AMBUSTUS, L. JULIUS JULUS. The
Tribunes were victorious every where, and Valerius retook Anxur.

A. M. 3656. R. 355. P. LICINIUS CALVUS, L. MANLIUS, P. TITINIUS, P. MELIUS, L.
FURIUS MEDULLINUS, L. POPILIUS VOLSO. Licinius was the first Military Tribune
chosen out of the Body of the people. The Winter proved so very cold, and there
fell such an abundance of Snow, that the same is recorded in the history of
that time, as an extraordinary thing.

A. M. 3657. R. 356. M. VETURIUS L. TITINUS, P. MENENIUS PACILLUS, CN.
GENUTIUS, L. ATTILIUS. The Tribunes of the people watched their opportunity so
well, that they got all the Military Tribunes chosen from among the Plebeians,
except only Veturius. The plague raged both in Town and Country. They had
recourse to the books of the Sibyls, and celebrated the first Lectis ter^^^^^
by an order of the Duum viri. This Religious ceremony is explained under the
word Lectisternium.

A. M. 3658. R. 357. L. VALERIUS POTITUS, M. VALERIUS MAXIMUS, M. FURIUS
CAMILLUS. The interest of the Senate was so great, that all the Military
Tribunes were taken out of the Patrician Order. The Waters of the Albanian Lake
grew so extraordinary high, and there being no visible cause of it, its
overflowing was taken for a prodigy: An Augur of Veii intimated to the Senate,
that there was no other way for the Romans to take Veii, but the making a
passage for this Water; thereupon the Senate sent to consult the Oracle of
Delphi.

A. M. 3659. R. 558. L. JULIUS JULUS, L. FURIUS MEDULLINUS L. SERGIUS FIDENAS,
AULUS POSTHUMOUS REGELLENSIS, P. CORNELIUS MALUGINENSIS, A. MANLIUS. The
Tarquin plundered the Campania of Rome. Posthumi^ and Julus routed them, and
retook the spoils. The Volsci besieged Anxur, and the Aequi Lavic^^

A. M. 3660. R. 559. P. LICINIUS CALVUS, P. TITINIUS, P. MENENIUS, CN.
GENUTIUS, L. ATTILIUS. Titinius and Genutius fell into an Ambuscado laid by the
Falisci, and suffered a great loss by it. The Soldiers encamped before Veii,
chose M. Furius Camillus Dictator, and his election was approved of by the
Senate. Camillus marched immediately to relieve Titinius, whom the Enemies kept
besieged, and after he had defeated them, he returned to the Siege of Veii; and
when he saw that the Town could hold no longer, he sent to the Senate to know
what he should do with so rich a place, and the Senate ordered that it should
be plundered, not only by the Soldiers, but also by all the Inhabitants of Rome
that would go thither. Camillus made a triumphant Entry after the taking of
Veii, and for the immortal memory of his achievements, he marked out the
Temple of Juno the Queen on mount Aventinus. This J^^ was Patroness of the
Veientes, and after the taking of Veii, the Romans having entered into her
Temple, and asked the Goddess if she was willing to go to Rome, her Statue made
a sign that she was consenting to it. Camillus dedicated also the Temple of
mother Matuta, whom Plutarch calls Lucothoea.

A. M. 3661. R. 360. P. CORNELIUS COSSUS, P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO, M. VALERIUS
MAXIMUS, C. FABIUS AMBUSTUS, L. FURIUS MEDULLINUS Q. SERVILIUS. The popular
Tribune Siccinius represented to the people that Rome was situated in a barren
and unwholsom territory, that the Country of the Veii was fruitful and
pleasant, the air wholesome, and a convenient dwelling place for every thing,
and advised them to go and settle themselves there; some other Tribunes
proposed that the Roman people should divide themselves in two parts, that one
part of them should remain at Rome, and the other should go to inhabit Veii,
but Camillus opposed both proposals as dishonorable to that City.

A. M. 3662. R. 361. M. FURIUS CAMILLUS, M. FURIUS MEDULLINUS, C. AEMILIUS, L.
VALERIUS PUBLICOLA. SP. POSTHUMOUS, P. CORNELIUS. Camillus went to plunder the
Fields of the Falisci, and got a great booty in their Camp, which he refused to
deliver to the Soldiers: This unusual practice they bore with, out of the great
respect they had for him; but they abhorred his severe virtue, tho they admired
it, says Livy. Camillus afterward besieged Faleria, and during this siege, a
Schoolmaster, who had under his care the Children of the most considerable
Families of the Inhabitants, brought all these innocent creatures to the Camp
of the Romans. Camillus, struck with horror at this base perfidiousness, clapped
the Master in Irons, and sent him back again, the children whipping him along
the way. This act of generosity moved so sensibly the Inhabitants of Faleria,
that they surrendered themselves to the Romans, and willingly submitted to so
generous Enemies. The Senate sent a Golden Cup to the Temple of Delphi, to
return thanks to Apollo for the good advice he had given him, to make a free
passage for the waters of the Albanian Lake. This Present, with the Ambassador
who carried it, was taken by the Pirates of Lipari; but Timasitus their
commander, being informed that the Ambassador was a Roman, he let him go free
with the Presents that were conscrated to Apollo.

CONSVLS.
A. M. 3663. R. 362. L. LUCRETIUS FLAVUS, SERVIUS SULPITITUS CAMERINUS. The
Tribunes of the people renewed the proposal made two years before of inhabiting
Veii, but the Senate opposed it, and distributed the lands of the Veientes to
the people.

A. M. 3664. R. 363. L. VALERIUS POTITUS, M. MANLIUS, afterward called
CAPITOLINUS. A great Drought occasioned a contagious distemper in Rome, of
which a great many people died.

MILITARY TRIBVNES.
A. M. 3665. R. 364. L. LUCRETIUS, SERVIUS SULPITIUS, M. AEMILIUS, L. FURIUS
MEDULLINUS, AGRIPPA, FURIUS C. AEMILIUS. M. Seditius a Plebeian, head a voice,
(which he thought to come from Heaven) that gave warning to the Romans of the
coming of the Gauls into Italy. The Senate neglected this advice, as a Dream;
but the event justified that it was not a mere fancy, for the Gauls entered
Italy and besieged Rome.

A. M. 3666. R. 365. The three Sons of FABIUS AMBUSTUS, P. SULPITIUS LONGUS, Q.
SERVILIUS, P. SERVILIUS, MALUGINENSIS. The Tribunes went out to meet the Gauls,
but they were vanquished; for out of too much confidence in their valor, they
passed the River Allin, and encamped at the Bank of it. There was a great
slaughter, and those who escaped caused such a consternation in Rome, that all
the inhabitants left the City, except some Officers and Soldiers, who got into
the Capitol, and some Senators, whose great age had rendered them unfit for
fighting, but whose great courage did not permit them to run away. These
continued in their Houses, and dressed themselves in their Robes of State. The
Gauls furiously pursued the Romans, and came to Rome the same day that the
Battle was fought, says Livy, or three days after, according to Plutarch. They
found the Town open and without Inhabitants: they got into it, set it on fire
in several places, and killed those venerable old men, whom they had took at
first for the Domestic Gods of the Romans. They besieged the Capitol, and as
they were scaling the Wall in the night, the Geese that were fed in the Temple
of Jano, made so great a noise, that M. Manlius being awakned by it, ran to the
Rampart and repulsed the Gauls. The besieged being in want of every thing, were
forced to capitulate, upon condition of paying to the Gauls a thousand pound
weight of Gold, or two thousand according to Pliny; and whilst they were
weighing the Gold in execution of the Treaty, Camillus (who tho absent had been
named Dictator) arrived and charged the besiegers, of whom they killed a great
number. The Gauls being retired, the Tribunes proposed again to go to inhabit
Veii, and leave the smoking ruins of Rome, but Camillus prevented it, restored
the service of the Gods, and marked out a Temple in honor of that voice that
they had despised, when it gave warning of the coming of the Gauls, and
instituted sacrifices to it, under the name of the God Locutius. Pliny affirms,
that a while before the taking of Rome, they had numbered one hundred fifty two
thousand five hundred and fourscore heads of Families.

A. M. 3667. R. 366. AULUS VALERIUS PULLICOLA, L. VIRGINIUS, P. CORNELIUS,
AULUS MANLIUS, L. AEMILIUS, L. POSTHUMOUS. The Romans remembering that the
eighteenth day of July, says Livy, or the fifteenth according to Sabellicus,
they had been defeated at Cremera, where all the Fabians were killed; and that
upon the same day, they were routed on the banks of the Allia by the Gauls,
they did mark out that day in their Fasts or Calendar for a fatal and unlucky
day, and forbad by a solemnal decree to undertake any thing for the future,
upon that day. Camillus was made Dictator ^he reduced the Volsoi to the Romans
obedience, after they had maintained their Liberty for seventy Years, says
Eutropius. He marched afterward against the Aequi, whom he overcame, as he did
also the Tuscans: His Triumph lasted three days together, for having subdued
these three Nations, and: out of the Spoils that he had got, he repaid the
Roman Ladies the price of the Jewels they had bestowed to enrich the Offering,
that the Roman People had made to Apollo.

A. M. 3688. R. 367. T. Q. CINCINNATUS, Q. SERVILIUS FIDENAS, C. JULIUS JULUS,
L. AQUILIUS CORVUS, L. LUCRETIUS TRICIPITINUS. The Fields of the Aequi, were
plundered, and the Romans took from the Tusoans Cortuosa and Contenebra.

A. M. 3669. R. 368. L. PAPYRIUS, CN. SERGIUS, L. AEMILIUS, L. LICINIUS, M.
MENENIUS, L. VALERIUS PUBLICOLA, C. CORNELIUS. The Tribes called Pometina,
Sabina, Stellatina, Arni^nsis were added to the former, and so made in all
thirty five.

A. M. 3670. R. 369. M. FURIUS CAMILLUS, SEXTUS GORN. MALUGINENSIS, L. SERGIUS
FIDENAS, L. QUINTIUS CINCINNATUS, L. HORATIUS PULVILLUS, T. VALERIUS. Camillus
and Valerius marched against the Antiates, whom they defeated, and took
Satricum.

A. M. 3671. R. 370. AULUS MANLIUS, P. CORNELIUS, T. and L. QUINTIUS
CAPITOLINUS, L. PAPYRIUS CURSOR, C. SERGIUS. M. Manlius attempted to make
himself Sovereign of Rome, and in order to it, spread abroad several reports
against the Senate, who thereupon made Aulus Cornelius Cossus Dictator, who
opposed Manlius, and summoned him to appear before the People, and discover the
place where the Senate had hid the Gold, which he accused them to keep for
themselves. Manlius shifted off this Question with ambiguous Answers, which
discovered his Calumny; wherefore the Dictator caused him to be arrested; but
the people grumbling at it, and threatening the City with a Sedition, the
Dictator thought fit to release Manlius.

A. M. 3672. R. 371. SERGIUS CORNELIUS MALUGINENSIS, P. VALERIUS POTITUS, L.
POSTHUMOUS, M. FURIUS CAMILLUS, SERVIUS SULPITIUS, T. QUINTIUS CINCINNATUS, C.
PAPYRIUS CRASSUS. M. Manlius renewed his Intreagues; and the Senate having won
to their Interest the Tribunes of the People, Manlius was summoned again; he
appeared, and was convicted of aspiring to a tyrannical Government, and
condemned to be thrown headlong from that same Rock that he had defended
against the Gauls in the Siege of the Capitol; his House was razed, and they
forbid his Family, to take for the future the fore-name of Ma^^^. The Plague
and the Famine did a world of damage both in the City and the Country.

A. M. 3673. R. 372. L. VALERIUS, AULUS MANLIUS, L. LUCRETIUS, L. AEMILIUS, M.
TREBONIUS, SERVIUS SULPITIUS. Colonies were sent this year to P^^ptine and
Nepete.

A. M. 3674. R. 373. SPUR, and L. PAPYRIUS, SERVIUS CORNELIUS MALUGINENSIS, Q.
SERVILIUS, C. SULPITIUS, L. AEMILIUS. Rome was a little mortified for the loss
of Satricum, which was taken by storm by the Volsci, and all the Romans of that
Colony were put to the Sword.

A. M. 3675. R. 374. M. FURIUS CAMILLUS, AULUS and L. POSTHUMII REGILLENSES, L.
FURIUS, L. LUCRETIUS, M. FABIUS AMBUSTUS. Camillus with Furi^^ his Colleague
made war against the Volsci, defeated them, and took their Camp by storm, and
because he found some Tusculans among the Prisoners, this was a sufficient
reason for proclaiming war against them; but the Tusculans opened their Gates,
without offering to make any defense; thereupon Camillus granted them the
freedom of Citizens of Rome.

A. M. 3676. R. 375. LUCIUS and P. VALERIJ, C. SERGIUS, LICINIUS MANCINUS, L.
PAPYRIUS, SERGIUS CORNELIUS MALUGINENSIS. The Tribunes of the people raised a
Sedition, and demanded the releafe of Usuries; but the Senate denying their
request, they stopped the raising of Forces to oppose the Inhabitants of
Praeneste, who made Incursions to the very Gate Collina. Quintias Cincinnatus
was thereupon created Dictator, and marched against the Enemy, who made a stand
on the banks of the River Allia; but he vanquished them, and took in twenty
days nine of their Towns, and Praeneste their capital City was surrendered by
Capitulation.

A. M. 3677. R. 376. C MANLIUS, P. MANLIUS, L. JULIUS PATRICIUS, C. SEXTILLIUS,
M. ALBINUS, L. ANTISTIUS. The Volsci got this year some advantage over the
Tribunes.

A. M. 3678. R. 377. SP. FURIUS, Q. SERVILIUS, LICINIUS MANCINUS, M. HORATIUS,
P. CLAELIUS, L. GEGANIUS. The Tribunes of the people proposed that all persons
in debt should be relieved, and the Senate consented that no man should be put
in prison for debt, so long as the war against the Volsci should last. A Tax
was laid upon the People, for the lining with Stone the Ramparts of Rome.

A. M. 3679. R. 378. L. AEMILIUS, B. VALERIUS, C. VETURIUS, SERVIUS SULPITIUS,
L. and C. QUINTIJ CINCINNATI. The Tribunes of the people made several Demands
to the Senate; 1. That the Interest that had been paid by the Creditors, might
be deducted from the Principal, and that the remaining part should be paid off
at several times in three years. 2. That no Roman Citizen should be allowed to
possess above five hundred Acres of Ground. 3. That one of the Consuls for the
future should be a Plebeian. The Senate opposed these Laws, and the Tribunes on
their side would not consent to the creation of the Magistrates Curules; so
that Rome was five years without Magistrates of the first Order.

A. M. 3685. R. 384. L. FURIUS, AULUS MANLIUS, SERVIUS SULPITIUS, L. CORNELIUS,
AULUS and CAIUS VALERIJ. The two last raised the siege of Tusculum, which was
besieged by the Vilitrians.

A. M. 3686. R. 385. Q. SERVILIUS, C. VETURIUS, A. and M. CORNELIJ, Q.
QUINTIUS, M. FABIUS. The Tribunes proposed to create ten Magistrates to take
care of the affairs of Religion, and the Books of the Sibylt, and that five of
them should be taken out among the Patricians, and the other five among the
Plebeians. This Magistracy was never before this time exercised, but by two men
called Duum-viri, both Patricians.

A. M. 3687. R. 386. T. QUINTIUS, SERVIUS CORNELIUS, SERVIUS SULPITIUS, SP.
SERVILIUS, L. PAPYRIUS, L. VETURIUS. M. Furius Camillus was chosen Dictator for
the fourth time, and to bring the people to reasonable terms, abdicated his
Office, which the Senate conferred upon P. Manlius, who to give some
satisfaction to the People, consented to the creation of the Decem-viri or ten
Men, appointed to manage the affairs of Religion.

A. M. 3688. R. 387. AULUS and MARCUS CORNELIJ, M. GEGANIUS, P. MANLIUS, L.
VETURIUS, P. VALERIUS. The Gauls came again into Italy, and M. Fur^us Camillus
was chosen again Dictator to oppose them. Livy says that the Gauls were beaten
near the Lake Albanus; but Polybius, a Greek born, from whom Livy has taken
many things, affirms that the Gauls were not beaten, but came and plundered the
Country as far as Albanus, and retired with a great Booty. The Senate consented
to the creation of a Consul out of the body of the people, and the people
agreed that a Praetor, and two Aediles Curules should be chosen out of the body
of the Patricians or the Nobles.

CONSVLS.
A. M. 3689. R. 389. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS, L. SEXTIUS.

A. M. 3690. R. 388. L. GENUTIUS AVENTINUS, Q. SERVILIUS AHALA. The Plague
swept away a great many People in Rome, and amongst them M. Furius Camillus.

A. M. 3691. R. 390. T. or C. SULPITIUS PETICUS, C. LICINIUS STOLO CALVUS. The
Plague continued in Rome, but to stop it they solemnized the Lectisternium, and
voted and celebrated for the first time the Senick Games, which were very
inconsiderable at first, for they were neither composed in measured Verses, nor
attended with any other Music but only some Flutes. The Tyber overflowed its
Banks, and the whole Country about it was laid under Water.

A. M. 3692. R. 391. L. GENUTIUS, L. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS. Rome was still
afflicted with Pestilence, and the Romans were forced to have recourse to the
Ceremony of driving the Nail; which was only practiced at first, to mark out
the number of years, according to the ancient Law; Let the greatest Praetor
drive the Nail the third day of September; since that time, this political
ceremony was turned into superstition, and they persuaded the common people,
that it had the virtue of turning away any public Plagues. This Nail was of
Brass, and they drove it into the back wall of the Temple of Minerva in the
Capitol, at the right hand of the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, and upon this
ceremony L. Manlius Imperiosus was made Dictator.

A. M. 3693. R. 392. Q. SERVILIUS HALA, L. GENUCIUS. A great Abyss opened of it
self, in the place where the Assemblies met, they endeavored all they could to
fill it up, but to no purpose; they had recourse to the South-sayers, who
answered, that this Abyss should never be closed up, but by throwing into it
that in which the Romans excelled. Q. Curtius a young Roman Knight presented
himself to the Senate, which was in a great perplexity about this Answer, who
acquainted him, that the Gods asked for nothing else, but a Roman to remove
that prodigy, upon which he freely offered to lay down his Life to fill up that
Pit; and then completely Arming himself, riding on Horseback, threw himself
into the Gulf, in the presence of all the People, who immediately flung
Flowers and Offerings into it, and a while after this Hole shut up of it self,
and that place was since called Lacus Curtianus, for an everlasting Monument of
Curtius's bravery.

A. M. 3694. R. 393. C. or C. SULPITIUS PETICUS, C. LICINIUS CALVUS STOLO. The
Gauls made a third irruption into Italy; and upon the first advice of this
Invasion, they made Titus Quintius Poenus Dictator. He with all the Roman
Forces encamped upon the Banks of the Anio, in the sight of the Gauls, the
River being betwixt them both: Then a Gaul of a prodigious stature came up to
challenge the Roman Forces to a single Combat; T. Manlius got leave of the
Dictator to fight this Enemy, and succeeded so well, that he killed him at one
blow. The Gaul fell down dead upon the ground, and Manlius kept for himself
nothing of his Spoils, but a rich Collar for a Token of his Victory; from
whence afterward he took the Surname of Torquatus, which afterward
distinguished his posterity from the other Manlii.

A. M. 3695. R. 394. C. PETILIUS LIBO BALBUS, M. FABIUS AMBUSTUS. The Tiburtini
were at war with Fabius, and called the Gauls to their assistance, who were
then in Campania. The Armies engaged near the Gate Collina, and the Fight was
lasting and bloody; but at last the Romans got the Victory. Q. Servilius Hala
was made Dictator.

A. M. 3696. R. 395. M. POPILIUS LAENAS, C. MANLIUS IMPERIOSUS. The Inhabitants
of the City of Tyber, now Tivoli, scaled Rome in a very dark night: This
unexpected alarm put the Town into a great Confusion; but the Romans at last
repulsed their Enemies with loss.

A. M. 3697. R. 296. C. FABIUS AMBUSTUS, C. PLAUTIUS PROCULUS. War was
proclaimed against the Tarquinians, who had plundered the Roman Territories;
Fabius was beaten, and a great slaughter was made of the Romans, besides seven
hundred Prisoners, who were all put to death after the Fight was over: The
Gauls coming again, and encamped at Pedum near Rome, C. Sulpitius was made
Dictator, and got a victory over them.

A. M. 3698. R. 397. C. MARTIUS RUTILIUS, CN. MANLIUS IMPERIOSUS. The Tribunes
got a Law to be made to reduce the use of money to one per Cent. Licinius Stolo
the Author of the Law, whereby it was forbidden to possess more than five
hundred Acres of ground, was himself convicted of possessing a thousand Acres,
and thereupon fined.

A. M. 3699. R. 398. M. FABIUS AMBUSTUS, M. POPILIUS LAENAS. Popilius plundered
the Fields about the City of Tyber, now Tivoli, after he had forced the
Inhabitants to retire within their Walls. Fabius offered Battle to the Falisci,
but they mistrusting their Forces, made use of a stratagem. Their Priests
placed themselves at the head of their Batalions, dressed in their priestly
habits, their heads surrounded with Serpents, and holding up lighted Torches in
their hands. This spectacle at first stopped the Romans, out of respect to
Religion, but that scruple being vanished, they fell upon them, and overthrew
the Enemies and all their Bugbears. The Tuscans afterward joining themselves
to the Falisa, C. Martius Rutilius was created Dictator, the first of the
Plebeians that enjoyed that Dignity, he made C. Plautius a Plebeian, General of
the Horse, at which the Senate grumbled very much. The Dictator got an entire
victory over the Enemies, and took eight thousand Prisoners. The Senate would
have denied him the honor of Triumph, but he triumphed notwithstanding, and
the people never before expressed so much joy. The Senate made all their
endeavors to get two Consuls chosen out of their Body, but the Tribunes gave
notice of their design to the people; who could not come to any resolution for
a long time; so that the Commonwealth was governed by by eight Inter-reges.

A. M. 3700. R. 399. C. SULPITIUS PETICUS, M. or L. VALERIUS PUBLICOLA. All was
quiet within and without the City, till the latter end of the year, when the
Patricians used their interests for getting the Consulship for those that were
of the body, in which they succeeded.

A. M. 3701. R. 400. M. FABIUS AMBUSTUS, T. QUINTIUS or M. POPILIUS. Fabius
defeated the Tiburtini, took Salucium, and forced them to lay down their Arms.
The Tarquins were also routed, and their Prisoners killed by way of
retaliation. The triumph was allowed to Fabius without any opposition. A league
was solemny made with the Samnites.

A. M. 3702. R. 401. C. SULPITIUS PETICUS, M. VALERIUS PUBLICOLA. (Sabillicus
mentions C. Martius Rutilius instead of Sulpitius.) The Tuscans, Ceratani, and
the Volsci, raised a great many Forces, whereupon the Senate created T. Manlius
Torquatus Dictator, who proclaimed War against the Ceretani, because they had
joined with the Tuscans to plunder the Roman Fields. The Ceretani frighted
thereat, sent an Embassy to Rome to excuse themselves, and they were pardoned
upon consideration that their Town had been a place of Refuge for sacred
things, when Rome was burnt by the Gauls. The Towers and Ramparts of Rome were
repaired, and the Temple of Apollo was dedicated. A great Rebellion broke out
at the latter end of the year, because the Patricians would keep the Consulship
among themselves, but they were brought again to the Law of Licinius, and a
Plebeian was made Consul.

A. M. 3703. R. 402. L. VALERIUS PUBLICOLA, a Patrician, C. MARTIUS RUTILIUS, a
Plebeian. Five Commissioners were established for the regulation of Usuries,
who were called Mensarii. C. Julius was elected Dictator.

A. M. 3704. R. 403. C. SULPITIUS PETICUS, T. QUINTIUS POENUS CINCINNATUS. The
Senate created M. Fabius Ambustus Dictator, without any pretense whatsoever;
but notwithstanding the opposition of the Senate and the Dictator, the Licinian
Law was put into Execution, and a Consul was chosen out of the Body of the
people.

A. M. 3705. R. 404. L. CORNELIUS SCIPIO a Patrician, M. POPILIUS LOENAS, a
Plebeian. Scipio falling sick, Popilius marched with the Army against the
Gauls, whom he put at first in disorder, and then attacked them in their Camp,
where he forced them with an invincible courage. L. Furius Camillus was named
Dictator.

A. M. 3706. R. 405. L. FURIUS CAMILLUS, APPIUS CLAUDIUS CRASSUS. The Gauls
came again this year, and encamped near Albano with a formidable power. The
Romans raised an Army of forty two thousand Foot, and three thousand Horse.
This Army encamped near the Gauls, and one of them challenging the Romans to a
single Combat, M. Valerius a young Tribune, commanding a thousand men, offered
himself to fight him. It Is related, that during the fight a Raven came to the
help of Valerius, and pearched upon his Headpiece, flying at the face of the
Gaul, and pecking him, insomuch that Valerius killed his adversary. This false
story probably is grounded upon the custom of the ancient Romans, who crested
their Head-pieces with figures of Animals, thinking thereby to render
themselves more terrible to their Enemies, and no doubt but Valerius had the
figure of a Raven upon his Headpiece, and they have represented this Figure
alive and moving, only to represent the agility of Val rius in this fight.
However it was, Valerius got the surname of Corvinus, which remained to all his
posterity. The Senate went on with their Intreagues to elude the Licinian Law,
and made F. Manlius Torquatus Dictator, but the people carried it for Laenas.

A. M. 3707. R. 406. M. VALERIUS CORVINUS, M. POPILIUS LOENAS. Valerius was
then but three and twenty years of age, yet his want of the age was dispensed
within consideration of the victory he had obtained over the Gaul, whom he had
killed the last year. The Plague was very troublesome to the Romans. The
Carthaginians made a league with the Roman people.

A. M. 3708. R. 407. T. MANLIUS TORQUATUS, C. PLAUTIUS VENOX. The use of Money
was reduced again to half per Cent.

A. M. 3709. R. 408. M. VALERIUS CORVINUS, C. PETILIUS LIBO. Valerius pursued
the Volsci as far as Satricum, where he forced them, burnt the Town, and
demolished its Fortifications. He obtained the Honor of Triumph, wherein he
appeared attended by four thousand Prisoners.

A. M. 3710. R. 409. M. FABIUS DORSO, SERVIUS SULPITIUS CAMERINUS. The
Aruncians renewed the War, plundering the Country about Rome, whereupon L.
Furius Camillus was made Dictator, who engaged and overcame the Aruncians,
having first devoted a Temple to Juno Moneta, which was built in the place,
where the House of Manlius Capitolinus formerly stood.

A. M. 3711. R. 410. C. MARTIUS RUTILIUS, T. MANLIUS TORQUATUS Livy relates a
great many prodigies that happened this year; for it rained Stones, and the Sun
was eclipsed at noon. P. Valerius Publicola was chosen Dictator.

A. M. 3712. R. 411. M. VALERIUS CORVINUS, AULUS or C. CORNELIUS COSSUS.
Valerius got a great Victory over the Samnites: he took one hundred and seventy
Colors, and forty thousand Shields. The Carthaginians hearing of it, sent to
congratulate the Roman people, and offered a Crown of Gold of five and twenty
pounds weight to Jupiter Capitolinus.

A. M. 3713. R. 412. C. MARTIUS RUTILIUS, Q. SERVILIUS AHALA. The Legions that
were in Winter quarters at Capua, considering how pleasant and fruitful that
Country was, resolved to make themselves masters of that rich Town, killing all
the Inhabitants thereof; but Martius prevented that cruel and treacherous
design, removing the several authors of that enterprise by diverse Commissions.
M. Valerius Corvinus was made Dictator.

A. M. 3714. R. 413. C. PLAUTIUS, L. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS. The Camp and the
Country of the Volsci were plundered. Aemilius put all the Samnites Country to
the Fire and Sword, and forced them to sue for Peace, which was granted them.

A. M. 3715. R. 414. T. MANLIUS TORQUATUS, P. DECIUS MUS. War being proclaimed
against the Latins, the two Consuls raised their Forces, and marched toward the
Enemies, who expected them near Capua. Both the Consuls separately saw a Ghost,
who told them with a distinct voice, that one of the two Armies should perish,
and the Commander of the other should be killed. The Entrails of Victims
foretold the same; so that both the Consuls agreed among themselves, that the
first of them that should find his Forces in a wavering condition, should
devote himself to the Infernal Gods to have the Roman Army. The Son of Maulius
the Consul, who was ordered to march with a body of Horse to observe the Enemy,
was challenged by the Commander of an advanced Post: This young man, ambitious
of Glory, not thinking of the Prohibition the Generals had made, accepted of
the Challenge, killed his Enemy, and brought the Spoils to his Fathers feet,
who barbarously put him to death, and sacrificed his own Son to the severity of
military. Discipline; from whence came this Proverb Manliana imperia, to
express an extreme severity in point of observation of Orders. They engaged the
Enemy, the Fight was very bloody, and the event uncertain for a long time; but
Decius seeing that his Forces grew weak, and that their courage failed 'em,
sent for M. Valerius the Pontiff, and being dressed in his Gown of State,
covered his Head, and put both his Feet upon a Dart; then lifting up his right
hand to the height of his Chin, he devoted himself to the Infernal Gods,
pronouncing aloud these words, which the Pontiff dictated him word by word,
Janus, Jupiter, and you Fathers, Mars, Quirinus, Bellona, Lares, Domestic
Gods, Gods Novencilles, Gods Indigites, Gods who have power over us and our
Enemies; and you Infernal Gods, I do invoke you, I adore you, and beg your
pardon, vouchsafe to bless the endeavors of the Roman People, and grant them
the Victory, and afflict with fear and death their Enemies. And so I devote my
self to the Infernal Gods, and to the Earth, the Iegions of the Enemies, and
their helpers, with my self. Thus having spoken, he sent word to Manlius that
he had devoted himself, then spurring on his Horse into the midst of the
Enemies, he revived the Soldiers courage, and got the victory by his death.
Manlius pursued the Enemies, possessed himself of their Camp, plundered the
rich Fields of Capua, and made his Triumphal entry into Rome.

A. M. 3716. R. 415. L. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS, QUINTUS PUBLIUS PHILO. The Consuls
always had the best of their Enemies. Q. Publius Philo one of the Consuls was
named Dictator. He signalized himself in his Office by several public Orders,
to the great mortification of the Patricians, for he caused a Law to be
enacted, by which the Senate was to encute the Orders of the people, and that
the People should first declare their opinion concerning the Laws that should
be proposed. He got also enacted that one of the Censors should be taken out of
the body of the People.

A. M. 3717. R. 416. L. FURIUS CAMILLUS, C. MENENIUS NEPOS. The Two Consuls
took the Town of Pedum, which Aemilius had only invested. Afterward they
marched through all the Country of the Latin, and seized upon a great many of
their Town, whereupon a Statue on Horseback was erected to each of them in the
Market place at Rome, which never had been yet done for any person. By the
Advice of Camillus the freedom of Citizens was granted to several of the
Latins, yet with this limitation, that they should have no vote in the
Assemblies. Camillus took Antium, from the Volsci, and brought to Rome all the
stems of their Galleys, and set them upon places designed for Orations, called
Rostra or pro Rostris.

A. M. 3718. R. 417. C. CALPURNIUS or SULPITIUS LONGUS, L. AELIUS PETICUS. The
Senate forced the Consuls to name a Dictator to go to the relief of the
Ar^^cians, because they had been remiss therein, they named C. Claudius
Regillensis. Minutia was convicted of having transgressed the Vessal's rules in
point of Chastity. Q. Publius Philo was the first Plebeian that was raised to
the Dignity of Praetor.

A. M. 3719. R. 418. L. PAPYRIUS CRASSUS, CAESO DUELLIUS. The Tuscans now
called Calvi in Terra Laboris, joined the Seditiams to make War against Rome,
but they were easily defeated at the first encounter.

A. M. 3720. R. 419. M. VALERIUS CORVINUS, M. ATTILIUS REGULUS. Valerius
besieged Calls, and took it by storm. L. Aemilius Mamercus was made Dictator
to preside in the Assemblies.

A. M. 3721. R. 420. T. VETURIUS, SPURIUS or P. POSTHUMOUS ALBUS. A Colony was
sent to Calls. P. Cornelius Rufur was created Dictator. The Plague raged in
the City

A. M. 3722. R. 421. L. or AULUS CORNELIUS, CN. DOMITIUS CALVUS. A Report was
spread abroad, that the Gauls were about making an irruption into Italy,
whereupon the Romans made M. Papyrius Crassus Dictator. Alexander King of
Epirus, made a Confederacy with the people of Rome. Two Tribes were added to
the former, viz. the Metianna and Scaptianna.

A. M. 3723. R. 422. M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, T. or C. VALERIUS POTITUS PLACCUS.
There was a great Mortality in Rome, and it was observed that it carried away
none but men. The cause of this particularity was for a long time unknown, till
a Slave declared to the Senate, that most part of the Roman women had plotted
to destroy all the men, and for that purpose made use of a poisoned drink.
Twenty of these women were seized, who bring asked about the quality of the
drink that was found by them: they answered impudently, that it was good; they
were commanded to try it themselves, and as soon as they had drank it, some
indubitable marks of poison appeared, and soon after they died. One hundred and
seventy others were apprehended, and publicly put to death. A Dictator was
created to drive in the nail, to appease the Gods by this Ceremony. Two Consuls
were poisoned by their Wives, of which they died. This is the first instance of
public Poisoning. Cn. Quintius was chosen Dictator.

A. M. 3724. R. 423. P. PAPYRIUS CRASSUS, L. PLAUTIUS VENNO. Peace was granted
to the Samnites, the Volsci, and the little Commonwealth of Fundi.

A. M. 3725. R. 424. L. AEMILIUS MAMERCUS, CN. PLAUTIUS. The Consul besieged
the Town of Priverna, and took it. He ordered the Governors Head to be cut
off, and interceded for the rest of the people: by his means the Inhabitants of
Priverna obtained a Peace, and the freedom of Roman Citizens.

A. M. 3726. R. 425. C. or P. PLAUTIUS PROCULUS, P. CORNELIUS SCAPULA. A Colony
was sent to Fregellae.

A. M. 3727. R. 426. CORNELIUS LENTULUS, Q. PUBL. PHILO. Claudius Marcellus,
was chosen Dictator to oppose the Samnites Naulans. The Senate disputed his
Election, but the people maintained it.

A. M. 3728. R. 427. C. PETILIUS, L. PAPYRIUS MALUGINENSIS, or CURSOR.
Alexander King of Epirus was killed in Lucania, now called Basilicates. The
fifth Lectisternium or Banquet was celebrated, because of the great affairs the
Romans had upon their hands.

A. M. 3729. R. 428. L. FURIUS CAMILLUS, DECIUS JUNIUS BRUTUS SCAEVA. A War was
proclaimed against the Marsi, and Camillus marched against the Samnites; but he
fell sick, and named L. Papyrius Cursor Dictator, who being obliged to go to
Rome, to offer there some sacrifices, left the command of the Army to Favius,
expressly forbidding him to attack the Enemy, let the opportunity be ever so
fair. Fabius seeing that the absence of the Dictator made the Samnites grow
careless, chose rather to hazard his life, than neglect so fair an opportunity
of defeating the enemies. He attacked them in their Camp, obtained a great
victory, and got a rich booty. The Dictator being returned to the Camp,
designed to put Fabius to death, but the whole Army and the Senate itself used
all their interest to get his pardon, but the Dictator remained inflexible; yet
was at last prevailed upon by the prayers of the whole people, to whom he
granted Fabius his life; saying unto him, Live thou, Fabius, more glorious for
this universal love of the people, than for the Victory thou have got over the
enemy, and may the Gods grant that thy bad example do not prove prejudicial to
the State.

A. M. 3730. R. 429. C. SULPITIUS LONGUS, Q. AEMILIUS or AURELIUS CERETANUS.
The Samnites broke the Truce, which was made for a year. The Tribunes of the
people accused the Tusculans of being concerned in the Rebellion of the
inhabitants of Priverna: but they came to Rome with their wives and children,
and cleared themselves.

A. M. 3731. R. 430. Q. FABIUS, L. FULVIUS. They created Aulus Cornelius Arvina
Dictator, who pursued the Samnites, and made so great a slaughter of them, that
they begged for Peace, offering to surrender up all that they had taken during
the War.

A. M. 3732. R. 431. T. VETURIUS CALVINUS, SP. POSTHUMOUS ALBINUS. The Samnites
were sent back again, and Peace was denied unto them. Pontius their General
raised all the force he could, and encamped on the top of Furcae Caudinae,
called now Stretto d'Arpeia, or Jugo di Santa Maria, or Vallo di Guardano.
Pontius ordered ten, the most resolute of his Soldiers, to disguise themselves
like Shepherds, and gave them some Cattle to drive: these new Shepherds were
taken by the Roman Forragers, who brought them before the Consuls. They were
severally examined, and all affirmed that the Samnites were busied at the siege
of Luceria. The Consuls deceived by this false report, went down through the
narrow passage of the Valley; but as soon as they were got into it, the
Samnites appeared upon the tops of the Mountains. They endeavored all they
could to pass the Defile, but the passage was stopped with strong barricadoes of
Trees hewn down. Then they attempted to go back again, but they found their
retreat obstructed; so that they were taken like Wild Boars in Nets. The
Samnites brought them all under shameful subjection. M. Fabius Ambustus was
elected Dictator.

A. M. 3733. R. 432. QUINTUS PUBLIUS PHILO, L. PAPYRIUS CURSOR. The Consuls of
the foregoing year delivered themselves up willingly to the Samnites, with the
other Commanders who had signed the Treaty of the Furcae Caudinae, to wash away
the shame the Roman people had been reproached with concerning it. The War was
renewed against the Samn^e^s, and Papyr^us besieged Luceria, and took it, and
conquered Pontius, and seven thousand of his men, and set six hundred Hostages
at liberty, that were kept Prisoner there.

A. M. 3734. R. 433. LUCIUS PAPYRIUS CURSOR, or MALUGINENSIS, Q. AEMILIUS
CERETANUS. They named M. Aemilevs Papus Dictator. Papyrius put the Garrison of
the Samnites to the Sword, which had been driven from Satricum.

A. M. 3735 R. 434. M. FOLLIUS FELCINA, L. PLAUTIUS VENNO. A Truce for two
years only was granted to the Samnites, instead of the Peace they sued for. A
Roman Governor was sent to Capua for the first time.

A. M. 3736. R. 435. C. JUNIUS BUBULCUS, Q. AEMILIUS BARBULA. The Roman Law
began to be received in all Italy.

A. M. 3737. R. 436. AULUS SPURIUS or SEMPRONIUS NAUTIUS RUTILIUS, M. POPILIUS
LAENAS. They made L. Aemilius Dictator, who engaged twice the Samnites; in the
first engagement the advantage was equal on both sides: but in the second fight
the Samnites were defeated. Q. Fabius was elected Dictator to succeed him.

A. M. 3739. R. 438. M. PETILIUS LIBO, C. SULPITIUS LONGUS. Cassiodorus
mentions two other Consuls before these, viz. L. Papyrius Junior, Q. Publicius,
or Publius Chilo. The Consuls took the Town of Sora by treachrey, and all the
Inhabitants were put to the Sword, except only two hundred and twenty five of
the chief Authors of the rebellion, who were sent to Rome, where they were
publicly whipped, and then beheaded. The Senate created Q. Menenius Dictator.

A. M. 3740. R. 439. L. PAPYRIUS CURSOR, Q. JUNIUS BRUTUS BUBULCUS. Junius took
Nola and the Fort of Fregellae. C. Petillius was made Dictator to drive the
Nail, to stop the Plague.

A. M. 3741. R. 440. M. VALERIUS, P. DECIUS. Valerius made an end of the War
with the Samnites. Appius Claudius came out of his Censorship, during which the
way called after his name via Appia was paved by his care. He made also the
Canal of Rome called Appian, which brought the Anio into Rome, and was called
Aqua Claudia: it carried the waters to the very top of Mount Aventini. All the
Potitie died this year, though they were thirty young men of that name in
twelve Families.

A. M. 3742. R. 441. C. JUNIUS BRUTUS BUBULCUS, Q. AEMILIUS BARBULA. The
Players upon Flutes and other musical Instruments quitted Rome and retired to
Tivoli, because they were forbidden to drink in Temples. The Senate desired
them to come again, but they refused; whereupon they sent some of their
acquaintance to them, who made them so very drunk, that they, brought them in
Wagons to Rome. After the fumes of the Wine were over, they were amazed to
find themselves in it, and would go back again, but they were forbid upon pain
of death to go out of the Town, and were allowed to mask themselves during
three days every year. Junius re-took Luceria, and killed 20000 Sammtes upon
the spot.

A. M. 3743. R. 442. Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS, Q. MARTIUS RUTILIUS. Fabius fought the
Tuscans and got the victory over them, but the Samnites got the day against the
other Consul. L. Papyrius Cursor was then created Dictator, who triumphed over
the Samnites, and their stately Shields were laid by his orders in the place of
the Assemblies; and this Ornament was so taking, that they adorned in the like
manner the Streets of Rome, where the Statues of the Gods were to pass.

A. M. 3744. R. 443, Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS, P. DECIUS MUS. Sabellicus mentions
neither of them. The Consuls got several advantages, one over the Samnites, and
the other over the Umbrians, who were quite routed.

A. M. 3745. R. 444. Q. APPIUS CLAUDIUS CAECUS, L. VOLUMINOUS FLAMMA. The
Proconsul Q. Fabius defeated the Samnites near Alif, and straightened them so
much in their Camp, that they could not get out of it, but upon condition of
subjecting themselves, and that their Confederates to the number of seven
thousand men, should be publicly exposed to Sale.

A. M. 3746. R. 445. L. CORNELIUS ARVINA, Q. MARTIUS TREMULUS. Cornelius was
much straightened in his Camp by the Samnites and want of Provisions. Martius his
colleague hearing of the condition he was in, came to his relief; the Samnites
marched out to meet him, and fought him, but they were quite routed, and lost
thirty thousand men. Upon the absence of the Consuls, Cornelius Scipio was
created Dictator. The Temple of Salus, devoted by Junius Bubulus during the War
with the Samnites, was Built.

A. M. 3747. R. 446. L. POSTHUMOUS, T. MINUTIUS AUGURINUS. The Consuls besieged
Boviana, and took it. The Coloss of Hercules was found among the Spoils, and
was dedicated in the Capitol, having been first carried in the Consuls Triumph.

A. M. 3748. R. 447. L. SULPITIUS AGERIO, or SAVERIO, P. SEMPRONIUS SOPHUS. The
Peace was concluded with the Samnites. The Aequi made some motions, but at last
they disbanded their Armies so soon as they heard that the Consuls were
marching against them. C. Flavius, Son to Cneus Flavius a freed man, was raised
to the dignity of Aedilis Curulis, notwithstanding the oppositions of the
Patricians. Flavius to be revenged of them, published the Civil Law, which the
Senate and the Patricians had always kept very secret among themselves. He did
also put out the Fasti and Calendars, that every one might know the Feriae, or
Holidays, and dedicated the Temple of Concord. This increased the mortification
of the Patricians, who had then nothing left secret. Q. Fabius Censor,
endeavoring to hinder the Mob from having any share in the elections of
Magistrates, divided the common people in four Tribes, which he called the
Tribes of the Town. The Senate was so pleased with it, that they granted Fabius
the surname of Maximus, which he had not been able to obtain by a great many
victories he had got over the Samnites, Tuscans and Umbians.

A. M. 3749. R. 448. L. GENUTIUS AVENTINUS, SERVIUS CORNELIUS LENTULUS. A
Colony of four thousand men was sent to Sora, and another of six thousand to
Albana. The freedom of the City was granted to the Arpinates. They sent a small
body of Forces into Umbria to repress certain Forragers, who retired into a
deep Den that had two ways to get in, the Roman Forces filled up both ways with
wood, and then set it on Fire, and smothered two thousand of these Forragers in
the Den.

A. M. 3750. R. 449. M. LIVIUS DEUTER, C. AEMILIUS. The Aequi not being able to
suffer the yoke of the Romans, attacked the Colony of Albana, whereupon C.
Junius Bubulcus was created Dictator to punish them, and in eight days time he
suppressed them. He came back to Rome, where he dedicated the Temple of Salus,
which he had vowed during his Consulship. The Marsi rebelled, and M. Valerius
Maximus was made Dictator, who defeated them, and reduced them to the Roman
subjection.

Some record in this place M. VALERIUS CORVINUS MAXIMUS, and P. SEMPRONIUS
SOPHUS; but Livy does not mention 'em.

A. M. 3752. R. 451. M. VALERIUS CORVINUS MAXIMUS, Q. APULLIUS PANSA. They
created four Pontiffs, and five Augurs out of the body of the People: So that
the people shared all dignities of the Commonwealth with the Patricians,
having besides the Populary Tribunes over and above their share. Valerius
proposed the Law of appealing to the People from the Sentences of the Senate,
when a Citizen was condemned to be whipped or dye.

A. M. 3753. R. 452. M. IULVIUS ^OETUS, T. MANLIUS TORQUATUS. The Consul
Manlius fell off his Horse, and broke his Neck, and M. Valerius Maximus
succeeded him. Rome was much pressed with famine, but was relieved by the care
of Fabius Maximus then Commissioner for the Provisions. Two Tribes were added
to the former, viz. the Anniana and Tarentina.

A. M. 3754. R. 453. L. CORNELIUS SCIPIO, FULVIUS CENTUMALUS. The Romans sent
some Forces to the assistance of the Lucani against the Samnites, whom they
defeated near Boviana.

A. M. 3755. R. 454. Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS, P. DECIUS MUS. The Samnites lost a
Battle, in which three thousand two hundred of them were taken Prisoners, and
four thousand four hundred killed.

A. M. 3756. R. 455. L. VOLUMINOUS FLAMMA, APPIUS CLAUDIUS. The Consuls got a
great victory over the Samnites. They killed seven thousand of the Enemies, and
took two thousand Prisoners. A Colony was sent to Minturna, that lies at the
mouth of the River called then Liris, or Clanius, and now Garillan.

A. M. 3757. R. 456. Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS, P. DECIUS MUS. The Tuscans, the
Samnites, and the Umbrians leagued together, and made War against the Roman
people. The 2 Armies being in view of one another, a Wolf that pursued a Hind,
passed in the sight of both Armies; the Soldiers gave a great shout, and
frighted those creatures so much, that the Wolf retired on the Romans side, and
the Hind on the side of the Samnites, who killed her. The Generals of the Roman
Army improved this accident as a good omen, and encouraged their Soldiers
thereby. They told them that the Wolf was an Animal consecrated to Mars, whom
they adored as one of their first Gods. Then they recollected the Fable of the
Wolf of Romulus: the Hind, said they, is consecrated to Diana, and the Samnites
have doubtless provoked that Goddess, by killing a creature that is under her
protection. The Armies engaged with an extreme fury, the Wing commanded by
Decius, not being able to resist the strength of the Enemies yielded every
where; when Decius devoted himself to the Infernal Gods, as his Father had done
before, and flung himself into the thickest Batallions of the Enemies; and yet
Fabius had much ado to get the best of the day. There was at Rome a quarrel
betwixt Women, which was like to bring on a great disorder. Virginia Aulus,
Virginius his Daughter, and Voluminous his Wife, being about to perform her
devotion in the Chapel of the Patrician Chastity, which stood in the Ox
Market, near the Temple of Hercules; the Patrician Ladies would not admit her,
tho she was of a Patrician Family, because they said she had degenerated in
marrying a Plebeian. Virginia would not submit this contest to the decision of
the people; but she built a Chapel in the long Street, which she devoted to
the Plebeian Chastity.

A. M. 3758. R. 457. LUCIUS POSTHUMOUS, ATTILIUS REGULUS. Posthumous fell sick,
the Samnites attacked the Camp of the Consul Attilius, and being favored by a
thick fog, made a great slaughter of his men. Posthumous having recovered his
health, went into Tuscany, and there routed the Tuscans in two several
encounters, took many Towns, and then made a triumphal Entry.

A. M. 3759. R. 458. L. PAPYRIUS CURSOR, SPURIUS CARVILIUS. The Samnites raised
an Army more numerous and powerful than before. They assembled all their Forces
together near Aquilonia, and made a retrenchment in the midst of their Camp
with boards and hurdles of rods walled together, covered with linen clothes,
and armed them with rich and fine arms. Papyrius engaged them, and killed three
and thirty thousand three hundred of them upon the spot, and made three
thousand eight hundred prisoners. The Consuls triumphed. The nineteenth Lustram
was solemnized, and the account of the Citizens being taken, amounted to two
hundred sixty two thousand three hundred and twenty two heads of Families. The
Romans being afflicted with the Plague, sent an Embassy to Epidaurus with rich
presents for Aesculapius, in order, if possible, to bring him to Rome.

A. M. 3760. R. 459. Q. FABIUS GURGES, DECIUS JUNIUS BRUTUS SCEVA. Fabius
fought the Samnites so imprudently, that it was almost agreed upon to recall
him; but Fabius Maximus, his Father, to prevent that disgrace, offered himself
to serve as his Sons Lieutenant. The Senate accepted of it with joy. And this
great man having restored the former posture of affairs, obtained for his Son
the honor of Triumph.

A. M. 3761. R. 460. L POSTHUMOUS, C. JUNIUS BRUTUS BUBULCUS. The Roman
Ambassadors got leave of the Inhabitants of Epidaurus to bring along with them
the God Aesculapius under the shape of a great Serpent, who presented himself
to them in his Temple, and followed them to Rome. He landed at an Island in the
Tyber, and the Romans built there a Temple to his honor.

A. M. 3762. R. 461. P. CORNELIUS RUFINUS, M. or ANNIUS CURIOUS DENTATUS. Curious
triumphed twice, viz. over the Samnites and Sabini. The first made an attempt
upon the fidelity of Curious, and offered him a rich present of Plate, instead
of earthen Dishes they saw him making use of: but this great man told them,
'twas more glorious to command rich men, than to be rich himself.

A. M. 3763. R. 462. M. VALERIUS, Q. CAEDITIUS NOCTUA Colonies were sent to
Cestrae and Adria.

A. M. 3764. R. 463. Q. MARTIUS TREMULUS, P. CORNELIUS ARVINA. They celebrated
the Celsus and Lustram, and took an account of the Citizens of Rome, who were
then increased to the number of two hundred seventy thousand heads of Families.

A. M. 3665. R. 464. M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, C. NAUTIUS RUTILIUS. The people not
being able to pay their Creditors, rebelled, and retired to Janiculum. The
Dictator Q. Horatius pacified the sedition.

A. M. 3766. R. 465. M. VALERIUS POTITUS MAXIMUS, C. AELIUS POETUS. The Gauls
besieged Aretium in Tuscany. The Consul Aelius attempting to relieve the Town,
lost his Army and life there.

A. M. 3767. R. 466. C. CLAUDIUS, M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS. The Gauls, contrary to
the Laws of Nations, murdered the Roman Ambassadors, who were sent to them to
demand the prisoners took before Aritium. This was the occasion of a bloody
War, but the Romans got the best on it.

A. M. 3768. R. 467. C. SERVILIUS TUCCA. L. CAELIUS or CAECILIUS METELLUS. The
Tarentini took some Roman Galleys, and killed the Commander thereof.

A. M. 3769. R. 468. Q. CORNELIUS DOLABELLA, CN. DOMITIUS CALVUS. Dolabella
defeated the Gauls, who came to besiege Rome, which obliged them to make peace
with the Romans, which continued for forty years together.

A. M. 3770. R. 469. C. FABRICIUS LUSCUS, Q. AEMILIUS PAPPUS. The Brutians and
Lucanians besieged Tauranum in Calabria. Fabricius marched against them, and
raised the Siege.

A. M. 3771. R. 470. L. AEMILIUS BARBULA, Q. MARTIUS PHILIPPUS. The Tarentini
finding themselves hard pressed by the Romans, implored the assistance of
Pyrrhus King of Epirus, who was very glad of that opportunity.

A. M. 3772. R. 471. P. VALERIUS LEVINUS, T. CORUNCANUS NEPOS. Pyrrhus came
into Italy; fought the Roman Army, and defeated it by means of his Elephants,
the Romans having never seen any before. Eutropius says that Pyrrhus advanced
as far as Praeneste, and that in his march he increased his forces and party.

A. M. 3773 R. 472. C. FABRICIUS LUSCUS, Q. AEMILIUS PAPPUS. One of Pyrchus's
Physicians came to Fabricius, and offered to poison the King; but the Consul
was struck with horror at his base treachery, and sent him back to his Master,
with a full account of his ill design. Pyrrhus was so pleased with the
generosity of the Cousul, that he sent him all the Prisoners he had taken at
the defeat of Levinus. However, these mutual kindnesses did not make an end of
the War; for they fought, and Pyrrhus again obtained the Victory.

A. M. 3774. R. 473. P. SULPITIUS SAVERIO, P. DECIUS MUS. This second
misfortune did not cast down the courage of the Consuls, they ordered their
Soldiers to attack the Elephants only, which they performed with such success,
that those creatures feeling themselves wounded, ran away, put their own
Soldiers in disorder, and gave the Romans an opportunity to get an entire
Victory. Pyrrhus lost twenty thousand men, and was wounded in the fight.

A. M. 3775. R. 474. P. CORNELIUS RUFUS, C. JUNIUS BRUTUS. Pyrrhus his
confederates were punished.

A. M. 3776. R. 475. Q. FABIUS GURGES, C. GENUTIUS. Several Prodigies terrified
the Roman people, and particularly a Thunderbolt, which struck off the head of
the Statue of Jupiter Capitolinus.

A. M. 3777. R. 476. MANIUS, or M. CURIOUS DENTATUS C. CORNELIUS DENTATUS.
Curious engaged Pyrrhus, defeated him, and killed three and twenty thousand of
his Soldiers. The honor of triumph was permitted him, and four Elephants were
shown the first time at Rome. After this overthrow Pyrrhus returned into
Greece, and came no more into Italy.

A. M. 3778. R. 477. SERVIUS CORNELIUS, M. CURIOUS DENTATUS. C. Fabritius
Censor, expelled P. Cornelius Rufinus a Consulary man out of the Senate,
because he found fifteen marks of silver utensils in his house.

A. M. 3779. R. 478. C. FABRICIUS LICINIUS or LUSCUS, C. CLAUDIUS CINNA. They
numbered the people, and found two hundred seventy one thousand two hundred
twenty four heads of Families. Ptolomeus Philadelphus sent an Embassy to Rome,
to make a league with the Romans. Eutropius reckons this year to be the four
hundred and sixty first after the foundation of Rome, and Cornelius Nepos the
four hundred and seventieth.

A. M. 3780. R. 479. L. PAPYRIUS CURSOR, C. SERVILIUS. The Vestal Seutilia was
convicted of lewdness, contrary to the constitution of her order, and was put
to death according to the laws.

A. M. 3781. R. 480. C. QUINTIUS GULOX, L. GENUTIUS. Eutropius mentions M.
Falius Pictor in the room of Genutius, omitting the following Consuls.

A. M. 3782. R. 481. C. GENUTIUS, CN. CORNELIUS BLASIO. The Mamertini, whom the
Carthaginians had called to their assistance, besieged them in their own
Citadel. These Mamertini were Soldiers of Campania, who after having served
under Agathocles, as Saballicus reports, or under Hiero, according to Polybius,
were put in Garrison in Messina. They were so taken with the situation and
convenience of the place, that they resolved to settle there, and for that
purpose killed all the male Inhabitants whom they came to relieve, and having
seized upon all their effects, and their Wives, they began a new settlement.
They were called Mamertini, that is, the Children of Mars.

A. M. 3783. R. 482. Q. FABIUS PICTOR, Q. OGULIUS GALLUS. There is nothing more
recorded of these Consuls, but their names.

A. M. 3784. R. 483. SEMPRONIUS SOPHUS, APPIUS CLAUDIUS CRASSUS. The Legion who
had seized upon Rhegium during the Consulship of L. Aemilius, was now besieged
and forced to surrender at discretion. All the Soldiers were beheaded. Polybius
tells us, that this Legion consisted of Romans, but Florus says it was made up
of the Inhabitants of Campania, and the Town of Capua.

A. M. 3785. R. 484. M. ATTILIUS REGULUS, L. JUNIUS LIBO. They begun to use
Money at Rome, says Eutropius, and the number of Quaestors was increased.

A. M. 3786. R. 485. DECIUS JUNIUS MUS, CN. FABIUS PICTOR. Volsinia, one of the
chiefest Communities in Tuscany, was oppressed by the Slaves, whom they had
made free. Decius subdued that Rabble, and punished them.

A. M. 3787. R. 486. Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS GURGES, L. MANLIUS.

A. M. 3788. R. 487. APPIUS CLAUDIUS, Q. FULVIUS FLACCUS. Aurelius Victor names
Appius Cl. Caudex, and says, that he was Brother to Appius Claudius Caecus: but
he could be but either his Son or his Nephew. The Mamertini, the greatest
villains in the world, begged the assistance of Romans, who assisted them
rather out of policy and self interest, than affection or justice. This year
the barbarous show of the Gladiators began first; M. and Decius Brutus invented
it, to grace the Funeral pomp of their Fathers. Florus mentions it not till
three years after.

A. M. 3789. R. 488. M. VALERIUS MAXIMUS, M. OTTACILIUS. The Conquest of Sicily
was attempted, and four complete legions were sent on that expedition. Valerius
brought from the City of Catanea in Sicily the first Dial that ever was seen at
Rome. It was set up upon a Pillar over against the Rostra. Claudius went over
into Sicily with a fine Army, and this was the first time that the Roman Horse
passed over the Sea. He gave Battle to the Carthaginians, and vanquished them,
and by this enterprise had the honor to be the first of all the Romans that
got a victory out of Italy.

A. M. 3790. R. 489. L. POSTHUMOUS, Q. MANLIUS. The Consuls took the Town of
Agragas, tho it was relieved by Hanno General of the Carthaginians, with whom
the Romans had a very bloody Battle.

A. M. 3791. R. 490. L. VALERIUS FLACCUS, T. OTTACILIUS CRASSUS. The Romans
fitted out a Fleet, and put sixscore Galleys to Sea. This was the first Navy
the Romans ever had. The Inhabitants were numbered, and amounted to three
hundred seventy two thousand two hundred and fourscore heads of Families,
according to Florus, but Eutropius's account amounts only to two hundred and
ninety two thousand three hundred thirty four.

A. M. 3792. R. 491. CN. CORNELIUS ASINA, C. DUELLIUS NEPOS. Cornelius was
treacherously besieged by Annibal, Duellius his colleague revenged the
Treachery; for he sunk many of the Carthaginian Galleys, took fifty of them,
and chased the Admiral, with all the remaining Ships. After this great victory,
Duellius returned to Rome, where he had the first Naval Triumph. He was also
allowed to have a Torch carried before him in the night, and players upon the
Flute to attend him.

A. M. 3793. R. 492. L. AQUILIUS FLORUS, L. CORNELIUS SCIPIO. Cornelius
defeated the Carthaginians in the Isle of Corsica, where Hanno their General
was killed, fighting for the defense of the Town of Olbia. The Consul buried
him very honorably.

A. M. 3794. R. 493 AULUS ATTILIUS COLLATINUS, Q. or C. SULPITIUS PATERCULUS.
The two Consuls offered the Carthaginians Battle before Palermo, but they
refused it. The Consul Attilius, out of rashness, attempting to engage the
Carthaginian Fleet, had a severe rebuke, but his Lieutenant by his prudence
attoned for it. The Islands of Sardinia and Corsica surrendered themselves to
the Romans after the taking of Caralla.

A. M. 3795. R. 494. C. CORNELIUS, C. ATTILIUS according to Cassiodorus, or M.
ATTILIUS REGULUS and L. MANLIUS according to Polybius, Eutrolius and Florus.
The Consuls put out to Sea with three hundred and fifty Sail, and a hundred and
forty thousand men. The Carthaginians came up to meet them with an equal force,
but the success was not alike, for thirty two of the Enemies Galleys were sunk,
sixty four taken, and the rest chased as far as the coasts of Africa.

Atiilius destroyed a dreadful Serpent, sixscore foot long whose Scales were so
hard, that they were forced to make use of a Balista to kill him. He sent the
skin thereof to Rome.

A. M. 3796. R. 495. Q. CAEDITIUS, L. MANLIUS or M. ATTILIUS REGULUS. Neither
Polybius, Eutropius, or Florus mention these Consuls. The Carthaginians having
lost three Generals, and above eighteen thousand men killed in several Fights,
besides five thousand Prisoners, sent to Sparta to get a General. The Spartans
sent them Xantippus, a prudent man and a great Captain, who beat the Romans in
a fight, where they lost thirty thousand men, besides fifteen thousand that
were taken Prisoners, with the Consul Regulus.

A. M. 3797. R. 496. M. AEMILIUS PAULUS, SERVIUS FULVIUS NOBILIOR. The
Carthaginians, proud of this Victory, put again to Sea, and engaged the Consuls
near Camarina. The Fight was long and obstinate, but the Romans got the
victory, and took a hundred and fourteen Ships of the Enemies. At their return
home, they met with such tempestuous weather, that they could save but
fourscore of their Ships.

A. M. 3798. R. 497. AULUS ATTILIUS, or according to Polybius, L. AQUILIUS, C.
CORNELIUS ASINA. The Consuls besieged Palerma, the chiefest City of the
Carthaginians in Sicily, and took it before it could be relieved. The Senate to
repair the loss of the former year, put two hundred and forty Ships to Sea,
which they sent to bring all that could be recovered of the first Fleet.

A. M. 3799. R. 498. C. SERVILIUS, C. SEMPRONIUS. Eutropius and Sabellicus call
the first by the Surname of Caepio, and the second by that of Blaesus. The
Romans lost two hundred and fifty Ships by stress of weather, upon which they
laid up the remainder of their Fleet, except threescore Galleys, which they
kept to guard the Coasts of Italy.

A. M. 3800. R. 499. C. AURELIUS COTTA, P. SERVILIUS GEMINUS. The Consuls went
over into Sicily, but there was nothing remarkable done on neither side.

A. M. 3801. R. 500. L. CAECILIUS, L. FURIUS or C. CURIOUS, says Sabellicus.
Eutropius gives the first the surname of Metellus, and the second that of
Pacillus. The Carthaginians sustained several Losses both by Sea and Land, and
thereupon they sent Ambassadors to Rome, and the Consul Attilius Regulus, who
was their Prisoner with them to treat for peace; but the Consul dissuaded the
Romans from it, and from exchanging the Prisoners, wherefore they sent back the
Ambassadors: Regulus returned with them according to his Parole. The
Carthaginians being exasperated with this denial, showed their resentment to
Regulus, and invented punishment for him both new and cruel: they put him in a
Vessel stuck full with points of Nails, and rolled it about till the generous
Roman expired.

A. M. 3802. R. 501. C. ATTILIUS REGULUS, L. MANLIUS VOLSO. The Consuls went
over into Sicily, and besieged Lilibaeum both by Sea and Land. Annibal got into
the place with ten thousand men, and made a vigorous Sally, having burnt the
Romans Engines.

A. M. 3803. R. 502. P. CLAUDIUS PULCHER, L. JUNIUS. Claudius seeing that the
siege of Lilibaeum took up a great deal of time, formed a design upon Drepanum
a Sea-Town: but Asdrubal who commanded in the place, having notice of it, drew
his Forces in a line of Battle at the mouth of the Harbor: Claudius was amazed
to see his Enemy in this posture; yet thought fit for the honor of the Romans
to attack him, but Asdrubal sunk many of his Ships, and took ninety three. The
superstitious people imputed this loss to the slight Claudius had made of the
Augur of the sacred Birds: for the Cage being brought before him that he might
take himself the Augur, and seeing that the Birds did not stir toward the Corn
that was laid there for them, he threw the Cage and the Birds into the Sea,
saying, Let them drink, since they will not eat. The people was numbered, and
there was found two hundred-fifty one thousand two hundred twenty two heads of
Families. Junius sailed for Sicily with sixty Ships, thinking to reinforce his
Fleet with the like number of Galleys; but Cartala Admiral of the
Carthaginians, being informed of the course he was steering, stood off to Sea,
and kept his Fleet under sail, to prevent the joining of the two Fleets; but
foreseeing a great storm approaching, he retired under shelter. The Romans who
had but little experience in Sea affairs, seeing themselves at liberty,
attempted to join their Galleys; but they were on a sudden overtaken by so
tempestuous weather, that they lost most part of their Ships.

A. M. 3804. R. 503. P. SERVILIUS GEMINUS, C. AURELIUS COTTA. The siege of
Lilibaeum was continued without any considerable success.

A. M. 3805. R. 504. L. CAECILIUS METELLUS, CN. FABIUS BUTEO. There was a sight
upon Mount Eryx, which Jurius had formerly taken. Sabellieus says that Junius
seized upon Erice, but in all probability he mistakes the Mountain for the City.

A. M. 3806. R. 505. M. FABIUS BUTEO, M. OTTACILIUS CRASSUS. The Fleet of the
Consuls was scattered by a storm, and rendered unfit for any Enterprise.

A. M. 3807. R. 506. M. FABIUS, C. ATTILIUS. Florus thinks that the Praetors
were first created this year; but this sort of Magistracy was in use in Rome
the year before the Consulship of L. Aemilius and L. Sextius. One of them
administered Justice to the Citizens of the Commonwealth, the other to the
Foreigners that came to Rome. They were allowed to use Ivory Chairs, and were
clothed like the Consuls, attended by six Lictors, and rode upon a white Horse.

A. M. 3808. R. 507. A. MANLIUS TORQUATUS, C. SEMPRONIUS. The War continued in
Sicily.

A. M. 3809. R. 508. C. FUNDANIUS, C. SULPITIUS GALLUS. Nothing remarkable
happened this Year.

A. M. 3810. R. 509. C. LUTTATIUS, A. POSTHUMOUS. Luttatius got together two
hundred Galleys, with five Banks of Oars each (Quinqueremes) to drive away
Amilcar Admiral of the Carthaginians, who had infested the Coasts of Italy for
five years together. The Carthaginians had notice of these Sea preparations,
and fitted out a like number of Ships. The two Fleets engaged, and the Romans
had the advantage. Eutropius says, that thirteen thousand of the Enemies were
killed, and two and thirty thousand made Prisoners. This loss obliged them to
sue for peace, which was granted, upon condition that they should quit Sicily,
and pay two thousand Talents ready Money for the charges of the War, and two
hundred every year during the space of twenty years. And thus ended the first
Punick or Carthaginian War, which had continued four and twenty years,
according to Polibius, and two and twenty, according to Eutropius. The Temple
of Janus was shut up.

A. M. 3811. R. 510. Q. LUTTATIUS CATULUS, AULUS MANLIUS TORQUATUS, The Consuls
triumphed over the Falisci, whom they defeated in six days, havving killed
fifteen thousand of their men, and conquered half of their Country.

A. M. 3812. R. 511. C. CLAUDIUS CENTO, M. SEMPRONIUS TRUDITANUS. King Hiero
came to Rome to see the public Shows, and made a present to the Roman people,
of two hundred thousand Bushels of Corn.

A. M. 3813. R. 512. C. MANLIUS, Q. or P. VALERIUS FLACCUS. The Romans sent to
Prolomeus King of Egypt, to offer him a succor of Forces, against King
Antiochus; but he returned them thanks, and would not accept of it. One
Licinus, says Eutropius, about this time introduced Comedy and Tragedy upon the
Roman Stage.

A. M. 3814. R. 513. T. SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS, L. CORNELIUS or L, VALERIUS
FLACCUS. The Romans accepted of Sardinia; which offered to surrender to them.
The Carthaginians were very much displeased at it.

A. M. 3815. R. 514. L. CORNELIUS, Q. FULVIUS. Eutropius says, that the first
of these Consuls was surnamed Lentulus, and the second Flaccus. Fulvius made
war in Liguria: burnt down the Forests, in which the Enemy used to retire.

A. M. 3816. R. 515. C. LICINIUS VARRUS, P. CONELIUS LENTULUS. The Consuls
routed the Ligurians, who were so bold to attack the Romans on the plain.

A. M. 3817. R. 516. T. MANLIUS TORQUATUS, C. ATTILIUS BALBUS. The Consuls
chastised the Sardinians, and Triumphed for the same. The Temple of Janus was
shut up.

A. M. 3818. R. 517. L. POSTHUMOUS ALBINUS, SPURIUS CARVILIUS MAXIMUS, or
according to Eutropius, CN. FULVIUS CENTUNCULUS. War was proclaimed against the
Illyrians, and the Consuls disarmed the Ligurians.

A. M. 3819. R. 518. Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS, M. POMPONIUS MATHO. Tullia a vestal
Virgin was convicted of Unchastity, and punished with death.

A. M. 3820. R. 519. M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS, M. PUBLICIUS MALLEO. Authors relate
nothing of what was transacted during this Consulship.

A. M. 3821. R. 520. C. PAPYRIUS MASSO, M. POMPONIUS MATHO.

A. M. 3822. R. 521. M. AEMILIUS BARBULA, M. JUNIUS PERA. Demetrius King of
Pharos hearing of the preparations the Romans made against Queen Teuca, Widow
to Agron King of Illyria, revolted from her, and joined with another party.

A. M. 3823. R. 522. L. or ANNAEUS POSTHUMOUS ALBINUS, CN. FULVIUS CENTUMALUS.
Posthumous went into Illyrium, where having joined his Forces with those of
Demetrius, he took the Towns of Apollonia and Corcyra, and many other places:
Whereupon Queen Teuca was forced to sue for peace, which was granted to her,
upon condition that she should pay a yearly Tribute, and that the Towns then
taken should remain to the Conqueror.

A. M. 3824. R. 523. Q. FABIUS SPURIUS CARVILIUS. The number of Praetors was
incresed to four.

A. M. 3825. R. 524. P. VALERIUS, M. ATTILIUS REGULUS. The Country taken from
the Gauls was given to the Soldiers; and that imboldened them to take up Arms
against the Romans, and Demetrius, whom they had made King of Pharos joined his
Forces with theirs.

A. M. 3826. R. 525. L. APUSTEIUS, M. VALERIUS MESSALA. The Gauls entered into
Italy with seventy thousand men, and the Romans opposed them with an Army of
eight hundred forty eight thousand foot, and fifty thousand eight hundred Horse.

A. M. 3827. R. 526. C. ATTILIUS, MAMILIUS LEPIDUS or PAPPUS. The Gauls engaged
the Romans, and quite routed them, but as they were returning home, they fell
between the Army of the Consul Attilius, and the remainder of the Forces of
Aemilius that were behind them, so that they were beaten, and lost forty
thousand men in this engagement, with Corgolitanus their King; on the Roman
side Attilius was killed.

A. M. 3828. R. 527. T. MANLIUS TORQUATUS, Q. FULVIUS FLACCUS. They carried on
the War in Liguria and Lombardia; but the Plague and the continued Rains
obliged the Consuls to retire, without having done any considerable thing.

A. M. 3829. R. 528. T. MANLIUS TORQUATUS, Q. FURIUS PHILO or C. FLAMINIUS
NEPOS. This last Consul entered into the Milanese, fought the Enemies with
success, and made his triumphal entry, notwithstanding the opposition of the
Senate. Flaminius is not reckoned among the Consuls, neither in the Fasti, nor
by Cassiodorus, because the Senate design'dto depose him, for some defect of
Formalities in his Election, and for that reason it may be, that his name was
not set down in the Calendars.

A. M. 3831. R. 529. M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, CN. CORNELIUS SCIPIO. They made war
against the Milanejes and Lombards. Marcellus took Milan, and returned to Rome
with great booty, having killed Veridomarus King of the Gauls.

A. M. 3831. R. 530. P. CORNELIUS ASINA, M. MINUTIUS RUFUS. Several Merchants
made a complaint to the Senate, that the Adriatic Sea was become dangerous,
because of the Piracies of the Italians. Rome took hold on this pretense to
proclaim war against them.

A. M. 3832. R. 531. L. VETURIUS PHILO, C. LUTTATIUS CATULUS. Hannibal laid
siege to Saguntum. The Saguntines sent for succor to Rome. The Romans sent
Deputies to Carthage to complain of it; but the Carthaginians, against Hanna's
opinion, accepted of the war, that the Deputies declared against them. The
Inhabitants of Sanguntum being reduced to the last extremity, chose rather to
set their Town on fire, and burn all their Goods and themselves withal, than
surrender to the Enemy. The (...) and the Haminian way were finished.

A. M. 3833. R. 532. M. LIVIUS SALINATOR, L. AEMILIUS PAULUS. This year two
hundred and seventy thousand heads of Families were numbered in Rome. The
enfranchised Slaves, who had been hitherto distributed amongst Tribes, were
divided into four, which were called Aesquilina, Palatina, Suburrana, and
Collina.

A. M. 3834. R. 533. P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO, T. SEMPRONIUS LONGUS. The War being
proclaimed against the Carthaginians, the Romans made public processions to
obtain the favor of the Gods. The Roman Army was four and twenty thousand
Foot, and eighteen hundred Horse strong, all Romans born, besides four and
forty thousand Foot, and four thousand Horse of Confederate Troops; and the
Carthaginians were fourscore thousand Foot, and ten thousand Horse. Hannibal
entered Italy with this Army, and came to the foot of the Alps about the
fifteenth of October, and in nine days he got up to the top of them, in spite
of the High-landers and the Snow, cutting and splitting the Rocks that were in
his way with Fire and Vinegar. Cornelius advanced against him, and met him upon
the banks of the Tessena, where they engaged, and Hannibal was victorious.
Sempronius came to relieve his Colleague, but he had no better success.

A. M. 3835. R. 534. CN. SERVILIUS GEMINUS, C. QUINTIUS FLAMINIUS. The Consul
Flaminius was sent against Hannibal, but he had fifteen thousand men killed in
the Fight, and eight thousand made Prisoners. Q. Fabius Maximus was made
Dictator; his wise and prudent conduct was suspected by the Romans, who ordered
by a Plebiscitum, that the General of the Horse should bear an equal power with
the Dictator.

A. M. 3836. R. 535. C. TERENTIUS VARRO, L. AEMILIUS PAULUS. The two Consuls
offered battle to Hannibal, who willingly accepted it. The Fight began with an
incredible eagerness, and was so bloody, that forty thousand Romans, with the
Consul Aemilius himself, were killed on the spot. Hannibal sent to Rome three
bushels of those Rings, the Roman Knights were for a badge of their Quality.
This overthrow has rendered the Village of Cannae famous to posterity. M.
Junius was created Dictator; They raised new Forces, and armed eight thousand
Slaves, that were bought for that purpose. To complete all their misfortunes,
the Romans received advice of the loss of the Army that Posthumous the Praetor
commanded in Gaul, which was crushed to death, and buried under the Trees of
the Forest Litana. The Gauls had half sawed those Trees, but kept them standing
by means of Ropes and other things, and let them fall on the Romans, when they
saw their whole Army in the Forest.

A. M. 3837. R. 536. T. SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS, MARCUS CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS. The
noise of Thunder being heard during the creation of the Consuls, the Senate
persuaded the People that this bad Omen was occasioned, because the two Consuls
were Plebeians. To avoid all disputes about it, Marcellus of his own accord
laid down his Consulship, and delivered up his place to Q. Fabius Maximus, who
restored the affairs of the Romans by dilatory methods. -- Cunctando restituit
rem.
Enn.

A. M. 3838. R. 537. FABIUS MAXIMUS, M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS. Marcellus met
Hannibal near Nola, and engaged him, but he got no great advantage over him.
The two Scipio's did wonders in Spain. Cneus Scipio forced the Camp of
Asdrubal, and put a supply into Illiturgis, which the Carthaginians had
besieged.

A. M. 3839. R. 538. Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS, T. SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS. Rome was set on
fire and the Incendiaries could not be discovered. Sifax King of Numidia made a
League with the Romans. Massinissa the Son of Gala, a young Prince, seventeen
years of age, defeated Sifax and killed thirty thousand of his men. Fabius
followed Hannibal every where, and encamped so advantageously, that he could
not be forced to fight.

A. M. 3840. R. 539. Q. FULVIUS FLACCUS, APPIUS CLAUDIUS PULCHER. Hannibal took
Tarentum by the treachery of Philomenes and Nico, two young Gentlemen of that
place. Marcellus took Syracusa by storm, having layn before it for three years
together, during which time Archimedes alone, made more resistance against him
with his Engines, than all the Arms of the Carthaginians. P. Scipio was
delivered up to the Enemies by the Geltiberians, or the people of Arragon, and
put to death by the Carthaginians. Cneus his Brother was a short time after
overpowered by three Armies of the Carthaginians.

A. M. 3841. R. 540. CN. FLAVIUS CENTUMALUS, P. SULPITIUS GALBA. Fulvius
besieged Capua, which surrendered to him after a siege of two years. He put to
death fifty six Senators, which were found alive, the others being dead during
the siege, and the rest of the Inhabitants were publicly exposed to sale.

A. M. 3842. R. 541. M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, M. VALERIUS LEVINUS. This last
Consul made an end of the Sicilian war, by the taking of Agrigentum, which was
the last place belonging to the Carthaginians. P. Cornelius Scipio came into
Spain as Proconsul, tho he was but four and twenty years of age. He took Nova
Carthago by storm, and got a very rich booty both of Ammunition and Provisions,
besides many Hostages, that the Spaniards had delivered to the Carthaginians,
and among them a very beautiful young Lady. Scipio enquired about her Country
and Family, and being told that she was betrothed to a young Celtiborian Prince
named Allucius, he sent immediately for her Parents and her Bridegroom, to whom
he delivered up his Spouse, and sent them back again. Valerius Maximus relating
this passage, calls the Bridegroom Indibilis, instead of Allucius, but
Polybius, who lived in the time of that Illustrious Roman, nor Livy do not
confound him with Iudibilis, whom they call King of the Illergetes.

A. M. 3843. R. 542. Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS CUNCTATOR, Q. FULVIUS FLACCUS. Twelve
Roman Colonies refused their usual Supplies of Men and Money; whereupon the
Senate was obliged to have recourse to the Treasure called Aerarium
vicessimarum, which never was made use of but in very urging necessities. They
took out of it four thousand pound weight of Gold, which were applied to the
most pressing exigencies. Scipio went on with the Conquests in Spain. He made a
Confederacy with Iudibilis, and Mandonius, the two greatest Princes of Spain,
whose friendship he had gained by setting at liberty their Wives and Children,
whom he had taken in Nova Carthago. He defeated Asdrubal, and possessed himself
of his Camp, where he got a great booty.

A. M. 3844. R. 543. M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, TITUS QUINTIUS CRISPINUS. Both
Cousuls fell into an Ambuscado of the enemy, where Marvellus was killed, and
Crispinus so wounded, that he died in few days after of his wounds, having
named Dictator T. Manlius Torquatus.

A. M. 3845. R. 544. C. CLAUDIUS NERO, MARCUS LIVIUS, whom Cassiodorus calls
SALINATOR. Asdrubal Barcha came into Italy, to the relief of Hannibal his
brother, and besieged Placentia, but hearing that the Consul Livius was drawing
near him, he raised the Siege, and encamped upon the banks of Metaurus in
Umbria. Nero joined his Colleague with such of the Troops as were able to
march, with the utmost diligence; and before the Carthaginians had notice of
it, the Consuls offered Battle to Asdrubal, who accepted of it, and was killed
in this fight, with five and fifty thousand of his men, and five thousand made
prisoners. Nero being returned to his Camp, ordered the head or Asdrubal (the
only booty he had brought with him) to be thrown among the Carthaginians; and
at the sight of this sad spectacle Hannibal uttered these words, Now I deubt no
more of the misfortune of Carthage. Both Consuls triumphed: Livius on a
Triumphal Chariot, and Nero only on Horseback, because he had fought in the
Army of his Colleague. Nero named Dictator his Colleague Livius, to preside in
the Assemblies.

A. M. 3846. R. 545. L. VETURIUS PHILO, Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS. Scipio went over
into Africa, having made a league with Sifax King of part of Numidia, and upon
his return from that journey fell so dangerously ill, that they gave him over
for dead. This false report being spread in Spain, Iudibilis rebelled, and the
Roman Army itself mutinied, and requested to return into Italy; but the
recovery of Scipio calmed their minds. The Carthaginians perverted Sifax from
the Confederacy made with Scipio, and gave him to wife Sophonisba, Asdrubal
Gisco's daughter, who was promised a long time before to Prince Massanissa.

A. M. 3847. R. 546. P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO AFRICANUS, P. LICINIUS CRASSUS. Mago
came into Italy to the relief of Hannibal. C. Octavius, Praetor of Sicily,
crossing the Sea, took eight Ships laden with Corn designed for Hannibal's
Army. The Praetor of Spain routed the Spaniards, and Indibilis their Commander
was killed in the fight, wherein he behaved himself with a great deal of
courage.

A. M. 3848. R. 547. M. CORNELIUS, whom Cassiodorus calls CETHEGUS, P.
SEMPRONIUS TUDITANUS. Scipio besieged Utica; Sifax and Asdrubal came to relieve
it with four and fifty thousand foot, and thirteen thousand horse. Scipio
raised the Siege, and marched against them. A general review was made of all
the Roman people, and the number of them amounted to two hundred and fiftteen
thousand heads of Families.

A. M. 3849. R. 548. CN. SERVILIUS CAEPIO, CN. SERVILIUS GEMINUS. Scipio being
reinforced with the Numidian horse that Massanissa had brought along with him,
beat the Carthaginians from several Posts. Massanissa took Sifax Prisoner, and
pursued his routed Army as far as Cirtha, the chief City of the dominions of
that unfortunate Prince, which was delivered up to him, with all the Towns of
Numidia, upon advice that their King was taken Prisoner. Scipio took Utica,
which put the Carthaginians into such a consternation, that they sued for
Peace. Q. Caecilius Metellus was elected Dictator.

A. M. 3850. R. 549. M. SERVILIUS GERMINUS, T. CLAUDIUS NERO. Hannibal returned
to Carthage, and was made commander of a very considerable Army, to oppose
Scipio: The Armies engaged, but the Carthaginians were beaten, and lost twenty
thousand men, and as many Prisoners. This loss obliged the Carthaginians to sue
again for Peace, which they obtained on the following conditions, that they
should pay a yearly Tribute to the Romans, that they should keep but four
Galleys in their Harbor, and that they should reimburse in ready Money, the
charges of the War. Scipio came back again to Rome, where he made his Triumphal
Entry.

A. M. 3851. R. 550. CN. CORNELIUS LENTULUS, P. AELIUS PAETUS. A Confederacy
was concluded with the Rhodians and King Attalus.

A. M. 3852. R. 551. P. SULPITIUS GALBA, L. AURELIUS COTTA. The War was
proclaimed against Philip King of Macedon, because he had attacked Illyrium
during the Carthaginian War. L. Furius Praetor of the Gauls defeated Amilcar,
and killed thirty thousand Gauls, both Insubres and Caeromani, and took two
thousand Prisoners.

A. M. 3853. R. 552. L. LENTULUS, P. VELEIUS TAPPULUS. L. Bebius Praetor of the
Gauls was beaten by the Gauls called Insubres, and lost six thousand men.

A. M. 3854. R. 553. SEXTUS AELIUS PAETUS, T. QUINTIUS FLAMINIUS. Quintius had
a Parley with Phllip King of Macedon, but that interview had no effect; for at
last they came to an engagement, wherein the Romans got a Booty, tho the
slaughter was not very great on either side, for King Philip lost but two
thousand men. After this victory Quintius besieged Corinth, but without any
success.

A. M. 3855. R. 554. CN. CORNELIUS CETHEGUS, Q. MINUTIUS RUFUS. Cassiodorus
does not mention these two Consuls in his Chronology. The two Consuls made War,
one in Luguria, and the other in the Country of the Boii. Cornelius engaged the
Ligurians and Milaneses, broke them, and killed fifteen thousand of them, and
took seven thousand Prisoners and among them Amilcar, their Commander, the last
of the Carthaginian Generals that remained in Italy. A battle was fought
between King Philip, and the Consul Quintius, in a place called Cynocephalum in
Thessalia, where the Romans were victorious. The Consul Cornelius triumphed
over the Milaneses, and Minutius obtained but the small. Triumph or Ovation on
Mount Albanus.

A. M. 3856. R. 555. L. FURIUS PURPUREO, M CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, Son to Marcellus
the Great. Flaminius concluded the Peace with King Philip, and thereby restored
the liberty to Greece, causing the same to be proclaimed at the Olympic Games.
A great many Slaves of the Romans got into a Body and rebelled, and had courage
enough to make a stand against a Legion designed to reduce them to their duty;
they were all disarmed and very severely punished.

A. M. 3857. R. 556. L. VALERIUS FLACCUS, M. PORTIUS CATO. Valerius fought
against the Boii, and killed eight thousand of them. Cato being arrived in
Spain, which Province was fallen to his share, routed forty thousand Spaniards,
and brought the whole Country under the Roman subjection. T. Quintius made War
against Tyrannus Nabis, besieged him in Sparta, and forced him to accept of a
disadvantageous Peace.

A. M. 3858. R. 557. P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO AFRICANUS, T. SEMPRONIUS LONGUS.
Flaminius withdrew the Garrisons of the Towns of Acrocorinthus, Demetriades and
Calcidona, and so restored an entire libetty to Greece, and the Greeks
delivered up to him all the Roman Slaves.

A. M. 3859. R. 558. L. CORNELIUS MERULA, Q. MINUTIUS THERMUS. Merula brought
up the Legions against the Boii, and beat them near Modena. There was a
powerful League made against Rome by Antiochus in Asia, the Aetolians in
Greece, and Hannibal in Africa, but so many Confederate Enemies, served only to
add a greater luster in the Roman Glory.

A. M. 3860. R. 559. L. QUINTIUS FLAMINIUS, CN. DOMITIUS AENEOBARDUS. The
League abovementioned began to discover its self in Greece. Antiochus joined
the Aetolians, and took Calcidona.

A. M. 3861. R. 560. L. CORNELIUS SCIPIO NASICA, M. ACILIUS GLABRIO. Acilius
went over into Greece with ten thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse. Antiochus
expected him at the narrow passage of Tempe, where the Consul made a great
slaughter of the Asiaticks, then besieged Heraclea, where the Aetolians after
the defeat of Tempe, were retired. He reduced the place, and forced the Enemies
to beg Peace.

A. M. 3862. R. 561. L. CORNELIUS SCIPIO ASIATICUS, C. LAELIUS NEPOS, whom
Cassiodorus call Africanus, to intimate that he is the same who was Scipio's
Lieutenant in Africa. Antiochus made War against Eumenes King of Armenia, and
besieged Pergamus, the chiefest Town of that Prince's Dominions: but when he
heard that the Consul was marching against him, he raised the Siege, and waited
for him upon the Banks of the Phaenician River, where he lost four and fifty
thousand men. Peace was granted to King Antiochus, upon condition that he
should not extend his Conquests on this side of Mount Taurus. Acilius Glabrio
caused a Statue on Horseback to be made, and set it up in the Temple of Piety,
and consecrated the same to the memory of his Father, whom the Statue
represented. This was the first Statue made of that precious Metal at Rome.

A. M. 3863. R. 562. M. FULVIUS NOBILIOR, C MANLIUS VOLSO. Scipio came back to
Rome, and was the first man that triumphed over the Asiaticks.

A. M. 3864. R. 563. C. VALERIUS MESSALA, C. LIVIUS SALINATOR. The Senate sent
ten Deputies into Asia, to settle the Affairs of Proconsul Manlius Volso.

A. M. 3865. R. 564. M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS L. FLAMINIUS CRASSIPES, or C. FLAVIUS
NEPOS. The Scipio's were both accused by the Tribunes of the people of
embezzling the public Money Scipio Africanus appeared before the Assembly in
white cloth, and having made the Eulogy of his great Achievements, without
excusing himself of the crime laid upon him, he ended his Speech with these
words. Upon this day of the year I destroyed Carthage, Rome's Emulator, let us
go and give thanks to the Gods for the same. Having thus spoken, he went up to
the Captitol, and there he performed his sacrifice.

A. M. 3866. R. 565. SPURIUS POSTHUMOUS ALBINUS, Q. MARTIUS PHILIPPUS. The
Consuls made an exact inquiry into the new superstition of the Bacchanalia that
were celebrated in the night time with horrid lasciviousness. Seven thousand
persons were found guilty of this shameful superstition. The Athletes, the
delight of the Greeks, were introduced into Rome.

A. M. 3867. R. 566. APPIUS CLAUDIUS PULCHER, M. SEMPRONIUS TUDITANUS. The two
Praetors of Spain were routed near Toledo; but a while after they had their
revenge on the banks of the River Tagus, insomuch that out of five and thirty
thousand Spaniards, four thousand only escaped, all the rest being either
killed or taken Prisoners.

A. M. 3868. R. 567. P. CLAUDIUS PULCHER, L. PORCIUS LICINIUS. Cassiodorus
relates some other Consuls instead of these.

A. M. 3869. R. 568. M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, Q. FABIUS LABEO. There was nothing
more remarkable this year than an exact enquiry after the Bacchanalia, and
poisonings. Scipio Africanus, Hannibal and Philopaem^n died this year, tho
Eutropius tells us that Hannibal died two years before.

A. M. 3870. R. 569. CN. BEBIUS PAMPHILUS, L. AEMILIUS PAULUS. The dissolute
life of the Priests of Isis, called Galli, occasioned an order from the Senate,
importing that the Temples of that Goddess, and Serapis should be razed to the
ground, but no man durst execute this Sentence of the Senate, out of a scruple
of Religion: Therefore Paulus Aemilius took himself an Ax, and began to
demolish that Nest of lewd people, and encouraged the workmen by his Example.

A. M. 3871. R. 570. M. BEBIUS PAMPHILUS, P. CORNELIUS LENTULUS or CETHEGUS.
There was found in Numa's Grave three Volumes concerning Religion, Petilius the
Praetor got them burnt without scruple; whereupon he was impeached of Impiety
and Sacrilege; yet he was found not guilty, because he took an Oath, that these
Books tended to the subversion of the Religion then established.

A. M. 3872. R. 571. AULUS POSTHUMOUS ALBINUS LUSCUS, C. CALPURNIUS PISO. This
Consul died a little while after his Election, not without suspicion of having
been poisoned by Quarta Hostilia his Wife, to get the Consulship for her Son,
who she had by a first Husband, called Q. Fulvius Flaccus, who was chosen in
the room of his Father-in-law.

A. M. 3873. R. 572. Q. FULVIUS FLACCUS, L. MANLIUS ACCIDINUS or LUSCUS. The
Ligurii Appuani were transported to Samnium, for it was thought impossible to
keep these fierce people in peace, so long as they could shelter themselves
amongst their Mountains.

A. M. 3874. R. 573. M. JUNIUS BRUTUS, A. MANLIUS VOLSO. Epulo King of the
Istrians took the Field, and by favor of very thick foggy weather drew near
the Camp of the Romans, and at the first onset forced the same; but while he
and his Army were feasting in the Romans Camp, Consul Manlius fell upon them
and defeated them.

A. M. 3875. R. 574. C. CLAUDIUS PULCHER, T. SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS. There was a
Serpent seen at Rome with four feet, which was taken for a prodigy. Claudius
routed the Istrians, and besieged them in Mesatia the chief Town of their
Country, whither they were retired.

A. M. 3876. R. 575. CN. CORNELIUS SCIPIO HISPALUS, Q. PETILIUS SPURINUS.
Cornelius died in his Consulship, and C. Valerius Levinus was chosen in his
room. Consul Levinus forced the Ligurians to retire unto their two Mountains,
called Laetum and Balista, and there besieged them, but was killed at the
beginning of the Fight. This misfortune rather encouraged than disheartened the
Romans, who at last beat the Enemy from those holds.

A. M. 3877. R. 576. M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS, P. MUCIUS SCAEVOLA. Cassiodorus
mentions these two Consuls, though there is nothing recorded during their
Consulship.

A. M. 3878. R. 577 SPURIUS POSTHUMOUS, Q. MUCIUS SCAEVOLA. Polybius does not
mention these two Consuls, and yet Cassiodorus affirms that he has taken his
Chronology out of the Calendars or Fasti of the Capitol, where they are
recorded.

A. M. 3879. R. 578. L. POSTHUMOUS ALBINUS, M. POPILIUS LAENAS. Peace was
granted to the People of Corsica, upon condition that they should pay every
year two hundred thousand pounds weight of Wax.

A. M. 3880. R. 579. C. POPILIUS LAENAS, P. AELIUS LIGUR. A stormy wind drove
away so great a quantity of Locusts into Apulia, that the Land was all over
covered with them. The Roman people solemnly renounced the friendship of
Perseus King of Macedonia, hearing that he was forming a party in Asia against
them.

A. M. 3881. R. 580. P. LICINIUS CRASSUS, C. CASSIUS LONGUS. Perscus defeated
the Roman Army commanded by the Consul Licinius, says Eutropius. This Battle
was fought on the Banks of the River Penes. The Praetor Lucretius laid the
siege before Coronea, and took it by storm with the Town of Thebes.

A. M. 3882. R. 581. C. ATTILIUS SERANUS, C. HOSTILIUS MANCINUS. The Alabandii
out of a base and ridiculous flattery ranked Rome in the number of their Gods,
built her a Temple, and instituted annual Games to the honor of their new
created Goddess. Mancinus got some advantage over Perseus.

A. M. 3883. R. 582. Q. MARTIUS PHILIPPUS, Q. SERVILIUS CAEPIO. Perseus desired
peace, but it was denied him. The Censors forbad the Farmers of the public
Revenues to renew their Lease.

A. M. 3883. R. 583. L. AEMILIUS PAULUS, C. LICINIUS CRASSUS. Paulus Aemilius
was chosen to have the conduct of the Macedonian war, though he was then sixty
years old. He found Perseus encamped, and well fortified upon Mount Olympus,
and forced him to remove from thence, and afterward engaged him. The
Macedonians, after a long and vigorous resistance, were at last overcome, and
Perseus surrendered himself to Paulus Aemilius, who led him in triumph with his
three Children; that unfortunate Prince died in Irons, and two of his Children
before him. Theyoungest called Alexander, was very skilful in Joyners work, and
Turning, and writ so good a hand, that the Register of the Commonwealth took
him for his Clerk: A sad fate of the last Successor of Alexander the Great.
Macedonia was then reduced to a Province, having been governed by thirty Kings,
during nine hundred and twenty three years, but had no great name in the world,
according to Justin, till one hundred and eighty two years before the defeat of
Persius. Paulus Aemilius, as an exemplary punishment of the Illyrians,
quartered his Army in threescore of their chiefest Towns, and at an appointed
day gave them up to be plundered by his Soldiers, who sold one hundred and
fifty thousand Inhabitants for Slaves.

A. M. 3885. R. 584. Q. AELIUS POETUS, M. JUNIUS POENUS. Memmius Praetor of
Spain reduced some Spaniards that were in Rebellion.

A. M. 3886. R. 585. M. MARCELLUS, C. SULPITIUS GALBA. Marcellus made war with
good success.

A. M. 3887. R. 586. CN. OCTAVIUS NEPOS, T. MANLIUS TORQUATUS.

A. M. 3888. R. 587. AULUS MANLIUS TORQUATUS, Q. CASSIUS LONGUS. The war was
carried on in Spain with differing success.

A. M. 3889. R. 588. T. SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS, M. JUVENTIUS. Sempronius reduced
Thracia, and the Country along the River Danube into a Province, and brought
them under the subjection of the Roman Empire.

A. M. 3890. R. 589. P. SCIPIO NASICA, L. MARTIUS FIGULINUS.

A. M. 3891. R. 590. M. VALERIUS MESSALA, C. FANNIUS STRABO.

A. M. 3892. R. 591. L. ANNICIUS GALLUS, CORNELIUS CETHEGUS.

A. M. 3893. R. 592. CN. CORNELIUS DOLABELLA, M. FULVIUS NOBILIOR.

A. M. 3894. R. 593. M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS, C. POPILIUS LAENAS. The Romans sent
people to work in the Mines, that were discovered in Macedonia.

A. M. 3895. R. 594. SEXTUS JULIUS CAESAR, L. AURELIUS ORESTES.

A. M. 3896. R. 595. L. CORNELIUS LENTULUS, C. MARTIUS FIGULINUS.

A. M. 3897. R. 596. P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO NASICA, M. GLAUDIUS MARCELLUS.

A. M. 3898. R. 597. L. POSTHUMOUS ALBINUS, Q. OPIMIUS NEPOS.

A. M. 3899. R. 598. Q. PULVIUS NOBILIOR, T. ANNIUS LUSCUS.

A. M. 3900. R. 599. M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, L. VALERIUS FLACCUS.

A. M. 3901. R. 600. L. LICINIUS LUCULLUS, AULUS POSTHUMOUS ALBINUS. Lucullus
made war against the Celtiberians, and sent Scipio over into Africa, to desire
some Elephants of Massmissa.

A. M. 3902. R. 601. L. QUINTIUS FLAAMINIUS, M. ACILIUS BALBUS.

A. M. 3903. R. 602. L. MARTIUS, M. MANLIUS NEPOS. The reduction of Utica gave
sufficient occasion to the Romans for proclaiming war against the
Carthaginians. They sent over the two Consuls into Africa with one hundred and
fifty Galleys, with five Oars in a seat, (Quiqueremes) one hundred with six
Oars (Sextiremes) and fourscore thousand Foot, all Romans born, and four
thousand of their best Horse. The Carthaginians, surpised at these
preparations of war, sent Deputies to complain to the Senate of this infraction
of a peace so solemnly sworn, and so religiously kept on their side. The Romans
demanded three hundred Hostages, and that they should bring up all their Arms
to the Consuls. The Carthaginians obeyed exactly, they delivered up their
Hostages and their Arms; consisting of Arms for two hundred thousand men, such
as were used in that time, and two thousand Engines of war. When they were thus
disarmed, Marsius told them, that he had orders to destroy their Town, but that
he would give them leave to rebuild another Carthage on the firm Land,
fourscore Furlongs at least off from the Sea. The Carthaginians were
thunderstruck at this cruel Declaration; and though they were without Forces and
Arms they shut up their Gates, and provided themselves with Arms as well as
they could, making use (in that necessity) of their Wives hair, instead of
strings for their Bows.

Asdrubal took the Field with twenty thousand men, and from time to time
supplied the Town with Provisions.

Manlius attempting to rid himself of this troublesome Enemy, fell
inconsiderately into a defile, where he had certainly perished, had not the
Tribune Scipio brought him off.

A. M. 3904. R. 603. SP. POSTHUMOUS ALBINUS, L. CALPURNIUS PISO. The
Carthaginians sent Ambassadors every where for relief; and made such progress
therein, that the Romans were amazed at it.

A. M. 3905. R. 604. P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO AFRICANUS, C. LIVIUS DRUSUS. Scipio
went over into Africa at the desire of the people, tho it was the Province of
his Colleague, and had under his command fourscore thousand Foot, and four
thousand Horse, with leave to raise such number of the Confederates as he
should think fit. Scipio with these Forces by night attacked a quarter of
Carthage, called Megara, on the land's side, took it by storm, and there he
lodged himself, and so kept the besieged from receiving Provisions. At the
beginning of the winter, having left some Troops to block up the place, he
marched with the remaining Forces against Asdrubal, who was very troublesome to
him: Asdrubal not being able to withstand him, got into Nephera, where Scipio
besieged him, and took the place, wherein seventy thousand men were killed.
Scipio returned in the beginning of the Spring, to carry on the siege of
Carthage, and stormed another quarter of the Town, called Cotton, wherein there
was a great slaughter for six days and six nights together. The strongest hold
of Carthage, called Byrsa, was not yet taken, and there, those that could
escape out of Megara and Cotton, had made their retreat; but wanting both
Provisions and Ammunition, they surrendered to Scipio as well as Asdrubal, who
was retired in the Temple of Aesculapius. Five thousand persons of both Sexes
went out of Carthage, which were the deplorable remains of that stately City,
the Rival of Rome, which flourished for six hundred and sixty seven years, or
seven hundred, according to some Authors.

A. M. 3906. R. 605. CN. CORNELIUS CENTUMALUS, L. MEMMIUS. The Achaians opposed
Memmius with a good Army, but were overcome. The Consul pursued the Victory,
laid siege to Corinth, and took it; he razed its walls, and carried all its
fine Ornaments also to Rome. This year Scipio laid Carthage even with the
ground. Corinth flourished for nine hundred and fifty years.

A. M. 3907. R. 606. Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS, L. HOSTILIUS MANCINUS. Fabius routed
Viriatus in Spain.

A. M. 3908. R. 607. SERGIUS SULPITIUS GALBA, L. AURELIUS COTTA. One Andriscus,
who called himself the Son of Philip the fifth King of Macedonia, because he
was like him both in shape and countenance, made some noise in Macedonia. The
Romans at first despised him, but after he had defeated the Praetor Juvetius,
they were afraid of him, says Florus.

A. M. 3909. R. 608. APPIUS CLAUDIUS PULCHER, Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS.

A. M. 3910. R. 609. Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS, Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS. Macedonia fell
to Metellus, who vanquished Andriscus. whom a King of Thracia delivered into
his hands. This pretended King followed the triumphal Chariot of the Consul,
and afterward the Senate ordered he should be put to death, and gave the name
of Macedonicus to the Consul who had overcome him.

A. M. 3911. R. 610. CN. SERVILIUS CAEPIO, Q. POMPEIUS or POMPILIUS RUFUS.
Florusil. 2. c. 17. says that this last Consul had dishonored the Roman name
in Spain, having caused Veriatus to be murdered by one of his Servants, whom
he corrupted for that purpose. Paterculus tells us that this Pompey was the
first of his name that was raised to the Consulship, and charges the Consul
Caepio-with the murder of Viriatus. Eutropius affirms that the murderers
committed the fact of their own accord, and demanded a reward from the Consuls
for the same, who generously answered that they had no reward for crimes. A
Macedonian persuaded seventeen thousand Slaves, that he was son to King
Perseus; but the Praetor Tremelius defeated him, before he had increased his
faction.

A. M. 3912. R. 611. Q. CAEPIO, C. LAELIUS. This last Consul undertook to get
the Agrarian Law enacted; but when he understood that it could not be done
without raising a great confusion in the Commonwealth, he gave it over:
whereupon he got the surname of Sapiens.

A. M. 3913. R. 612. CN. CALPURNIUS PISO, M. POPILIUS LAENAS, whom Florus and
Eutropius call Q. POMPFIUS LAENAS. This last Consul was beaten in Spain by the
Numantini, who might have quite routed him; but had rather make Peace with him,
than provoke the Romans.

A. M. 3914. R. 613. P. CORNELIUS CAEPIO or SCIPIO NASICA, D. JUNIUS BRUTUS.
This Consul beat the Celtae, the Lusitanians and the Galicians at Sea; and was
thereupon surnamed Brutus Galacius.

A. M. 3915. R. 614. M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS, C. HOSTILIUS MANCINUS, who carried on
the siege of Numantia. Being gone out of his Camp against the Augur of the
Auspices, the Numantini attacked the same, seized upon it, and having followed
the Consul, overtook him in a narrow passage, where they might have easily
routed him, had he not concluded a Peace with them: The Senate refused to
ratify that Peace, being disadvantageous and shameful to the Roman people, but
sent Mancinus with his hands bound to Numantia, with the bundle of Rods, the
badge of his dignity.

A. M. 3916. R. 615. P. FURIUS PHILO, SEXTUS ATTILIUS SERANUS. Numantia was
besieged again.

A. M. 3917. R. 616. SERGIUS FULVIUS FLACCUS, Q. CALPURNIUS PISO. The siege of
Numantia was carried on, but very slowly.

A. M. 3918. R. 617. P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO AFRICANUS, C. FULVIUS FLACCUS. Scipio
starved the Numantini, and tho they made several vigorous sallies, reduced them
to such exrremities, that they burnt their Wives, Children, and all that they
had most dear and precious to them, even their Arms, and then rnn naked against
the Arms of the Romans, leaving to Scipio no other ornament of his triumph, but
the bare name of Numantinus. Pliny says that the booty of this rich Town was
but seven thousand, pound weight of Silver, and therefore Florus accounts it
for nothing.

A. M. 3919. R. 618 C. MUTIUS SCAEVOLA, L. CALPURNIUS PISO. The Consul Murtus,
who was a learned Lawyer, persuaded Tiberius Gracchus to get the Agrarian Law
to be received; he brought it about, after a great resistance from the Senate,
who named Commissioners to share the Lands; but allowed but nine obeli a day to
each of them to bear their charges. Attalus King of Pergamus gave by his last
Will his Kingdom and all his goods to the Roman people. Tiberius Gracchus made
use of this opportunity to flatter the people, and demanded that the Money of
Attalus might be distributed among them. The Senate opposed his demand; but
Gracchus went up the Capitol, and a great number of people after him. Then
Scipio Nasica, Jupiter's High Priest cried out, Let those that are for the good
and conservation of the Commonwealth follow me: and having put his Gown over
his head. ascended the Capitol, followed by the Senators and the most rich
among the Plebeians. The people made room for him out of respect to his
Priesthood: but he and his followers making use of the Seats of the Temple,
instead of Arms, knocked down Gracchus with three hundred more of his party.
Aristonicus, who called himself the Son of Attalus, occasioned a second War in
Asia.

A. M. 3920. R. 619. P. POPILIUS LAENAS, P. RUPILIUS. Spain having been
absolutely subdued by the taking of Numantia, it was reduced into a Province.
Florus l. 2. c. 20. says that this year King Attalus died, and gave his
dominions to the Roman people. Judas Machahaeus made a league with the Roman
people: as we read in the book of the Machabees.

A. M. 3921. R. 620. P. LICINIUS CRASSUS, L. VALERIUS FLACCUS. Crassus went
into Asia, to make war against Aristonicus, Attalus's pretended Son, who had
seized upon the Kingdom of Pergamus. The Consul took greater care to lay hold
upon the Treasures of Attalus, than to pursue Aristonicus, who haivng rallied
his Troops, fell upon the Romans and entirely defeated them. Eutrepius l. 4.
and Justinus l. 36. say, that the Consul was killed upon the spot: but Valerius
Maximus relates his death otherwise, and says, that after his overthrow he was
taken by some Thracian Soldiers between Smirna and Elaea, and as they were
bringing him to Aristonicus, he designing to be killed, put a Soldiers eye out
with a Switch he had in his hand, whereupon the Soldier killed him; so died
Crassus, the only Roman Consul who was ever taken alive in War.

A. M. 3922. R. 621. APPIUS or C. CLAUDIUS PULCHER, M. PERPENNA. This last
Consul had order to revenge the affront that Aristonicus had put on the Roman
people. He besieged him in Stratonica, and took him Prisoner, having forced him
to surrender for want of Provisions. The Consul preserved his life, that he
might adorn his Triumph, but he was strangled in prison by order of the Senate.

A. M. 3923. R. 622. C. SEMPRONIUS TUDITANUS, M. AQUILIUS NEPUS. Aquilius made
an end of the War in Asia, by poisoning the Waters. Scipio Nasica Aemilianus
was found dead in his Bed, and by marks that appeared upon his Body, it was
plain that he had been strangled; his own Wife, and Cornelia, the Gracchi's
Mother, were suspected of having committed that crime.

A. M. 3924. R. 623. CN. OCTAVIUS NEPOS, T. ANNIUS LUSCUS.

A. M. 3925. R. 624. L. CASSIUS LONGUS, L. CORNELIUS CINNA. Jonathas, Brother
to Judas Machabaeus, renewed the league with the Romans.

A. M. 3926. R. 625. L. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS, L. AURELIUS ORESTES. One of the
slaves that manured the ground in Sicily, named Eunus, a Syrian born, not being
able to bear the misfortune of his condition, played at first the Enthusiast,
as being inspired by the Goddess of Syria: and said that he was sent from the
Gods, to free the Slaves; and to get credit among the people, he had in his
mouth a Nut full of Brimstone, and setting it dexterously on fire, he blew out
Flames to the great amazement of the vulgar. Two thousand Slaves and others
oppressed with misery, joined him, and with their help he broke open the
Prisons, and unfettered the Slaves, crying out every where Liberty. By these
means he was in few days at the head of threescore thousand men, and got ground
on the Romans. Perpenna being sent against them, took them by Famine, and all
the Prisoners were nailed to the cross.

A. M. 3927. R. 626. M. PLAUTIUS HIPSAEUS, M. FULVIUS FLACCUS. A Slave called
Athenoin, a Sicilian born, and a Shepherd, killed his Master, and got out of
Prison as many Slaves as he could, and put himself at the head of them, taking
upon him the quality of King and Liberator of the Slaves. Aquilius was ordered
to punish him, and made use of the same means, that had so well succeeded with
Perpenna, he had the like good success, except only that Atheneon was not taken
alive, because the Soldiers being too eager to seize him, tore him in pieces.
Fulvius persuaded the Italians to beg the Freedom of Roman Citizens, but the
Senate prevented it.

A. M. 3928. R. 627. C. CASSIUS LONGINUS, C. SEXTIUS CALVINUS. The Allobroges,
Haedui and Averni made war against the Marsitians, ancient Confederates of the
Romans. Sextius who was sent to assist them, destroyed the Allobroges and their
Allies, after a war of three years standing. Eutropius reckons this year to be
the 627 ab urbe condita.

A. M. 3929. R. 628. Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS, Q. QUINTIUS FLAMINIUS. Carthage was
rebuilt two and twenty years after its ruin. Metellus laid siege before
Cantobricum in Spain, and as he was ready to storm it, the besieged laid the
Children of Rethogenes a Spanish Prince, who was on the Romans side, on the
breach. Metellus moved to compassion by the prayers of Rethogenes, raised the
siege and retired.

A. M. 3930. R. 629. CN. DOMITIUS, C. FANNIUS STRABO. Gracchu, Tribune of the
people, got Commission for rebuilding Carthage; and cast a line about it in
seventy days, and called her Junonia. Sextius built a Town in Gallia
Narbonensis, near a spring of mineral waters, which was called Aqua Sextiae.

A. M. 3931. R. 630. L. OPIMIUS, Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS. Opimius revoked all Orders
decreed by Gracchus, and particularly the re-peopling of Carthage, giving out,
that it was not the will of the Gods, who had declared their mind about the
same by a Prodigy, for a Wolf had plucked out the stakes that were driven into
the ground to draw the line about it; Gracchus maintained that that prodigy was
false and forged; and while they were arguing upon that point, a Lictor spoke
so insolently, that he was killed by Gracchus's Faction. The Consul and the
Senate made a great noise for the death of this wretched man, thinking thereby
to raise the people, but on the contrary they expressed their indignation, that
the Senate should make such a disturbance for the death of an insolent Lictor,
who had made no scruple to knock down Tiberius Gracchus Tribune of the people,
an inviolable Magistrate, even in the Temple of Jupiter. Afterward a sedition
broke out in Rome, raised by the faction of Gracchus and that of the Senate.
Opimius promised to give for the Head of Gracchus its weight in Gold, and the
same was brought to him, and was found seventeen pounds eight ounces weight.
Then Opimius built a Temple to the Goddess Concerrd.

A. M. 3932. R. 631. P. MANLIUS NEPOS, C. PAPYRIUS CARBO.

A. M. 3933. R. 632. L. CAECILIUS METELLUS CALVUS, L. AURELIUS COTTA.

A. M. 3934. R. 633. M. PORTIUS CATO, Q. MARTIUS REX. C. Cato, Grandson to Cato
the Great, was fined for having converted several things in Macedonia to his
own use, which belonged to the Republic. A Colony was sent to Narbona.

A. M. 3935. R. 634. P. CAECILIUS METELLUS, Q. MUCIUS'SCAEVOLA. This last
Consul triumphed over Dalmatia.

A. M. 3936. R. 635. C. LICINIUS GETA, Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS EBURNUS.

A. M. 3937. R. 636. M. CAECILIUS METELLUS, M. AEMILIUS SCAURUS. All Arts
serving only for diversion were banished Rome, except playing upon the Roman
Flutes, Singers and Dice players.

A. M. 3938. R. 637. M. ACILLIUS BALBUS, C. PORTIUS CATO.

A. M. 3939. R. 638. C. CAECILIUS METELLUS, CN. PAPIRIUS CARBO. Massinissa King
of Numidia being dead, his Son Micipsa succeeded him alone, after the death of
his Brothers Mastanabal and Gulossa. Micipsa had two Sons Adherbal and
Hiempsal; and his Brother Mastanabal had left a Son called Jugurtha, by a
Concubine, whom the esteem and love that the Numidians had for him, rendered
suspicious to Micipsa; but to get himself sure of him, he adopted him, and made
him an equal sharer with his own Children. A while after this Adoption Micipsa
died, and left his Kingdom to his two Sons, and to Jugurtha, who was so cruel
as to cause Hiempsal to be murdered in the Town of Thirmida. Adherbal took up
Arms to revenge his Brothers death, but was beaten; he had recourse to the
Romans, but Jugartha sent them Ambassadors loaded with Gold and Silver, and
thereby won them over to his interest.

A. M. 3940. R. 639. C. LIVIUS DRUSUS, L. or C. CALPURNIUS PISO. L. Opimius was
sent to divide the Kingdom of Numidia: The lowest Numidia, which is bounded by
the Sea, fell to Adherbal; but so soon as Opimius had left Africa, Jugurtha
invaded his Brother's Territories, where he destroyed all, and besieged him in
Cirtha, the capital City of his Kingdom, and so streighten'd him, that he was
forced to surrender. Jugurtha put him to death with all his faithful Servants.

A. M. 3941. R. 640. P. CORNELIUS SCIPIO NASICA, L. CALPURNIUS BESTIA. The News
of what Jugurtha had done in Africa being brought to Rome, a War was proclaimed
against him, and the Consul Calpurnius was sent into Africa. This cruel Prince
sent an Embassy to Rome, to bribe the Senators and people with rich Presents:
But his Ambassadors were ordered to depart Italy in ten days, and Jugurtha was
summoned to appear at Rome in person to justify himself. He came thither upon
the parole of Cassius the Proeror, who had been sent to notify unto him the
orders of the Senate. Memmius Tribune of the people accused him of having put
to death the two Sons of Massinissa his Father and Benefactor; but he got off
of this impeachment with Money. But upon advice that Massiva Son of Gulossa had
been murdered by his orders, he was shamefully banished out of Rome; and at
his going out of the Town he spoke these words, O infamous Town, thou art to be
sold, if thou could find a buyer. Scipio pulled down a very fine Theater,
that Lucius Cassius had began, lest the Romans courage should be softened and
effeminated by the Luxury and Pleasures of the Greeks.

A. M. 3942. R. 641. SPURIUS POSTHUMOUS ALBINUS, M. MINUTIUS RUFUS. Albinus was
sent against Jugurtha, but he came back to Rome, because the meeting of their
Assemblies or Commitia required his presence, and left his Brother Aulus to
command in Africa: Aulus out of a desire of gaining Glory, laid siege to Stul,
a Town impregnable by its situation; but Jugurtha attacked his Camp in the
night, and made a great slaughter of his men. Aulus retired upon a Hill with
the scattered Remnants of his Army, but Jugurtha besieged him the next day, and
forced him to surrender, upon condition that he should pass under the yoke
himself, and all the rest of his Soldiers, and that he should quit Africa.

A. M. 3943. R. 642. Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS NUMIDICUS, M. SYLLANUS. Metellus
went into Africa, which put Jugurtha under a consternation. Metellus seized
upon Vacca a large Town, where he kept his Magazines, and then besieged Zama
the chief Town of Numidia; but being perpetually harassed by Jugurtha he raised
the Siege.

A. M. 3944. R. 643. SERGIUS SULPITIUS GALBA, M. AEMILIUS SCAURUS. Jugurtha
made great preparations of war, and attempted to corrupt the Roman Garrisons.
The Inhabitants of Vacta, irritated by the Covetousness of the Romans, returned
to the subjection of their ancient Master; but Metellus retook that place,
destroyed the Inhabitants thereof, and permitted his Soldiers to plunder it.
Then he marched against Jugurtha, whom he defeated, and forced him to retire to
Bocus his Son-in-law, King of Mauritania.

A M. 3945. R. 644. L. CASSIUS LONGINUS, C. MARIUS. This last Consul, had the
management of the Affairs of Africa. He formed a design upon Capsa, one of the
most powerful Towns of Africa, took it without resistance, and gave it up to
his Soldiers to be pillaged. Afterward he engaged Bocus and Jugurtha near
Cirtha, and got a complete victory over them. Bocus delivered up his
Father-in-law to Marius, pursuant to a secret Treaty between them.

Hircanus King and Sovereign Pontiff of the Jews, renewed the confederacy with
the Roman people.

A. M. 3946. R. 645. Q. SERVILIUS SEPIO, C. ATTILIUS SERRANUS. The Cimbri and
Teutoni began to fright Italy. Some think these Nations to be the Scythae,
others would have them to be the Germans of the North: They were three hundred
thousand fighting men, besides a great number of Women and Slaves.

A. M. 3947. R. 646. Q. RUTILIUS RUFUS, C. MANLIUS. The Cimbri and Teutoni
defeated the two Consuls on the Banks of the River Rhone. This loss brought so
great a fear upon Rome, that it is paralleled by Historians, with the fright
that seized the Romans, after they were routed at Cannae by Hannibal; they were
afraid the Gauls would come again to besiege the Capitol. Rutilius instituted
Fencing Masters, to teach young Soldiers how to handle their Weapons.

A. M. 3948. R. 647. C. MARIUS, C. FLAVIUS FIMBRIA. The people was in great
terror, and thought that no other man but Marius was able to defend them
against the fury of the Cimbri, wherefore he was named Consul in his absence,
contrary to the laws. Marius came again to Rome, he triumphed over Jugurtha,
and brought into the Exchequer three thousand and seven pounds weight of Gold,
and five thousand seven hundred and seventy five pounds of Silver in the Mass,
besides a great quantity of Gold and Silver Coin. He bestowed all the time of
his Consulship, in making preparations for this great and important Expedition
against the Cimbri.

A. M. 3949. R. 648. C. MARIUS, L. AURELIUS ORESTES. The Cimbri turned their
arms against Spain, and so gave an opportunity to Marius to reinforce his Army,
and bring it under a good Discipline. Orestes died in his Magistracy.

A. M. 3950. R. 649. C. MARIUS, L. LUCTATIUS CATULUS. Marius being informed
that the Cimbri were marching toward Italy, went over the Mountains, and
encamped on the banks of the River Rodanus, now the Rhone: he engaged them in
Provence, and gave such an overthrow, that they lost one hundred thousand men,
either killed or taken Prisoners. The Inhabitants of Marseilles for a long time
enclosed their Vineyards with the bones of the Cimbri and Toutoni, who were
killed in this bloody Fight. Florus says, that Teutobocus their King was made
prisoner and led in triumph to Rome.

A. M. 3951. R. 650. C. MARIUS, MANIUS AQUILIUS. Marius preferred the safety of
Rome before the triumph that was ordained him; and the glory of a second
Victory, to the glory of a victorious entry into Rome, he pursued the Cimbri,
whom he engaged and routed in the plain of Versellae, killing sixscore thousand
of them on the spot, and taking sixty thousand Prisoners. Marius in
consideration of this great Victory, was called the third founder of Rome.

A. M. 3952. R. 651. C. MARIUS, L. VALERIUS FLACCUS. This sixth year of
Marius's Consulship was spent in Actions unworthy of him; for he seconded all
the seditious proposals of Saturninus a Tribune of the People, and obliged the
Senators to take an Oath, that they should follow the Laws made by the people;
which they did with this limitation, Si Leges sunt: There was none but Metellus
that refused to take the Oath. Paterculus and Valerius Maximus both justify
Marius about the death of the Tribune Saturninus, and the Praetor Glaucia. It Is
true that he shut up these two seditious men in the Court of Hostilia; but he
did so, to secure them from the fury of the people, and save them under that
pretense; but the Senate having discovered his design, sent some of his
faction, who got upon the tops of the Neighboring houses, and killed them with
their Darts.

A. M. 3953. R. 652. M. ANTONIUS, AULUS, POSTHUMOUS ALBINUS. The Thracians
rebelled, and committed horrid cruelties on the Romans.

A. M. 3954. R. 653. Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS PIUS, T. DIDIUS. This last Consul
was sent to punish the Thracians, and Metellus in several engagements defeated
two Brothers, called the Herculians, Authors of the Rebellion in Spain.

A. M. 3955. R. 654. CN. CORNELIUS LENTULUS, P. or C. LICINIUS CRASSUS. Cn.
Carbo went over into Gaul to observe the conduct of Crassus, because he had
banished his Father. A while after, finding no fault therewith, he returned
into Rome, and reported that his Father could not be guiltless, seeing he had
been condemned by so just and moderate a man as Crassus.

A. M. 3956. R. 655. CN. DOMITIUS AENEOBARBUS, C. CASSIUS LONGINUS. Ptolomeus
King of Egypt made the Roman people his Heir by his Will.

A. M. 3957. R. 656. P. LICINIUS CRASSUS, Q. MUTIUS SCAEVOLA or SCAEVULA. They
made a Law which was called after their Names Licinia and Mucia, about the
regulation of the Citizens.

A M. 3958. R. 657. CAIUS COELIUS CALDUS, L. DOMITIUS AENEOBARBUS.

A. M. 3959. R. 658. C. VALERIUS FLACCUS, M. HERENNIUS. All was quiet in the
Roman Empire under these Consuls.

A. M. 3960. R. 659. C. CLAUDIUS PULCHER, M. PERPENNA.

A. M. 3961. R. 660. P. or L. MARTIUS PHILIPPUS, SEXTUS JULIUS CAESAR. M.
Livius Drusus Tribune of the people, attempted to restore to the Senate the
right of judging in certain Causes, which Gracchus had got from them, and given
to the Knights. He endeavored also to obtain the freedom of Roman Citizens for
all the Inhabitants of Italy; but he was vigorously opposed: whereupon the
Inhabitants of Italy raised one hundred thousand men, to obtain it by the force
of their Army.

A. M. 3962. R. 661. C. JULIUS CAESAR, C. RUTILIUS LUPUS. The Consuls raised
one hundred thousand men, whom they divided into several Bodies, that they
might resist the several Nations of Italy leagued together; yet they were
worsted every where, and the Consul Rutilius was killed in an Engagement. At
the latter end of the year, Julius Caesar made a Law, granting the freedom of
Rome to the Latins and the Confederates, as Tully says, in his Oration for
Balbus.

A. M. 3963. R. 662. CN. POMPEIUS STRABO, L. PORCIUS CATO. The war against the
Inhabitants of Italy was carried on; There Cato was killed, and several Bodies
of the Army defeated. The Italians seeing the good success of their Affairs,
erected a Commonwealth of their own, which they called the Italian Republic;
and the capital City of this new State was Cornificium; But Pompeius destroyed
their infant Republic, and routed their chief Forces. The Senate granted the
freedom of their City to the Latins that were not of the League, but they were
not incorporated into the thirty five Tribes, nor had the privilege of voting
in the Assemblies.

A. M. 3964. R. 663. L. CORNELIUS SYLLA or SULLA, Q. POMPEIUS RUFUS. Several
prodigies threatened the Roman State with some fatal revolution. A woman was
brought to bed of a Serpent, and great foundings of Trumpets were seen in the
air: These prodigies were the forerunners of the troubles, which were
occasioned by the Civil Wars between Marius and Sylla, which had their rise
from what follows. Marius stood for the command of the Army against Mithridates
King of Pontus, and Sylla pretended the same, for being Consul, that Command
belonged to him; yet Marius made so good an interest for himself, that he
carried it, being seconded by the Tribune Sulpitius. The Consuls being offended
at this proceeding, stopped all Employments and acts of Justice: But Sulpitius
grew so insolently bold, that he attacked the Consuls in the Rostra, and killed
and overthrew all that would oppose his fury. Sylla could find no shelter, but
in the House of Marius, from whence he was not permitted to go out, till he had
passed his word to repeal what he had ordered. Marius sent one of his
Lieutenants to Nola, to oblige the Army to swear fidelity to him, but Sylla
prevented it, and came to the Army before Marius's Lieutenant, whom he caused
to be put to death, as soon as he came into the Camp; and having caused the
Army to take an Oath to him, he marched directly toward Rome, and possessed
himself of the Gate Collina, and some other posts. The Inhabitants made at
first some resistance from the tops of their Houses, but Sylla threatened them
to set the whole Town on fire, if they offered to oppose him. Marius made a
vigorous resistance in the sacred street, but not being able to withstand any
longer, he quitted the Town and went over into Africa. All things being then at
Sylla's command, he called the Senate, and caused Marius and Sulpitius with
their followers to be proscribed, and declared Enemies of the Roman People.

A. M. 3965. R. 664. L. CORNELIUS CINNA, CN. OCTAVIUS FLACCUS. After the
Consul's election, Sylla set out for Rome to make war against Mithridates, and
began this Expedition with the defect of Archelaus one of his Generals.
Octavius expelled Cinna out of Rome, and substituted in his room Cornelius
Merula, the great Priest of Jupiter. After this affront Cinna retired into
Italy, and persuaded the Italians to rebel, enticing them with the promises of
the freedom of Citizens, and of being incorporated into the thirty five Tribes,
that they might be partakers of all the privileges of the Roman people: By
this means Cinna raised a considerable Army, and Marius joined himself to him.
They took the Town of Ostia by treachery, and destroyed all the Inhabitants
thereof. Afterward Marius went over the River Tyber, leaving Cinna on the
other side, and seized the Janiculum, whereupon the Romans sent him
Ambassadors to desire him to come again to Rome; and to that purpose the act
of his banishment was repealed. Marius and Cinna entered again into Rome, and
there made a very great slaughter.

A. M. 3966. R. 665. L. CORNELIUS CINNA, C. MARIUS. Marius died the 17th day of
his seventh Consulship, and Cinna got Valerius Flaccus elected in his room, who
was ordered to go and make war against Mithridates: they made Fimbria, with the
quality of Praetor, his Lieutenant General, that he might have a greater
Authority. He fell out with Placcus, who shamefully deposed him; but this great
Man was revenged of the Consul, and got him murdered in a Well, where he had
hid himself. After his death, Fimbria having the sole command of the Army,
pursued Mithridates, and forced him to retire by sea to Mitilene.

A. M. 3967. R. 666. L. CORNELIUS CINNA, CN. PAPYRIUS CARBO. Cinna went on with
his Murders and Proscriptions. P. Lenas Tribune of the people, caused his
Colleague Sextus Lucilius, to be thrown headlong from the Tarpeian Rock.

A. M. 3968. R. 667. CORNELIUS CINNA, CN. PAPYRIUS CARBO. Sylla divided Asia in
forty four Provinces, and then returned into Italy: Cinna marched against him,
but his own Soldiers mutinied, and killed him in his Camp. Carbo would have no
Colleague.

A. M. 3969. R. 668. L. SCIPIO ASIATICUS, C. NORBANUS FLACCUS. The two Consuls
with the young Marius, opposed Sylla with two powerful Armies; but he defeated
them, and pursued Norbanus so closely, that he besieged him in Capua.

A. M. 3970. R. 669. CN. PAPYRIUS CARBO, C. MARIUS. Sylla engaged Marius near
Signium, and got a full victory, having killed twenty thousand of his men, and
taken eight thousand Prisoners. Offella one of Sylla's Generals besieged Marius
in Praeneste, where he retired after his defeat, and kept him so close that he
could not get off; whereupon he murdered himself. Then Praeneste was delivered
up to Sylla, who got all the Inhabitants together in the place of Arms, and had
them murdered by his Soldiers. Pliny affirms that Sylla found in Praeneste
three thousand pounds weight of Gold, and seven thousand pounds of Silver.
Sylla came again to Rome, where he took the Name of Faustus: He caused himself
to be created perpetual Dictator, and obliged the Senate to approve by a
decree, all that he had done, and all that he should do afterward. He changed
many ancient Laws, and made new ones, and created three hundred Senators, whom
he chose himself out of the Equestrian Order; besides he freed ten thousand
Slaves, to whom he gave the freedom of Citizens, and called them by his name
Cornelians. When he walked in the City, he was attended with four and twenty
Lictors, and a great Guard. At last he quitted the Dictatorship, being guilty
of many Murders, Assassinations, Prescriptions and Banishments.

A. M. 3972. R. 671. M. TULLIUS SILLIUS, CN. ORTILLIUS DOLABELLA. These two
Consuls are recorded in this order in the Chronologies; but it is very likely
that they were both Consuls, during the Year of Sylla's Dictatorship; for we
find that there were Consuls during the perpetual Dictatorship of Caesar, and
the Sovereign Authority of the Emperors.

A. M. 3973. R. 672. L. CORNELIUS SYLLA FAUSTUS, Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS PIUS.
This year all things were very calm.

A. M. 3974. R. 673. P. SERVILIUS ISAURICUS, APPIUS CLAUDIUS PULCHER. Sylla
refused the Consulship and retired into the Country, where he lived the rest of
his days in quiet. The Consul Claudius went into Macedonia, where he died of a
fit of Sickness. His Colleague passed over Mount Taurus, where the Romans never
had been before. He brought Cecilia and Licia under the Roman subjection; and
having in three years time performed the Expedition, returned to Rome, where he
received the honors of Triumph, with the Name of Isaurieus.

A. M. 3975. R. 674. M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS, Q. CATULUS LUCTATIUS, Sylla died:
Lepidus would not permit the Magnificent Funeral designed for him, because of
the Murders he had committed; yet Catulus was allowed to pay to the body of
his Friend all the testimonies of his acknowledgment. Pompeius growing in
credit, sided with the Nobility, and marched at the head of an Army, that
Catulus trusted him with against Brutus, and besieged him in Modena. Pompeius
got the Government of Spain, with the Character of Pro-consul.

A. M. 3976. R. 675. M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS SCAURUS, DECIUS JUNIUS BRUTUS. Scaurus
made Laws to regulate the Expenses of private men. Pompey and Metellus had
several Engagements in Spain with Sertorius, but Pompey was always beaten, and
Metellus always victorious; whereupon Sertorius passed a biting Jest upon
Pompey, as Eutropius and Plutarch relate, If that old woman, said he, rallying
the Physiognomy of Metellus, was not here, I would send this Boy to School,
meaning Pompey, who was then but a Youth.

A. M. 3977. R. 676. CN. OCTAVIUS COSCONIUS, CN. SCRIBONIUS CURIO. This last
Consul succeeded Claudius in the Government of Macedonia. He carried on his
Conquests as far as the River Danube. He spent, three years in these wars, and
afterward came to Rome to make his triumphas entry. Octavius routed the
Dalmatians, took Salonica, and triumphed likewise over that Nation.

A. M. 3978. R. 677. L. OCTAVIUS, C. AURELIUS COTTA. There was nothing
remarkable transacted during their Consulate.

A. M. 3979. R. 678. L. LICINIUS LUCULLUS, M. AURELIUS COTTA. Lucullus got a
Commission to march against Mithridates, who had increased his Forces during
the civil wars of Marius and Sylla; yet he defeated him in several Battles.

A. M. 3980. R. 679. M. LICINIUS LUCULLUS, C. CASSIUS. Spartacus a famous
Gladiator got out of the Prisons of Capua, with seventy of his Companions; and
being at the head of sixty thousand men, who joined themselves to him,
undertook to make war against the Roman people. He routed all the forces that
opposed him; and beat Cassius the Praetor, who would dispute with him the
passage of the River Po, with ten thousand men.

A. M. 3981. R. 680. L. GELLIUS, CORNELIUS LENTULUS. The Senate committed the
care of the war against Spartacus to Crassus, who was followed by the most part
of the Nobility. This General ordered a Trench to be made of fifteen Leagues
long, from one Sea to the other, to enclose Spartacus, and prevent his escape;
but he overcame this obstacle, by filling up the Trench in a certain place with
Fascines, in a very dark and cold night.

A. M. 3982. R. 681. CN. AUFIDIUS ORESTES, P. CORNELIUS LENTULUS SURA. Crassus
pursued Spartacus, who retired toward the Alps, after having lost twelve
thousand men, that Crassus had cut off in several skirmishes. But two of
Crassus's Generals pursuing him with too much precipitation were beaten, and
the Army they commanded cut in pieces. This Victory was the cause of his ruin,
for his Soldiers growing proud of these advantages, forced Crassus to an
Engagement, and were quite routed, and Spartacus himself lost his life. Lucius
was victorious in the famous Battle of Cizicenna against Mithridates; his
Lieutenant General beat the Fleet of the King, and Lucullus having subdued
Paphlagonia, Bithinia; Pontus, and taken Synopae its capital City, he again
defeated Mithridates near Cabyra, and took away from him the lower Armenia.
This unfortunate Prince fled to Tigrannes King of the upper Armenia, who styled
himself King of Kings. Lucuilus followed Mithridates into Armenia; besieged and
took Tigranocerta the chiefest City of the Kingdom, which Tigrannes had built.
Tigrannes, who had besieged Ptolomais, hearing of the great progress of the
Romans, raised the siege and marched against Lucullus; but he was overcome, and
Lucullus took the Town of Nisiba, where Tigrannes was taken prisoner.

A. M. 3983. R. 682. M. LICINIUS CRASSUS, CN. POMPEIUS. Pompey taking notice
that Crassus's opinion prevailed in the Senate, made it his business to gain
the Love of the People, wherefore he restored the Tribunes the authority that
Sylla had taken away from them; and referred the trial of civil and criminal
Causes to the Equestrian Order.

A. M. 3984. R. 683. Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS CRETICUS, Q. HORTENSIUS. The Isle of
Candia revolted, and gave a fair opportunity to Metellus to signalize himself.
He subdued the whole Island in the space of three years, and afterward
obtained the triumph and the surname of Creticus. Appion King of Cyrene and
Lybia died, and by his Will bequeathed his Territories to the Roman people,
with the Towns of Ptolomais, Cyrene and Bernice, says Eutropius. The Capitol
was entirely rebuilt, and dedicated by Quintus Catulus, according to
Cassiedorus. The disturbances between Hircanus and Aristobulus began this year,
and were carried on so far, that they occasioned the destruction of Jerusalem,
and the servitude of the Jews, as Josephus their Historian relates.

A. M. 3985. R. 684. L. CAECILIUS METELLUS, Q. MARTIUS VATIA REX. This year was
employed in ordering and settling the Provinces, that Appion had lest by his
Will to the Roman people.

A. M. 3986. R. 685. M. CALPURNIUS PISO, M. ACILIUS GLABRIO. The Pirates grew
formidable upon the Miditerranean Sea. Pompey was ordered to clear the Sea of
them; whereupon he fitted out five hundred men of war, and raised sixscore
thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse; with these Forces he cleared the Sea in
forty days, and by this quick Expedition he got so far into the esteem of the
people, that they gave him Commission to march against Mithridates and
Tigrannes, to the prejudice of Lucullus, who having almost destroyed them,
deserved the honor of making an end of that war.

A. M. 3987. R. 686. M. ANNIUS or AEMILIUS LEPIDUS, L. MANLIUS TORQUATUS or L.
JULIUS TULLUS.

A. M. 3988. R. 687. L. AURELIUS COTTA, L. MANLIUS TORQUATUS.

A. M. 3989. R. 688. P. JULIUS CAESAR, Q. MARTIUS. (Salustius adds the surname
of Figulinus to that of Martius.) During these three Consulates, Pompey carried
on the war against Mithridates, and killed forty thousand of his Men, having
lost himself but twenty Soldiers. The reason they give of this great
disproportion is, that they engaged in the night, and the Roman Soldiers had
the Moon behind them: So that their shadow being carried near the Enemies, the
Enemies blows could do them no harm. This Battle was fought in Asia Minor:
Mithridates escaped with two men only, and Hipsicratea one of his Wives. A
while after his own Son, having rebelled against him, he killed himself out of
grief. After his death Pompey entered the Territories of Tigrannes, and encamped
within sixteen miles from Artaxates his Capital City. Tigrannes being weakened
by so many losses, and fearing the Army of Pompey, came to him and laid down
his Diadem at his feet; Pompey took it up and gave it to him again, and
contented himself with some Provinces of his Kingdom, with the best part of his
Treasures, which he yielded to the Roman people. Pompey came a while after into
Judea, and inquired into the Quarrel between Hircanus and Aristobulus, upon
pretense of being Mediator between them. Aristobulus, to show how far he
trusted him, put all his strong places into his hands, and made him several
rich presents, and among other, a fine golden Vine a very curious piece of
work; but he was deceived in the protection he expected from Pompey: Therefore
he armed what forces he could, and got into Jerusalem. Pompey pitched his Camp
at the very Gates of it, and carried on the siege vigorously: Aristobulus, to
prevent the ruin of Jerusalem, came out to surrender himself to Pompey; but
while the Roman General was flattering this Prince with hopes, Gabinius his
Lieutenant got into the place, and after a slender resistance they opened the
Gates to Pompey. The faction of Aristobulus got into the Temple, being resolved
to defend themselves; but Pompey besieged them, and took them after a siege of
three months. The Holy Temple was profaned, not only by the uncircumsised
Nations that entered it, but also by the slaughter of the Jewish Priests, who
were promiscuously killed with the Victims. Hircanus was made high Priest, but
was deprived of the Royalty. Pompey left the Treasure of the Sanctuary
untouched.

A. M. 3990. R. 689. M. TULLIUS CICERO, M. ANTONIUS. The City of Jerusalem was
taken during their Consulate. Catiline began his seditious practices. Cicero
quelled this dangerous Conspiracy at its very beginning, having ordered such as
were guilty to be put to death., and obliged Catiline to quit the City. Cato,
who was Tribune of the people, and bore a hatred to Julius Caesar, because he
had an amorous Intreague with Porcia his Sister, would have his name set down
in the number of the Conspiracy; but he put himself under the protection of the
people. Catilline at his going out of Rome, caused the bundle of Rods to be
carried before him, as if he had been Consul, and with this state he got at the
head of twenty thousand men, that Manlius had privately raised. Antonius
assembled quickly an Army, and pursued Catiline with the utmost diligence, that
he might have no time to increase his Forces, and overtook him in the plain of
Pistois, where he engaged him. The Fight was very bloody, but the greatest part
of the Conspirators was killed, with Catiline himself. Scaurus made war against
the Arabians, without any other design, than that he might have an opportunity
to plunder the rich Town of Petra, the chief City of their States; but he took
so ill measures, that his Army would have starved, had not Hircanus the High
Priest of the Jews relieved them. Hircanus afterward became Mediator of the
Peace between Aretas King of the Arabians and the Romans; and the siege of
Petra was raised, upon condition of paying three hundred Talents to Soaurus for
the charges of the war. M. Otho or Roscius Otho then Praetor, procured a Law,
by which it was ordered, that the Equestrian Order should have a distinct place
at the Theater, from that of the people.

A. M. 3991. R. 690. DECIUS JUNIUS SYLLANUS, L. LICINIUS MURENA. Pompey
triumphed for several days together, viz. over the Pirates, over the Kings,
Mithridates, Tigrannes and Aristobulus. The Sons of Mithridates and Tigrannes
and Aristobulus himself followed the triumphal Chariot.

A. M. 3992. R. 691. M. PAPYRIUS or M. CALPURNIUS PISO, M. VALERIUS MESSALA.
Cutiline was killed this year, according to Cassiodorus; but his opinion does
not seem probable; for Salustus expressly observes that this Conspiracy began in
June, during the Consulate of Caesar and Martius. Besides, it is undeniable that
Anthony commanded the forces of the Commonwealth, when Catiline was defeated.

A. M. 3993. R. 692. Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS CELER, L. AFRANIUS. Caesar asked the
Consulates, and making interest for it, reconciled Crassus and Pompey, and
married his Daughter Julia to Pompey.

A. M. 3994. R. 693. C. JULIUS CAESAR, M. CALPURNIUS BIBULUS. As soon as Caesar
was made Consul, he proposed the Agrarian Law. Bibulus vigorously opposed these
novelties, but it was to no purpose; for his Colleague carried every thing, and
also abused him in his person, causing the Fasces that were carried before
Bibulus, to be broke in the presence of Bibulus himself. Bibulus durst not
appear any more after so great an affront, and shut up himself in his own
house, causing his oppositions to be posted up by night: wherefore the people
seeing him no more, said in jest, Julio and Caesare Coss. Caesar got the
Government of Gaul for five years.

A. M. 3995. R. 694. L. CALPURNIUS PISO, AULUS GABINIUS PAULUS. The hatred of
the Tribune Clodius broke out against Cicero, who had impeached him for having
profaned the Mysteries of Ceres, because he went into the house of Calpurnia
dressed in a Woman's Apparel upon the account of Galantry. Cicero to avoid his
fury went into Gaul, where he served in the quality of Caesar's Lieutenant.
Clodius's anger seemed to be over, because Cicero was out of his reach: but
Cicero fell into the snare, for he returned to Rome, where immediately Clodius
accused him of having put to death Lentulus, Cethegus, Sura and other
accomplices of Catiline, without having observed any formality of Justice: Upon
this accusation Cicero was banished Rome, and his Houses both in the Town and
Country were burnt down.

Alexander Son to Aristobulus having made his escape out of Pompey's hands,
came into Judea, where he raised ten thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse,
and then attacked Gabinius, but was beaten. Alexander lost three thousand men,
and retired into Alexandria, where he defended himself for some time; but at
last was forced to surrender. Aristobulus King of the Jews, with Antigonus his
Son, escaped also out of the Prisons of Rome, and would attempt to raise men in
arms as Alexander had done; but he had no better success than Alexander, for he
was brought again prisoner to Rome.

A. M. 3996. R. 695. P. CORNELIUS LENTULUS SPINTER, Q. CAECILIUS METELLUS.
Pompey taking notice that the esteem the people had for him, was lessened by
the Artifices of Clodius, resolved to be revenged of him, and to recall Cicero
out of his banishment, and restore him to all his Estate. Clodius could never
prevent it by his Veto or opposition, for the Senate ordered that all exercise
should cease till Cicero's return. Clodius being afraid that this decree of the
Senate should be approved of by the People, raised as many Men as he could to
prevent it, and Pompey and the Senate likewise raised forces, and engaged
Clodius and his Men. The sight was bloody, but the Senate got the best; and
Cicero returned. The Commission for bringing Corn to Rome was bestowed upon
Pompey, as a reward in consideration of Cicero's return. A while after Milo
murdered Clodius: whereupon Cicero made a sine Apology in the behalf of the
murder of Clodius his Enemy, which is to be seen in his Orations.

A. M. 3997. R. 696. CN. CORNELIUS LENTULUS, L. MARTIUS PHILIPPUS. Caesar
formed the famous Triumvirat with Pompey and Crassus, which was so fatal to the
Commonwealth, that at last it brought the Roman people under the subjection of
one man. Cato and the Consul Martius his Fatherin-law attempted to break this
league, but could not accomplish it.

A. M. 3998. R. 697. CN. POMPEIUS MAGNUS, M. LICINIUS CRASSUS. The Consuls got
an order, by which Caesar should remain in his Government for five years more,
Pompey should be Governor in Spain and Africa, and that Crassus should have
Syria and Egypt, with the absolute power of making war against what Nation
soever he should think fit. Crassus was so impatient of being at war with the
Parthians, that he put to Sea before the Spring, in a very hard season, so that
he lost a great many of his Ships. He plundered the Temple of Jerusalem, which
Pompey and Gabinius had spared out of respect, and carried away two thousand
Talents of consecrated Silver.

An Arabian, whom Plutarch calls Ariamenes, and Appianus Abaris, guided Crassus
and his Army into a dry and barren Plain, and exposed him to the Parthians
fury, who defeated him, killed his Son, and the greatest part of his Soldiers;
he attempted to escape in the dark, but another Arabian, whom he had took for
his Guide, betrayed him also; for he guided his forces during the night, so
that the next morning they were in a great plain, in sight of the Parthians.
Surena the Parthians Commander pretended to be willing to come to a treaty with
Crassus; whereupon the Consul advanced to the Parley, but the Parthians
surrounded him, and killed him with their Arrows.

Caesar was more fortunate in his Government, he defeated the Sicambri and
Usipeles, which were the people of Guelderland and Zutphen, and laid a Bridge
over the River Rhine, and passed over into Germany, where he stayed but
eighteen days, and came back again into Gaul, from whence he undertook the
Conquest of England.

A. M. 3999. R. 698. APPIUS CLAUDIUS PULCHER, L. DOMITIUS AENEOBARBUS. The
death of Crassus created Jealousy betwixt Pompey and Caesar. Julia, Pompey's
Wife, and Caesar's Daughter, died in Childbed. And after her death, Pompey
seeing that Caesar's Victories had got him the love of the people, could not
bear his preference; wherefore he would have laid down his Employments; but
Cato, who was Caesar's Enemy persuaded him to the contrary.

A. M. 4000. R. 699. CN. DOMITIUS CALVUS, M. VALERIUS MESSALA. Caesar went over
a second time into England with eight hundred Sail, and all the choice of the
Nobility of Gaul. The English made no great resistance; Castivelanus their King
submitted to the Romans. The people of Namur and Hainault took up Arms, and
besieged Cicero in his Camp, but Caesar came to his relief and got him off,
being then reduced to the last extremity. Afterward Caesar went toward Rome,
and sent to Pompey to borrow two Legions of him, which Pompey sent him. Scipio
Hipseus and Milo stood both at Rome, with open force for the Consulship;
whereupon the Senate named Pompey the only Consul, with the power of choosing a
Colleague.

A. M. 4001. R. 700. CN. POMPEIUS MAGNUS. He chose for his Colleague Q.
Caecilius Metellus. Pompey being a Widower took Cornelia, Scipio's Daughter,
for his second Wife, and all his care was to make himself sure of the Senate,
to counter-ballance the favor of the people, who declared openly for Caesar.
He was continued Governor of Spain and Africa for four years; and Caesar
obtained the Government of Gaul for the same time. Many disturbances arose in
Gaul, that kept Caesar very busy. He defeated Vercingentorix, besieged and
took Avaricum now Bourges Bituricum, now the chief City in Berry, and Alexia,
near Vellacundirum (Auxerre), and forced Vircingentorix to surrender himself.

A. M. 4002. R. 701. M. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS, SERVIUS SULPITIUS RUFUS. Marcellus
upon Pompey's motion proposed to send a successor to Caesar, but Sulpitius's
Colleague, and the Tribunes of the people opposed it, saying, that Caesar had
obtained his Government for four years, which time was appointed by the Senate,
and that it would argue much injustice and imprudence in the people, to take
his Government from him, while he was victorious, and before the time appointed
by the Senate was expired. The Proposal was then rejected for this time.

A. M. 4003. R. 702. L. AEMILIUS PAULUS, C. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS. Marcellus,
Cousin German to the last Consul of this name, proposed again to recall Caesar,
and send him order to disband his Army; Aemilius on the contrary, added to the
reasons alleged the foregoing year by Sulpitius, that Caesar offered to
disband his Army, if Pompey, who was his declared Enemy, would also break his
Forces. The Tribune Curio seeing that the Senate favored Pompey, made that
proposal to the people, who approved the same, and Anthony Curio's Colleague,
openly read Caesar's Letters in the presence of the people, notwithstanding the
opposition of the Consul Marcellus, who made all his endeavors to prevent it.
Marc. Antony, who was on Casar's side was made their chief Pontiff, and Galba
was debarred of the Consulate, because he had been Caesar's Lieutenant.

A. M. 4004. R. 703. L. CORNELIUS LENTULUS, G. CLAUDIUS MARCELLUS. The two
Consuls favored the party of Pompey, and proposed to recall Caesar and disband
his Army; but Curio and other Friends to Caesar, opposed boldly the Consuls,
who dismissed the Assembly, upon pretense that they grew too hot. Labienus one
of the chiefest General Officers of Caesar forsook him, and went over to
Pompey. The Consuls found out another way to bring their design about; they
exaggerated the shame or disgrace that the defeat of Crassus by the Parthians
had brought upon Rome; and that to revenge that affront, it was necessary to
send two Legions of Caesar's, and two other of Pompey's, with some other Forces
to make war against them. As soon as Caesar had notice of this order, he sent
two of his Legions, with two more that Pompey had lent him. Fabius came to Rome
from Caesar, and delivered his Letters to the Consuls, who were hardly
prevailed upon by the Tribunes, that the same should be read to the Senate, and
would never consent that his offers should be taken into consideration, but
ordered to consider of the present state of the affairs of the Republic.
Lentulus one of the Consuls said, that he would never forsake the Commonwealth,
if they would speak their mind boldly. Scipio, Pompey's Father-in-law, spoke to
the same purpose, and said that Pompey would never forsake the Republic, if
the Senate would stand by it. Whereupon it was ordered that Caesar should
disband his Army by a certain time, or otherwise he should be declared
Criminal. Marc-Anthony and Q. Massius Tribunes of the people opposed this
resolution. The Censor Piso and the Praetor Roscius offered themselves to go to
Caesar, to inform him how the affairs went, but they were not allowed to go,
and all the proceedings were stopped. They had recourse at last to the last
remedies, and to a Decree, by which it was ordered, That the Magistrates should
take care of the safety of the Commonwealth. The Tribunes went out of Rome and
retired to Caesar at Ravenna, where he was expecting an answer suitable to the
equity of his Demands.

The following days the Senate met out of the City, that Pompey might be
present at the Assembly, for being Proconsul, by his Office he could not be at
Rome. Then they raised Forces throughout Italy, and took Money out of the
Exchequer to bear Pompey's charges. Caesar having intelligence of all these
proceedings, assembled his Soldiers, and represented to them in a pathetical
way the injustice of his Enemies, and exhorted them to stand by him against
their violence. The Soldiers cried out presently that they were ready to
protect his Dignity, and that of the Tribunes. Caesar trusting himself to their
fidelity, brought them toward Rimini, where he met the Tribunes of the people,
who came to him to implore his assistance.

All the Towns of Italy where Caesar appeared opened their Gates, and sent away
Pompey's Garrisons. This great progress surpised Pompey's Followers, and
obliged them to quit Rome, and Caesar pursued them as far as Brundusium, where
Pompey crossed over the Sea with the Consuls. Caesar having no Ships to follow
them, returned to Rome. The Magistrates and the Senators that remained there
made Lepidus Inter-Rex, who created C. Julius Caesar Dictator, who recalled the
banished Citizens, and restored them to the possession of their Estates: He
laid down that great Office, after having kept it eleven days only, and then
was made Consul.

A. M. 4005. R. 704. C. JULIUS CAESAR, P. SERVILIUS VATINIUS ISAURICUS. Caesar
had then no other thoughts, but to pursue Pompey; but first of all he thought
fit to make himself Master of Spain, where Pompey had fortified himself a long
while ago. He had several skirmishes on the Segra near Laerida, and so closely
pursued Afranius one of Pompey's Generals, that he was obliged to disband his
Army, composed of seven Roman Legions, and of a great many Confederates. Varro
another General of Pompey's attempted to defend Calis and Cordua, but all the
Neighboring Provinces declared themselves for Caesar, so that he was forced to
yield to his good Fortune, and delivered up his Forces, Ships, and all his
Ammunitions. In the mean time Pompey got together a very strong Fleet, composed
of several Squadrons from Asia, the Cyclades Islands, Corsou, Athens and Egypt,
making in all five hundred Ships, besides the Tenders, and other small Ships.
His Land Forces were not inferior to his Naval Strength, but he had dispersed
his Army into several places, to keep the Provinces in his Interest; and had
then with him but forty five thousand Foot, and seven thousand Horse: Caesar
was not so strong, for his Army consisted only of a thousand Horse, and twenty
two thousand Foot. These two Armies engaged in Thessalia near Pharsalia, and
Pompey's Army was defeated, and himself forced to escape in disguise to
Amphipolis, where he attempted to rally his scattered Forces; but Caesar
pursued him so close, that he had no time to do it, and fled away into Egypt,
where King Ptolomy caused him to be murdered before he landed. Caesar was so
concerned at the news of his death, that the murderers thought they could not
avoid a punishment suitable to their Crime, but by the death of Caesar himself.
Photinus the Eunuch, and Archaelas attacked Caesar, but Methridates King of
Pergamus came to his relief, and delivered him from these Murderers.

A. M. 4006. R. 705. Q. FURIUS CALENUS, P. VATINIUS. Though Caesar was absent
from Rome, yet he was made Dictator the second time, and his Dictatorship
continued for a whole year. He reduced the Kingdom of Pontus into a Roman
Province, and bestowed the Government of it upon Celius Vincinianus. It was
concerning this Victory that Caesar obtained over Pharnaces King of Pontus,
that he wrote to his Friend Anicius, veni, vidi, vici, I am come, I have seen,
I have overcome; to show with what swiftness he had subdued the Kingdom of
Pontus. Caesar returned by way of Asia Minor, and gave the Kingdom of Bosphorus
to Mithridates King of Pergamus, and from thence came to Rome, where his
presence was necessary: After his arrival he disbanded a great part of his
Forces, giving one hundred Crowns to each Soldier, with Lands enough to live
there rich and contented.

A. M. 4007. R. 706. C. JULIUS CAESAR, M. AEMILIUS LEPIDUS. Caesar did not stay
long at Rome, but went over into Africa at the beginning of January, where at
first he was worsted by Labienus's Forces. Afterward he drew the Africans to a
Fight near the Town of Tapsus, where the Forces of Labienus and Afranius, though
reinforced by those of Scipio, were cut in pieces. Caesar gained great Glory in
this Battle; for he got three Camps of the Enemies, killed ten thousand Men, or
fifty thousand, according to Plutarch; made several Prisoners, and lost but one
hundred and fifty Men. After this Victory Caesar marched toward Utica, where
Cato commanded, who seeing all things in a desperate condition killed himself.
Tuba got off safe in the last battle with Petreius, and attempted to retire to
Zama a Town of his own, very strong and well provided, where he had left his
Wife, Children and Treasure, but the Inhabitants thereof shut up the Gates upon
him, and made a present of all his Treasure to Caesar. Afranius and Sylla had
no better fortune, for they fell into a body of the Army, that Sitius, Caesar's
Lieutenant commanded, and Sylla was made prisoner with Pompeia his Wife and
Children. Sitius's Soldiers killed him and Afranius by Caesar's order, who
spared the life of Pompeia and his Children, and restored them to their Estate.
Scipio attempted to get into Spain, but the Winds and the Sea drove him back to
^o^na, where Sitius was returned, who sunk easily all his Ships.

Caesar having subdued Africa, made it a Province, and subjected it to the
Roman Laws. He caused all the Goods of Juba to be sold, and made presents to
his Soldiers of the Money arising by them. Caesar returned to Rome, where he
triumphed for three days together: The first day he triumphed over Egypt, the
second over the Kingdom of Pontus and Pharnaces, and the third over Africa and
King Juba; and in so modest a manner, that there was nothing seen in his
Triumph, that could seem to insult over the memory of those he had vanquished:
The next day after these Triumphs, he entertained all the Roman People at two
and twenty thousand Tables, and gave them the diversion of a great many Fights
of Gladiators, and a representation of a Sea Fight. The Citizens were numbered
and were found 320000 heads of Families, who had escaped the fury of the Civil
Wars.

Pompey's Sons, with the remains of his Party, were retired into that part of
Spain called Vlterior or Baetica, where Caesar pursued and defeated them near
Munda, killing thirty thousand on the spot, among whom were three thousand
Roman Knights, and seventeen Field Officers, with Labienus and Actius Varus.
After this Victory Munda and Cordua were both besieged and taken; Pompey's Sons
died of their wounds.

A. M. 4008. R. 707. Q. FABIUS MAXIMUS, C. TREBONIANUS. Caesar crowned with
Glory after so many Conquests came to Rome, to make his triumphal Entry there;
and then the Senate and the Roman people submitted to him, creating him
perpetual Dictator, and rendered him such Honors that were only due to the
Gods. Rome could never get a more illustrious Master. He applied himself
carefully to all that could contribute to the grandeur and welfare of the Roman
people. He reformed the Calendar, rebuilt and re-populated several Towns; and
undertook to cut the Isthmus of Corinth, which joined Merco to the Continent of
Greece, and terminates the Gulf of Lepanto. He would also join the Anio to the
Tiber, by a Canal that was to be cut from Rome to Circaeum, and fall in at
Terracinae. This great man in the midst of his Grandeur and Prosperity was
murdered in the Senate, and died of three and twenty wounds he received, being
then fifty six years old.

CONSUALIA,
and Consuales Ludi. Feasts and Games instituted the tenth day of August, or of
March, as Ovid says, in the third Book of his Fastorum, in honor of the God
Consus, or God of Counsel, (as it is interpreted by St Austin and Servius.)
Romulus made use of him when he stole the Sabine Virgins, at the Games that
were represented at Rome, where he had invited the Sabines. During this Feast
the Horses and Asses were crowned with Flowers, and rested, and a Mule was
sacrificed to this God. After this sacrifice they represented the Games called
Consuales, afterward named Romani and Circenses; according to the report of
Asconius Paedianus, in his Commentary on the first Verina. Ad id tempus
Circensi spectaculo contenta erat civitas nostra, quod primus Romulus raptis
Virginibus Sabinis Consualium nomine celebravit. Vid. again this word, before
the word Consul.

CONSUS.
The God Consus, or the God of Counsel, according to Servius's interpretation.
Consus, says this Grammarian upon the 8th of the Aeneid, is the God of Counsel,
who has his Temple covered in the great Circus, to show that Counsel ought to
be kept secret: And St Austin lib. 4 de civitate dei, cap. 11. Consus is named
so from the Counsel he gives or inspires men with; but Cyprianus calls him the
God of Cheating and Malice, for it was he that inspired Romulus to ravish the
Sabine Virgins, who came to Rome, to be present at the Games that were there
represented, the Sabines having been invited to them by Romulus. Livy speaking
of the Rape of the Sabines. The Romans, says he, celebrate still in our time
this Feast and Solemnity, and call it Consualia. There is an Altar under ground
very near the great Circus, where they make Sacrifices, attended with great
Illuminations of Fires and Lights; there are also many Horse-races. Wherefore
some name this God (...) or Neptune, and (...) or Earth-mover; affirming that
for that reason his Altar was hid under ground, because Neptune, who is the
Sea, incompasses the Earth. Others pretend that this Feast and Horse-Races were
made in honor of Neptune; but that Altar was consecrated to a certain Spirit
or Demon, keeper of secret Councils.

Varro confirms Livy's opinion, but Dyonysius Halicarnasseni tells us, that the
Romans dedicated a Temple to Neptune the Horse-tamer, and kept a Feast every
year on the sixteenth of August, which the Arcadians called (...), and the
Romans Consualia, during which time the Horses, Mules and Asses rested.

CONTUBERNIUM MILITARE,
A Company of Soldiers that lodge in the same Tent, commanded by a Decunus, or
leader of ten men. This company was the tenth part of a Company of an hundred
men called Centuaria.

CONVIVIUM,
V. Epulum, a Banquet or Feast.

CORAGIUM,
The Obsequies of a Virgin.

CORDAX,
A kind of an old, merry and pleasant Dance, full of ridiculous and extravagant
postures, like Country dances.

CORICEUM,
A part of the Ancient Palaestra. Grammarians don't agree about the meaning of
this word; the greatest part of Interpreters deriving the same from the Greek
word (...) that signifies a young Girl, say, that Coriceum was a place where
young Girls exercised themselves with wrestling and running. Palladio thinks
they were little Schools for Girls. Others take its Etymology from the Greek
word (...) i. e. the Hair, as if it were an appointed place for shaving.
Mercurialis, without troubling himself with the Etymology, affirms that it was
a place where they laid up the Wrestlers Clothes, or such as went into the
Baths; and gives no other reason for the same, but only that such a room was
requisite in the Palaestra: but Baldus tells us, that this word Coriceum is
derived from the Greek word (...), which signifies a Ball, and his
interpretation of this word seems the most reasonable; wherefore we may say,
that Coryceum is a place where men play at long Tennis, vulgarly called Welsh
Tennis, or at Baloon, which was a necessary thing in a wrestling place.

CORINTHUS.
Corinth the chief City of Achaia, placed in the middle of the Isthmus of
Peloponnessus between the Ionian and the Aegean Seas. It was built first by
Sisiphus the Son of Aeolus, and named Corcyra, according to Strabo; and after
having been destroyed, it was rebuilt by Corinthus, Pelops his Son, and called
after his Name Corinthus. The Corinthians abused the Roman Ambassadors,
whereupon Mummius was sent thither, who put the Inhabitants to the sword, and
razed the Town to the ground.

CORINTHIUM.
Viz. AES. Corinthian Brass. Pliny mentions three sorts of Corinthian Brass;
viz. the white, red and the mixed colored: this diversity arises from the
proportion of the three sorts of Metals whereof it is compounded, which are
Gold, Silver and Copper, which according to Pliny and Florus, were mixed
together when the City of Corinth was burnt, for many Statues and Vessels of
these three Metals were melted down and so incorporated.

CORINTHIUS,
Viz. ORDO. The Corinthian Order, one of the three orders of Architecture;
consisting in its Pillars and Chapter, which is adorned with Carvers work, of
two ranks of fine leaves, sixteen in number, being cut therein, and from whence
come out so many small branches or stalks, covered again with the same number
of Cartridges. This order was invented by Callimachus Stonecutter, who by
chance found a Basket set upon a plant of Acanthus, covered with a tile, that
had very much bent its leaves. This new Figure pleased him, and he imitated it
in the Pillars he wrought afterward at Corinth, settling and regulating upon
this Model all the proportions and measures of the Corinthian Order.
Villappendus says, that this History of Callimachus is a Fable, that the Greeks
did not invent the Corinthian Chapter, but took the Model thereof from the
Temple of Solomon, where the top of the Pillars were adorned, as he says, with
leaves of Palm Trees, unto which the leaves of an Olive Tree are more like than
those of an Acanthus, which he tells us, never were used by the Ancients in the
Corinthian Chapiters: However, the contrary is observed in many tops of
Pillars, that are yet to be seen in Greece, and even in the Pillars called
Tutelles at Bourdeaux, the tops whereof are of the Corinthian Order, with the
leaves of Acanthus.

CORIOLANUS.
After the taking of the Town of Corioli, the Consul C. Martius took the
Surname of Coriolanus. Dionysius Hallicarnasseus tells us, that Coriolanus
being upon the Guard, the Enemies made a sally out of the Town and attacked him
in his post, but he beat them back so vigorously, that he entered the Town
along with them, and set it on fire; which brought such terror upon the
Inhabitants and the Garrison, that they quitted the place. Plutarch relates
this in a different manner, and says, that the Consul having engaged the Volsci
some miles from Corioli, he performed wonderful deeds of Valor; and having
routed them, he went at the head of a body of Reserve, and charged the Rear of
the Enemies, who flying into Corioli for shelter, he got in promiscuously with
them, and made himself Master of the Town. This great Captain, proud of the
Nobility of his Family and his Rank, does treat the Roman people with too much
Authority, and exasperated them to that degree, that they banished him out of
Rome. Coriolanus highly resenting this Affront, retired among the Volsci, and
came at the head of them to incamp on the Cluvian Trenches, two leaguesoff
Rome, after he had taken many Towns from the Romans. The Romans, afraid of
their lives, attempted to move him by Prayers. The Pontiffs and the most
considerable of the Senate were sent to him, but could not prevail with him,
and he yielded only to the solicitations of his Mother and his wife Volumnia.
He brought again the Volsci into their own Country, but they put him to death
for having been so favorable to his Country.

CORNELIA,
Viz. FAMILIA. The Cornelian Family. Many great men and worthy Ladies in the
Roman Commonwealth came from that Illustrious Family.

CORNELIA,
Pompey's Wife, for whom he had more tenderness and regard, than for the whole
Empire. All his fear was upon her account, and he took more care to save her
from the public danger, than to prevent the ruin of the Universe.

-- Seponere tutum,
Conjugii decrevit onus; Lesboque remotam
Te procul a saevi strepitu, Cornelia, belli.
Lucanus. After the loss of the battle of Pharsalia, Pompey encouraged her to
constancy, telling her, that if she had loved only the person of her Husband,
she had lost nothing; and if she had loved his Fortune, she might be glad to
have now nothing else to love but his Person.

-- Tu nulla tulisti,
Bello damna meo. Vivit post praelia magnus,
Sed forma perit: quod defles, illud amasti.
Luc. Cornelia embarked with Pompey, and departed from the Island of Lesbos,
where she was left during the war. The Inhabitants of the Island were generally
sorry at her departure, because she had lived all the while she was there,
during her Husbands profperity, with the same modesty as she should have done
in time of his adversity. Stantis adhuc fati vixit quasi conjuge victo.


After the death of Pompey, she took no other pleasure but in mourning, and
seemed to love her grief, as much as she had loved Pompey. -- Saevumque arcte
complexa dolorem,
Parfruitus lacrymis, and amat pro conjuge luctum.


CORNELIUS COSSUS,
A military Tribune, who killed Voluminous King of the Veientes in a pitched
battle, and consecrated his Spoils called Opimae, to Jupiter surnamed
Pheretrius.

CORNELIUS MERULA,
He was Consul and Priest to Jupiter. He sided with Sylla, and got his Veins
opened, for fear of falling into the hands of Marius, who had seized upon Rome
with his party.

CORNELIUS GALLUS,
An intimate Friend to Augustas and Virgil, whose Encomium you may read in the
4th Book of his Georgicks; under the name of Aristeus. He killed himself
because he had been suspected of Treachery.

CORNELIUS SEVERUS,
An Heroic Poet and a Declaimer; Quintilian and seneca speak commendably of
him.

CORNELIUS TACITUS,
A Famous Historian and a wise Politician, who wrote the History of the Roman
Emperors in sixteen Books of Annals, beginning from the death of Augustus. The
six, seven, eight and ninth Books are lost.

There were many other Illustrious Men of that Family.

CORNICEN.
He that blows a Horn or Cornet, invented by Marsyas in Phrygia. It Is a kind
of a great Flute, with seven holes; there are some that are straight, made of a
whole piece of wood, of Service-tree or Plum-tree: Some others are of two
pieces and crooked.

The Ancients made use of them in War and Sacrifices; those that were used in
Sacrifices were commonly made with Box-tree, and those used for the Games were
of Silver, or of Bones of Asses Legs, the sound whereof was more clear, as
Plutarch relates it.

CORNICULARIJ.
A kind of Officers that stood at a corner of the Bar, where the Magistrate
administered Justice, to hinder the people from coming in and disturbing the
Magistrate: Cornicularii, quia Cornibus secretarii praetoriani praeerant, says
Cassiodorus.

CORNIX,
A Crow, a Bird with black Feathers, lesser than a Raven, but croaking and
feeding upon Carrion like him. She fore-tells the Rain with her croaking, which
was accounted a bad Omen to him that began any undertaking. Saepe sinistra cava
praedixit ab ilico Cornix.
Virg. Eclog. 1.

And sometimes it was a good Omen. Farpeio quondam quae sedit culmine Cornix,
Est been non potuit dicere, dixit erit.
Epigram. Maronis.

Yet the Crow was under the protection of Concord, for Aelianus tells us, that
the Ancients were used to call upon the Crow in their Weddings. Politianus
affirms that he has seen a Golden Medal of the young Faustina, Marcus Aurelius
his Daughter, and Wife to L. Verus, on the reverse whereof a Crow was
represented as the Symbol of Concord.

CORNU,
The Horny hard part that grows on the head and at the feet of many Animals.
The Ancients, says Plutarch, hung up Stags horns in the Temples of Diana, to
show that she was the Goddess of hunting. Servius tells us, that they
represented the God of Sleep with a Horn.

CORNU-COPIA,
The Horn of Plenty, according to the Fable; it is a Horn from which came out
all things that could be wished for, out of a privilege that Jupiter gave his
Nurse, whom they supposed to have been a She-goat or Amalthea. This Fable is
grounded upon the fruitfulness of a Territory of Libia, whose Figure is like an
Ox's Horn, very abundant in Wine and rare Fruits, which King Ammon gave to his
Daughter Amalthea, whom the Poets have supposed to have been Jupiter's Nurse.

CORONA,
A Crown. Crowns were added to Honor, Virtue and the Achievements of great
men, by Priests in Sacrifices, by the people in Game, Shows and Feastings: and
because of their several uses, they were made of several Materials, as we shall
see afterward.

The Crowns that were bestowed upon merit, and for reward of great Actions were
called Civica, Obsidionalis, Muralis, Castrensis, Navalis, Vallaris, Ovalis,
and Triumphalis.

The Crown Civica was made of Branches of Oak with Acorns, or of ground Oak,
and was given to such who had saved a Citizens life in a battle, having
defended him, and killed his Enemy.

The Crown Obsidionalis, was made of Grass called Gramen, gathered in the Camp,
and given in honor of the courage of the Soldier or Captain, who had forced
the Enemy to raise the siege of a Town or Camp.

The Crown Muralis was bestowed upon him, who had first scaled the Wall of a
besieged Town or some other place, and entered by the breach. This Crown was of
Gold or Silver, with Battlements of old Walls round about, in the form of Beams.

The Crowns Castrensis and Vallaris were granted to such, who forced the
Palisadoes and the Camp of the Enemies, and beat them from the Trenches and the
Fences where they were retired. This Crown was made of Gold and Silver, with
Pales of Palisadoes round about, like so many Rays.

The Crown Navalis was of the same metal with the two former, formed with Beaks
of Ships, and was given to him who first boarded the Enemies Ships.

The Crown Triumphalis was at first made of Laurel; but afterward they made it
of Gold: the Cities sent it to the victorious General, to wear on the day of
his Triumphal Entry.

The Crown Ovalis was granted to him, who had obtained the lesser Triumph,
called Ovatio, and was made of branches of Myrtletree.

They likewise crowned the Conquerors in the public Games of Greece; the Crown
of the Olympic Games dedicated to Jupiter, was made of wild Olive Tree. That
of the Pythian Games, celebrated in the honor of Apollo, for the defeat of the
Serpent Pytho, was of Laurel. That of the Isthmian Games, solemnized in the
honor of Palemon, kept in the Isthmus of Corinth, was made of branches of
Pine Tree: and that of the Nemaean Games, celebrated in the honor of the young
Archemorus, they gave a Crown of Smallage: and this is confirmed by the four
following Latin Verses of Alciatus, translated out of the Greek of Archias.

Sacra per Argivas-certamina quatuor urbes
Sunt; duo facta viris, and duo Coelitibus.
Vt Jovis and Phaebi, Melicertaeque Archemorique
Proemia sunt pinus, poma, apium, atque olea.
In public Feastings and Rejoycings they were crowned with Ivy, Roses, and
other natural and artificial Flowers. Pliny tells us, that these Crowns or
Garlands of Flowers were not used, and that they were kept for the Statues of
the Celestial Gods. Menestus and Callimachus both Physicians, wrote against the
use of Crowns of Flowers in Feastings, saying that they were hurtful to the
Brain: but Typho another Physician, and Aristo a Peripatetick Philosopher
maintained the contrary, and said that Flowers may open the pores of the Head,
and make a free passage for the fumes of the Meat and Wine. It might however
fall out, that some Flowers and Herbs may hurt the Brain; and this may be the
reason why they left off the use of Garlands of Flowers, and made use of little
woollen Bands, which they tied up about their Heads in their merry Meetings.

Livy tells us at the end of his first Decade, that in the Year 460, all the
Romans assisted at public Games, with their Heads crowned with Laurel or
Flowers, eodem anno coronati primum ob res bello been gestas, ludos Romanos
spectaverunt, and the Conquerors were crowned with Palm-branches.

They likewise crowned themselves with Flowers and Herbs, at the Sacrifices and
Feasts in honor of the Gods; as it appears by ancient Marbles.

They gave also the Gladiators, that were made free, a Crown of Wool.

CORONA,
In Architecture, is that part of the Cornish, which is called the Caves.
Vitruvius by the word Corona understands the whole Cornish.

CORONA LATA,
The Cornish of the Dorick Order, according to Vitruvius.

CORONIS,
The Goddess Coronis, worshipped in Sicyonia, according to Pausanias: She had
no Temple, but they offered Sacrifices to her in the Temple of Pallas.

CORONIS,
Phlegias's Daughter, loved by Apollo; but being grown too familiar with
Ischis, the Son of Elatus of Thessalia, a Raven who saw them together,
acquainted Apollo with it. This raised his jealousy to that height that he
slew her; and took the Child out of her Womb, with the help of Mercurius, and
called him Aesculapius, whom he committed to the care of Chiron the Centaur to
be brought up, and the Raven's Feathers that were white before were changed
into black, that he might mourn for ever for the death of Coronis, Apollo's
Mistress. Pindar does not mention any thing of the Raven, but says, that Apollo
discovered himself the Infidelity of his Mistress, that he slew her, and took
the Child out of the womb of Coronis, as they were going to burn her on a
Funeral Pile.

CORTINA TRIPOS,
A threefooted Stool, covered with the skin of the Serpent Pytho, whereupon the
Pythonissa or Priestess of the Temple of Apollo of Delphis, sat down to
pronounce the Oracles of that God. Virgil takes this word for the Oracle
itself. Nec te Phaebi Cortina fefellit.
1. Aen.

The Oracle of Apollo has not deceived you.

CORVINUS,
A Surname given to Valerius Maximus a Tribune, during the Consulate of Furius
and Appius ccccv years after the foundation of Rome, when the Gauls entered
Italy: The two Armies being then in presence, a Gaul, of the stature of a
Giant, came out of the Camp, and challenged the stoutest of the Romans.
Valerius accepted the challenge, having first obtained leave of the Consuls;
and fought him in the sight of both Armies: But the Historians observe a
wonderful thing, that a Raven fell upon the Giant, and sometimes blinded him
with his Wings, sometimes peck'd him, and scratched his Face and his Hands, and
sometimes pearching upon the headpiece of Valerius, he assisted him to get the
Victory, insomuch that he killed his Enemy on the spot; whereupon he took the
name of Carvinus, and was so much considered since, that Augustus erected him a
Statue in the Marketplace of Rome.

CORVUS,
A Raven, a Brid of good Omen. Apollo took an Antipathy against him, because
his indiscreet prattling caused the death of Coronis his beloved Mistress, whom
he killed out of jealousy: in punishment whereof, he changed his white
Feathers into black ones, as we learn it from Ovid, l. 2. Metamorphosis.
Sperantemque sibi non falsae praemia linguae,
Inter aves albas vetuit consistere corvum.


It Is said, that young Ravens taken out of their Nest, and exposed to the smoke
of brimstone-flower, become white.

Ovid tells us, that Phoebus sent the Raven to fetch water, but having tarried
too long, he excused his long stay upon the want of a Pitcher, and the fright
he was put in by a Serpent; but the truth was, that he staid till the Figs were
ripe, to feed upon them. Apollo did punish his lying, and forbid him to drink
all the while the Figs were growing ripe.

Addis, ait, culpae mendacia, Phoebus? and audes
Fatidicum verbis fallere velle Deum?
At tibi, dum lactens haerebit in arbore ficus,
De nullo gelidae font bibantur aquae.
The Poets have disguised a Physical Truth under this Fable; for the Ravens are
sick and thirsty, all the while the Figs are milky, according to Pliny: Corvi
aegrescunt sexagenis diebus siti maxim, antiquam fici coquantur autumno.

CORVUS,
An Engine to pull down a Wall, called also a Crane; this Engine of War was
found out by Cetras a Chalcedonian, which was made use of, says Polybius, to
grapple the Ships of the Enemies. This Historian makes an obscure description
of it, and all that we can understand, is that there was a Pillar and a Ladder
that turned upon it, at the end of the Ladder there was a Pully, through which
went a Rope, having a very heavy Iron Hook to it, which they let fall into the
Enemies Ship.

CORYBANTES,
The Priests of the Goddess Cybele, the Mother of the Gods, according to the
Fable; at the celebration of this Goddess's Mysteries, they ran up and down by
Precipices, with their hair dishevelled. Some made incisions in their Elbow and
elsewhere, others blew a Horn, beat the Drum, and played upon the Cymbals: So
that Mount Ida resounded with their cries and debaucheries. By the help of this
horrid noise they saved Jupiter from the hands of Saturn, who would have
devoured him, according to the agreement made with Titan his Brother. They
first inhabited Mount Ida, in Phrygia, thence they went to an Island called
Creta, or Candia, upon a Mount that they likewise called Ida; and here they
saved Jupiter with skipping and dancing, which they did perform by striking
with Swords and Darts against Shields. It Is said that Rhea taught her Priests
this dance in Creet and Phrygia. Some Authors confound the Corybantes with the
Curetes and Idaei Dactyli. This word is derived from the Greek (...) which
signifies to to toss the head to and fro, as mad men do; but Diodorus Siculus
writes, that they are called Corybantes, from one Corybantes the Son of Jason
and Cibele, who introduced the mysteries of that Goddess in Phrygia.

CORYCEUM,
vid. Coriceum.

COTHURNUS,
A Buskin, a kind of Shoe that the Roman Ladies did wear, that they might
appear the taller. It was worn also by Actors of Tragedies, that they might the
better represent Hero's: wherefore to express the lofty strain or high style of
an Author, it is said that he wears the Buskin: and in cothurnis prodit Aesopus
novis. Phaed. Aesop raises his Style. This Shoe was soled with Cork, and
covered the calf of the Leg, therefore Virgil says, Purpureoque alte suras
vincire cothurno,
1. Aeneid.

COTYLA.
(...). An ancient measure of Liquors, containing nine ounces of Italian
Measure, viz. an onnce less than the Roman Hemina. Apuleius says, that the
Cotyla and Hemina were synonymous among the Ancients, and that they are both
taken for half the Sextarius. The Hemina, says he, is the half of the
Sextarius; wherefore the Greeks call it Cotyle, i. e. incision or division,
because it divides the Sextarius in two. Isidorus says the same in his
Origines. Epiphanius says positively, that the Cotyla is the half of the
Sextarius, and that it is called Cotyla, because it divides the Sextarius in
two. Galen in his Books of Physic, makes use of the like expressions. Suidas
also tells us, that in his time the Cotyla was called half the Sextarius.

CRANA,
Janus his Daughter, who succeeded Sabatius in the Government of the
Aborigenes. Berosus says, that Crana was Janus's Daughter, but according to
Ovid, she was Apollo's Sister, and Janus his Mistress, and this God gave her
for a reward of the last favor she had granted him, the office of overseer of
the hinges of Doors, whereupon she was called Cardinea.

Prima dies tibi, Crana, datur, Dea cardinis haec est.
-- Teque Potitus,
Jus pro concubitu nostro tibi Cardinis esto,
Hoc pretium positae virginitatis habe.
CRANUS,
the Son of Crana and Janus, and not his Brother, as Berosus says. He honored
Crana very much, having dedicated a Wood to her on the Banks of the Tiber, and
instituted a Feast to be kept every year. He reigned four and fifty years over
the Aborigenes.

CRASSUS,
called Marcus, was a very eloquent and covetous Roman, he sled away from Rome
into Spain, during the factions of Marius and Sylla. He put an end to the War
of the Slaves, who had rebelled under the Conduct of Spartacus, whereupon they
granted him the lesser triumph, which was performed on Foot, and called
Ovation. Afterward he was chosen Consul and Censor. The Government of Syria
and Egypt fell to him. He proclaimed War against the Parthians, and was so
forward in it, that he would not tarry till the Spring, but embarked in a very
bad Season, and lost many of his Ships. Then trusting to an Arabian, whom he
had taken for his Guide, he ventured himself and his Army too far in a Desert
Country, where Surena the Parthian Commander, entirely defeated the Roman Army.
Publius his Son was killed in the Fight, and a while after he himself fell by
treachery, and had his Head and right Hand cut off, and sent to King Orodes in
Armenia, who poured melted Gold into his Mouth, that his dead body might be
burned with the same Metal, that had inflamed his mind with an insatiable
desire of Riches. Flor. l. 3. cap. 3. Plutarch adds, that he had plundered the
Temple of Jerusalem, carrying away above 2000 Talents of Silver, and all the
Gold that was found there, and Sidonius Apollinaris has observed that he
laughed but once in the whole course of his life.

There was another called Pub. Licinius Crassus, who was chosen Pontiff before
he arrived at the usual age, and afterward elected Consul, and was no less
covetous than M. Crassus. He made War in Asia against Aristonicus, who called
himself the Son of Attalus, and under that pretense seized upon the Kingdom of
Pergamus. He had more regard to the Treasures of Attalus, than the management
of the War: wherefore he was vanquished and taken alive in the Fight; but as
they were bringing him to Aristonicus, he was killed by a Soldier, whom he
provoked to do it, by striking out one of his Eyes with a Switch that he had in
his hand,

CREPIDA,
A kind of a Shoe used in former times, like Slippers without a heel, made up
of three Soles sewed together, that made a small noise in walking, upon which
account they were named Crepidae a crepitu; but there are some Authors who
derive this word from (...) a kind of Shoe used among the Greeks, which Persius
calls in the first Satyr Crepidae Graiorum, and Suetonius affirms c. 13. in the
life of Tiberius, that this kind of Shoe came from the Greeks. They were more
especially made for the use of Philosophers, and men that lived in austerity,
and a retired life.

CREPITUS,
A Fart, a Deity worshipped by the Egyptians under an obscene Figure, which
might be seen in some curious collections of Antiquities.

CROESUS,
King of Lydia, who possessed great Wealth and Treasure, and sent some Wedges
of Gold for an offering to Apollo, as a reward for his false Oracles. He was
taken Prisoner by Cyrus, and condemned to be burnt alive: being brought to the
place of Execution, and lying upon the pile of Wood, he cried out Solon, Solon,
(a Philosopher whose advice he had despised in the time of his prosperity.)
Herodotus enlarges this History, and relates in the first Book of Clio, that
Cyrus having defeated and taken Croesus Prisoner, put him in Irons, and got him
tied fast to a pile of Wood, there to be burnt alive with fourteen young
Children of the chiefest Lords of Lydia. In this condition Croesus pronounced
three times the word Solon. Cyrus asked him what God he was calling upon, he
answered, that Solon was a Philosopher, who foretold him this misfortune:
whereupon he commanded immediately the Fire should be put out, but they could
not do it. Then Craesus called upon Apollo, and a sudden Rain fell, which did
put out the Fire.

Lucian relates that Solon went to wait on Croesus at Sardis, the Capital Town
of his Empire, and that Croesus spoke to him thus; Now, Solon, I have shown
thee all my Treasures and Glory, pray tell me who is the happiest man in the
world? Solon. There are very few Croesus, that deserve that name, but of all
that I have ever known, Biton and Cleobis seem to me the most happy, who died
both at the same time, after they had drawn the Priestess of Argos their Mother
in a Chariot to the Temple: and Tellus, that illustrious Athenian, who, after
he had lived a good life, died for his Country; for no man can be called happy
before death, and when he has finished his course. -- Dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet.


Horace took this thought from the Oediput of Sophocles.

Xenophon in the 7th Book of the Cyropedia, relates the History of Croesus,
after another manner, and says, that being defeated by Cyrus, he retired for
shelter to Sardis, where Cyrus, having vigorously pursued him, the Inhabitants
of the Town, to avoid the fury of the Conqueror, delivered up Croesus and their
Town into his hands; then Croesus appearing before him, called him his Lord and
Master, and told him the answer he had from the Oracle of Apollo how he might
be happy, which was to know himself, (...); but that his prosperity and great
riches had blinded him.

CREUSA,
The first Wife of Aeneas, and Daughter of King Priam and Hecuba, who was lost
in the taking of Troy, and was delivered from the Grecian slavery by Cybele the
mother of the Gods, and entertained in her service; as it is related by Virgil
l. 2. Aeneid. v. 785.

Non ego Myrmidonum seeds, Dolopumve superbas
Aspiciam, aut Grais servitum matribus ibo.....
Sed me magna Deum genitrix his detinet oris.
Some say that Aeneas put her to death by the order of the Greeks, that none of
Priam's race should remain alive; and others more probably believe that she was
killed or taken prisoner, as she was following Aeneas that night Troy was
taken, having lost her way in the burning of the Town.

CREUSA,
The Daughter of Creon King of Corinth, whom Jason married after his divorce
from Medea, who being enraged for Jason's forsaking her, resolved to revenge
that affront; and to that purpose, she seemed to be pleased with the new match,
and sent to the Bride a Casket full of Precious Stones, so violently enchanted
with fire in it, that as soon as she opened it, it burnt her, and her Father
Creon, with the Palace.

CRIOBOLIUM,
A Sacrifice of Rams, from the Greek word (...) which is a Ram. This word is to
be seen in an Inscription at Rome. Diis Omnipotentibus,

CROCODILUS,
a Crocodile, a Beast that lives in the River Nile, etc. and was worshipped by
the Egyptians. It Is said he is very greedy of Dogs-flesh, wherefore the Dogs
run all the while they are drinking Water out of the River Nile, lest they
should be devoured by the Crododiles. Phaed.

CROESUS,
vid. after Crepitus.

CROTALUM,
was a kind of Castinietta made of a Reed, divided into two, lengthways, which
being struck one against the other with different motions of the Fingers, made
a sound like that the Stork makes with her Bill, wherefore the Ancients gave
that Bird the Epither of Crotalistria, i. e. Player upon the Crotalum. And
Aristophanes the Poet, calls a great talker a Crotalum.

Pausanias tells us, that Pisander Camirensis reported that Hercules did not
kill the Stymphalides with his Arrows, but that he had frighted and driven them
away with the noise of the Crotala; and according to this Author the Crotalum
must be a very ancient Instrument of Music, if it was made use of in Hercules
his time. Ovid joins the Crotalum with the Cymbals. Cymbala cum crotalis
prurientiaque arma Priapo
Ponit, and adducit tympana pulsa manu.


They acted several sorts of postures when they played with the Crotalon, as
Dancers do when they dance Sarabands, and play with the Castaniets; as appears
by an ancient Poem entitled Copa, attributed to Virgil.

Clemens Alexandrinus, who ascribes the Invention of this Instrument to the
Sicilians, would have the Crotala banished from the Festivals of Christians,
because of the unbecoming postures their sound was attended with.

CRUMATA,
Another kind of Castaniets made of little bones or shells, as Scaliger
observes upon the Copa of Virgil, they were very common among the Spaniards,
and especially among the Inhabitants of the Province Baetica about Cadiz, to
which Martial makes allusion:

Nec ae Gadibus improbis puellae,
Vibrabunt sine fine prurientes,
Lascivos docili tremore lumbos.
Epigr. 79. lib. 5. The same Poet in another place speaks of a Woman that could
play with that Instrument, and make motions with her Body.

Edere lascivos ad Boetica crumata gestus,
Et Gaditanis ludere docta modis.
Epig. 71. l. 6. The Inhabitants of that Country have kept to this time the use
of that Instrument, and from them Castaniets come to us.

Yet these Castaniets were not unknown to the ancient Greeks. Aristophanes
calls them (...), Oyster's shells, and Marshal, Testae. Audiat ille testarum
crepitus.


CRUPEZIA,
Another kind of Castaniets to play with the feet, and were called Crupexia
from the Greek word (...), to strike, and (...), the sole of the foot,
according to the Aetymology which Hesychius the Grammarian gives of it.

Pollux says that these Crupezia's were Shoes, made use of by Players upon the
Flure. Arnobius lib. 7. against the Gentiles calls them Sea^^lla, and laughs at
their superstition, saying, What, are the Gods moved with the sound of Cym
bals, and the noise of Castaniets, (Scabillorum)? Salmasius, who in his
Commentary upon the life of Carinus, has collected all that is to be found in
Authors about this kind of Castaniets, says that they were also called
Scabella, Scamilla and Scamella, because it was like a little stool or a
footstool, which they struck several ways with a wooden or iron shoe; but I
think that these Castaniets were of several forms. There are some represented
like a Sandal made of two Soles, and a Castaniet tied betwixt them. Those who
will be further informed in this matter, may read Bartolinus's Treatise de
Tibiis veterum.

CRUX,
A Cross, a Gibbet of the Ancient Romans, whereon they hanged their Slaves and
Malefactors. This punishment was made use of among the Jews, Persians,
Egyptians, Greeks and Romans. The Criminals were tied to it with Ropes, or
nailed, and always died upon it, but when they had hung there a while, they
broke their Bones to make them expire the sooner, as they used the Malefactors
that were crucified with our Savior. But since our Lord was crucified, the
Emperors gave orders that no Criminal should be put to death upon the Cross.
These Crosses were of several Figures, as Justus Lipsius tells us in his
Treatise de Crucibus.

CRYPTAE:
Vaults appointed for the interment of particular Families.

CTEISBIUS,
a Native of Alexandria was a Barber's Son, and naturally endowed with an
excellent Genius for Mechanical Inventions, for which he had a strong
inclination. He hung a Looking-glass in his Fathers Shop, so that it might be
easily pulled down, or raised higher, by means of an hidden Rope, which he thus
performed.

He put a wooden Tube under a Beam where he had fastened some Pullies, over
which the Rope went, and made an angle in ascending and descending into the
Tube, which was hollow, that a little Leaden Ball might run along it, so that
the Ball passing and re-passing in this narrow Cavity, by its violent motion
expelled the air that was enclosed and condensed by compression and forced it
against the air without; these oppositions and concussions made an audible and
distinct sound; and observing by this, that air enclosed and expelled with
violence, made a sound like the Voice, he was the first that from this
principle invented Engines, which received motion from Water, also all
Automata's that go by the force of Water enclosed; Engines that depend on the
power of the Circle or Lever, and many other pleasant and useful Inventions,
particularly Clocks that move by Water. To set these Engines at work, he bored
a Plate of Gold or a precious Stone, and he chose such kind of materials, as
being subject to wear by the constant passing of the Water, or liable to
contract filth to obstruct its passage. This being done, the Water which runs
equally through the small hole raises a piece of Cork, or little Ship inverted,
which Workmen call Tympanum, upon which is a Rule and some Wheels equally
divided, whose Teeth moving one another, made these Wheels turn very leisurely.
He also made other Rules and Wheels divided after the same manner, which by one
single motion in turning round, produces diverse effects, made several small
Images move round about Pyramids, threw up Stones like Eggs, made Trumpets
sound, and performed several other things that are not essential to Clocks.
This we have from Vitruvius lib. 9. c. 9.

CTESIPHON.
A famous Architect who made the Temple of Diana at Ephesus. He invented an
Engine to bring the Pillars of this Temple from the quarries where they were
dug out, to Ephesus; for he durst not make use of Carts, as others commonly do,
because the wheels would have sunk in the way, under such a weight, but he got
four pieces of Wood, each of four inches square, two whereof were joined cross
the other two, which were longer and even with the body of each Pillar. At both
ends of each Pillar he drove in Iron Pins made like a Swallows Tail, and made
them fast there with Lead, having fastened into the crossing pieces of Wood,
Iron-rings, to put in the Iron-pins; besides, he put some strong short poles of
Oak at both ends of the Engine, to which the drawing Oxen were fastened, and
when they drew the Iron-pins that were in the Iron-rings, could turn freely
enough to let the body of the Pillars roll easily upon the Ground; and thus he
brought all the Pillars of the Temple of Diana.

CUBITUS,
A Cubit, an ancient Measure. Philander observes, that there were three kinds
of Cubits, viz. The great one, which was nine ordinary Foot long; the middle
one was two foot long, which was about a foot and ten inches of the common
foot, and the small one was of a Foot and a half, which was about an inch and a
half less than a common foot of twelve inches.

CUBUS,
A Cube, a solid and regular Body, with six square sides, all even, like its
Angles, Dies, are little Cubes. This word comes from (...), Tissera, a Dice. A
Cubical number is that which is multiplied twice, once by its root, and another
time by its product ('it is the third power in Algebra) 64 is a Cube number,
produced by the multiplication of 4, which is the root, which makes 16 its
Square: and multiplied again by 4 it makes 64, which is the Cube.

A Cubical foot Cube, is a measure of solid bodies, which are a foot every way.

CULEARIA VASA,
Vessels of the greatest content. This word is derived from Culeus, an ancient
measure containing about 540 pints (which is near two Hogsheads,) it was the
biggest measure for Liquors, Culeus hac nulla est major mensura liquoris, says
Fannius. It was made of Leather or baked Earth, as we learn it from Varro.

CUNEI SPECTACULORUM.
The Seats and Benches in Theaters, which having a large basis, and growing
narrower, the nearer they came to the Center of the Theater, had the form of a
Wedge, and therefore were called Cunei.

CUNINA,
A Goddess, who had the charge of Childrens Cradles, called Cunae.

CUPIDO,
The God of Love, according to the fable. There are several opinions concerning
his birth. Hefiod says, he was born of the Chaos and the Earth; Tully after
Lucian, of Mars and Venus; Arcesilas says, that he was the Son of the Night and
the Air; Sapho of Calus and Venus; Seneca of Vulcan and Venus. Ovid and
Plutarch are of opinion, that there were two Cupids, one celestial, which is
innocent Love, and the other terrestial, which is filthy Love; the first born
of Venus and Jupiter, the second of Erebus and the Night. He is represented
like a Boy, naked and winged, with a vail over his eyes, carrying a quiver upon
his Shoulders; and holding a Torch with one hand, and a Bow and some darts with
the other, wherewith he wounded the hearts of Lovers.

Plutarch tells us, that the Egyptians and Greeks had two Cupids, one
Celestial, and the other Common.

Lucian seems to be of that opinion in the Dialogue betwixt Venus and Cupid;
for there Cupid confesses, that tho he had pierced with his Darts all the other
Gods, yet he had met with some hearts that were impenetrable, viz. Minerva's,
the Muses, and Diana's.

CURATORES,
Omnium Tribuum. The Syndicks, who were the Protectors of the Districts of
Rome, like the Aldermen of the Wards in London.

CURATORES,
Operum publicorum. The Overseers or Surveyors of public works, who took care
of them.

CURATORES,
alvei, Tiberis and cleacorum, The Commissioners for cleansing the Tiber, and
the Common-shore of the City, they were established by Augustus, according to
what Suetonius says, Nova officia excogitavit, curam operum publicorum, viarum,
and aquarum alvei and Tiberis.

CURATORES,
Viarum extra Urbem. The Commissioners for the Highways, Cawseways, and Bridges
about the City of Rome.

CURATORES,
Denariorum Flandorum, expressed in ancient inscriptions by these three
Letters, C. D. F. The Warden of the Mint, called also Viri Monetales, who had
the care of coining. The inscriptions of old Gold and Silver pieces were stamped
with these five letters, A. A. A. F. F. i. e. Aere, Argento, Auro flando,
feriundo, overseers for melting and coining species of Brass, Silver and Gold.

CURATORES
Kalendarii. Men who put out the public money to interest, which was paid at
the Kalends, or the first day of the month, from whence they were called
Kalendarii.

CURETES.
The Inhabitants of the Isle of Crete, to whom Rhea committed the care of
bringing up young Jupiter. The Curetes were accounted Inhabitants of Crete,
because that worship passed from that Island to the rest of Greece and Italy,
as it formerly came from Phoenicia into Egypt, Phrygia, and Samothracia, and
from thence to Crete, from whence it was at last communicated to the Greeks.

CURIA.
A place, says Festus, where those who were entrusted with the care of public
affairs met; but Curia among the Romans signified rather the persons who met in
Council, than the meeting place; for there was no certain place appointed for
the Assemblies, the Senate meeting sometimes in one Temple, and sometimes in
another. Yet there was certain places called Curia, as Curia Hostilia, Curia
Calabra, Curia Saliorum, Curia Pompeii, Curia Augusti; but Antiquity has left
us no account of those Edifices.

There were two kinds of these places or Courts, some wherein the Pontiffs met
about the affairs of Religion, and were called by a general word, Curiae
Veteres; there were four of these, viz. Foriensis, Ravia, Vellensis, and
Velitia, which were in the tenth Ward of the City of Rome, and the other,
wherein the Senate assembled about State Affairs. We have this division from
Varro, in the fourth Book, de Lingua Latina: Curiae duorum genera; and ubi
Sacerdotes res divinas curarent, ut Curiae veteres; and ubi Senatus humanas, ut
Curia Hostilia.

CURIA CALABRA.
The Court of Calabra was built by Romulus upon Mount Palatinus, as Varro says,
or in the Capitol, in the same place where now the Storehouse for Salt is kept
at the Conservators Lodging, as it is some other Authors opinion. It was called
Calabra, from the verb Calare, i. e. to call, because it was the place
appointed by Romulus, where the King of the Sacrifices called the Senate and
the people, to tell them of the new Moons, the days for Sacrifices, and public
Games.

CURIA HOSTILIA.
The Court Hostilia, built by Tullus Hostilius, in the place where the Senate
often assembled.

CURIA POMPEII, or POMPEIA.
The Court of Pompey adjoining to the Theater, which he caused to be built in
the place now called Campo di Fiore. It was a very magnificent Palace; the
Senate was assembled there when Julius Caesar was murdered, and the Statue of
Pompey was sprinkled with Caesar's Blood. At the Entry of this Palace was a
magnificent Porch, supported with an hundred fine Pillars: It remained entire
near three hundred years, and was burnt down in the time of the Emperor Philip,
who succeeded Gordianus III.

CURIA SALIORUM.
The Court of the Salii, on Mount Palatine, where, the Augurial staff of
Romulus was found entire, having received no hurt by the fire, after the Court
was reduced to ashes, as Tully relates in his Books de divinatione.

CURIA JULIA or JULII.
The Court of Julius Caesar.

CURIA AUGUSTI,
The Court of Augustus.

CURIA OCTAVIA.
The Court of Octavia, Augustus his Sister.

CURIA POMPILIANA.
The Pompilian Court.

CURIA CATONIS.
The Court of Cato.

There are several other Courts mentioned by Vopiscus in the life of the
Gordiani. All these places had nothing material, but that they were called
after the names of those who built them. The Senate never met in those places
till they were consecrated by the Augurs.

CURIAE.
The Roman People was at first divided into three Tribes, and each in ten
Curiae. Each Curia had its Curio or Priest, who had the care of the Sacrifices,
and Feasts proper to each Curia; as we learn from Dionysius Halicarnasseus.
This was like Popish Parishes, which have their peculiar Saints Feasts and
Curates, and these Curates a Bishop at their head, called by the Romans Curio
Maximus, the first of the Curates, who, in spiritual Affairs, governed all the
Curio's and Curiae, Maximus Curio, cujus authoritate Curiae, omnesque Curiones
reguntur, says Festus.

Livy relates, that Romulus called each Curia after the names of the Sabin
Ladies, whom he had stole away. Yet this is not likely; for there is no name of
the Sabin Ladies in History: And Dionysius Halicarnasseus tells us, that they
took their name from the part of the Town were they dwelt.

Each Curia maintained its Curio with the offerings and tithes that each
Inhabitant paid him, or by some contribution of money; which Festus calls Aes
Curionium, quod dabatur Curioni ob sacerdotium Curionatus.

The Sacrifices of the Curiae were called Curionia and Curialia Sacra, like the
Parochial Masses of the Church of Rome, where every particular man of the
Curiae is bound to be present: Wherefore Romulus and Numa had assigned Funds to
bear the charges of these sacrifices, and keep the Feastings made after the
sacrificing was over, which were called Agapae.

CURIO.
The Priest or Curate of each Curiae or Parish. Varro derives the Etymology of
Curio from Curia, because the Curio's were established to be spiritual heads in
the Curiae. Curioni dicti a Curiis, qui fiunt ut in his sacra faciant; others
take it from cura care, because they offer sacrifices for their Parishioners.

The Popish Curates have a great Analogy to these ancient Curio's, as to their
office, (laying Paganism aside) for the name agreed with them, either taken
from Curia or Cura: their office is alike; for the Curates are subordinate to a
first Curate, viz. the Bishop, and receive orders from him concerning what must
be done in their Parochial Churches, what rites and ceremonies ought to be
observed, either in the administering of the Sacraments, or the rest of Divine
service, and the list of the Feasts that are to be kept; likewise the Curions
instituted by Romulus, were subjects to the Curio called Curio Maximus, who
gave them directions about the Feasts of each month, the ceremonies of the
sacrifices, and several other things contained in the ritual or formularies
they had made concerning them. Therefore Festus defines this great Curio, a man
by whom all is done in the Curiae, and is an Overseer over all the Curio's:
Maximus Curio, cujus auctoritate Curiae omnesque Curiones reguntur.

After the Curio's Death, the Curiae chose themselves their Curio, as it was
granted them by Romulus, and then presented him to the great Curio to be
confirmed by him. The Christian Churches formerly chose their Curates after the
same manner.

CURIO MAXIMUS,
The great Curio, who had authority over all the Curio's, with respect to the
external Policy. He was chosen by the Assembly of all the Curio's, and then was
confirmed by the Senate and the people.

CURIOUS DENTATUS,
a Roman Consul, who triumphed over the Samnites and Sabines during his
Consulship. The Samnites, who had suffered great losses by this great man,
attempted to bribe him. Wherefore they sent him Deputies, who found him at
Table sitting upon a form, and eating some Turnips in an earthen Dish:
whereupon they offered him a rich present of Plate. But he smiling told them in
contempt, That he had rather command rich men, than to be overburthen'd with
these superfluities.

CURSOR,
a Courrier, such a one as Martial speaks of in an Epigram. Cursorem sexta
tibi, Rufe, remissimus hora.
Livy tells us, that Sempronius Gracchus, a very active youth, was chosen for a
Courrier, and that in three days he arrived at Pella, having rid very fleet
Horses appointed for that purpose; and this shows that a long time before
Augustus the Romans had Posthorses settled in their Empire, as is also
mentioned by Suetonius. Xenophon l. 8. de Cyropedia says, that Cyrus was the
first inventer of them, and settled Posthorses from place to place, with a
Postmaster, to receive and take care of the Packets that the Courriers
brought, that he might have fresh news from the most remotest places. Herodotus
in Urania says, that Xerxes was the first that established them after his
defeat.

CURTIUS QUINTUS,
A Roman Knight, who devoted himself for the public good, during the
Consulship of Q. Servilius Ahala, and L. Genutius. A great Abyss opened in the
place where the Assemblies were kept at Rome, which they attempted to fill, but
to no purpose; whereupon they had recourse to Oracles, who answered, that this
Pit could never be shut up, but by throwing into it, that in which the Romans
did excel above all other Nations. The Senate assembled upon this answer, and
Q. Curtius a young Roman Knight presented himself to the Senate, and showed
them, that Rome was not more fruitful in the production of any particular
thing, than other Cities, and that which made her so famous, was the brave men
that she brought up; and that the Gods demanded but a Roman to expiate for that
prodigy, and that he offered himself freely to lay down his life to fill up
that Abyss. After this Speech Curtius put on his Arms, and riding upon his
Horse, he spurred him on into the Abyss. The people that were spectators of
that action presently threw flowers upon him, and made offerings; and the hole
closed of itself by degrees. This place was called since the Curtian Lake.

CUSTODES.
Some Roman Officers appointed to prevent any deceit in the delivering Tickets
for the election of Magistrates.

CYATHUS.
A small Vessel, wherewith they took the Wine out of a larger Vessel. The
Cyathus contained an ounce and a half of liquor.

CYBELE.
The Daughter of Coelus, Sister and Wife to Saturn, who begot Jupiter. Fabulous
Antiquity gave her many names, sometimes she is called the mother of the Gods,
Rhea, Cybele, Dindymia, Berecynthia, Pessmuntia, etc.

Pliny says that the Earth is rightly called our Mother, because God gave it to
men to be their Palace, as Heaven is his own.

The Pagans called her the Mother of the Gods, meaning by those, Gods those who
had been men; and honored her under the name of Rhea and Cybele: She was
principally honored in Phrygia: She took from thence most of her names;
Cybele, Dindyma and Ida are Mountains of Phrygia; Berecynthia, Pessinus, Andira
are Towns of Phrygia; Mygdonia is a little Country: and from these several
places she has got her different names.

She was not only called Cybele, as Faustus says, but also Cybebe; because,
says he, she makes people run mad, from the Greek word (...), agere in furorem.

Rhea is derived either from (...), to run, because of the rains and celestial
influences, that make the earth fruitful; or because of the continual flowing
of seeds and generations of all terrestrial natures; or rather this name comes
from (...), terra, by a transposition like that of (...) in (...), aer. The
Greek word (...), terra, comes plainly from the Hebrew Erets, which signify
the same thing, and Rhea might be directly derived from it.

Dindymia. She had this name from a Mountain in Phrygia or Troades, called
Dindyma, where she was particularly worshipped, and from whence her Feasts and
Ceremonies were brought to the Greeks and Romans.

Idaea, because of Mount Ida in Phrygia, where she was likewise adored.

Berecynthia, from a Castle of Phrygia of that name, near the River Sangaris,
or from the Mountains of that name, as Fulgentius relates.

Pessinuntia, from the Town Pessinus; or, as Herodian says, because a Statue
fell formerly in the fields of Phrygia, which was thought to be the Statue of
Cybele; or because the place where the Phrygians solemnized the feast of this
Goddess was called Pessinus, on the banks of the River Gallus. The Romans
having conquered this Country, were advised by the Oracle, that if they could
transfer to Rome the Goddess of Pessinus, their Empire should be raised to a
sovereign degree of greatness: whereupon they sent a famous Embassy to the
Magistrates of that Country, to ask them leave to bring her to Rome, which was
granted them: and they carried that Deity (which was but a nasty, rough and
unpolished Stone) on board of their Ship, and brought her to Rome: as Ovid
says, Est moles nativa: loco res nomina fecit;
Appellant saxum, pars bona montis ea est.
Fast. l. v. v. 150.

CYBELE,
is derived either from the Greek word (...), and (...), i. e. to make Gambols,
and shake the head; because the Priests of this Goddess, called Corybantes,
Daetyli Idaei, Curetes and Galli, danced and shook their heads like mad men on
the day of the feast; or this word comes from the place called Cybele, or in
fine from a little Grove of Pine-trees consecrated to her.

She is also called Maja, i. e. Mother or Nurse. This word is common both to
the Greeks and Latins: and in all likelihood is a Greek word, and signifies a
Nurse, which is the Earth. But those that will have it a Latin word derive it
from Majus, which is the same with Magnus, from whence comes Major and Majestas.

The Romans honored the Earth by the names of Tellus and Tellumo, Tellus was
the feminine name, and Tellumo the masculine, and so it was a God and Goddess.
St Austin relates to this purpose what Varro says on this subject: The same
Earth has a double virtue, a Masculine virtue to produce Seeds, and a Feminine
virtue to receive and nourish them; from the latter she was called Tellus, and
from the other Tellumo.

The Romans called also the Earth Ops, because of her power to give help. Opis
is different from Ops, and it is one of the names of Diona, among the Greeks,
because she helps women in labor. King T. Tatius built her a Temple under the
name of the Goddess Ops.

They gave her also the name of (...), as much as to say (...), terra matter.
Plato derives this name from (...), dans ut matter.

St Austin, in the 7th Book, chapter 24. de Civitare Dei, relates the explanation
that Varro gives of all the mysterious particulars of the worship of Cybele or
the Earth. She is called, says he, the mother of the Gods; the Drum which is
ascribed to her, is the Figure of the Globe of the Earth; the Turrets that she
carries over her head, represent the Towns; the Seats that surround her, show
that she only stands still, while all things are in motion round about her; the
Eunuch Priests who attend her, denote that to get Corn and Seeds the Earth must
be manured, because all things are to be found in her Bosom; their agitations
and motions before their Goddess, teach Husbandmen that they must not lie
still, because they have always something to do; the sound of Cymbals denote
the noise of the Instrument of Husbandry; the Cymbals are made of Brass,
because they were formerly of that Metal, before Iron was found. The tame and
untied Lion gives us to understand, that there is no Land so wild and and
barren, but may be manured. Besides, Tellus having many Names and Sirnames, she
was taken for several Deities. They think, says he, that Tellus is the Goddess
Ops, because she mends, and grows better by Labor; the Mother of the Gods,
because she brings forth a great many things; the great Mother, because she
produces Food; Proserpina, because Corn comes out of her Bosom; Vesta, because
she clothes herself with Grass and green Turf.

This is the Physical Explication of the most particular things Poets and
Historians have feigned concerning Cybele, so much reverenced by the Greeks and
Romans. By all these names they meant the same Goddess, viz. the most
effeminate part of the world, which is like its Mother; whereas the Sun and
Stars are considered as the Father thereof

Strabo informs us of the greatest part of the Ceremonies used in honor of
this Goddess, which were always performed with fury and transport of mind. The
fury of the Priests of Cybele was the voluntary agitation of Fanatic Men, who
made a great noise and tumult, and cut their Bodies with Knives, so that these
Sacrifices of Cybele, were like those performed by the Priests of Baal, related
in the Book of Kings. Pliny tells that the Priests of Cybele used to cut off
the marks of their Sex with a Knife, made of Medicinal Earth, found in the
Island of Samos, and that they run in no danger of their Life, when they made
use of that sort of Knives.

There is an old Marble at Rome, cut in honor of the great Mother of the Gods,
with the figure of that Goddess crowned with a Turret, holding with one hand a
Drum, and with the other some Ears of Corn: She sets upon a Chariot drawn by
two Lions, attended by Atys, who holds a Ball in his Hand, and leans upon a
Pine Tree, for this Tree was consecrated to her.

There are yet three Medals to be seen where Cybele is otherwise represented.
One is of the Emperor Severus, where she is represented holding with one hand a
Scepter, and with the other a Thunderbolt, and her Head covered with a Turret:
She rid upon a Lion flying through the Air. The other Medal is of the Emperor
Geta, stamped after the same manner, with this Inscription Indulgentia
Augustorum. The third is of Julia, who represents the Mother of the Gods
crowned with Turrets, attended by two Lions, and sitting upon a Throne, she
holds with her right hand a branch of Pine Tree, and lays her left hand on a
Drum, with this Motto Matter Deum.

This Goddess is also represented with a great many Breasts, to show that she
feeds Men and Beasts, and carries Turrot on her Head, and has two Lions under
her Arms.

CYCLOPES,
The Cyclopes, a race of fierce and haughty Men, who have but one Eye in the
middle of their Forehead. Poets have given this Name to some Inhabitants of
Sicily, whom they feigned to be Vulcan's Assistants in the making of Jupiter's
Thunderbolts, they made also the Arms of Achilles and Aenca^. They were so
named, because they had but one round Eye in the middle of their Forehead. They
are the Sons of Heaven and Earth, as Hesiod tells us, or of Neptune and
Amphitrits, as Euripides and Lucian say. Those of most note among them are
Polyphemus, Brontes, Steropes and Pyracman. Apollo killed them with his Arrows,
to revenge the death of his Son Aesculapius, whom Jupiter had killed with a
Thunderbolt, made by these Cyclopes.

Poets say also, that Polyphemus was Shepherd to Neptune, and Galatea's Lover,
and that Ulysses put out his Eye with a Firebrand, to revenge the death of his
Companions, whom the Cyclopes had eaten.

CYCLUS SOLIS,
The Cycle of the Sun or of the Dominical Letters, is a revolution of 28 Years,
which being expired; the same Dominical Letters return again in the same order.

To understand this well, it must be observed, that the Year being composed of
Months and Weeks, every Day of the Month is marked in the Calendar with its
Cipher, and one of these seven Letters A, B, C, D, E, F, G. The first Letter
begins with the first Day of the Year, and the others follow in a perpetual
Circle to the end.

Wherefore these Letters might be unalterable, to denote every Holy Day or
every Day of the Week, as they are in respect to the Days of the Months, if
there was but a certain and unvariable number of Weeks in the Year; and as A
marks always the first of January, B the 2, C the 3, so A should mark always
Sunday, B, Monday, etc. But because the Year is at least of 365 Days, which
make up 52 Weeks and a Day over; it happens that it ends with the same day of
the Week with which it began; and so the following Year begins again, not with
the same Day, but with the next to it: And from thence it follows, that A,
which answers always the first of January, having noted the Sunday for one
Year, (for which reason it is called the Dominical Letter) it will note the
Monday in the following Year, and G will note the Sunday: and so forward.

It Is plain, by what has been said, that if the Year had but 365 Days, this
Circle of Dominical Letters, should end in seven Years by retrograding G, F, E,
D, C, B, A. But because every four Years there is a Leap-Year, which has one
Day more, two things must needs happen.

First, That the Leap-Year has two Dominical Letters, one of which is made use
of from the first of January to the 25th of February, and the other from that
Day till the end of the Year. The reason of it is plain, for reckoning twice
the 6th of the Kalends, the Letter F which notes the Day, is also reckoned
twice, and so fills up two Days of the Week: From whence it follows, that the
Letter that till then had fallen upon Sunday, falls then but upon Monday, and
that the foregoing Letter by retrograding comes to note Sunday.

The second thing to be observed is, that that having thus two Dominical
Letters every fourth Year, the Circle of these Letters does not end in seven
Years as it would do; but in four times seven Years, which is 28. And this is
properly called the Cycle of the Sun, which, before the correction of the
Calendar, began with a Leap-Year, whereof the Dominical Letters were G, F.

CYCLUS LUNARIS,
The Cycle of the Moon. It was no less difficult to determine by a certain
Order, the Days of the New Moons in the course of the Year. To this purpose a
great many Cycles were proposed, which afterward Experience showed to be
false, and they were obliged to receive this Cycle of 19 Years, Invented by
Methon of Athens, called the Golden Number, to make the Lunar Year agree with
the Solar; for at the end of them the New Moons returned again on the same
Days, and the Moon began again her course with the Sun, within an Hour and some
Minutes or thereabouts. This Number was called the Golden Number, either for
its excellency and great use; or because, as some say, the Inhabitants of
Alexandria sent it to the Romans in a Silver Calendar, where these Numbers from
1 to 19 were set down in Golden Letters. This Number has been called the great
Cycle of the Moon, or Deceunovennalis, and (...), of 19 Tears; or Methonicus
from the Name of its Author. This Golden Number has been of great use in the
Calendar, to show the Epacts and New Moons, ever since the Nicene Council
ordered that Easter should be kept the first Sunday after the Full Moon of
March.

However, this Cycle was not settled every where, according to the same manner
in the Calendar; for the Western Christians, called Latins, imitating the
Hebrews, reckoned the Golden Number 1. on the first day of January of the first
Year: But the Christians who Inhabited Asia, under the name of Christians of
Alexandria, placed the Golden Number 3. at the same day.

CYCNUS,
A Swan, a Bird living in or about the Waters, very fine to behold, with a long
and straight Neck, very white, except when he is young. Ovid in the 12th Book
of his Metamorphosis, says that Cycnus was King of Liguria, and kin to Phaeton,
who for the grief of his death was changed into a Bird of his name.

It Is said that Swans never sing but when they are at the point of death, and
then they sing very melodiously. Tully in his Tusculans tells us, that Swans
are dedicated to Apollo the God of Divination, who being sensible of their
approaching death, rejoice and sing with more harmony than before. I ucian on
this account laughs at the Poets, in his Treatise of Amber or the Swans.

I also expected, says he, to have heard the Swans warbling all along the
Eridanus, having learned that the Companions of Apollo had been there changed
into Birds, who still retain their singing, for a token of their excellency in
Music. But this I fouud as fabulous as the rest; for inquiring of the People
thereabouts, they told me, that indeed, sometimes they saw Swans upon the
Eridanus; but that their singing, or rather screaming, was not more grateful
than that of other River-Fowls.

CYDIPPA,
A Noble and Beautiful Lady, whom Acontius loved and married by an Artifice;
for his Birth not permitting him to pretend to so great a Match, he wrote these
words upon an Apple, I take my Oath by the Mysteries of Diana that I will be
thy Wife: then he let fall this Apple at the Feet of Cydippa; who took it up,
and read what was written upon it, and so engaged herself thereby to make these
words good, for whenever she designed to marry another Man, she fell
dangerously ill, which she imputed to Diana's. anger, and to appease her she
married Acontius. Ovid in his Epistles of Acontius and Cydippa.

CYLINDRUS,
A Cylinder, a solid body extended in length, equally round, the extremities
whereof are equal Circles. Archimedes has writ an excellent Book upon the
Cylendes. Petit has made a Treatise of the Arithmetical Cylinder, called
Rabdology, which are Fillets of Past-board set in order upon a Cylinder, that
is easily turned about. This Invention is owing to Napier a learned Scotch-man.

CYMBALA.
Cymbals, This word comes from the Greek (...), i. e. hollow, because they were
made like two little Porringers of Copper or Brass, and for that reason were
sometimes called only Era. These Cymbals were found, as we may see by the
Figures that we have of them, and by this verse of of Propertius.

Qua numerosa fides, quaque era rotunda Cybeles.
Cassiodorus, who has described Cymbals, calls them Acetabula, i. e. a hollow
piece, as the concavities of the Bones, that receive the head of another Bone,
and are therefore called Acetabula, the Box of the Bones. St Austin, upon the
101 Psalm says, that Cymbals must touch one another to make a sound, and that
ancient Authors compare them often to the Lips. Fulgentius in the first Book of
his Mythology tells us, that the two Lips are like Cym^^ls that form the
sounds, and the Tongue like the bow of a Musical Instrument, that cuts and
divides them.

Isidorus Pelutioca having compared the Psalterion, the Cythara, the Drum, the
Strings and the Organs, used in ancient Ceremonies, with several parts of the
Body, compares also Cymbals to the Lips, because they form sounds, by pressing
and striking one against the other like Cymbals.

Ovid, in the 3d Book, de arti amandi, calls Cymbals by a name that seems very
difficult to be understood. Disce etiam duplici genialia nablia palma Verrere.
He gave them this Epithet genialia, because they used Cymbals at Weddings, and
other Diversions. This Instrument being composed of two separated pieces,
several Authors call it by names in the plural number, as Petronius, Intrans
Cymbalisiria and concrepans era. A woman coming in, and playing on a Cymbal.

CYNOSURA.
The name by which the Grecians call the little Bear. It signifies Dogs-tail.
It Is the nearest constellation to our Pole, consisting of seven Stars, four of
them are in a square Figure like the four Wheels of a Chariot, and the three
others in a long Figure like the beam of a Cart; whence the Country People call
that Star the Chariot, and from one the number of these Seven Stars, our Pole,
and all that are of Heaven to the Aequinoxial Line, are called Septentrional.

CYNTHOS.
A Hill in the Isle of Delos, covered with very thick Trees, where Latona
brought forth Apollo and Diana, and upon that account Horace calls him Cynthius.

CYPARISSUS,
A young man of extraordinary Beauty, who was not to be comforted for the death
of a Stag, that he had killed a hunting, and would murder himself; whereupon
Apollo changed him into a Tree called after his name Cyparissus, a a Cypress,
which is carried in Funeral pomps, and consecrated to dead men.

CYRUS.
The Son of Cambyses, who transferred the Empire from the Medes to the
Persians. He subdued the Assyrians, took Babylon, made war against Croesus King
of Lydia, and took him prisoner. He set at liberty the Jews, who were captive
in Babylon, and sent them again into their own Country, under the conduct of
Zorobabel, with order to rebuild the Temple of Jerusalem. This happened two
hundred years after their captivity, as it was foretold by Isaiah and Esdras.
But this Prince being at War with the Scythians, and Massagetes, he was slain
with two hundred thousand men in an ambush laid by Queen Tomyris, who cut off
his head, and threw it into a vessel full of blood, with this invective,
Satiate thy self with Blood, which thou have so much thirsted after.

CYTHARA.
A Musical Iustrument with strings, of a triangular figure, which was played
upon with a bow, as it is described in a Letter attributed to Hieronymus. And
according to what Pausanias says, Cythara and Lyra were two instruments, and
Mercurius was the inventer of the Lyra, and Apollo of the Cythara. Yet most of
the Ancient Poets confound these two Musical instruments, because they are very
like one another. For Cythara was of a triangular figure, and the Lyra after
the form of two opposite SS. There are some Statues and Medals whereon Apollo
is represented with the Lyra in his hand, and sometimes with the Cythara.

CYTHERA.
An Island in the Aegean Sea, where the Goddess Venus was drove ashore in a
Sea-shell, and there the Inhabitants built her a magnificent Temple, from
whence Venus was called Cytherea.

CYTHERON.
Mount Cytheron near Thebes, consecrated to Apollo and the Muses: called upon
that account Cytherides. There were celebrated the Orgia, or Feasts dedicated
to Bacchus.

D.
D. The fourth letter of the Alphabet, called by the Hebrews Daleth, by the
Greeks Delta, and the Romans D. This letter is likewise the third consonant,
which is often pronounced like a T; for it is properly but a diminution of the
T, according to what Quintilian says. Wherefore some learned men in the Greek
tongue pronounce the Tau as a Delta after the (...), and pronounce (...), as if
it were written (...); which may be an acceptable softning in the
pronunciation, tho it is not a fault to say otherwise. In the Latin tongue the D
and the T have a great affinity, and are often changed one for another, as At
for Ad. And Quintilian laughs at those who scruple to write indifferently, one
for the other, set for sed, haut for haud, and others, to be seen in ancient
Inscriptions.

D, is also a Numerical Roman Character, which signifies five hundred: because
D is the half of a Gothic M, that makes a Thousand. If there is a stroke over
D, it stands for five thousand.

D was formerly made use of instead of the Letter P, as in the ancient
Inscription, Denates for Penates.

D, alone signifies Decius, Divus, Diis, etc.

DACRYMAE,
is often written by Livy instead of LACRYMAE, tears; from the Greek word (...)
or (...) lacrymae.

DACTYLI IDAEI
Cybele having brought forth Jupiter and Juno at one Birth, the story tells us,
that she only show Juno to Saturn, and gave Jupiter to the Curetes or
Corybantes to be nursed up by stealth, because his Father would have devoured
him. The Corybantes, lest the crying of the little Jupiter should discover him,
invented a kind of a dance which they called Dactyli, where they met one
another, striking upon little Brass Shields with measured intervals. And this
noise hindered Saturn from hearing the cries of his Son.

Lucian says, that the Dactili Idaei, having received the God Mars from the
hands of Juno, being yet a Child, they taught him dancing before the exercise
of Arms, as if the dancing was a prelude of the War.

(...), Daduchus, a Greek word that signifies Lamp-bearer. Hesichius explaining
this word (...), which was the name formerly given to the Torch-bearer of the
Goddess Ceres, explains it by that of Lamp-bear, and renders the word (...),
which signifies a Torch, by the word Lamp. Yet some ancient Authors make a
distinction betwixt Lamps and Torches. Trebellius Pollio in the life of the
Emperor Galitnus, gives an account of a procession, where the people carried
Torches and Lamps, cum cereis facibus, and lampadibus praecedentibus Capitolium
petunt; but it must be observed, that the Torches of the Ancients were not made
like our Flambeaus, for they had no wick; and a great many of them were Lamps
set in the end of a Stick, or some Pitch put to the end of a Bundle.

DAEDALUS,
An Athenian, whom Mercury made famous in Mechanics. He fled from Athens into
Crete, where he went into the service of King Minos. There he made the
Labyrinth with so many ways turning and winding about, that men who had got
once into it, could never get out. Sometime after Minos being displeased at
him, put him into the same Labyrinth with his Son Icarus, but he made himself
and his Son Wings, which he fastened with Wax, and so flew away. Icarus flew so
high, and so near the Sun, contrary to his Fathers advice, that the Sun melted
the Wax of his Wings, and he fell down into that Sea, which was ever since
called after his name, the Icarian Sea. Dadalus flew safely to Sardinia, and
from thence to Cumae, where he built a Temple to Apollo.

Diodorus Siculus enlarges the History or Fable of Daedalus, and says, that
Daedalus was the Son of Micio an Athenian, and the most ingenious Artificer of
his age for Mechanics, and invented the Plummer, the Augur, the Rule, and many
other Tools for the perfecting of that Art. He was the first also who in
Statues expressed all the parts of Humane Body, in their natural Situation,
which gave birth to a report that he gave motion to them. Notwithstanding he
had got a great name by his works, yet he was forced to fly from Athens, having
been condemned to dye by the Areopagus, for the death of Talus his Nephew, whom
he killed out of jealousy, because he had found out the Potters, and Turners
Wheel, with all Tools fit for the perfection of that Art. He retired then to
King Minos in Crete, who had married Pasiphae, one of the Daughters of the Su^.
This King Minos offering one day a Bull in sacrifice to Neptune, kept a very
fine one, and sacrificed a lesser in his place; whereupon the Gods grew angry,
and inspired his Wife with an immoderate love for that Bull; and to enjoy him,
Daedalus made a wooden Cow, wherein Pasiphae putting herself, played the Beast
with that Bull, and begot Minataurs. Lucian thus unfolds this Fable. I fancy,
says he, Daedalus and his Son were learned in Astrology, and that the one
having puzzled himself in that Science, gave occasion to the Fable. Perhaps
also Pasiphae, having heard the other Discourse of the Celestial Bull, and of
other Stars, became enomour'd with his Doctrine, whereupon the Poets feigned
that she was fallen in love with a Bull, which she enjoyed by his means.
Authors ascribe to Daedalus the invention of the Potters Wheel, the Plummet and
the Sails for Ships; and this gave birth to the Fable of his having made Wings
for himself to get out of Crete.

Diodorus Siculus continuing that History, says, that the Cretians refusing to
obey Minos, after the death of his Father Asterius, he begged the assistance of
a Prince, called (...), with whom his Wife Pasiphae was in Love, and enjoyed
him by the help of Daedalus, who favored it; but the King having discovered
the Intreague, they flew all away with Taurus on board his Ships, to avoid the
Anger of the Prince.

Philochorus says, that the (...) was nothing else, but a cruel and bloody
Officer of King Minos, called Taurus; and this King having instituted Funeral
Fights in remembrance of his Son Andregeas, Taurus did overcome all such who
presented themselves to fight, and got the prize, which was a Tribute of some
Children, that Minos exacted of the Athenians. Thesmus overcame him, and freed
the Athenians from that unnatural Tribute.

DEMON,
(...). Genius an Angel, ^ate. This word in the Holy Scripture, is always taken
for the Devil, or a bad Genius. A^^leius gives us a short definition of the
nature of Demons, and tells us that they have a rational Soul, a Body of Air,
and that they are everlasting, though they are obnoxious to the same passions
with Men. And that the Predictions, Augurs, Divinations, Answers of Oracles,
Dreams and Magic Performances belong to them. He pretends that they carry Men's
Prayers to the Gods, and bring to Men the Favors they obtained from them. He
has written a whole Book of Socrates his God, or Socrates his Devil, according
to St Austin. He gives an account of the Opinions of the Platonic
Philosophers, who divided Intellectual Natures into three Orders, viz. Gods,
Men and Demons; i. e. of Inhabitants of Heaven, Earth and Air. They said that
Demons were Immortal like the Gods, but were obnoxious to Passions like Men,
and loved the filthy Diversions of Theaters and the Fables of the Poets.

Cassianus has handled at large all Questions relating to Demons in his
Conferences, where he shows that there are Demons of several kinds; some
called Fauni, who love to play and laugh with Men, but do them no harm; others
delight in hurting Men, and drawing them into all kind of Crimes. He tells us
that Demons were formerly Angels, whom God created before Corporeal Beings;
but revolting against the Sovereign Power, they were precipitated into the Air,
which is full of them; that God out of his goodness and mercy has not permitted
that we should see them, lest the terror, example and contagion of their Crimes
should draw us into perdition.

St. Justin says, that God having created the Angels, some of them forsook the
Law of their Lord, and were taken with a brutish passion for Women, and begot
the Demons; afterward these rebellious Angels and the Demons, brought
uncleanness and wars upon the Earth, and that Poets having described these
Wars, have introduced Jupiter acting in part therein. By this word Demons,
it is said, St Justin understands the Titans and Giants, whom Idolatrous Nations
have worshipped as their Gods, and many of the Fathers have been of the same
opinion with Justin, that they were begot by the disobedient Angels and Women.

Athenagoras has followed Justin's steps. Yet he has expressly observed, that
Giants were begotten by the Apostate Angels and Women, and were called Demons
or Genius's, and that the Poets were not ignorant of it.

The Christian Religion teaches us, that Demons are spiritual things, who in
the person of Lucifer the first Angel were precipitated into Hall, because he
would equal himself with God.

Doubtless the Pagans had some knowledge of the Books of Moses, and have made
Fables of what is said in those Books of Angels and Demons.

DAGON,
An Idol of the Philistines, mentioned in the Book of Kings. Some Authors say,
that its uppermost part was like the Body of a Man, and its undermost like a
Fish: The Hebrew word Dag signifies a Fish; yet it most be granted that Dugon
may come from Dugas, i. e. Wheat: And Philo in Eusebius has rendered the word
Dagon by that of (...) frumentum or framenti praeses.

DANAE,
The Daughter of Acrifius King of the Argives, who being brought to Bed of a
Son, her Father clapped her with her new born Child into a Chest, and cast them
into the Sea, because she had lost her Virginity: He had shut her up close in a
Brazen Tower lest she should be seen, but Jupiter changed himself into a golden
Shower, and dropped into her Lap through the Roof, and got her with Child. King
Acrisius performed this act of cruelty, because the Oracle had foretold that he
should be slain by a Son of his Daughter. Danas did not refuse to dye, provided
her harmless Child should be spared; but unmerciful Acrisius, who could not be
moved neither with Prayers nor Tears, put away the young Babe, who stretched
out his arms to him, as if he had implored his assistance. The Chest was caught
in the Fishermens Net near the Isle of Scriphos, and both the Mother and the
Child got safe ashore.

DANAKH,
(...) A small Coin that the Greeks put into the mouth of dead Bodies, to pay
their passage in Charon's Ferry-boat, called so from (...), i. e. of the dead.
It was an obolus, worth about one Penny and one Farthing. Euripides calls that
piece of Silver the honor of the dead, (...), because Charon refused to carry
over the Stygian Lake, the dead men, who had nothing wherewith to pay the
Ferry-men. Aristophanes confirms that custom; for he introduces Bacchus
inquiring of Hercules, who descended into Hell, how much they paid for their
passage; and he answers them two oboli, intimating, that if a dead man pay one
obolus for his passage, a man who is alive ought to pay two oboli. Lucian
laughs at that custom of the Greeks, in his Dialogue of Mourning. They put,
says he, a piece of Silver into the mouth of those that dye, to pay the
Ferry-man, without considering whether that Money be current in that Region:
besides, I should think they would do much better, in not giving them any at
all, that they might be constrained to send them back to life again.The same
Lucian introduces in another place, Charon and Menippas dscoursing thus on the
matter.

Char. Pay the Ferry-man, sirrah.


Menip. Bawl as long as thou will, the Devil a farthing shall thou get.


Char. Come, come a penny for your passage.


Menip. How! would thou have Money from one that has none?


Char. Can any man want a penny?


Menip. I want it.


Char. Sirrah, I will cut thy throat, or I will have my Money.


Menip. And I will crack your Fool's crown for you, with this Staff.


Char. How! must I have nothing then for ferrying you over?


Menip. Since Mercury brought me hither, let him pay you your fare, if he will.


Mercury. That would be a fine thing indeed? I should pay for the dead, after I
had the trouble of conducting them.


Char. Pay me, or otherwise you shall not budge from hence.


Menip. Pull then thy Boat ashore; but what course can thou take to make me
pay thee, seeing I have no Money-?


Char. You know well enough you was to have brought some.


Menip. And grant I did know it, could I hinder dying?


Char. What! Shall you be the only person to boast having passed in Charon's
Ferry for nothing?


Menip. How! say ye, for nothing; have I not drudged and tugged at the Oar and
Pump, without molesting thee with my lamentations as others have done?


Char. That is nothing at all to your fare.


Menip. Restore me then to life again.


Char. Ay, to be beaten by Aeacus, I thank ye?


Menip. Leave me then at rest.


Char. If I ever catch you again in my clutches.


Menip. There is no returning hither twice.


Strabo says that the Inhabitants of Hermione, a Town of M^ria, did not put
this obolus in the mouth of their dead, as other Greeks did, for their Town was
consecrated to Proserpina, wherefore they were ferried over gratis.

DANAIDES.
The Daughters of Danaus, old Belus his Son, and Aegyptus's Brother. The Poet
tells us, that Danaus was obliged to marry his fifty Daughters to his Brothers
Sons, who were like in number; but he ordered them all to murder their Husbands
upon the Wedding night, to prevent the death he was threatened with by the
Oracle. All of 'em obeyed his barbarous order, except only one, who was struck
with a just horror of that Crime. It is feigned that they were all sentenced in
Hell, as a punishment of their Crime, to fill a Tub full of holes with water;
but Hypermnestra was exempted from the punishment, because she had no share in
their guilt, for she would not murder Lyceus her Husband.

DANAUS,
The Son of old Belus, and Aegyptus's Brother, who drove away Stenelus out of
the Kingdom of Argos, where he reigned five years. Pliny relates, that he was
the first who made use of Ships to cross over from Egypt into Greece. He had
fifty Daughters, whom he used very severely, forcing them to work with their
own hands, and married them to the Sons of his Brother Aegyptus, who were also
fifty in number. Pausanias tells us, that Danaus built a Temple to Apollo,
surnamed Lycienus, either from Licia, or the Greek word (...), i. e. a Wolf, or
from (...) light; wherefore Homer calls him (...), begetting light. Once he
came to Argos to dispute with Gelamor, the Son of Stenelus, about the Kingdom,
and having referred the controversy to the people, it was put off to the next
day. But the next morning by break of day a Wolf crossing the Country, fell
among a herd of Cattle, that were feeding along the Walls, and assaulted a
strong and vigorous Bull. The Inhabitants went upon the Walls, and stood there
to see the event of the fight, and ascribed Gelamor's Party to the Bull, and
the Party of Danaus to the Wolf. The Bull was overcome, and the Wolf
victorious, whereupon the Inhabitants adjudged the Kingdom to Danaus, who
thought that Apollo had sent this Wolf on purpose to favor his right, who
built him a Temple for an acknowledgement of his good offices.

DAPHNE,
Daughter of the River Peneus, according to the Fable, who was beloved and
courted by Apollo, but had rather be changed into a Laurel or Bay Tree, than to
yield to his violent pursuits.

DAPHNE,
The Daughter of Tiresias, was also one of the Sybils, as Diodorus tell us, l.
4 c. 6. Chrysippus calls her Sybilla Delphica; because after the destruction of
Thebe, the Argives sent her to Delphi, where she learned the Art of Divination.
Pausanias calls her Herophila, she lived a long time before the War of Troy;
she foretold that Helena should be brought up at Spart^, for the ruin of Asia
and Europe, and that for her sake the Greeks should destroy the City of Troy.
The Inhabitants of Delos pretend that she has made Hymns in the praise of
Apollo.

DAPHNIS,
Son of Mercury, born in Sicily. Diodorus tells us, that he was the first
composer of Pastorals. Having passed his word to a Nymph whom he loved, upon
pain of losing both his Eyes in case of falsehood, he afterward fell in love
with another and was struck blind.

DARDANUS,
Son to Jupiter and Electra, who killed Janus his Brother, and then fled away
and retired into Phrygia, where he married the Daughter of King Teucer, who
made him his Partner in the Government of the Country, which was called after
their names, sometimes Teucria, and sometimes Dardania. This happened about the
time, that according to holy History Joshua succeeded Moses in governing the
Israelites, seven hundred years before the City of Rome was built, and in the
time that the Assyrians reigned in the greater Asia.

Dardanus left Erichthonius Heir to his Dominions, who had a Son, whose Name
was Tres, Great Grandfather to Priamus, who was King, and changed the Name of
his capital City, and called it after his own Name Troy. His Children were
Ganimedes, whom Jupiter stole away under the figure of an Eagle, and Assaracus
the Father of Capys, who begot Anchises the Favorite of Venus, who was
Aeneas's Mother.

DEA BONA,
The good Goddess, whom some Writers call Fauna, Fatua and Dryas, Wife to
Faunus, surnamed Bona Dea, because she was so true to her Husband, that she
never came out of her apartment, and saw no Man besides himself. Yet Varro and
Macrobius say, that she was Faunus's Daughter, and not his Wife: Others tell us
that Bonn Dea was one Flora, Faunus's Wife, who being so much given to
drinking, was once whipped by her Husband with a Rod of Myrtle. This Chastizement
reclaimed her, and she became a Goddess, and when they offered her Sacrifices
they never carried Myrtle, because of the accident that befell her.

All the Roman Ladies assembled to make her a Sacrifice in May, at the House of
the High Priest, in the most retired Room; or as Plutarch says, at the Consul's
House. This Sacrifice was made in the Night, and it was required too, that they
should have had no company with Men, during nine days before. There was no Man
admitted to it, neither any representation of Man or Dog suffered there, and if
there was any, they were obliged to cover them with a Vail, as we learn it from
Juvenal, Satyr 2. -- Ubi velari pictura jubetur
Quaecunque alterius Sexus imitata figuram est.
The Wine that was used in this Sacrifice, which the chief Priestess and the
others then drunk, was called by them Milk. This Ceremony in process of time
degenerated into Drunkenness and shameful Debaucheries, which Juvenal describes
in the 6th Satyr.

Nota Bonae secreta Deae, cum tibia lumbos
Incitat, and cornis pariter, vinoque feruntur
Attonitae crinemque rotant ululante Priapo
Maenades, etc.
DEA NUNDINA,
A Divinity, who presided on the ninth day after the birth of Children, at
which time the Romans were used to give them a Name.

DECANUS MILITARIS,
A Leader who commanded ten Soldiers.

DECEMBER,
The Number Ten, which the Romans figured thus X. We learn from Ovid, that this
Number was very much regarded by the Ancient Romans. The Cabalist Hebrews and
Pythagorean Philosophers are of opinion, that every number of Ten is full of
Divine Mysteries. Romulus, says Ovid, made up the Year of ten Months only, he
composed his Senate of one hundred Men, (which Number is made up of Ten
multiplied by it self) divided still each of the three Tribes into ten Hundred
of Footmen, and ten Tenths of Horsemen. This number is so very perfect that
Faith is represented with two right hands joined together, and each of them
being composed of five Fingers, both together make up the number Ten: Numbers
also don't go beyond Ten, and after Ten we begin again with Unites, so ten and
one make eleven. Plato teaches us in his Timeus, that Ten is composed of the
four first Numbers, one, two, three, four, which joined together make Ten: that
one represents the Point; two, the Line; three, the Superficies and the
Triangle, which is the first plain Figure; and four the Square, and the solid
Body in length, breadth and depth, or the Cube.

DECEMBER,
The tenth Month in the Year of Romulus, consecrated to Saturn. Under the Reign
of Commodus, this Month was called out of flattery Amaxonius, in honor of a
Courtezan, whom that Prince passionately loved, and had got painted like an
Amazon; but it kept that Name but during that Emperors Life.

Upon the Kalends of this Month they made a Sacrifice to the Feminine Fortune,
because she had appeased Coriolanus.

The day of the Nones fell out upon the Feast of Faunus, called Faunalia, which
was solemnized by Countrymen in the Fields, with Games, Mirth and Feastings.

The Eleventh of the Month, or the third of of the Ides, they kept the Feast
Agonulia.

The thirteenth, or the day of the Ides, they celebrated the Feast
Septimontium, which was instituted upon the enclosing the seventh Mount within
the compass of the City of Rome.

The seventeeth day of the Month, or the sixteenth of the Kalends was the Feast
Saturnalia, of which more afterward in its place.

In this great Feast was comprehended the Feasts called Sigillaria and
Angeronalia.

The two and twentieth they solemnized the Feast Lararia, in honor of the Gods
Lares.

The three and twentieth, they made a Feast called Laurentiualia, in honor of
Acca Laurentia the Wife of the Shepherd Faustulus.

At the latter end of the Month they had the Juveniles Ludi, and the
Country People kept the Feast of the Goddess Vaouna in the Field, having then
got in their Fruits and sown their Corn.

DECEM-PEDA,
A Perch ten foot long to measure Land. It was called in Greek (...).

DECEM-VIRI,
Ten Magistrates chosen at Rome, to govern the Commonwealth instead of Consuls,
with an absolute Power. They were created upon this occasion.

The Tribunes of the People having observed for a very long time, that the
Magistrates did always favor the Nobility to the prejudice of the People,
demanded an equality of Laws for both. Tarentius or Tarentillius Arza, A. 289.
ab urb. cond. showed himself very zealous in this Affair, and proposed the
famous Law, called after his Name Tarentilla, which was the occasion of so many
Troubles and Divisions in Rome. This Law ordered among other things, that five
Magistrates should be created, as Livy says; or ten, as Dionysius
Halicarnasseus tells us, to moderate and keep the Consulary Authority in favor
with the People. The Senate opposed this Law; yet it was received afterward.
Three Deputies were immediately sent into Greece to fetch the Laws of Solon,
and to inform themselves of the customs of the Commonwealth of Athens, and
other the best forms of Government of Greece; for hitherto the Romans governed
themselves by their own Customs. These Deputies acquitted themselves of their
Trust with great fidelity and exactness. At their return the Senate created ten
Magistrates to govern the Republic, and to examine the Laws of Solon, which
being approved of by the Senate, and agreed by the People, were engraven upon
twelve Tables of Brass, and called them therefore the Laws of the twelve
Tables, or the Decemviral Laws.

The first difficulty they met with in the Election of the Decemviri, was
whether they should be all taken out of the Patrician Body, or some of them out
of the Body of the People; the Patricians carried it this time; and at their
Election they were empowered to quit their Office whenever they should think
fit.

They began to perform the functions of their Office A. cccii ab urbe condita,
and did govern with such moderation and equity, that the Romans thought they
lived still in the golden Age of their Fathers; but the following Year the
Decemviri, enticed by the sweetness of an absolute Power, made an ill use of
their Authority; so that Appius Claudius one of them, having murdered Lucius
Siccius Dentatus a valiant Roman Soldier, and ravished Virginia, a Maid of an
extraordinary Beauty, the Decemviri were banished, and their State forfeited.
They were called the ten Tarquins, because of their Tyrannical Government. And
the People were so exasperated against them, that they demanded them that they
might burn them alive. Then the Consulary Government was resumed, and the
Decem-viratus lasted but two Years.

DECEM-VIRI,
Sc. Litibus judicandis. Ten Judges established to administer Justice in the
absence of the Praetors, when busied in foreign Wars. Their office became
afterward common; for the making Sale of Goods, called Subhastationes, because
they set up a Pike in the place where the Sale was made. Theophilus speaking of
it says, Sed quid vetat appellatione Decem-virorum intelligi qui litibus
judicandis and hastae praeerant.

DECENNALIA FESTA,
Festivals, that the Emperors in the declining times of the Empire, kept every
tenth Year, by offering Sacrifices to the Gods, and bestowing Largesses upon
the People.

DECIMATIO,
A punishment that the Romans used to inflict on the Soldiers, who had quitted
their Post, or raised a Mutiny in the Camp, or behaved themselves cowardly in
the Fight; which was practiced thus: The General assembled the whole Camp, then
the Tribune brought to him those that were guilty, and impeached them, and
reproached them with their cowardly Actions and Baseness in the presence of the
whole Army; then putting their Names into an. Urn or a Headpiece, he drew
five, ten or twenty of them, according to their Number; and the fifth, the
tenth or the twentieth was put to the Sword, and the others were saved; and
this was called Decimare.

DECIMARE,
A word of the ancient Roman Militia, who to punish whole Legions, when they
had failed in their Duty, made every tenth Soldier draw Lots, and put him to
death for an example to the others.

DECIMAE,
The tenth part of the Fruits of an Estate, or other like portion of Goods,
which differs according to the custom of places. They vowed formerly the tenth
part of the Booty got at the taking of a Town, or the Spoils of the Enemies to
their Gods, as Juno, Apollo and Hercules.

Censorinus c. 1. de die Not. says that the ancient Romans, being persuaded
that they held every thing from the Liberalities of the Gods, not excepting
their own life, offered them a portion of their Servants, Fields, Towns, and
consecrated them also their Heirs, to give them thanks for their Health.

After a famous Victory, Camillus declared, that he had promised and vowed to
Apollo the tenth part of the Booty, Apollini se decimam vovisse partem cum
diceret Camillus, Pontifices solvendum religione populum censerent: These are
the words of Livy, who says besides, that Camillus protested that he had vowed
the whole tenth part, and therefore they must include in it even the ground of
the Town that he had took, and its Territory, urb is atque agri capti decimam,
quae and ipsa voto contineatur.

This Historian relates still the vow of the holy Spring Ver Satrum, that the
Senate and the Roman People made in a very dangerous time, when they were
afraid of the Carthaginiaus and the Gauls. By this Vow they obliged themselves
to offer in Sacrifice to Jupiter, the whole increase of their Flocks and Herds,
which that Spring should produce. Quod vir attulerit ex Suillo, Ovillo,
Caprino, Bovino grege, Jovi fieri. Pliny observes that the Romans never tasted
of their Wine, or other Fruits of the Earth, before their Priests had offered
the Primitiae or first Fruits thereof in the, Temples.

The Greeks were not less religious than the Romans. Herodotus tells us, that
Craesus when Cyrus had taken the Capital City of his Kingdom, advised him to
place a Guard at the Gates, lest some part of the Booty might be carried away,
before the tenth of it should be offered to Jupiter.

The same Author relates in another place, that the Greeks, after the famous
Victory of Salamina, consecrated the first Fruits of the Spoils to the Gods,
and among others, three Ships taken from the Phaenicians.

Dionysius Halicarnasseus says, that Hercules having subdued Spain and Italy,
promised to bestow the tenth part of the Booty for Sacrifices. And that
Tarquinius Priscus had vowed to build a Temple to Jupiter, Juno and Minerva, if
he got a Victory over the Sabines. Tarquinius Superbus performed the Vow of his
Great Grandfather, and bestowed upon that Magnificent Building the tenth part
of the Spoils he obtained at the taking of the Town of Sinuesse.

Diogenes Laertius in the Life of Solon, introduces a Letter of Pisistratus to
Solon, wherein he says that the Athenians laid aside the tenth part of their
Revenues for Sacrifices, public Wants, and the Charges of War.

Plutarch proposes this Question, Why at Rome many rich Persons consecrated to
Hercules the tenth part of their Estate? and he answers, that it might be
because Hercules himself consecrated to Rome the tenth part of the Oxen of
Geryon which he was carrying away; or because he made the Romans free of the
Tithes they paid before to the Tuscans; or because they thought that Hercules,
who lived very soberly, was pleased that rich men would retrench some part of
their superfluities.

DECIUS MUS,
A Roman Consul, who fought a Battle against the Latins, and devoted himself to
death, to save the Roman Army. This great Man seeing his Soldiers cowed, and
the Roman Legions lost ground, sent for M. Valerius the High Priest, who being
clothed with his Gown edged with purple color, called Praetexta, he put both
his Feet upon a Dart. his Head covered, and holding up his Right Hand,
pronounced his Vow aloud, the High Priest uttering the words, which he repeated
after him: Janus, Jupiter, and Fathers Mars and Quirinus, Bellona, Lares,
Domestic Gods, Gods Indigeti, whose power is extended over us and over our
Enemies; and ye, Infernal Gods, I call upon you, I adore you, vouchsafe to
bless the endeavors of the Romans, and give them the victory: Strike their
Enemies with fear and death; wherefore I devote my self to the Gods of Hell and
to the Earth, and with me the Enemies Legions and their Confederates.Having
thus spoken, he got on Horseback, and spurred on his Horse through the thickest
Battallions of the Enemy. This Action raised the courage of the Legions, and
gave an opportunity to the other Consul Manlius to defeat the Enemy, and obtain
a full victory.

DECUMANA PORTA,
The back Gate in the Camp of the Romans.

DECUMATES AGRI,
Lands called Serves, manured by the meanest sort of the Gauls, now called the
Dukedom of Wirtemberg.

DECURIO.
An Officer in the Roman Army, who commanded ten Troopers: for Romulus having
at first divided the Roman people into three Tribes, he appointed at the head
of each Tribe a Colonel to Command it, and afterward divided each Tribe in
ten Curia, or Companies, and appointed a Centurion or Captain to Command a
hundred men, and a Decurion to command ten men.

DECURIONES
MUNICIPALES. A Court of Judges or Councillors, who representing the Senate of
Rome in the free Towns. They were called Decuriones, because in the times they
sent Roman Colonies into the conquered Towns, they chose ten men to make up a
Senate, and a Court of Counselors, called Civitatum Patres Curiales; Fl^^orati
Municipiorum Senatores, and their Court, was called Curia Decurimum, and Minor
Senatus.

They were chosen almost with the same ceremonies as the Senators. And were to
be five and twenty years old, with a Revenue of two hundred and twenty five
pounds Sterling per Annum. This Election was made at the Kalends of March. Then
the Duum-viri assembled for that purpose the Court of the Decurions, with the
Judge of the Province, and were elected by the majority of Votes. The Decurion
then chosen paid his welcome to the whole Body in Money, or a Present, which was
more or less according to the custom of the place, as we learn by the Emperor
Trajanas to the young Pliny, who had consulted him about that Duty of Entry.
The Emperor answers him, that there was no general rule established upon that
account, and that every one must follow the custom of the place. Vlpianus tells
us, that the Money was equally divided among the Decurions.

Their office was to take care of all that was for the benefit of the Town, and
the Revenues of the Commonwealth. Some of this Revenue was bestowed for the
re-building of the Walls, and other public Edifices, and the rest for
maintenance of learned men. They pronounced Sentences called Decreta
Decurionum, with two D. D. at the top of them.

DEDICATIO
Templi, and DEDICARE Templa. The Dedication of Temples; we shall here inform
you by whom it was made, and with what ceremonies.

When a Temple was built, it was to be dedicated to some Divinity, and the
Dedication thereof belonged to some great Magistrate, at Consuls, Praetors,
Censors, Decem-viri, Duum-viri, Vestal Virgins, and the High Priests in the
time of the Commonwealth, or the Emperors during the Monarchick Government.
The Temple built by Tarquinius in honor of Jupiter Capitolinus, was dedicated
by the Consul M. Horatius Pulvillus, An. 247, some time after the Romans had
expelled the Kings. The Temple of Mars, consecrated in the War against the
Gauls, was dedicated in the year 365 by the Duum-viri, appointed for the
keeping of the Book of the Sybills.

The Dedication was to be authorized by the Senate and the people, according to
the Law Papyria, made by Pupyrius Tribune of the people; and the College of the
Pontiffs was to give their consent to it, as Livy and Tully tells us.

These things being exactly observed early in the morning, the College of the
Pontiffs, and other Orders met, with a great Crowd of People, and many persons
of note at the appointed place. They surrounded the Temple with Garlands of
Flowers; the Vestal Virgins holding in their hands branches of Olive Tree,
sprinkled the outside of the Temple with Lustral or Holy Water; then the person
who consecrated the Temple drew near the Gate with a Pontiff at his side, to
show him the ceremonies, and tell him the Prayers that he was to make, holding
with one hand the side-post of the Gate, and then said thus, Ades, Ades, for
example Luculle, Dum dedico Templum hoc, ut mihi praeeatis, postemque teneatis.
This ceremony was expressed with these words, Postem tenere, or apprehendere.

Then the Pontiff holding the Ceremonial in his hand, pronounced aloud the form
of the consecration, which the consecratind person repeated after him; and the
ceremony was expressed by these words, Solemnia verba praeeunte Pontifice
effari.

Afterward they consecrated the Court of the Temple by sacrificing a Beast,
the inwards whereof were laid on an Altar of Green Turf, lustrabatur area, exta
super cespitem reddebantur.

Then the consecrating person came into the Temple with the Pontiffs, and took
the Statue of the God and Goddess to whom the Temple was consecrated, and
anointed it with Oil, and laid it on a Pillow rubbed with Oil, in temple ipsum
quoque prius unctions dedicatum ana cum ara and pulvinari collocabatur.

After all the ceremonies were over, the Temple was called Augustum, i. e.
Augurio Sacratum, and the person who had consecrated it, might have an
Inscription containing his name, his qualities, and the year of the
consecration set upon the Temple, as we may see in the following Inscription.
Nunc. R. Et Minervae. Sal.



Tatitus relates the Dedication of the Capitol that was made by Vespastan's
order, Annal. l. 4.

In clear and serene weather, they surrounded the Temple with Garlands and
Holy-bands, and made those Soldiers whose names were of good omen, go into the
Temple, carrying in their hands branches of such Trees as were acceptable to
the Gods. The Soldiers were followed by the Vestal Virgins, attended by young
Children of both Sexes, whose Parents were still alive, and sprinkled the place
with Spring and Riverwater. Then the Praetor offered the ordinary Sacrifices of
the purification, and having laid the inwards of the victims upon Greens,
prayed Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, and the other Gods, protectors of the
Empire, to bless a work that men's piety was consecrating to their glory. Then
immediately he touched the Holy bands, that were tied to the Rope, which held
the first Stone; and the Priests, and Magistrates, with the whole Senate, the
Equestrian Order, and the greatest part of the people hoised up the Stone in
the air with loud acclamations, till it was laid on its foundation, where they
threw presently many pieces of Gold and Silver, and Metal as it came out of the
Mine.

As for the consecration of Christian Churches, some ascribe this institution
thereof to Pope Clement, others to Felix, who was Pope in the time of the
Emperor Aurelianus, and some others to Sylvester in Constantinus's time.
However, that institution is very ancient, being practiced in imitation of the
dedication of the Temple of Jerusalem, which God had commanded, and in
remembrance of the same, the Israelites kept a Feast every year called Encaenia.

DEFENSOR
Civtiatis. The most considerable Magistrate after Consuls and Duum-viri. He
may be called Syndick, as he is named in the Roman Law, Defensores, says
Arcadius, quos Graeci syndicos appellant, pro Republica agebant and
convenichantur.

This Magistrate was chosen out of the number of the Citizens, by the Decurion
and the Priesthood, then this Election was confirmed by the Praefectus
Praetorio, who delivered him his Letters Patent. This office was first for five
years, but afterward it was reduced to two years.

The Duty of this place was to protect the people both in Town and Country, and
to judge of their differences. He had two Officers under him to put his
Sentences into execution, and prevent the peoples mutinying, having power to
imprison those who should be the authors of any Sedition.

DEJANIRA.
The Daughter of Oenius King of Aetolia, who married Hercules; but she was the
cause of his death, having sent him by Licas a garment that Nessus the Centaur
had presentud her, which was dyed with the blood of the Serpent called Hydra,
that Hercules had killed: for as soon as he had put it on he fell mad, and
threw himself into a bonfire he had made in the Mount Oeta, where he was
presently consumed by the flames. Dejanira hearing this misfortune, slew
herself with her Husbands Club.

DEIDAMIA.
The Daughter of Lycomedes King of Scyro. In the Court of this King Thetis had
his Son Achilles brought up in a Girls habit, to preserve his life, for the
Fates said that he should dye in the siege of Troy. Achilles begot a Son by
Deidamia called Pyrrhus, because his father was called Pyrrha all the time of
his disguise.

DELATOR.
An Informer of a capital crime or conspiracy, who discovers the whole matter
to the King or Magistrates. Tacitus writes, that Informers were very common at
Rome. These secret accusers, the plague of families, in the time of Tiberius,
instead of being suppressed by punishments, were encouraged by rewards; for the
most famous were esteemed sacred and inviolable persons, and the others were
left by Tiberius to the vengeance of the people.

DELOS.
The Island Delos. Neptune received an order from Jupiter to stop this floating
Island, which had been separated from Sicily by stormy weather, that Latona who
was in labor might lie in there. Juno being highly provoked banished her out
of Heaven, and the Earth swore that she would not receive her; wherefore there
remained no other place for her, but only that Island, which was not bound by
the Oath of the Earth, because it was not then in the World. Latona was
therefore received there, and deliverd of Twins Apollo and Diana, the fairest
Children of Jupiter, as Lucian tells us.

DELPHI,
A City in Baeotia, near Mount Parnassus. There Apollo had a Magnificent
Temple, enriched with Presents, that were sent thither from all parts. In this
Temple was a Priestess called Pythia or Pythonissa, inspired by Apollo, who
gave out Oracles, sitting on a little three-legged Stool, called Tripos or
Cortina, because it was covered with the skin of the Serpent Pytho; wherefore
Virgil says, Nec te Phoebi Cortina fefellit, i. e. The Oracles of Apollo have
not deceived you.

DELPHINUS,
A Dolphin, a great Seafish, with a crooked Back, pleasant to the Eyes, of a
changeable Color, according to the several Motions of his Body, which is
covered with very thin Scales. He is a great Friend to Man, as Lucian gives us
to understand in the Dialogue between Neptune and the Dolphins. Nept. I love
you Dolphins, for continuing your Love and Affection toward Mankind.


Dolph. No wonder, Neptune, we have a kindness for Men, since we were Men our
selves once.


Nept. In good earnest, I bear Bacchus a grudge for having thus Metamorphiz'd
you after his Victory. He might in my mind, have contented himself, with
subduing you, as he did other People. But pray tell me the adventure of Arion:
Now as for Melicerta, I know you wafted him over to Corinth, when he was
tumbled down with his Mother from off the Scironian Cliffs.


Dolph. As Arion was very much beloved by Periander for the excellency of his
Art, he dwelt commonly with him; but when he was become very rich, the Toy took
him in the Crown, to return into his own Country, to make a figure there with
his Riches. But after he was embarked in a Ship, the Seamen and people without
Faith and Humanity, resolved to throw him overboard, that so they might have
his Wealth. But he first of all desired them to suffer him to make his Funeral
Oration, and to sing an Elegy on his Harp; then flouncing into the Ocean, with
all the best things he had, the Dolphins thronged about the Ship, allured by
the Charms of his Harmony, saved him, and I my self carried him upon my back,
as far as Taenarus.




Pindar, Herodotus and Pliny, relate the great Affection Dolphins bear to Men;
and tell us, that they brought back the Body of Hesiod, who was murdered in
the Temple of Neptune, and thrown into the Sea; and received Telemachus the Son
of Ulysses, who fell into the Sea playing on the shore: Wherefore, ever since,
his Father wore the figure of a Dolphin in his Scutcheon and Signet; and for
that same reason Lycophron in his Cassandra gives him the surname of (...),
because he was a flat-nosed Man like the Dolphins, which Pliny calls Simos.

DEMOCRITUS,
A Philosopher who laughed at Men and Humane things; and said, that there was
nothing solid, and all was Vanity, that a Man was but a concourse of Atoms, and
the Toy of Destiny or Fortune.

DEMONAX,
A Philosopher of the Isle of Cyprus, of an Illustrious and Rich Family, but
his Mind being yet above his Fortune, he forsook all his Wealth to give himself
to Philosophy. He studied first Humane Learning, then Philosophy, but embraced
no particular Sect, and yet taking what was good in every Sect, he never
determined which of them he valued the most. He disputed modestly, hated Vice,
bore no ill will to vicious Men, but took care to cure them as Physicians do
Diseases, without being angry with his Patients; for he thought that to err,
was natural to Man, but forgiving and correcting was the property of a
Wiseman; and warned his wealthy Friends never to trust to the uncertainty of
Fortune, neither to be proud of their Wealth, which was often the share of
Fools, and encouraged the others to suffer patiently the miseries of this Life,
because neither Men nor Miseries could last long; and that Custom softens the
greatest hardships, and inured Men to pain. At last, seeing he was fallen into
want, he voluntarily starved himself with hunger. The Athenians buried him very
honorably at the public Charge.

DENARIUS,
A Roman Penny, to the value of seven-pence-half-penny of English Money. The
Romans having for a long time used brass Money, which they call At quasi Aes, or
Libra and Pondo, because it was a pound weight, began to coin Silver, A. 585.
ab urb. cond and coined first the Denarius, which was marked with the letter X,
because it was worth ten Asses, and divided into two Quinarii marked with V,
which were subdivided into two Sestertia, marked with these three Letters IIS.

In the latter times of the Commonwealth, the Emperors reduced the Roman Penny
to the weight of a Dram, viz eight in an Ounce; for it is certain, as Pliny
and Livy say, that before that time, it weighed more; for at first they coined
six, then seven Denarii out of an Ounce.

But there is a difficulty arising from what is said before, that the Roman
Penny was worth ten Asses; for Vitruvius says, that it was of the value of
sixteen Asses. To explain this difficulty, we must understand, that formerly at
Rome, each Ass (ten whereof made up a Roman Penny) weighed twelve Ounces; and
that afterward, in the time of the first Punick War, the Commonwealth being
then in debt, it was thought fit to lower the Coin, and reduce the Ass to two
ounces, and since that time in the War of Hannibal the Asses were reduced to
one ounce; but at the same time the value of the Roman Penny was regulated, and
then went for sixteen Asses instead of ten, which was the value of the old
Roman Penny, as Festus and Pliny tells us: And this resolves the Difficulty
that arises from what Vitruvius says.

DENDROPHORI,
The College of the Dendrophori is often mentioned in the Ancient Marbles Yet
it is not well known what kind of Men the Dendrophori were. The Learned are
divided upon this account; Salmasius in his Commentaries upon the Life of
Caracalla, written by Spartianus says, that the Dendrophori were those persons,
who, in the Processions made in honor of the God, carried Branches of Trees in
their Hands, according to the Etymology of the word (...), i. e. Tree-bearer;
wherefore the Epithet of Dendrophorus was given to the Silvan God in an old
Inscription cited by Gruter, because this God is commonly represented carrying
a Branch of a Pine Tree, in the Processions made in honor of Bacchus. And we
see often, in Basso relievos, where the Bacchanalia are represented as men
carrying little Shrubs or Branches of Trees.

The Title of the Theodosian Code seems to favor this Opinion in the 20th Law.
It Is just, says the Text, that all the Places that the Dendrophori and other
Religious Men among the Pagans have possessed, and were appointed for their
Feastings and distribution of Money, be applied to the Revenues of our Houses,
having banished the Error that instituted them. According to this Text
Dendrophori was not a Name of a Trade, but of a religious or superstitious
Order. However, most of the Learned are of a contrary opinion, which seems very
probable, and say, that the Dendrophori were Men, who bought Timber for the War
and Warlike Engines: Wherefore they were commonly joined in the same Company
with those who made the Engines called Fabri.

DERCETO,
The Mother of Semiramis, she was represented half Man and half Fish, as
Diodorus Siculus expressly speaks. But Lucian in his Dea Syria divides her Body
otherwise. Semiramis, says he, founded that Temple in honor of her Mother
Derceto, whose Image I have seen in Phaenicia, being that of a Woman from the
middle upwards, whose lower parts ended in a Fish's Tail. The transformation of
Derceto, the Mother of Semiramis, into a Fish, is a very famous Fable. Ovid
mentions it in his Metamorphosis.

DESIGNATOR.
A Master of Ceremonies in Funeral Pomps, or a sworn Crier, who ordered all
things at Funerals, either relating to the Parade, or the Habits of that
Ceremony. Vlpianus says, that this Officer was a noted Man, receiving his
Office from the Prince, and was attended by two Lictors and other Officers in
Mourning Dresses. Horace makes mention of him Epist. 7. l. 1. Designatorem
decorat Lictoribus atris.


They not only furnished all that was necessary for the Funeral, but undertook
the Funeral Games and Spectacles, says Tertullian.

DESULTORES
and DESULTORII, Men who leap from one Horse to another, at the Horce-races of
the Games called Circences. From hence the Latins proverbially speaking, call
inconstant and wavering men, desultoriae naturae homines.

DEUCALION,
A Scythian, the Son of Prometheus, who reigned in Thessalia, in the time of a
great Deluge: For the Greeks relate, that the first Men being cruel and
insolent, without Faith, Hospitality and Humanity, perished all by that Deluge,
the Earth issuing out abundance of Waters, which swelled up the Rivers, and
with the excessive Rains caused an overflowing of the Sea, which covered the
Earth with Water. Deucalion alone remained, having got safe into an Ark with
his Family, and two Beasts of every kind, who freely followed him into the Ark
both wild and tame, without devouring one another, nor doing him any harm. Thus
he floated till the Waters were retired, then re-populated Mankind, by throwing
stones behind him, which were changed into Men. Pyrrha his Wife did the like,
and threw Stones behind her, which were changed into Women; this they performed
by the advice of Themis. The Inhabitants of that Country enlarge the Story with
another Prodigy, and say, that an Abyss swallowed down all the Waters; and that
Deucalion in remembrance of it, erected an Altar and built a Temple, where a
very little Hole remains still. Wherefore the Inhabitants of that Country and
those of Syria, come twice a year to the Neighboring Sea, where they draw a
great quantity of Water, and pour it into the Temple that Deucalion built, and
this Water runs through the Hole; and the Origin of this Ceremony is still
ascribed to Deucalion, in remembrance of that Accident.

Ovid says, that Deucalion and Pyrrha escaped from the Flood, and staid in a
little Boat on the top of Mount Parnassius, which is above the Clouds and
Meteors; that they were both of a perfect Innocence and Holiness: wherefore
Jupiter seeing that there were none left of all Mankind but those two persons,
put an end to the Deluge, and made the World habitable as it was before.

It Is plain by this account, that Ovid knew something by tradition of the Ark
of Noah, and his singular Justice, and was told of the place where that Ark
stood, and the choice of an only Family for the reparation of Mankind. And it is
no wonder that the name of Noah was changed, and that of Pyrrha invented by
Poets. As for the manner of multiplying afterward Mankind, it was enough to
name a Father and a Mother, a Husband and a Wife. As to the Fable of the Stones
thrown behind their back, and their numerous posterity, it is a Poetic fancy,
to show with what facility God re-populated the Earth, and the hardness of
those Men, who were the first Inhabitants of this new World. Plutarch has
mentioned the Dove and the Ark of Deucalion. Pindar says, that Deucalion and
Pyrrha, by an order of Jupiter, came down from Mount Parnassus, and without any
conjugal Correspondence begat a great number of Children made of Stones;
because the Greek word (...) signifies both a Stone and People; and in so
little time, that it seemed that the Stones were transformed into Men.

Tzetzes explains this Fable something otherwise; for he says, that Deucalion
or Noah at their coming out of the Ark, set up on one side Stones like so many
Altars, according to the number of Men who were in the Ark; and his Wife and
other Women set up also on their side, as many Altars as they were in number,
to give thanks to God for having escaped this universal Deluge; and because
there was as many Men as Women in the Ark, it was said, that the number was
equal on both sides, so many Men according to the number of Stones; and that
this multiplication of Stones or Altars, was the cause of the multiplication of
Men.

St. Austin affirms, that the deluge fell out during the reign of Cecrops at
Athens, according to what Eusebius and Hieronimus say; but this Flood of
Deucalion overflowed but one part of Greece. However, the Greeks changed the
name of Noah into that of Deucalion, and confounded these two Deluges, that
they might ascribe to their Country the glory of restoring Mankind, and
re-populating the whole Earth.

DEVERRA,
One of the three Divinities, whom the Ancients entrusted with the care of a
Woman in Childbirth, as Varro and St Austin tells us, lest the God Silvanus
entered the House and troubled her.

DEUS,
The Sovereign Being. Here we must explain the word Deus. Some derive it from
the Verb Do, because God gives every thing, and can receive nothing from any
Creature whatsoever. Wherefore when they offered Sacrifices, they did not say
dare exta Diis, but reddere, to show that they only rendered him what he had
first given them. Others derive it from the Greek word (...), which signifies
fear, because we ought not to draw near him, but with a reverential fear: and
many Authors take its derivation from the Verb (...), i. e. to see and
contemplate, because God sees all things, and nothing escapes his sight and
knowledge. But tho there are several Opinions and Disputes concerning the
Etymology of that word, the Ancients are yet more divided about the definition
of the nature of God. Thales Milesius said that God was an Intelligence, who
had made all things of Water, and was the principle of all the World.
Anaximander assured, that God was born like the rest of Men. But Anaximines and
Anaxagoras had more sublime thoughts, for tho they ascribed an Airy Body to
God, nevertheless they acknowledged him for an infinite Being, who filled up
all Imaginary spaces. Pliny tells us that God is an Independent Being, who is
all Spirit, all Intelligence, all Sight, and all Hearing; and gives motion to
all Beings, and is moved by none but by himself. Doubtless, Pliny and others,
who have called God a Sovereign Intelligence, who fills, sees, knows, rules all
things, and has no limits, neither to his power or duration, had that excellent
notion from Plato.

Seneca speaking of the Poets, who have described Jupiter thundering against
the wicked, says, that we must not imagine that the Poets thought that Jupiter
struck men with Thunderbolts; but not being able to express better the
punishments that attended wicked Men, they were obliged to persuade them, that
God under the name of Jupiter, who sees all things, had always Thunderbolts in
his hand, wherewith to punish their Impieties.

And though the Ancients left us a ridiculous Genealogy of Gods, yet they did
not really believe that there was such a Multitude of Divinities: But they
conformed themselves to the Superstitious Error of the common People, to keep
them the better in awe, and hope out of respect to so many Gods. Pliny ascribes
the multitude of Gods to the weakness of Man's understanding, who was not able
to apprehend how only one God could govern so many different parts of the
World, wherefore Men fancied that there were many Gods, and that each of them
had his peculiar Employment and Function in the government of the World.

And when they made Beasts, Trees and Metals their Gods; they did not believe
that they were really Gods (except it were the common sort of People) but
observed some peculiar Qualifications and Proprieties in them, and for that
reason called them Gods.

DIA.
No Author tells us who was that Goddess Dia, so often mentioned in the
Inscription of the Arvaux's.

Sebastian Fesch of Basil, Doctor of Law, says that she was the Goddess Ops or
Cybele, Saturn's Wife, the Grandmother of the Gods, whom the Greeks called
also Rhea. And she might by way of Eminency be called Dia, i. e. Divina, as the
Mother and Queen of other Divinities. From this word Dea or Dia, is come the
name of Die in the Province of Dauphine, which was called Dia or Dea
Vocontiorum, because the Vocontij, who inhabited in its Neighborhood,
especially worshipped that Divinity.

DIANA,
The Daughter of Jupiter by Latona, who was born in the Isle of Dolos. This is
the same Goddess, who was called Lucina or Diana upon the Earth, and assisted
Women in labor, as Poets tell us; the Moon in Heaven; and Hecate or Proserpina
in Hell. Upon this account they ascribed unto her three Heads or three Faces,
and she is also called Triformes. Virgil speaks thus of her; Tergeminamque
Hecaten, tria Virginis ora Dianae.


And Diana, the Moon and Proserpina were thus confounded in one single Divinity.

All that was said concerning Diana, has respect rather to a Fable than the
History, or is rather it self a natural History. Yet Tully has spoken of her as
an Historian, when he distinguishes three Diana's; One born of Jupiter and
Proserpina, who brought forth winged Cupid; another better known, born of
Jupiter and Latona; and a third, who had Vpis for her Father, and Glauce for
her Mother, whom the Greeks call often Vpis after her Fathers Name: Dianae item
plures; prima Jovis and Proserpinae; secunda notior, quam Jove tertio and
Latona natam accepimus; tertiae pater Vpis traditur, Glauce matter; came Graeci
saepe Vpim paterno nomine appellant. And yet these were probably but the
Diana's of Greece, in imitation of the Diana's of Egypt. For Diana was among
the Dieties in Egypt, when Typhous made war against them, and she changed
herself into a Cat, wherefore the Egyptians called her Bubastis. Ovid speaking
of these Transformations of the Gods, does not forget that of Diana: Feel soror
Phaebi latuit. Herodotus tells us, that there was in the Town of Bubastis in
Egypt, a Temple of Babastis, called by the Greeks Diana, and that the Egyptians
said that Diana and Apollo were born of Dionysius and Isis. Sanchoniathon says,
that Saturn and Astarte begot seven Girls, or seven Diana's.

Strabo mentions one of the Grecian Diana's, whom they called Britomartis, and
was also named Dictynna, from the word Dicte.

And Solinus affirms, as Gasaubon observes, that the Inhabitants of Crete
called Diana by that name, because it signifies a mild and sweet Virgin: Quod
Sermon nostro sonat Virginem dulcem. Hesychius says, that the People of Crete
called (...), that which was sweet, (...). Casaubon is of opinion that the
other part of this word comes from (...), i. e. Companion, because a Virgin
never forsakes the company of her Mother.

In fine, Diodorus Siculus affirms, that the Cretans, who introduce the
Theology of Phaenicia and Egypt into their own Country, said, that Jupiter
begot Venus and the Graces, that Diana took care of new born Infants, and
Lucina presided over Women in Labor.

She was called Diana because she was the Daughter of Jupiter, as it is
intimated by her Name; for the ancient Latins said Dius instead of (...),
Jupiter: She was named Delia, because she was born in the Island of Delia. This
Goddess made a Vow of Virginity, which she carefully kept; wherefore the Poets
called her Casta Diana. She was the Goddess of Woods, Hunting and Cross-ways.
All the Nymphs are her Companions; but when they married they forsook her
company, and were obliged to carry Baskets full of Flowers and Fruits into her
Temple to pacify her. The Ides of August was a day kept holy in her honor; and
it was not then allowed to hunt, because they imagine, that that day she
permitted her Hounds, and all things that appertained to her Hunting Equipage
to rest; every one crowned his Hounds, and they lighted Torches in the
Forests, where they offered her in Sacrifice an Ox, a Boar and a white Hind.
They presented her still the first Fruits; Oenus King of Aetolia forgot it, in
an offering he made to the Country Gods; which so highly provoked her anger,
that she sent the Calydonian Wild-boar, who destroyed all his Country. The
Sythians, says Lucian, offered Men in sacrifice upon her Altar. Among all the
Temples that were built to her honor, that of Ephesus was most remarkable, for
its largeness and magnificence. It was 425 foot long, and 220 foot broad,
adorned with an hundred and twenty seven Pillars of threescore foot high,
wrought with so much art, and enriched with so much excellent carved work, that
nothing finer was ever seen: There was a Staircase to go up on the Temple,
made of one entire piece, which was the Wood of a Vine. This Temple was built
by the Architect Ctesiphon in sixscore Years time, and was burnt by a
profliigate Fellow, called Erostratus, who by this Conflagration, designed to
transmit his Name to posterity, not being able (as he confessed himself) to do
any thing more remarkable. The Ephesians built it again, as magnificent as
before.

Diana had also a Temple in the Town of Magnesia, built by Hermogenes
Alabandinus, a famous Architect.

This Goddess had another Temple at Rome upon Mount Aventine, in the Reign of
Servius Tullius, which was built by the Romans and Latins, at both their
Charges; and there they met every year to offer a Sacrifice, in commemmoration
of the League made between both Nations. This Temple was adorned with
Cows-horns. Plutarch and Lavy tell us the reason of it, when they relate that
Autro Coratius a Sabin, who had a very fine Cow, was advised by a Southsayer to
offer it in a Sacrifice to Diana of Mount Aventine, promising him if he offered
that Sacrifice that he should never want any thing, and that the City whereof
he should be a Citizen should subdue all other Towns of Italy. To that purpose
Autro came to Rome, but a Slave of King Servius having acquainted his Master
with Autro's design, who being gone to purify himself in the Tiber, before he
offered his Sacrifice, Servius made use of that opportunity, sacrificed the Cow
to Diana, and hung the Horns in her Temple.

She was commonly drawn Goddess-like, with dishevelled Hair, clothed with a
hairy Gown of purple color, trimmed with golden Buckles, which she tuckt up to
the very knees. She held a Bow in her Hand, and carried a Quiver full of Arrows
on her Shoulder. They also represented her sitting on a golden Chariot drawn
with Hinds. Albricus the Philosopher in his Pictures of the Gods says, that
Diana was represented holding a Bow and Arrow, with a Half Moon on her
Forehead, and about her a great company of Dryades, Hamadryades, Naiades,
Nercides, and Choires of the Nymphs of the Woods, Mountains, Fountains and
Seas; and even Satyrs, who are Country Divinities.

Strabo l. 14. de descriptione Mundi relates, that in the Isle of Icarus there
was a Temple of Diana, called (...) or Taurica; Livy l. 4. Dec. 4. calls it
Tauropolum, and the Sacrifices that were offered in that Temple Tauropolia.
However, Dionysius in his Book De^situ Orbis says, that Diana was not called
Tauropola from the People, but from the Bulls that abound in that Country.

DIAPASON.
This Greek word signifies a Chord, which includes all Tones, we call it an
Octave, because all its tones are eight in number. Aristotle says that the
Greeks did no not call it Diocto, i. e. Octave, because the Harp of the
Ancients, which included all the tones, had but seven Strings.

DIATONUM,
A kind of Song, which proceeds out by tones and semi-tones, and is more
natural and less forced than other kinds of Music.

DIAULON,
Is a kind of Race, which was a Furlong in length, and at the end thereof they
returned back along the same Course.

DICHALCA,
The foruth part of an Obolus.

DICTATOR,
A Roman Magistrate, who was alone invested with the Consulary and Sovereign
Authority, and had power of life and death over the Romans, he had Lictors
walking before him. Pomponius Laetus allows him but two; but Raphael
Volateranus says, more likely there were four and twenty Lictors, for each
Consul had commonly twelve. This Magistrate was never chosen, but when the
Commonwealth was reduced to some great Extremity, either by an unexpected War,
or some popular and epidemical Disease, to drive in the Nail, or choose new
Senators. The Consul elected a Dictator by Night upon the Territories of the
Commonwealth, and no where else. That Office was for six Months; at first none
but Patricians only were admitted to it; but afterward they were taken out of
the People, and the first who was honored with that Employment was called T.
Largus.

DICTATURA,
The Dictatorship, the Dignity of Dictator, which commonly lasted but six
Months, yet the Senare might continue it.

DIDO;
or Elise, the Daughter of Belus King of Tire. She married Sicheus, Hercules's
Priest, whom Pigmalion, Dido's Brother, murdered, to possess his Treasure.
Dido fearing her life, sailed to the Coasts' of Africa, where she built a Town
and called it Carthage. Jarbas King of Getulia would force her to marry him,
but she refused to consent to it, and had rather kill herself, than stain her
former Bed. Virgil relates this otherwise in his Encid, but by the account of
Chronologers what he said is impossible, for Aeneas lived 260 Years before Dido.

DIES,
The Day. The Ancients divided the day into a natural and artificial. They
called the natural day that which is measured by the duration of time, that the
Sun takes to move round the Earth, which comprehends the whole space both of
the Day and Night. And they called the artificial day, the duration of that
time the Sun is above our Horizon.

The natural day is also called civil, because several Nations reckon it
several ways; some begin it one way, and others another way.

The Babylonians began the day with the raising of the Sun.

The Jews and Athenians began it with the setting of the Sun, and the Italians
follow them, and begin the first hour of the day with the Sun setting.

The Egyptians began it as we do at midnight, and the Vmbri at Noon.

The day that begins with the rising and setting of the Sun is not equal; for
from the Winter-Solstice to the Summer-Solstice, the day that begins with the
Sun setting has something more than four and twenty hours: and on the contrary,
less from the Summer-Solstice to the Winter-Solstice; but the natural day that
begins at midnight or at noon is always equal.

The artificial day on the contrary is unequal all over the World, except under
the Aequinoxial Line; and this inequality is more or less, according to the
diversity of Climates.

The Romans distinguished the days into holy days and working-days: In the one
of these followed their Diversions, and the other their Business and Trading;
some days were also accounted by them lucky, and others unlucky.

We ought here to observe the general division that Numa made of the days
called Fasti and Nefasti; the days called Fasti were divided in Comitiales,
Comperendini, Stati, Praeliares.

Fasti dies were pleading days, at which time the Praetor was allowed to
administer Justice; and the word fasti is derived from fari, i. e. to speak or
pronounce: Wherefore the jurisdiction of the Praetor consisted in pronouncing
these three words Do, Dico, Addico: On the contrary, dies nefasti were no
pleading days, at that time there was no Justice administered, which Ovid has
expressed by these two Verses.

Ille nefastus erit, per quem tria verba silentur.
Fastus erit per quem lege licebit agi.
The days called Fasti were marked with an F. in the Roman Calendar, and the
days called Nefasti were marked with an N.

Paulus Manucius observes that there were three sorts of days called Fasti;
some were merely called Fasti, and those days were entirely spent in the
administration of Justice; others were called Intercisi or Enterocisi, because
one part of those days was employed to offer Sacrifice, and the other to
distribute Justice, which was administered from the time that the victim was
sacrificed, till the inwards were offered upon the Altars of the Gods, during
the time they were examining the Entrails, inter caesa and porrecta: and those
days are marked in the Calendar with these two Letters E. N. The third sort of
days called Fasti, were fasti in the afternoon, and nefasti in the morning,
marked in the Calendar with these Letters N. P. Nefastus priore tempore, or
priore part diei, as we learn from Ovid.

Neu toto perstare die sua jura putetis,
Qui jam Fastus erit, mane Nefastus erat.
Nam simul exta Deo data sunt, licet omnia fari;
Verbaque honoratus libera Praetor habes.
DIES SENATORII.
Days that the Senate met about the affairs of the Commonwealth, which were
commonly the Kalends, the Nones, and the Ides of the month, except upon
extraordinary occasions, for then there was no other days excepted, only those
appointed for the Assemblies of the people.

DIES COMITIALES.
Days of the meeting of the people, marked in the Calendar with a C. When the
Assemblies did not sit a whole day, the Praetor was allowed to bestow the rest
of the day in administering Justice.

DIES COMPERENDINI.
Days of adjournment. After a hearing on both sides, the Proetor granted time
to the Clients, either to inform more fully, or to clear themselves: this
adjournment was commonly of twenty days, and was only granted to Roman
Citizens, and to summon a Foreigner at Rome.

Macrobius says that this last adjournment was called Stati Dies.

DIES PRAELIARES.
Days during which it was permitted to engage the enemy. There were also other
days called Justi, viz. thirty days that the Romans were wont to grant to their
Enemy, after they had proclaimed War against them, and before they entered
their Territories, and used any Act of Hostility, to give them time by this
delay to come to an agreement, or make satisfaction for the wrong they had done
them. Justi Dies, says Festus, dicebantur triginta, cum exercitus esset
imperatus and vexillum in arce positum.

There were other days called NON PRAELIARES or ATRI, fatal and unluckly,
because of some loss the Romans had suffered during those days, wherefore it
was not allowed to engage the Enemy upon such days. The Greeks called them
(...).

It Is certain that the Ancients accounted some days luckly, and others fatal,
and that the Chaldeans and Egyptians have first made observations upon those
days, and the Greeks and Romans in imitation of them, have done the like.
Hesiod was the first, who made a Catalogue of lucky and fatal days, entitled
(...), where the fifth day of the month is noted for an unlucky day, because,
as he says, the Furies of Hell are walking that day upon the Earth: wherefore
Virgil tells us in the first Book of his Georgicks.

-- Quintam fuge, pallidus Orcus,
Eumenidesque satae: tum partu Terra nefando
Caeumque Japetumque ^reat, saevumque Typhoea,
Et conjuratos caelum rescindere fratres.
The opinion of Plato was, that the fourth day of the month was lucky, Hesiod
assures that it was the seventh day was fortunate, because it was Apollo's
Birthday; and that the 8th, 9th, 11th, and 12th days were also lucky.

The Romans accounted also some days lucky and others fatal. And the following
days after the Kalends, Nones and Ides were reckoned fatal and unfortunate. And
this opinion was grounded upon the answer of a Southsayer. For the Military
Tribunes Vigilius, Manlius, and Caelius Posthumous, seeing that the Common
wealth suffered always some loss, presented a Petition to the Senate in the
year 363, desiring them to enquire about the cause of these misfortunes. The
Senate sent for a Southsayer, called L. Aquinius, who being come into the
Assembly, they asked him his opinion about the same; he answered, that when Q.
Sulpitius, one of the Military Tribunes, engaged the Gauls with so bad success
near the River Allia, he had offered Sacrifices to the Gods the next day after
the Ides of July; that the Fabians were killed at Cremera, because they engaged
the Enemy upon the like day. After this answer the Senate referred the
consideration of the whole Affair to the College of the Pontiffs, and desired
them to give their opinion therein. The Pontiffs forbad to engage the Enemy, or
to undertake any thing upon the next day after the Kalends, Nones and Ides, as
Livy reports. Besides these days that were accounted unlucky, there were also
some other days, that every particular man esteemed unfortunate in respect to
his own person. Augustus never attempted to perform any thing upon the day of
Nones, others upon the fourth of Kalends, Nones and Ides. Vitellius having
obtained the dignity of the high Pontiff, made Ordinances concerning Religion
upon the 15th of the Kalends of August, which were ill received, because of the
loss they had suffered upon that day at Cremera and Allia as Suetonius relates
in the life of that Emperor, and Tatitus in the second Book of his History, c.
24. They took for a bad omen, that being made High Priest, he ordained
something concerning Religion upon the eighteenth day of July, which is fatal,
because of the Battles of Allia and Cremera.

There was also many other days accounted fatal by the Romans, as the day that
they offered Sacrifices to the Ghost of deceased persons; the day following
after the Feasts called Volcanalia, the fourth before the Nones of October, the
sixth of the Ides of November, the Holyday called Lemuria in May; the Nones of
July, called Crapotinae; the Ides of March, because Julius Caesar was killed
that day; the fourth before the Nones of August, because of the defeat of
Cannae that happened upon that day; the Holydays of the Latins called
Saturnalia, and many others recorded in the Calendar.

However, some Romans slighted those ridiculous and superstitious observations;
for Lucullus answered to those who endeavored to dissuade him from engaging
Tigranes, because upon the same day the Cimbri had routed the Army of Caepio,
I, said he, I will make it of a good omen for the Romans. Julius Caesar
transported his Forces over into Africa, tho the Augurs opposed his design.
Dion of Syracusa engaged Dyonisius the Tyrant, and overcame him one day when
the Moon was eclipsed. And so did many others.

DIES FESTI,
Holydays. See after Festum.

DIESIS,
The quarter of a Tone. This word is derived from the Greek (...), i. e. to
pass and run through something; the Diesis among Musicians are the lesser parts
of a Tone. Wherefore Aristotle says, that the Diesis are the Elements of the
Voice, i. e. of Tones: However, the Pythagoreans who are thought to be the
inventers of the name Diesis, do not make it so small; they divided the Tone in
two inequal parts, the lesser, which we call the Semi-tone minor was called
Diesis, and the greatest, which is our Semi-tone major, was called Apotome.

DII,
Gods. The Romans made two classis, or orders of their Gods; in the first were
ranked the Gods called Dii majorum gentium, in the second were the Gods called
Dii minorum gentium. The Gods of the first order were the most powerful,
nobiles and potentes, and were called upon under great exigencies. They were
twelve in number, six Males, and six Females. Neptunus, Mars, Mercurius,
Vulcanus, Apollo, Jupiter:
Juno, Minerva, Ceres, Vesta, Diana, Venus.
The Gods of the second order, whom Ovid comprehends under the word Plebs, were
of a much lesser consideration, and had no power but from the great Gods;
wherefore they were called upon but in affairs of less moment.

Tully l. 2. de legibus makes three orders of Gods. The first order is of
Celestial Gods, the second of Demigods or Hero's, who were carried up into
Heaven on account of their achievements, and in the third order were those who
gave men the power to become themselves Gods.

They divided also the Gods, into Gods of Heaven, Gods of the Earth, Gods of
the Sea; in Gods of Forests, Gods of Rivers, and Gods of Gardens.

There is still another division of Gods into Gods called Consentes, and Gods
elected, in Deos Consentes and Electos. The Gods called Consentes are the
twelve Gods mentioned before. They had their share in the Government of the
Universe, and the chiefest employments in the administration thereof. The Gods
elected were eight, whom the Gods called Consentes had chosen and entrusted
with a share of the government, relying so far upon them. And these twenty
Gods, viz. twelve Males and eight Females, were adored as the Sovereigns of all
the little Gods, who had but small and limited employments in the government of
the Universe, are the names of the Gods called Consentes, and Gods called
elected. JANUS, JUPITER, SATURN, GENIUS, MERCURY, APOLLO, MARS, VULCANUS,
NEPTUNE, The SUN, HELL or PLUTO, LIBER: TELLUS, CERES, JUNO, The MOON, DIANA,
MINERVA, VENUS, VESTA.

The Names of the Gods of the Sea, NEPTUNE, SALACIA, VENILIA, EGERIA, JUTURNA,
PORTUNA.

The names of the Gods of Hell, PLUTO, ACHERON and STYX his Wife, PROSERPINA,
AEACUS, MINOS, RHADAMANTHUS, CHARON,, The Three PARCAE, the FURIES.

The names of the Gods called Indigites, or of the Heroes or Demigods, as
HERCULES, AESCULAPIUS, FAUNUS, CARMENTA, CASTOR and POLLUX, ACCA LAURENTIA,
QUIRINUS or ROMULUS.

The names of the Gods called Semones, or Semi-homines, who had the protection
of men during the course of their life.

Those that presided at Births, were the Goddess MENA or LUNA, for (...)
signifies the Moon, or PRIVIGNA JUNO, and JUNO FLUONIA, LUCINA or DIANA, LATONA
or PARTUNDA, and EGERIA, who assisted Women in their Labor.

After a Woman was delivered of a Child, three Gods were called upon to
preserve the Woman lying in, and preserve her from the God Silvanas; viz.
INTERCINODA, PILUMNUS and DEVERRA. The Child who was born was put under the
protection of these Gods, VAGITANUS to preside at his Cries; LEVANA, to take
him up; CUNINA, to lay him in the Cradle; RUMINA, to suckle him; POTINA, to
give him Drink; EDUCA, to feed him; OSSILAGO, to knit his Bones; CARNEA or
CARNA and CARDEA, to take care of his Vitals; JUVENTUS, presided over his
Youth; ORBONA was called upon by the Parents, lest she should take away their
Children.

When the Child grew up, they prayed to other Gods in his behalf, viz. MURCIA,
lest he should be idle; STRENUA, to act with vigilance and vigor; ADEONA and
ABEONA, to go and come again; AVERRUNCUS, to put away evil; ANGERONA, to drive
away Melancholy; and two GENII, one good and the other bad.

The Names of the Country Gods, JUPITER, the EARTH, the SUN, the MOON, CERES,
LIBER, MINERVA, VENUS, PALES, FLORA, POMONA, VERTUMNUS, SEIA or SEGETIA SEGECE,
TULLINA, TUTANUS, ROBIGUS, PAN, SILENUS, SILVANUS, TERMINUS, PRIAPUS; and an
infinite number of others, as the Gods PENATES and LARES, of whom we will speak
severally and in their Order.

DILUVIUM,
A Deluge, a general Inundation that God sent formerly upon the Earth to drown
both Men and Beasts, to punish their wickedness. For that purpose God opened
the Cataracts of Heaven, and preserved only Noah and his Family out of this
Deluge, with two of each kind of all living Creatures in an Ark, that he
ordered him to build for that purpose.

There has been formerly five Deluges, yet there was but one universal one,
sixteen hundred years and more after the creation of the World, in the time of
old Ogyges the Phaenician, as Xenophon tells us.

The second Deluge covered only the Land of Egypt with Waters, and was
occasioned by by an overflowing of the River Nile, in the time of Prometheus
and Hercules, and continued but a Month, as we learn from Diodorus Siculus.

The third Deluge happened in Achaia, in the Province of Attica, and lasted
threescore days, in the time of Ogyges the Athenian. Diodorus speaks of it in
his sixth Book, and Pausanias in his Attica relates, that in the lower Town of
Athens, in the way that leads to the Temple of Jupiter Olympius, there was a
hole seen in the ground a foot and a half wide, and through that hole the Waters
of the Flood were sunk, wherefore it was a custom among the People, to throw
every year into that hole, a kind of an offering made with Wheat Flour and
Honey.

The fourth Deluge was in Thessalia in Deucalion's time, and continued a whole
Winter, as Aristotle tells us in the first Book of his Meteors.

The fifth happened about the Ostia of the River Nile in Egypt, in the Reign of
Proteus, and about the time of the Trojan War.

But Poets confound these Deluges, and say, that the Universal Deluge was in
the time of Deucalion, the Son of Prometheus, who escaped alone with his Wife
in a Boat on the top of Mount Parnassus in Ph^cis.

Lucian seems to countenance this opinion of the Poets in the Dea Syriae. The
most common opinion (says he) is, that Deucalion of Scythia is the founder of
this Temple, (he means the Temple of Syria;) for the Greeks say, that the first
Men being cruel and insolent, faithless and void of Humanity, perished all by
the Deluge, a great quantity of Water issuing out of the bowels of the Earth,
which swelled up the Rivers, and forced the Sea to overflow, by the assistance
of Rain and violent Showers, so that all lay under water: only Deucalion
remained, who escaped in an Ark with his Family, and two of each kind of all
living Creatures, that followed him into the Ark, both wild and tame, without
hurting one another. He floated till the Waters were withdrawn, then populated
the Earth again. They added another wonder, that an Abyss opened of it self in
their Country, which swallowed up all the Waters; and that Deucalion in memory
of that Accident, erected there an Altar and built a Temple. A Man may still
see there a very small Cliff, where the Inhabitants of that Country, with those
of Syria, Arabia, and the Nations beyond the Euphrates, resort twice a year to
the Neighboring Sea, from whence they fetch abundance of Water, which they
pour into the Temple, from whence it runs into that Hole; and the Origin of
this Ceremony is likewise attributed to Deucalion, and instituted in
commemoration of that Accident.

This is what Holy Scripture informs us concerning the Universal Deluge. The
wickedness of Men being great in the Earth, at last the day of Punishment came.
And the Lord commanded unto Noah to put in the Ark all sort of Provisions, and
take two of each kind of unclean Animals, and seven of the clean Animals, viz.
three Males and three Females to preserve their Specie upon the Earth, and one
more for the Sacrifice after the Flood should be over. This being done, Noah
shut up himself in the Ark, the seventeenth day of the second Month of the
Solar Year, (which was the nineteenth of April according to our computation)
with his three Sons and their Wives. It did rain forty days and forty nights.
And God opened the Cataracts of Heaven, and the Fountains of the Deep; and the
Waters increasing during an hundred and fifty days, (the forty Days
abovementioned being included) were fifteen Cubits higher than the top of the
highest Mountains. And all Flesh died, both Men and Beasts, and none escaped
but those that were in the Ark. The hundred and fiftieth day the waters abated,
by a great wind that the Lord raised, and the twenty seventh of the seventh
Month, to reckon from the beginning of the Flood, the Ark rested upon a
Mountain of Armenia; Hieronymus calls it Mount Taurus, because the River Araxes
ran at the foot thereof.Others grounding their Opinion upon a more ancient
Authority, tell us, that the Ark rested upon one of the Gordian Mountains; and
Epiphanius says, that at his time they showed yet the remainders of the Ark.
Many Arabian Geographers and Historians are of this Opinion. The first day of
the tenth Month the tops of the Mountains appeared. And Noah and his Family
went out of the Ark the twenty seventh day of the second Month (the twenty
ninth of April according to our account) by the command of the Lord, as he went
in before by the same order.

DIOCLETIANUS,
Born in Dalmatia, of a mean Parentage, and Slave to Annulinus the Senator. His
great ability in War and Government raised him to the Throne. And as soon as he
had obtained the Sovereign Power, he put Aper to death, to make good the
prediction of an old Witch, who had foretold him that he should be a great Man,
when he had killed the fatal Wild-boar (for till that time he was but a
Wild-boar Hunter;) nevertheless this Prediction was to be understood of Aper,
Mumerian's Father-in-law, for Aper signifies in Latin a Wild-boar. This Emperor
raised a most violent Persecution against the Christians, and was both
ambitious and cruel. His folly grew to such an excess, that he ordered that the
People should adore him like a God, and should kiss his Feet: a new thing,
never required of them by his Predecessors, who were only saluted after the
manner of Consuls.

His Vices blasted the Glory of his Life, and his great ability, which might
otherwise render him famous, either in Peace or War. From a Soldier of Fortune,
he raised himself to the greatest Dignity in the World, and maintained it with
much Glory, and left it with as much greatness of Soul.

When his Colleague endeavored to persuade him to take again the Purple, he
talked to him of the Lettices of his Garden of Salona, and no Man was ever able
to remove him from the retirement he had chosen. He died in a very strange
manner, for he felt dreadful pains all over his Body, which was falling to
pieces, and stunk so horridly, that no body was able to come near him, and he
was a terror to himself. After his death Licinius placed him among the number
of Gods after the usual manner.

DIOGENES,
A Cynick Philosopher, who called himself the Citizen of the Universe, the
Physician of the Soul, and the Herald of Liberty, promising himself that he
could persuade men to leave their pleasures. Lucian introduces him speaking in
his Dialogue of the Sects of Philosophers exposing to Sale, delivering the
Epitome of his Doctrine. You must be audacious, impudent, snarl at all Mankind,
and find fault with everything; for that is the complete way to be admired: Let
your Speech be rude, your Tone the like; your Looks stern, and your Mien
barbarous; in short, your whole deportment wild and savage.He did wear an old
patched garment, with a Staff and a Bag, and dwelt in a Tub, which he tumbled
in the daytime, lest he should remain idle.

DIOMEDES,
King of Aetolia, the Son of Tydeus, and fair Deiphile, the Daughter of
Adrastus, King of Argos. He went to the Trojan Wars with Achilles, and was
killed by Ulysses, as they were coming back together, after they had stolen the
Palladium. After his Death his Servants were changed into Birds called
Diomedeae Aves, mentioned in Pliny l. 10. c. 44.

I will not omit, says he, the Birds of Diomedes, whose Feathers are white, and
the eyes like fire. There are some of them found in an Island of Apulia, where
Diomedes was buried.

DIOMEDES,
King of Thrace, who exposed all persons who came into his Kingdom to be
devoured, by four Horses that he fed with Blood and Man's Flesh. Palaephatus
tells us, that Diomedes was the first man that bred Horses, and spent all his
Estate about it, wherefore these Horses were called Anthropophagi, i. e.
Men-eaters, and this gave occasion to the Fable that Diomedes Horses were fed
with Man's-Flesh. Philostratus affirms, that these four Creatures were four
Mares, or four Daughters of Diomedes, who were very lecherous, and consumed the
Estates and the Health of all men that were in love with them. Hercules slew
him, and gave his Corpse to be eaten by his own Horses.

DIONYSIUS,
An Epithet given to Bacchus, for Jupiter to preserve Bacchus, whom he had
begot of Semele, from jealous Juno, transformed him for a time into a He-goat,
and Mercury carried him to the Nymphs, who inhabited the Neighborhood of the
Town of Nysa in Asia, to nurse him up. Wherefore he was surnamed Dionysius from
(...), i. e. Jupiter, and (...) Nysa. This we learn of Lucian in his Dialogues
of the Gods, where Mercury talking with Neptune about young Bacchus, whom
Jupiter placed in his thigh, to complete his time, and was just now delivered
of him. I have carried him, says he, to Nysa, to be brought up by the Nymphs
inhabiting there, who have named him Dionysius, from the name of his Father,
and their own Country.

DIONYSIA.
The Feasts of Bacchus. See Orgia and Bacchanalia.

DIOSCORIDES.
A Greek Physician of Anazarba, who came to Rome, and obtained the freedom of a
Citizen. He got particularly acquainted with Licinius Bassus an illustrous
Roman; and took the name of Pedacius or Pedianus of the Family Pedania, as
Lambecius observed in his Commentaries upon the Library of the Emperor; and he
has left us some Books of the nature of Plants, and virtue of Metals.

DIPHILUS,
An able Architect, but a slow Workman; from whence comes the Latin Proverb,
Diphilo tardior, to represent a very slow man, who does not finish his work.

DIRAE.
The Furies of Hell, called also Eumenides. Poets mention three of them, viz.
Tisiphone, Megaera and Alecto, whom they represent with fiery eyes, their heads
attired with Serpents, and holding Iron Chains in their hands, and Scourges
with burning Torches to punish guilty Consciences.

DIRCE.
The Wife of Lycus King of Thebes, whom he married after he had divorced
Antiope. Zethus and Amphion tied her to the tail of a Horse and dragged her
about, but the Gods out of compassion turned her into a Fountain.

There was another of that name, who preferred herself in Beauty to Pallas,
wherefore she was transformed into a Fish.

DIS,
The God of Riches, also called Plutus. He is represented lame and blind;
wherefore when Jupiter sends him to any person, he arrives there but very late,
and often when there is no want of him: But when he returns, he goes as fast as
the wind, and men are amazed to lose the sight of him so soon. And if Riches
come to men sleeping, he don't walk then upon his own Legs, but he is carried
away, and then it is not Jupiter who sends him; but Pluto, who is also the God
of Riches, as it is intimated by his name, for he makes great Riches pass from
one hand into another: And being blind, he often misses his way; but he turns
so often up and down, and on every side, that he meets some one or another who
takes hold on him. Wherefore he inriches but very few just men; for being
blind, how can he find a just man, who is a thing so scarce to meet with? but
the wicked being in great numbers, he easily met with them.

DISCORDIA,
Discord. The Ancients have made Discord a mischievous Divinity. Aristides
represents her with dreadful and fiery eyes, a pale countenance, black and blue
lips, wearing a Dagger in her bosom. Jupiter banished her out of Heaven,
because she sowed divisions among the Gods. She caused the ruin of Troy, for
being angry that she was not invited with the other Gods to the wedding of
Thetis and Beleus, she threw a Golden Apple into the Banqueting room, which
fell at the feet of Venus, Pallas and Juno. Mercury took it up, and observed
that there was written about it, It Is for the fairest. The three Goddesses fell
out presently among themselves, each of them pretending that it belonged to
her, and had not Jupiter commanded them silence, they would have come to blows.
Yet he would not decide their quarrel, and referred them to Paris the Son of
Priam to be judged by him, who gave it for Venus the Goddess of Beauty;
whereupon Juno grew angry, and in revenge thereof, destroyed Troy and the
Trojans together. -- Saevae memorem Junonis ob iram;
Who remembered the judgment that Paris had pronounced in the behalf of Venus.

DISCUS,
A quoit which Gamesters used in ancient exercises. It was a round thing of
Metal or Stone, a foot broad, which they threw into the air to show their skill
and strength. Discus was also a round consecrated Shield, made to represent a
memorable deed of some of the Heroes of Antiquity, and to keep it in
remembrance thereof in a Temple of the Gods, where it was to be hung up.

DIVORTIUM,
Divorce between a Husband and his Wife.

At first Divorce was rare among the Romans. Romulus, says Plutarch, made many
Laws, but the most rigorous of all was, that which forbad the Wife to forsake
her Husband, and allowed the Husband the liberty of forsaking his Wife, in this
three cases. If she has made use of Poison to kill the Fruit of her Womb, if
she has put another Child upon him instead of his own, and in case of Adultery.
If the Husband dismissed his Wife upon any other account, he was bound to give
her part of his Estate, and the other part was consecrated to Ceres; and then
he was obliged to offer a Sacrifice to the Gods called Manes. Leges etiam
quasdam tulit Romulus, inter quas vehemens est illa qua mulieri maritum
relinquendi potestas adimitur: viro autem ejicere uxorem conceditur, si
veneficio circa prolem usa fuerit, aut alienam pro sua subdidisset, aut
adulterium commississet. Si quis alia de causa repudiasset conjugem, ejus
mariti bona partim uxori cederent, partim Cereri sacra forent, atque Diie
Manibus rem sacram facere tenebatur.

The Law of the twelve Tables permits Divorce upon the forementioned causes,
and prescribes some rites that are to be observed in that case, the neglect
whereof made it void. It was to be made in the presence of seven Roman
Citizens, all men of ripe age. Divortia septem civibus Romany puberibus
testibus adhibitis postea faciunto aliter facta pro infectis habentor, says the
Lex Julia.

The Husband took the Keys of his house from the hands of his Wife, and sent
her back with these words, Res tuas tibi habeto, or Res tuas tibi agito, i. e.
what is your own take it again. Tully says in his Phillippick, Frugi factus
est, mimam illam suas sibi res habere dixit ex duod^cim tabulis, clavis ademit,
exegit. He is become an honest man, he has bid this lewd Creature to take what
was her own again, and has took the Keys from her, and put her away.

Though the Laws allowed Divorce, yet it was not put into practice at Rome till
the year 70, when a certain person named Spurius Carvilius Ruga, in the time of
the Consulship of M. Pomponius, and Caius Papyrius, or of M. Attilius and P.
Valerius put away his Wife for barrenness.

DODONA,
A Town of Chaonia, famous for the Forest, where the Oaks spoke by the Oracle
of Jupiter, called Dedonaeus. Aristotle (as Suidas relates) says, that there
were two Pillars at Dodona, and upon one thereof a Basin of Brass, and upon the
other a Child holding a Whip, with Cords made of Brass, which occasioned a
noise when the Wind drove them against the Basin.

Demon (as the same Suidas relates) says, that the Oracle of Jupiter, called
Dodoneus, is compassed round about with Basins; which, when they are driven one
against the other, communicate their motion round about, and make a noise that
lasts a while. Others say, that the noise proceeded from a sounding Oak, that
shook its Branches and Leaves when it was consulted; and declared its Will by
the Priests called Dodonaei.

Poets tell us that the Ships of the Argonauts were built with Timber fetched
out of the Dodonaean Forest, wherefore they spoke upon the Sea, and pronounced
Oracles.

There was in the Town of Dodona a Fountain, the Waters thereof, though very
cold, yet would light a Torch lately put out, when dipped in 'em. Lucretius
ascribes this effect to the hot Vapors, that issued from the great quantity of
Brimstone which is in the veins of the Earth; and some others ascribe it to the
Antiperistasis of the great cold, that condensed the heat remaining still in
the Torch, and thus lighted it again.

DOLABRA,
The Pontifical Ax, to knock down the Victim in Sacrifices.

DOMITIANUS,
The twelfth Emperor of Rome, Son to Vespasian, and Titus's Brother. During his
Father's life he gave himself to Poetry, and made great progress in it; and
Quintilian, Pliny and Silius Italicus commend him for the same. At his first
coming to the Empire, he showed much modesty and justice, making many good
Laws, and forbad the making of Eunuchs. He renewed the Lex Julia against
Adulterers, forbad the use of litters to public Women, and deprived them of
the right of Inheriting. To these Virtues was joined a great Magnificence and
Liberality, giving to the People several very costly Games and Shows, but soon
after he discovered his cruel and lascivious temper, which he had hitherto
hidden. For he kept company with his Niece, as if she had been his lawful Wife.
His Vanity was not less than his Incontinence, he took upon him the Name of God
and Lord, and was proud of having that Title given to him in all Petitions
presented to him. The People were obliged to comply with the fantastical
Impiety of a Man, who was not then capable of hearing reason. The Poets of his
time, and especially Martial were not sparing of his Praises; and their Verses
are still shameful Testimonies of their Flatteries of a Prince, who deserved so
little the name of God, that he was unworthy of bearing the Name of Man.

He renewed the Persecution that his Father had begun against Philosophers, who
were obliged to disguise themselves, and fly away into Foreign Countries. As
for the Christians he cruelly persecuted them, and banished St John the
Evangelist into the Isle of Pathmos, after he was miraculously come out of a
great Kettle full of boiling Oil, wherein this Tyrant had ordered him to be
cast. His design was to ruin utterly the Christian Religion; but a Man named
Stephen, made free by Clemens the Consul, delivered the Church and Empire of
this cruel Persecutor. Suet onius relates, that the day before his Death, he
said, that the next day the Moon should be bloody for him in the Sign of
Aquarius. The Senate pulled down his Statues, and razed out all the Titles he
had usurped, and Men out of a base compliance had bestowed upon him. The
greatest part of the day he passed in his Closet, killing Flies with a golden
Bodkin, Wherefore it was said that he was always alone, and that there was not
so much as a Fly with him. He built a Temple to the Goddess Health, having
escaped the danger that he had run at the coming of Vitellius.

DOMUS,
This word is commonly taken for all sorts of Houses, either Magnificent or
Ordinary; but it is often taken by Writers to intimate a fine House of some
great Lord, or Palaces of Princes, as it appears by these Verses of Virgil,
speaking of the Palace of Dido.

At Domus Interior regali splendida luxu.
These great Houses were built with much Magnificence, and were of a vast
extent; for they had many Courts, Apartments, Wings, Cabinets, Bagnio's,
Stoves, and a great many fine Halls, either to sit at Table, or to transact
matters of consequence.

Before these great Houses there was a large place or Porch, where Clients and
Persons giving attendance to great Men, waited till it was day light, to be
admitted to make their Court. It Is to be supposed that this Porch was covered,
for the convenience of Persons, who were sometimes waiting very long before
they were admitted.

There was a second part to these Houses, called Cavum-Aedium or Cavaedium, it
was a great large Court, enclosed with Rows of Houses.

The third part was cal'ed Atrium interius, i. e. in general the whole inside
of the House. Virgil has took this word in Vitruvius's sense, when he said,
Apparet Domus intus, and atria longa patescunt; for it is plain that Virgil
means by the word Atria, all that may be seen in the inside of a House when the
Doors are opened. There was a Porter waiting at the Atrium, called Servus
Atriensis. Within this place there were many figures; for the Romans, who
passionately loved Glory and Praises, raised every where Trophies and Statues,
to leave Eternal Monuments of their great actions to posterity, not only in the
Provinces, which they subdued to the Empire, but also in public places, and
their own palaces at Rome.

There were painted or engraven Battles, Axes, bundles of Rods, and the other
badges of the Offices that their Ancestors or themselves had possessed, and
Statues of Wax or Metal, representing their Fathers in Basso relievo, were set
up in Niches of precious Wood or rare Marble. The days of their solemn Feasts,
or their Triumphal Pomp, these Niches were opened, and the Figures crowned with
Festoons and Garlands, and carried about the Town. When some persons of the
Family died, these Statues accompanied the Funeral Parade; wherefore Pliny
says, that the whole Family was there present from the first to the last.

Besides, there were great Galleries in these Houses, adorned with Pillars, and
other works of Architecture, and great Halls, Closets for Conversation and
Painting, Libraries, and Gardens neatly kept.

These Halls were built after the Corinthian or Egyptian order. The first
Halls had but a row of Pillars set upon a Pedestal, or on the Pavement, and
supported nothing but their Architrave, and cornish of Joyners Work or Stud,
over which was the Ceiling in form of a Vault; but the last Halls had
Architraves upon Pillars, and on the Architraves of the Ceilings made of pieces
joined together, which make an opened Terras, turning round about.

These Houses had many apartments, some for men, and others for women; some for
Dining-rooms called Triclinia, others for Bedchambers named Dormitoria; and
some others to lodge Strangers, to whom they were obliged to be Hospitable.

Ancient Rome was so large, that there were eight and forty thousand Houses
standing by themselves, being so many Insula, and these Houses were very
convenient, because they had a light on every side, and doors on the Streets,
and not exposed to the accidents of fire. But this must be understood of Rome,
that was rebuilt by Nero, after he had reduced it himself (as it is thought)
into ashes.

The Greeks built after another manner than the Romans; for they had no Porch,
but from the first door they entered into a narrow passage; on one side of it
there were Stables, and on the other there was the Porters Lodge; at the end of
this passage there was another door, to enter into a Gallery supported with
Pillars, and this Gallery had Piazza's on three sides.

Within the Greek's houses there were great Halls, for the Mistresses of the
Family, and their Servant Maids to Spin in; in the Entry both on the right and
left hand there were Chambers, one was called Thalamus, and the other
Antithalamus. Round about the Piazza's there were Dining-rooms, Chambers and
Wardrobes. To this part of the House was joined another part, which was bigger
and had very large Galleries, with four Piazza's of the same height. The
finest Entries and most magnificent Doors were at this part of the House. There
were four great square Halls, so large and spacious, that they would easily
hold four Tables, with three Seats in form of Beds, and leave room enough for
the Servants and Gamesters. They entertained in these Halls, for 'twas not the
custom for women to sit amongst men. On the right and the left of these
Buildings there were small apartments, and very convenient rooms to receive the
chance Guests; for among the Greeks wealthy and magnificent men kept
apartments, with all their conveniences to receive persons who came far off to
lodge at their Houses. The custom was, that after they had given them an
entertainment the first day only, they sent them afterward every day some
Present that they received from the Country, as Chickens, Eggs, Pulse and
Fruits; and so the Travelers were lodged as they had been at their own House,
and might live in these apartments privately and in all liberty.

These apartments were paved with Mosaic or inlaid Work. Pliny tells us, that
the Pavements that were painted and wrought with art come from the Greeks, who
called them (...). These Pavements were in fashion at Rome, during the time of
Sylla, who got one made at Praeneste in the Temple of Fortune. This Greek word
(...) signifies only a Pavement of Stones, but the Greeks meant by that word
those Pavements made of small Stones of several colors, inlaid into the
Cement, representing different Figures by the variety of their colors and
order.

This Pavement was not only used for paving the Courts of Houses and the Halls,
but also in Chambers, and wainscoting the Walls, and these kind of Pavements
were called Musaea, Musia and Musiva, because ingenious works were ascribed to
the Muses, and that the Muses and Sciences were thereby represented. The word
Mosaic is derived from the Latin word Musivum, but not from Moses nor the Jews.

Here we must explain two difficulties, viz. whether the Romans had formerly
Chimneys and Privies in their Houses.

It Is certain, that in former ages men had Chimneys in their Kitchins; but it is
doubtful whether they had any in their Chambers, for their Chambers were warmed
only by some Pipes that conveyed a warm vapor from a Fire made of a kind of
Coals that burn without making any Smoke, called by Suetonius, Miseni Carbones.
Yet we read several things which seem to perswad: us that they had Chimneys in
their Chambers.

Suetonins tells us, that the Chamber of Vitellius was burnt, the Chimney
having took fire Nec ante in Praetorium rediit, quam flagrante triclinio ex
conceptu camini. Horace writes to his Friend to get a good fire in his chimney.
Dissolve frigus, ligna super foco,
Large reponens.
Od. 9. l. 1. Tully writing to his Friend Atticus, tells him, Camino Luculento,
tibi utendum censco. And Vitruvius speaking of the cornishes that are made in
Chambers, give warning to make them plain and without Carver's work in places
where they make fire. However, in those ages if they had any chimneys like
ours, they were very rare. Blondus and Salmuth say, that chimneys were not in
use among the Ancients; but Pancirollus, and many others affirm the contrary.
Wherefore, without deciding absolutely the question, it is most certain they had
Kilns to warm their Chambers, and other apartments of their Houses, called
Fornaces vaporaria; and Stoves called Hypocausta. Philander says, that the
Kilns were under ground, built along the Wall, with small Pipes to each story
to warm the Rooms. They had also Stoves that were removed from one Room to
another; for Tully writes that he had removed his Stove, because the Pipe through
which the fire came out, was under his Chamber, Hypocausta in alterum
apodyterii angulum promovi, propterea quod ita erant posita, ut eorum
vaporarium, ex quo ignis erumpit, esset subjectum cubiculo.

The Romans did not only make use of Wood to warm their rooms, but also of the
Beams of the Sun, which they gathered in some Kilns, as we do with our
Burning-glasses. This Kiln was called in Greek (...), and in Latin Solarium, or
solare vaporarium, and it was not allowed to plant Trees, that might be a
hindrance to the gathering of the Beams of the Sun, as Ulpian says.

It does not appear, neither by the writings or buildings that remain of the
Ancients. that they had Privies in their Houses. And what they call latrinas
were public places, where the persons who had no Slaves went to empty and wash
their Pans, and these persons were called latrinae from lavando, according to
the Aetymology of M. Varro; for Plautus speaks of the Servant-maid, quae
latrinam lavat, who washes the Pan. And in this place of Plautus, latrina cannot
be understood of the public Houses of Office, which were cleansed by Pipes
under the ground, which carried the Waters of the Tiber to these places, and
it is likely that Plautus made use of the word latrina, to insinuate that sella
familiaris erat velut latrina particularis.

The Public Necessary Houses for the day were for the convenience of the
People in several places of the Town; and were called Sterqulinia, covered and
full of Spunges, as we learn of Seneca in his Epistles: As for the night, they
had running Waters through all the Streets of Rome, and there they threw all their
ordure; but rich men used Pans, which the Servants emptied into the Sinks, that
carried all their Waters into the great Sink of the Town, and from thence into
the Tiber.

DONARIA,
Gifts and Presents offered to the Gods, and hung up in their Temples.

DONATIVUM,
A Gift and Largess in Money, which the Emperors bestowed upon Soldiers, to get
their affection and votes in time of need.

DRAM,
A Dram, a kind of weight, composed of two Scruples, and each Scruple of two
oboli; and so a Dram was six oboli. As for the proportion that the Dram of the
Greeks did bear with the Ounce of the Romans, Q. Rommus in his Poem of Weights
and Measures, makes the Dram the eighth part of an Ounce, which is not much
different from the Crown of the Arabians, which weighs something more than the
Dram.

The Dram and the Roman Denarius were of the like value, so that the Dram may
be worth about Sevenpence Halfpenny of English Money.

DRACONARIUS,
The Dragonbearer, the standard of the Roman Infantry, the head whereof was
drawn in Silver, and the rest of the Body was of Taffety, hung up at the top of
a Pike, fluttering in the Air like a Dragon, and out of it hung down great
Bands with tufts of Silk at the end.

DRACO,
A Dragon, so called from (...), to see plain, to be clear-sighted; and for his
watchfulness this Animal is dedicated to Minerva. It Is said that he loves Gold,
wherefore a Dragon watched the Golden Fleece at Colchos, and the Golden Apples
of the Garden of the Hesperides; and it is reported that the Dragon of Pallas
dwelt near Athens, because the Athenians did wear their Hair tuckt up with
Tresses of Gold.

DRUIDAE,
The Priest of the Ancient Gauls. Thus Caesar speaks of them l. 4. of the Wars
of the Gauls. The Druides of the first Order are Overseers of the worship of
the Gods and Religion, and have the direction of both Public and Private
Affairs, and teaching of Youth. If there is any Murder or Crime committed, or
Suit at Law about an Inheritance, or some other Dispute, they decide it,
ordaining Punishments and Rewards; and when a Man will not stand to their
Judgment, they suspend him from communicating in their Mysteries. And those who
are so excommunicated, are accounted wicked and impious, and every Body shuns
their Conversation; if they are at law with other Men, they can have no
Justice, and are admitted neither to Employments nor Dignities, and die without
Honor and Reputation.

All the Druides have an High Priest, who has an absolute Power. After his
Death the most worthy among them succeeds him, and if there are many Pretenders
to his Office, the Election is decided by Votes, and sometimes by force of
Arms. They met every Year in the Country of Chartres, which is in the middle of
Gaul, in a place consecrated and appointed for that purpose, where those who
are at Law, or at Variance met from all places, and stand to their Decisions.

It Is thought that their Institution came from Britain, and those who will
have perfect knowledge of their Mysteries, traveled into that Country. They
never follow the War, and are free from all Taxes and Slavery, wherefore many
get into their order, and every one puts in for a place among them for his Son
or Kinsman. They must learn by heart a great number of Verses; for it is forbid
to write them, either to exercise their Memory, or lest they should profane the
Mysteries in publishing them; wherefore they remain sometimes twenty Years in
the College. In other things they make use of writing in Greek Characters. One
of the chiefest points of their Theology is the Immortality of the Soul, as a
profitable Belief, that inclines Men to Virtue by contempt of Death. They hold
Metempsychosis, and have many Dogma's of Theology and Philosophy, which they
teach their youth.

Diodorous Siculus joins the Druides to Poets in the Authority of pronouncing
like Sovereign Judges, about Controversies of Private Men and States, and (...)
binding the Armies ready to engage. Lucian tells us, that they were the Authors
of the Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul, which made the Gauls undaunted
Men, having a generous contempt of Death, which was in their opinion, but a
very short passage to an Immortal Life.

The Origin of the word Druides is derived from the Greek, (...), i. e. an
Oak, because they commonly met in the Forests, where they began their
Sacrifices with the Misletoe of Oak, that their youth gathered the first day of
January.

DRYADES,
The Nymphs of the Woods.

DRYOPE,
A Nymph of Arcadia. Homer says, that Dryope kept company with Mercury, who
begot upon her God Pan; Lucian on the contrary, in the Dialogue between Pan and
Mercury tells us, that he is the Son of Penelope, the Daughter of Icarus, whom
Mercury ravished in Arcadia, having tranformed himself into a He-Goat to
surprise her: Wherefore Pan was born with Horns, a Beard, a Tail, and the Feet
of a She-Goat.

DUCENARII,
The Receivers of the hundredth penny, a Tax that was paid to the Roman
Emperors.

DUUM-VIRI SACRORUM, The Duum-viri, or the two Magistrates, whom Tarquinius
Superbus created at Rome, a Dignity that was a kind of Priesthood. This Office
was set up upon this occasion: Tarquinius having bought of an unknown Woman
three Books of Verses, which were thought to have been written by the Sybil of
Cumae, he named two Magistrates or Commissaries for the Books of Religion, and
all their Duty was to keep these Books, and consult them in some cases, about
what was to be done for the good of the State.

DUUM-VIRI MUNICIPALES, These two Magistrates were in the free Towns, what
Consuls were at Rome. They were chosen out of the Body of the Decurions, on the
Kalends of March, but did not enter upon their Office until three Months after
their Election, that the People might have time to inquire if they were duly
elected, and in case of an undue return, they chose others. They took the Oath,
that they would serve the City and Citizens well and faithfully, and were
allowed to wear the Robe called Praetexta, edged about with Purple, and a white
Tunick or Jerkin, as Juvenal tells us, Satyr 5. They had Officers who walked
before them, carrying a small Switch in their Hands. Nevertheless, some of them
assumed the privilege of having Lictors carrying Axes and bundles of Rods
before them, as we learn of Tully in the Oration against Rullus, Anteibant
Lictores non cum bacillis, sed ut hic Praetoribus ante eunt cum facibus duobus.

After they had taken possession of their Office, it was a custom to make a
distribution among the Decurions, and have some Show of Gladiators represented
before the People. This Office was commonly for five years, wherefore they were
called Quinquennales Magistratus. Their Jurisdiction was of a great extent, as
we may see in the Treatise of Pancirollus c. 8.

DUUM-VIRI NAVALES, Commissaries for the Fleet. These Commissaries were created
in the Year 542, at the request of M. Decius Tribune of the People, when the
Romans were at War with the Samnites. The Duty of their Office was to take care
of the sitting of Ships, and ordering the Seamen who were aboard.

DUUM-VIRI CAPITALES, The Duumvirs, surnamed Capitales or Judges in Criminal
Causes. It was lawful to appeal from their Sentence to the People, who only had
power to condemn a Citizen to die. Some of these Judges were established at
Rome and other free Cities; who were taken from the body of the Decurions, and
had a great Authority and Power; for they took care of the Prisons, and were
Members of the Public Council. They had two Lictors walking before them.

E.
E Is the fifth Letter of the Greek and Latin Alphabet. The Greeks call it
(...), and the Latins E.

We find this Letter in the Medals of Antoninus surnamed Pius, to mark the
fifth Year of his Reign.

The Latins have several pronounciations for this Letter. First, they have a
long and open E, like the (...) of the Greeks, which for that same reason is
often doubled, as in Medals and upon Marbles; Feelix, Seeds, etc. The second E
of the Latins is a short and closed E, as the (...) of Greeks: And these two
different E's are distinctly observed in Ancient. Authors. E vocalis, says
Capella, duarum Graecarum vim possidet. Nam cum corripiter E Graecum est, ut ab
hoc host, cum producitur Eta est, ut ab kac die.

But there is yet a middle pronounciation between the E and the I. Wherefore
Varro observes that they said veam instead of viam? and Festus observes that
the me instead of mi or mihi; and Quintilian tells us, that an E was put
instead of an I in Menerva, Leber, Magester, instead of Minerva, Liber,
Magister. Livy wrote Sebe and quase. And Donatus says, that because the
affinity of these two Letters, the Ancient Authors said Heri and Here; Mane and
Mani, Vespero and Vespere, etc. Wherefore we read in the ancient Inscriptions
Navebus, exemet, ornavet, cepet, Deana, mereto, soledas, and the like. And from
thence comes the change of these two Vowels in so many words, either in the
Nominative Case, as Impubes and Impubis, or the Accusative, as pelvem and
pelvim; or the Ablative, as nave and navi, and the like names of the third
Declension, and in the second, as Dii instead of Dei.

The Latins also write E instead of A, wherefore Quintilian says, that Cato
wrote indifferently dicam or di^em, faciam or faciem. And doubtless this is the
reason why A was so often changed into E, either in the praeterit, as Facio,
feci; Ago, egi; Jacio, jeci; or in the compound Verbs, as Arceo, coerceo,
Damn, condemno; Spargo, aspergo; from this also it comes that they said balare
instead of belare, as we see in Varro's writings; and that we meet with so many
words written with an E for an A in Ancient Authors Books, and old Glosses, as
Defetigari instead of defatigari; Varr. Effligi instead of affligi, Charis.
Expars instead of expers. Imbarbis instead of Imberbis. V. Gloss. Inars instead
of of iners. V. Glos.

It must be still observed, that the E has some affinity with the O, for the
Latins have made of tego, toga; of adversum, advorsum; of vertex, vortex;
accipiter instead of accipitor, as Festus says; hemo instead of homo; ambe and
ambes instead of ambo and ambos in Ennius's writings; exporrectus instead of
experrectus. This is also the reason why there are so many Adverbs in E and in
O, vere and vero; tute and tuto; nimie and nimio; rare and raro; in Charisius's
writings, and the like.

Likewise the E; has an affinity with the U; wherefore they said Diu instead of
Die; Lucu instead of luce; Allux instead of allex the great Toe; Dejero instead
of dejur; Neptunus instead of Nuptunus, a nubendo terram, i. e. operiendo, as
says Tully.

EACUS.
See AEACUS.

EANUS,
instead of JANUS, as Tully calls him.

ECASTOR.
By Cassor's Temple, an Oatk of the ancient Romans, which may be rendered into
English by truly, indeed, certainly.

ECHO.
A Nymph of the air, who fell in love with Narcissus, but being slighted by
him, she retired into the Grots, and hollow places of the Mountains, where she
pined away to a Skeleton, having nothing left but her voice. When we read in
Virgil, vocisque offensa resultat imago, or in Horace, Cujus recinet jocosa
nomen imago: or in Claudian,

Tunc silvae, tunc antra loqui, tunc vivere fontes,
Tunc sacer horror aquis, aditisque effunditur Echo.
Clarior, and doctae spirant praesagia rupes.
When we read, I say, these fine passages of the Poets, we cannot but conceive
this repeating of the sound and voice in the like manner, that we have told
before, which has given occasion to Ovid to feign that it was a Nymph who being
fallen in love with Narcissus, and having made love to him ineffectually, was
turned into a voice and sound. Inde latet silvis, nulloque in monte videtur,
Omnibus auditur; sonus est qui vivit in illa.


EGERIA,
See AEGERIA.

EGISTUS,
See AEGISTUS.

ELAEOTHESIUM.
A place where they kept Oil and Wax mixed to anoint the Wrestlers. This mixture
was also called Ceroma, and did not only render the members slippery and less
fit to take hold on, but also more nimble and fit for Exercises. Vitr.

ELECTRA.
The Daughter of Agamemnon, and Sister to Orestes, who killed his Mother
Clytemnestra, to revenge the death of his Father Agamemnon, whom Clytemnestra
had murdered in revenge of Polyxenes her Daughter, sacrificed by him.

There was another woman of that name, the Daughter of the Ocean and Tethis,
and Atlas's Wife, whose Daughter had by Jupiter, Dardanus the founder of Troy.
Aratus in his Phoenomenon says, that she is one of the seven Pleiades, who hid
herself, lest she should see the destruction of Troy.

ELECTRIDES,
The Islands of the Adriatic Sea, which are at the mouth of the River Po,
where Poets seigned that there grew Trees distilling Amber.

Lucian speaks thus of these Islands, in the Treatise of the Amber or the Swans.

Hearing when a youth, that all along the Eridanus grew Trees distilling Amber,
which was the tears of Phaeton's Sisters, who had been turned into Poplars, and
still lamented his disaster, I imagined if I ever traveled that way, I would
spread my Garment underneath to catch that precious Liquor, but sailing lately
on that River, and not seeing any of those Trees on the Banks, where the name
of Phaeton is not so much as known, I asked our Waterman when we should arrive
at those places so famous among the Poets. They fell a laughing at my
simplicity, and wondered any were so insolent, as to retail and spread about
such shams. They added, that if their Country afforded any such Trees, as
produced so great a Treasure, they would not wear out their lives in tugging at
the Oar, since they might enrich themselves in a moment. This nettled and put
me very much out of countenance, in that I had thus sufferred my self to be so
childishly culled by the Poets, and I regretted these things, as if I had
really lost them.

Strabo l. 5. affirms that these Electrides Islands are not to be found, and
that all that Poets say upon this matter, was but a fiction of their own brain.

ELEGIA.
An Elegy, or a mournful Poem. The verses of a Latin Elegy are by turns
Hexameters and Pentameters.

Quintilian accounts Tibullus to be the first Latin Poet for writing Elegies;
but the younger Pliny gives the preference to Propertius.

ELEMENTA,
the Elements, Physical Principles, whereof all the natural Bodies are
composed. The ancient Philosophers, as Pythagoras and Aristotle, allowed four
Elements, viz. the Fire, the Air, the Water and the Earth. Carts and the
Moderns allow but three.

Plutarch in the first Book of the Philosophers opinions, says, that Empedocles
admits of four Elements, which he calls Gods. Thales was the first who taught
that Water was the principle of all things. Heraclitus of Ephesus said, that it
was Fire. Democritus and Epicurus his Follower were for the Atoms, called
invisible Bodies.

The Pythagoreans, besides Water and Fire, allowed still Air and Earth for
principles of all things.

ELENCUS,
The God of Liberty and Truth, mentioned in Maenander's Comedies, as we learn
of Lucian in his Apophrades, or the bad Grammarian.

ELEUSIS,
A City of Attica, not far off from Athens, where Eleusius reigned, who
received Ceres, when she was seeking for Proserpina her Daughter, who had been
stolen away. This Goddess in reward of her kindness, helped his wife in her
labor, as Lactantius says, and succled the Child called Triptolemus, with
Divine Milk. When he was grown up a man, she taught him to sow Corn: wherefore
the Inhabitants of Eleusis kept Holy Days called Thesmophores, or Cerceles, in
honor of this Goddess.

Solinus relates, that there is in that Country a Fountain of very quiet
Waters, which are yet moved with the sound of the Flute, as if they were
pleased with Harmony.

ELEUSINA SACRA,
The Mysteries of Eleusina, which were instituted by the Inhabitants of the
City of Eleusis in Greece, in honor of the Goddess Ceres; no Man was admitted
to these Mysteries, but only Women, who took all immodest Liberties among
themselves, which they kept very secret.

ELEUTHERIA,
Feasts celebrated in Greece every fifth Year in Honor of Jupiter
Eleutherianus, i. e. Protector of Liberty. The Greeks instituted these Feasts,
after the defeat of three hundred thousand Persians, whom Mardonius brought
against Greece.

There were still some other Feasts called Eleutheria, celebrated by the
Semians in honor of the God of Love.

ELISA,
Otherwise called Dido, the Daughter of Belus King of Phaenicia, v. Dido.

ELYSII CAMPI,
The Elysian Fields, so variously spoken of by ancient Writers. Elysium is
doubtless an Hebrew or a Phaenician word, which signifies a place of Delight
and Joy.

All the Nations have made themselves a Paradise and a Hell; the Phaenicians
showed example to the Egyptians and the Greeks; and it is very likely that the
Meadow, mentioned by Diodorus Siculus, in the description he has left us of the
Egyptian's Funerals, was the Elysian Field of Egypt, which he placed about
Memphis, very near the Acherusian Lake, which is surrounded with most
delightful Meadows. Homer says that dead Men inhabit these Meadows, because
it is the Egyptians Burial place, who carry the Corpse of the Dead over the
Acherusian Lake. Pratum ficta mortuerum habitatio, est locus prope Memphim
juxta Paludem, quam vocant Acherusiam, circa quam sunt prata amaenissima.
Apposite autem dicit Homerus mortuos istis in locis Habitare, quoniam maximae
Aegyptiorum funerationes ibi peraguntur; mortui per lacum and fluvium
Acherusiam transfretantur.

Besides these Elysian Fields, Homer speaks of some others, which are in a very
remote Country; and if we believe what Strabo says, they are in Spain. And
Proteus King and Prophet of Egypt foretold to Menelaus, that the Gods will
send you to the Elysian Fields, where is Rhadamanihus, and where Men livevery
pleasantly; there falls neither Snow nor Rain, and there is no Winter, but
Zephirs cool Men with their sweet breath.

Strabo applies this description to Spain, and affirms that the Fortnnate
Islands are so called, because they are in the Neighborhood of Spain.

Diodorus Siculus has made a description of them, which is yet extant.

Horace speaks of these Islands, famous for their Riches.

Ereptum Stygiis fluctibus Aeacum
Virtus and favor, and lingua potentiam
Vatum divitibus consecrat insulis.
Hesiod placed the Heroes in the Isle of the Blessed, which lies in the Ocean;
therefore the ancient Geographers have placed an Elysian Field and a River
Lethe there.

The Phaenicians found abundance of Riches in Spain, and that it was a very
pleasant Country, wherefore they called it a Paradise.

But after the Fortunate Islands were discovered, and the Treasures of Spain
were almost wasted, there they placed the Elysian Fields, and called those
Islands the Isles of the Blessed. Plato gave that name to the Paradise or
Dewlling Place of Just Men. Hesychius discovers some other places, that were
accounted the abode of Felicity, Elysium, Beatorum Insula. Some Authors say
that this place is in Egypt; others in the Isle of Lesbos, and many others in a
place stricken with a Thunderbolt, and inaccessible to Men.

Dionysius, who has made the description of the World, mentions the white
Island in the black Sea, called also the Isle of the Heroes, where Achilles and
the other Heroes dwell since their death, by the favor of Jupiter, who rewards
Virtue.

Italy had also her Elysian Fields, as Virgil relates in the 6th Book of the
Aeneid, where he places the Elysian Fields in Italy, and says, that Aeneas went
to see them, and there met Anchisos his Father.

Plutarch places the Elysian Fields in the Moon. And when Hesychius said that
some Writers thought the Elysian Fields were in a place inaccessible to Men,
because of the Thunderbolts and stormy weather, it seems that he makes allusion
to the Terrestrial Paradise mentioned in the Holy Scripture, from whence Adam
was driven away after his Sin, and the entry whereof was guarded by a Cherubim,
armed with a Flaming Sword.

Pindarus makes a very fine description of the Paradise and Happiness of just
Men, But he seems to allow two Paradices for just Men; and the most excellent
of these Paradices is granted to them after they have kept their Innocence
during three several Lives, and in three several Bodies.

Statius is also for two Paradices, one in Heaven, and the other in the Elysian
Fields upon the Earth.

Lucian has left us a very pleasant description of the Elysian Fields, which
may be deservedly inserted here.

We were conducted to the City of the Isle of the Blessed, to assist at their
Feasts, we were ravished at our entrance to see a City of Gold, and Walls of
Emerald, the Pavement all in-laid work of Ebony and Ivory. The Temples of
Rubies and Diamonds, with great Altars raised upon one single precious Stone,
on which Hecatombs were seen to smoke. They have seven Gates all of Cinnamon,
and a Moat of sweet scented Lustral Water, a hundred yards broad, which was
only as deep as was necessary to bath in at ones ease. Yet they have public
Baths of admirable Artifice, wherein they burn nothing but Faggots of Cinnamon.
The Edifice was of Crystal, and the Basins or Bathing Tubs great Vessels of
Porcelain full of Dew. Now the Blessed have no Body, and are inpalpable; yet
they drink and eat, and perform the other natural functions; they never grow
old, but remain continually at the Age they dye in, being that old Men there
recover their Beauty and Vigor. Of all the Seasons they know none but the
Spring, and feel no oother Wind but Zephirus, but the Earth is covered with
Flowers and Fruits all the Year long, which are gathered every month, and they
are said to bear twice in the Month called Minos: Their Ears, instead of Corn,
are loaded with little Loaves like Mushrooms. There are three hundred sixty
five Fountains of fresh Water, and as many of Honey, and four hundred of sweet
Ointment, but smaller than the others, with several Rivers of Milk and Wine.
They keep their Feasts without the City in the Elysian Fields under the shade
of a Wood, which surrounded it, there they sat upon Beds of Flowers, and have
their Meat brought by the Winds. They are at no pains to make Garlands, for the
little Birds, which hop round singing, scatter Flowers upon them, which, they
have pillaged in the neighboring Meadows; they never cease singing during the
Meal, and rehearsing curious fine Verses. Their Dances are composed of Boys and
Virgins, and their Musick-Masters are Eunomus, Arion, Anaereon, and
Stesichorus. When they have finished their Songs, appears a second Quire of
Musicians, composed of Swans and Nightingales, which with the Zephirs make up a
most pleasant Consort. But what furnishes most to the felicity of the Blessed
is, that there are two Springs, the one of Laughter and the other of Joy, of
which each Man drinks a whetting Brusher, before he sets down to Table, which
renders him gay and cheerful all the rest of the day.

ELPENOR,
One of Vlysses's Companions, whom Circe turned into a Hog, and being restored
to his former shape, fell down along a Staircase, and killed himself.

ELYSIJ CAMPI,
See before, after Elisa.

EMPEDOCLES,
A Philosopher and a Poet of Agrigentum, who wrote Verses concerning natural
things. He taught that nothing living ought to be eaten, and that the seat of
the Soul was not the Head nor the Heart, but the Blood; and because he wore
brass Slippers, Lucian calls him in jest Mr Slipperman. He cast himself into
the mouth of the burning Mountain Aetna. Diogenes Laertius ascribes his Death
to pride and presumption, that the People finding him no where, might conceive
he was taken up into Heaven; other Writers ascribe it to Melancholy, and some
others to a mere Accident. Lucian in his Icaromenippus, introduces Menippus
speaking thus to Empedocles. Being at a great loss upon this account, says he,
Empedocles appeared to me black like a Collier, as if he had been just then
disembogued out of Mount Aetna. I retired at first, thinking it was a Fantome,
or some Demon of the Lunar-Globe, but he re-incouraged me, by telling me his
Name, and informed me, how the smoke which came out of that burning Mountain
had carried him up thither, where he now dwelt, and skipt up and down feeding
upon Dew........... This having said, he vanished out of my sight, after I had
promised to make him, at my return, effusions upon the tunnel of my Chimney,
and to invoke him three times at the New Mood; for which he thanked me, and
answered like a true Philosopher, that he had not done it for Reward, but only
for the love of Virtue.

EMPOUSA,
An ancient Fantome, and an excellent Dancer, as Lucian says. Eustathius tells
us, that it was a frighting Hobgoblin dedicated to Hetate; and this Fantome
turned herself into several shapes, as Suidas and Aristophanes report. And was
called Empousa, because she walked only upon one Foot. Some Writers assure that
it was Hecate herself, or one of the Lamiae or She-Devils.

ENCHALABRIS,
A kind of a Table that the Priest set up, whereupon the Victim that was
killed, was stretched out to view its Inwards.

ENCHALABRIA,
The Vessels wherein they put the Inwards of the Victims after they were viewed.

ENCELADUS,
The Stoutest of the Giants, who, according to the Fable, made war against the
Gods. Jupiter struck him with his Thunderbolt, and threw Mount Aetna upon him,
having his Body half burnt, as Virgil tells us after Homer. Fama est Enceladi
semi-ustum fulmine corpus,
Vtgeri mole hac.
He was the Son of Tartarus or Abyssus and the Earth.

ENDYMIO,
A Shepherd, who was stolen away by Night in a deep Sleep, and made King of the
Lunar-Globe, according to the Fable, as Lucian tells us.

But the truth is, that Endymion gave himself much to the contemplation of the
Moon, to observe her changes and motions, and improved so far in that study,
that it was reported that he had lain with her.

Some Writers tell us that Endymion was a very Just King of Elis, who obtained
of Jupiter to sleep for ever.

Some others say, that Endymion loved much to Sleep, whereupon arose that
Proverb of a sleepy and slothful Fellow; Endymionis somnum dormit. He sleeps
like Endymion.

ENEAS,
See Aeneas.

ENNIUS,
An Ancient Latin Poet born at Tarentum, or in Calabria. He had written several
Books, whereof some Fragments are yet Extant. His style was harsh and
unpolished.

ENTAEUS,
A prodigious Giant, the Son of the Earth, who was threescore Cubits high. He
inhabited the Wilderness of Lybia, and dwelt in a Cross-way, where he committed
many Robberies, and obliged Men who passed that way to wrestle with him. But at
last he met with Hercules, as he was coming from the Garden of Hesperides, who
took him up into the air, and strangled him with his Arm, having observed that
his strength renewed every time he threw him on the Earth his Mother. Entaeus
is the Emblem of Voluptuousness, and Hercules of Reason, which overcomes
Sensuality. Superata tellus Sidera donat, says Boethius; and the greatest
Victory that a Man can obtain, is to overcome Voluptuousness. And Scipio
ordered the following words to be engraved upon his Tomb. Maxima cunctarum
Victoria, victa Voluptas.


ENYALIUS,
A God of the Sabins, called by them and the Romans, Quirinus; it is not well
known whether it be Mars, or some other Divinity bearing an equal sway with
him. They danced sacred Dances in his Temple.

EOLUS,
See Aeolus.

EPEUS,
The Son of Endymion, who was an excellent Ingineer among the Greeks, and among
other war like Engines, invented the Battering Ram or Raven, to beat down the
Walls of the Towns: Virgil says, that he made the Horse that was carried into
Troy.

EPHEBEUM,
A place for young Boys in Greece. For Hebe in Greek signifies R^pe-age, which
is at fourteen Years, and this is the time that the Boys begun to wrestle and
exercise themselves: and all the Interpreters agree, that the Ephebeum was a
place for these Exercises, and Vitruvius establishes this opinion, when he says
that it was a place where was many Seats.

EPHEMERIDES.
Registers or Day-Books calculated by Astronomers, to mark the state of Heaven
every day at midday, i. e. the place where all the Planets meet at noon; and
these Journals are made use of draw Horoscopes or Celestial Schemes.

EPHESTIO,
A Favorite of Alexander the Great, whom he ranked among the Gods after his
Death, and those who refused to acknowledge Ephestion for a God, were guilty of
a high crime against Alexander; for he had not only been at the charges of many
Millions for his Funeral Pomp, but the Cities had built Temples and Altars in
his honor; and there was no greater Oath taken but by his name, and to
ridicule these things was a crime deserving death. For the Courtiers, to
flatter the Passion of Alexander, told him many tales and visions; that
Ephestion had appeared to them in a dream; that he cured men who called upon
him; relating false Oracles, and acknowledging him for their Protector;
wherefore Alexander, having his ears continually battered with these
discourses, at last believed them, and applauded himself that he could make a
God, which was a greater thing than to be a God himself. And there were then
many good men who fell into his displeasure, because they would not comply with
his passion, or showed some distaste for this madness. Captain Agathocles had
been exposed to be devoured by Lions, because he had shed tears at Ephestion's
Grave, as if he had been Mortal, had not Perdical took his Oath by the Gods,
and especially by Ephestion, that this new God had appeared to him while he was
a hunting, and had bid him to report to Alexander that he should pardon
Agathocles, for having shed tears at the remembrance of his Friend, and that he
was to take pity of humane infirmity.

EPHESUS,
A City of Asia, very famous for the Temple of Diana, which was accounted one
of the seven wonders of the world. This City was built by the Amazons, and then
augmented by Androcus the Son of Codrus.

Asia was two hundred years about the building of the Temple of Diana, and all
her Provinces had contributed toward the charges of that great design. This
City was from all times much given to Magical Arts, and there were spells
publicly sold. Eustathius observes that there were spells engraven on the
Feer, the Girdle, and the Crown of the Statue of Diana.

EPHORI.
Overseers of the Commonwealth, or Lacedemonian Magistrates, like the Tribunes
among the Romans, their office was to restrain and curb the authority of the
Kings of Sparta.

They were chosen five in number, thirty years after the death of Lycurgus,
during the the reign of Theopompus, to be Ministers and assistants to the Kings
in the administration of Justice. But their Authority grew so great, that they
attempted to reform their Kings and punish them, as they did in the person of
Archidamus, whom they fined, because he married a woman of little size. And
they imprisoned Agis, as Pausanius relates.

EPICHARMUS,
A Pythagorean Philosopher, who first invented Comedies, and has left us some
rules concerning the same.

EPICTETUS,
A Stoic Philosopher, born at Hierapolis in Phrygia, Slave to Epaphroditus,
Nero's Favorite, who comprehended all Philosophy in these two words, bear and
forbear, and was so much esteemed that Lucian says, that his Lamp, though it
was but Earthen-ware, was sold for 3000 Attick Groats, which is about 92 Pounds
of English. Money.

This Philosopher lived till the time of M. Antoninus, and has left us a
Manual, which seems rather the work of a Christian than of a Stoic
Philosopher, speaking so well of the contempt of Riches, Sobriety, and
submission to the Will of God. Arianus his Disciple has published four Books of
his Sayings or Sentences, wherein he shows that he had much improved under so
good a Master.

EPICURUS,
A famous Philosopher; Author of the Epicurean Sect. He was Disciple both to
Democritus the great laugher, and Aristippus a very debauched man; and was,
says Lucian, more impious and debauched than all of them together, yet good
company and a lover of Feasting. He placed the chief Felicity in pleasure and
voluptuousness of mind, which brings tranquillity to the Soul and Body.

EPIDAURUM,
A City of Sclavonia, now Ragusa. This City was consecrated to Aesculapius, and
the Epidaurians built him a magnificent Temple, wherein the Statue of that God
was set up, made of Gold and Ivory of Trasimedes's work, an excellent Sculpto
of that time.

EPIMENIDES,
A Philosopher and a Poet of Creta, who stopped the Plague with a Sacrifice of
Sheep, which he offered to the unknown God of the Athenians, mentioned by St
Paul. It Is said that he fell asleep in a Cave, where he slept seven and fifty
years.

EPIMETHEUS,
The Son of Japetus, Brother to Prometheus, who had forbad him to accept of any
present from Jupiter. But Pandora came to him from Jupiter, and presented him
with a Box, wherein all the evils of Nature were enclosed. At the opening of
the Box all these evils flew out and filled the Earth with Diseases and
Calamities, and there remained nothing but hope only at the bottom of the Box.

EPITAPHIA,
Epitaphs, Inscriptions set on the Tombs of the dead, or the Marbles of the
Sepulchers.

The Greeks set on only the name of the dead, with these Epithets, Good man, or
Good woman, Good morrow. (...). Nicon the Son of Zenon. Good man. Good morrow.

(...). Olympia.



Pausanius observes that the custom among the Sicyonians was to set on the
Tombs only the name of the persons, with the word of greeting XAIPE: yet the
Greeks added often to their Epitaphs the words (...) and (...), tho all the Men
for whom these Epitaphs were written, were not Heroes, as this word signifies.

The Athenians set on only the name of the dead, with the name of his Father
and Tribe.

The Romans added at the top of their Epitaphs Diis Manibus, which was
sometimes expressed only by Halves.

DIS. MAN. And very often with two Letters D. M. and the Roman Natives wrote
their Epitaphs in Greek, (...) i. e. (...), as in the following Inscription.
(...) To the Gods Manes. To Julius Alcaeus his Father very Pious, has dedicated
this Monument.



This Epitaph and the like are of Romans who inhabited Greece, or of Greeks
living at Rome; and it is not likely that the Natives of Greece, and especially,
those who lived before they were Subjects to the Romans, dedicated thus their
Tombs to the Gods Manes. The Romans were also used to introduce their Dead,
speaking in the Epitaphs. C. JULIUS C. L.



C. Julius Barnaus, Freed-man of Caius, lies here, if any Man prophanes his
Urn, don't let him be admitted in Hell.

Sometimes their Epitaphs were full of moral Expressions, adorned with fine
Carvingwork and Architecture, which not only served for an Ornament to their
Monuments, but also for an Instruction to posterity, by the Achievements they
represented, and the moral thoughts thereby suggested.

EPULONES,
Ministers of the Sacrifices of the Gods. Pomponius Latus relates their
History, taken out of a Passage in Cicero de Oratore, viz. The Pontiffs not
being able to attend all the Sacrifices that were offered at Rome, upon the
Altars of so many Gods who were adored there, ordained three Ministers whom
they called Epulones to attend the Holy Feast at the Solemn Games. He adds,
that this Priesthood was very ancient, though no Man can tell exactly the time of
the Institution thereof. Livy tells us, that it was instituted in the year 553,
during the Consulate of Fulvius Purpurio and Marcellus, and that there were but
three created upon the motion of T. Romulcius. The privilege of wearing the
Gown edged with Purple like the Pontiffs, was granted to them. Afterward their
Number was increased to seven, to whom Julius Caesar added three more to make
up the number of ten. Their Duty was to furnish Banquets for Jupiter, and the
other Gods of his Retinue, at their public Sports, or at the Birth of
Emperors; wherefore these Officers were called Epulones, and the Banquet Jovis
Epulum.

Jupiter was there lying upon a Bed, with a Pillow under his Head, and Juno
with Minerva sitting at his sides. The Sacrifice being over, the Gods were
served as if they were able to eat; the Epulones performed that Function for
them.

EPULUM,
A Banquet, a holy Feast prepared for the Gods; their Statue was commonly laid
upon a Bed, and they were served as if they had been hungry; but this was the
Function of the Ministers of the Sacrifice, called for that reason Epulo^et.

ERAT^
^^e of the Muses, who ruled amoro^^^^

ERATOSTHENES,
A Cyreneus Philosopher, Scholar to Aristo and Callimachus, Library Keeper at
Alexandria to Ptolomcus Evergetes King of Egypt. He was besides, a Grammarian,
a Poet, a Philosopher, and was called for his Learning, the second Plato. He
was also skilful in Astronomy, and the first Man who corrected some mistakes of
ancient Astronomers; he died in the 82 year of his Age.

ERATOSTRATUS,
A Man of Ephesus, who set on fire the Temple of Diana, to perpetuate his Name
to posterity. The Ephesians to disappoint him, under severe penalties, forbad
the mentioning his Name.

EREBUS,
A God of Hell, born of the Chaos and Darkness. It Is also the Inferior part of
the Earth, from the Hebrew Ereb, i. e. vespera, nox. Poets take him for Hell,
and Virgil for a River of Hell.

ERESICTHON,
A Thessalian, who destroyed a Forest consecrated to Ceres, and was therefore
so cruelly punished by Famine, that having consumed all his Wealth, he was
obliged to sell his Daughter Metra, who having obtained of Neptune the ability
of transforming herself, she sold herself a great many times, to get Money for
the maintenance of her Father; but her cunning was at last discovered, and
Eresicthon forced to eat his own Flesh.

ERICTEUS,
The sixth King of Athens, brought up by Minerva. He had a Daughter called
Creusa of an extraordinary Beauty, whom Apollo enjoyed, and begot a Son by her
called Janus. Ericteus married her to Xipheus, who had no Children by her;
wherefore he had his recourse to Jupiter, to desire of him a worthy Successor
to reign in his room after his death. Apollo by an Oracle rendered upon the
Tripos at Delphi, ordered him to take for his Son the first Man he should meet;
and by chance, or rather by the care of his Wife Creusa, he met the young
Janus. Ericteus took him to be his Son, and brought him up like the Son of a
King. But Janus touched with an eager desire of reigning, forsook Athens, and
went into Italy. The Historical and Poetical Dictionary on the contrary says,
that Ericteus had some Daughters, who grew mad, and precipitated themselves,
for having against the order of Minerva opened the Chest, wherein the Serpent
born of the Seed of Vulcan was locked up; but Tully in his Oration for Sexti^s,
says, that these Princesses were very (...), and died for the defense of their
Country.

ERICTON,
The Fourth King of Athens, born of the Earth like his Predecessors, as the
Athenians say. Some Writers tell us, that he was born of the Seed of Vulcan
spilt on the ground. He first found out the use of Coaches, to hide the
deformity of his feet, which were like the feet of a Dragon.

ERIDANUS,
The River Po in Italy. Phaeton fell into this River when Jupiter struck him
with a Thunderbolt. Apollonius of Rhodes, in the fourth book of the Argonautes,
relates this Fable. They entered far off into the River Eridanus, where Phaeton
being struck on the Stomach with a Thunderbolt fell half burnt off the Sun's
Chariot into a Lake, the Waters whereof cast forth a vapor so infectious, that
no Bird can fly over it without dying. Round about it, how swift soever be the
Lake, are the Heliades his Sisters turned into Poplars, and their Tears are
flowing Amber. But all this is fabulous, as Lucian tells us. See Electrides.

ERINNYS,
The name of one of the Furies of Hell, and sometimes common to them all, who
torture guilty Consciences on the Earth and in Hell, i. e. (...), discordia
mentis. Notwithstanding it is more likely that this word is derived from (...),
male facere. The three Furies were, Tisiphone, Alecto and Megara, and draw
their etymology from the Greek (...), ultio coedis: (...), quietisnescia;
(...), odiosa.

Pausanias says, that the Goddesses called Severae, whom Hesiod calls Erinnyes,
had a Temple at Athens near Areopagus, or Judgment-Hall. Aeschylus the Poet is
the first who had described them with hanging Serpents. Virgil has followed
this Idea. And Homer had mentioned the Eriunyes before Hesiod, and in some
place he has described them as the revengers of the wrong done to the poor.

ERYMANTUS,
A Mountain in Arcadia, inhabited by a huge wild Bear, that wasted the Country,
whom Hercules carried away alive upon his Shoulders.

ERYPHILA,
The Wife of Amphiaraus and Sister to King Adrastus, who for a Bracelet of Gold
given her by Polinices, discovered to him the place where her Husband was hid,
because he was unwilling to go to the Theban Wars, where he knew he should dye,
according to the Oracle. But being acquainted with the covetousness of his
Wife, he commanded his Son Alcmaeon to murder his Mother as soon as he should
hear of his death, which he performed according to his Father's orders.

ERYTHREA,
The Name of one of the Sibyls, born in the City of Erithrea in Ionia, where
she delivered her Oracles. She lived in the time of the War of Troy. Fenestella
relates, that the Senate of Rome sent Ambassadors to Erithrea, to fetch the
Verses of this Sibyl. Eusebius in the life of Constantine tells us, that
Constantine repeated some Acrostick Verses of this Sybil, mentioning the coming
of the Son of God, and the Day of Judgment. It Is asserted, that Tully had
translated these Verses into Latin; and St Austin affirms, that he had seen
them written in Greek, being in number twenty seven, recorded by Sixtus
Senensis.

ERYX,
A Mountain of Sicily, from this word is derived

ERYCINA,
An Epithet given to Venus, because Ericus built her a Temple on the top of
Mount Erix in Sicily.

ESCHYLUS,
A writer of Tragedy. Dionysius the Tyrant bought his Table Book, wherein he
had writ his excellent Tragedies, to the end that he might therewith mend his
own.

ESCULAPIUS,
See Aesculapius.

ESQUILINUS,
The Mount Esquilinus enclosed by Servius in the City of Rome. This Mount was
also called Exquilinus, because Romulus mistrusting the Sabines, set Centries
upon it for his Guard; it was still called Cespius, Oppius and Septimius,
because it contained some little Hills called by those names.

ETEOCLES,
Born of the Incest of OEdipus and Jocasta his Mother. Eteocles having deprived
his Brother Polynices of the Royalty of Thebes, tho an agreement was made
between them, that they should reign yearly by course, Polynices retired to
Argos, where he married the Daughter of King Adrastus, and then returned with
an Army to bring Eteocles to reasonable terms. Jocasta their Mother attempted
in vain to make them friends: they prepared on both sides to engage: Tiresias a
South-sayer, declared that the Victory should remain to the Thebans, if they
offered Monaeceus the Son of Creon in sacrifice to Mars, whereupon Monaeceus
sacrificed himself. The Armies engaged, Eteocles and Polynices killed one
another; and Jocasta seeing that they were both slain, murdered herself.

ETESII,
mild Northerly winds arising every year after the Summer-solstice, at the
rising of the Dog Star, which blow for six weeks together, to cool the air from
the heat of the Dog Days.

EVANDER,
King of Arcadia, the Son of Carmenta, who for his Eloquence was esteemed the
Son of Mercury. Having by chance slain his Father, he forsook his Kindom, and
by the advice of his Mother, (who was a Prophetess) retired into Italy, from
whence he drove out the Aborigines, and possessed himself of their Country,
where he built a Town upon Mount Palatinus, which he called Palanteum, from the
name of his great Grandfather.

EVANGELUS,
A rich Citizen of Tarentum, who attempted to get the prize at the Pythian
Games, and because he was neither strong nor nimble enough to dispute the prize
of the Race, he endeavored to obtain that of Music. Wherefore he came to
Delphi at the persuasion of his Flatterers, and presented himself at the Games
dressed in a Gown of Golden Linen, and crowned with Laurel, the Leaves whereof
were of Massy Gold, and the Fruit composed with great Emeralds. His Harp was
also made of Gold, set off with precious Stones, and adorned with the Figures
of Orpheus, Apollo, and the Muses. At this sumptuous apparel the whole Company
was struck with admiration, and they conceived great hopes to see and hear
wonderful things; but when he came about to sing and play upon his Harp,
instead of wonders that were expected from him, they heard but a pitiful shrill
voice, which he was never able to bring in tune with his Harp, and to
accumulate misfortunes, when he attempted to strike the strings of his Harp a
little harder, he broke three of them. The whole company fell a laughing, and
the more willingly, because they were well pleased with another Musician who
had played before him: Then laughing being turned into anger, the Presidents of
the Games ordered that he should be whipped off the Stage, and being all over
bloody he was forced to cross the Scene, taking up the Ornaments of his Harp
which fell down under the lashes.

EVERGETES,
i. e. well doing or Benefactor. The Greeks called by that name, Men who had
done some considerable Kindness to their Country: Wherefore so many Kings were
proud of the Epithet Evergetes.

It Is no wonder then, if the Greeks, who were naturally inclined either to
Flattery or Satyr, according to the good or bad usage they had received, were
used to bestow this Title upon their Kings. Demosthenes says, that being
deceived by the counterfeited Virtue of Philip of Macedonia, they called him
Benefactor. Antigonus, Surnamed the Tutor and Giver, was by consent of all the
Greeks called Evergetes. The Emperor Julian says, that the Titles of Savior
and Benefactor of the Country were formerly bestowed upon the River Nile,
because of the Fertility that its overflowing brings every year to Egypt. And
at the birth of Osiris a voice was heard, says Plutarch, proclaiming that the
great and well-doing King Osiris was born. Wherefore the Elogy of Evergetes
flattering the Ambition of Princes, became afterward a Surname, affected by a
great many of them, to distinguish them from those, who were called by their
Name.

The Kings of Syria have very much affected this Epithet, as we see in their
Medals. Alexander Eupator Evergetes, Demetrius, Philometor Evergetes, Philippus
Evergetes. Mithridates King of Pontus, the Father of Mithridates the Great,
Surnamed Eupator, is also called Evergetes in Strabo and Appian. The Kings of
the Parthians have followed their Example, as it appears by the Medal of
Arxanes, where he is named King of Kings, Just, Evergetes and Philthellenes or
Lover of the Greeks.

After the Romans had subdued Greece, the Greeks gave the same Titles to the
Roman Emperors. And Philo the Jew, in imitation of them, gives the Titles of
Savior and Evergetes to the Emperors Augustus and Caligula. The Romans
bestowed the same Titles upon Vespasian at his return from Judaea, and upon
Constantine, after he had obtained the Victory over Maxentius the Tyrant.

EUMELUS,
An excellent Musician of Elis, who was admired by all the Spectators at the
Pythian Games, and proclaimed Victorious, though he was ill-cloathed, and had but
an old fashioned Harp.

EUMINIDES,
The Furies of Hell, Daughters to Acheron and Nox, or to Pluto and Proserpina;
respected by the Ancient Heathens, as Executors of the Vengeance of the Gods
against wicked Men. They were represented with Heads dressed with Serpents,
having Fire in their Eyes, and a fierce Countenance, holding in their Hands
burning Torches.

They had a Temple at Cesyna a Town of Achaia. See Erinnys and Furiae.

EUMOLPIDES,
The Priests of the Goddess Ceres and Eleusina, a City of Attica, They were
called Eumolpides from Eumolper their Ancestor. This Eumolpes, Nephew to the
King of Thrace, was ordained Pontiff to celebrate the mysteries of Ceres, by
Ericteun King of Athens, and Eleusina, and became so powerful by this
Priesthood, that he made War against the Prince who had bestowed it upon him.
They were both killed in this War, and their Children made a Peace, on
condition that the dignity of Priesthood should remain for ever to the
posterity of Eumolpes, and the Royalty to Ericteus's Offspring. The sacred
Rites in honor of Ceres, were accounted so Holy, that they were called by way
of pre-eminence, Mysteries, and were kept so secret, that scarce any account of
them has reached us.

EUNUS,
A Slave born in Syria; who not being able to bear any longer the misfortune of
his condition, played at first the Enthusiast, and pretended to be inspired by
the Goddess of Syria, and sent by the Gods to procure Liberty to the Slaves.
And to get credit among the People, he put in his mouth a Nut full of
Brimstone, and set it cunningly on fire, and blew softly through the same, and
thus cast Fire out of his Mouth, to the great amazement of the People. Two
thousand Slaves and other simple Men, pressed with Misery and drawn in by his
juggling Tricks joined themselves to him, and in a short time he was at the
head of fifty thousand Men, and defeated the Roman Praetors; but Perpenna
reduced them by hunger, and all those who escaped death were nailed upon the
cross.

EVOHE,
An Epithet given to Bacchus, in the celebration of his Mysteries (this word
signifies Merry Companion and Good Son.) Jupiter gave him this Epithet for a
Reward, because he helped him to defeat the Giants.

EURIPUS,
A narrow Sea between Eubaea and Boeotia, that ebbs and flows seven times in
four and twenty hours. Aristotle is said to have drowned himself in this Sea,
because he could not find out the cause of its ebbing and flowing so often.

The Canals of Water which surrounded the Circle at Rome, where the Sea Fights
were represented, were also called Uripes.

EUROPA,
The Daughter of Agenor King of Phoenicia, whom Jupiter ravished for the sake
of her Beauty; for being one day come down with some other Virgins to divert
herself on the Seashore, Jupiter came and played about her in the shape of a
Bull, that was so fair and handsome, that she had a mind to get upon his back,
seeing he was so mild that he let her stroke him. But so soon as he had got
this fair Lady upon his back, he run into the Sea, and swam toward Greece. The
poor Lady ashamed, took hold with her hand on one of his Horns, to keep herself
fast, and with the other hand she made fast her Veil that was tossed up by the
wind, and turned her Head toward the shore, where she saw the other Virgins
stretching out their arms to her. The Sea immediately grows calm, the Winds
kept in their breath, a thousand Cupids came fluttering about her, without
dipping their Wings in the water, but only their Toes. Some of them carried in
their Hands the Wedding. Torch, the others sung the Hymen-Song, and were
followed by the Sea-Gods, the Nereides half naked riding upon Dolphins, and
waited on by the Tritons, who were playing about. Neptune and Amphitrites
marched before, representing the Father and the Mother of the Bride. Venus was
carried by two Tritons in a Sea-shell, and was spreading Flowers upon this fair
Virgin.

This Spectacle lasted from the shore of Phaenicia, till Creta, where as soon
as Jupiter was landed, he took again his former shape, and holding his Mistress
by the Hand, he led her into the Dictean Cave.

Some are of opinion that she gave her name to this part of the World that we
call Europa; but others say, that this name came from Europus, who was one of
the first Kings that reigned there.

EURUS,
A Wind called by the Greeks Apeliotes, blowing from the Equinoxial East.

The Roman Mariners call it Subsolanus, and is represented black all over,
having a flaming Sun upon the Head, because the Ethiopians, who inhabit toward
the rising Sun, are black. Cartari in his Images of the Gods.

EURYDICE,
The Wife of Orpheus, who flying from Aristeus King of Arcadia, who attempted
to ravish her, on a Serpent, and died of his Sting. Orpheus to recover her went
to Hell, and with his Music charmed Pluto and Proserpina, who granted him his
Wife, upon condition that he should not turn his Head to look on her till he
saw the light. But he failed, and so lost his Wife for ever.

EURYLOCHUS,
The only Man of Ulysses's Companions, who tasted not of Circe's enchanting
Cup, and escaped being turned into a Swine.

EUTERPE,
One of the nine Muses, the inventer of the Flute, and other Musical
Instruments. Ex. S. C. i. e. ex Senatus consulto, which signifies by a Decree
of the Scante.

EXAUCTORATI,
Viz. Milites, Soldiers discharged from going to the Wars.

EXCOMMUNICATIO,
Excommunication, excluding Men from participating of the Mysteries, and
cutting them off from Communicating with Men of the same Religion. The
Excommunication was practiced among Pagans, and was declared by their Priests,
with the usual Ceremonies in such cases. The Excommunicated Persons were forbid
to be present at the Sacrifices, and to enter in the Temples in the presence of
the Gods; then they were delivered to the Devilish Spirits and the Furies of
Hell, with some Imprecations expressed by these words, Sacris interdicere,
Diris devovere, Exsecrare: And because this was a dreadful Punishment,
therefore it was inflicted only upon wicked Men hardened in Crimes. And the
She-Priest Theana the Daughter of Menon was highly commended, for refusing to
excommunicate Alcibiades at Athens, though the People had ordered her to do it.
And the Priests called Eumolpides, on the contrary, were blamed for the
performance of the same. Plato l. 7. of the Laws, forbids all Priests of both
Sexes to excommunicate any body, but after a diligent enquiry into the case,
and to do it but at the last extremity, and according to the Laws.

We have an illustrious Example of an Excommunication among the Romans, in the
person of M. Crassus, as it is related by Plutarch in his Life; for Atteius
Tribune of the People, not being able to stop his Journey into Syria against
the Parthians, he run to the Gate, out of which Crassus was to go out of the
City, and set in the middle of the way, a Cahfing-dish with a great fire in it,
and when Crassus drew near, he threw some Perfumes in it, and pronounced Curses
against him, with dreadful Imprecations, and called upon some Gods, whose names
only served to fright Men, and so Excommunicated him.

The Romans, says Plutarch, did hold this Ceremony of Imprecation to be very
ancient, but they put it in practice but very seldom.

The most rigorous punishment inflicted by the Druides among the Gauls, was the
Excommunication, as we learn of Caesar, l. 6. When a Man, says he, speaking of
the Druides, will not submit to their judgment, they exclude him from partaking of
their Mysleries. And those who are struck with that Thunderbolt, are accounted
wicked and impious Men; every one shuns their meeting and conversation; if they
have any business, they have no justice done them; they are not allowed to
possess any Office or Dignity, and dye without Honor and Reputation.

When an excommunicated Man came to repent, and had his Wickedness in horror,
and beg pardon of the Gods for the same, he went to the Priests to be restored
again, then the Priests, after a strict Examination restored him to his former
condition. And this Action was called Resacrare, or sacris restituere qui
execratus fuerat.

But if a Man died during the time of his Excommunication, and before he had
repented of his Crime, and was restored again, after his death the Priests made
a solemn service to the Gods called Manes, to beg of them that his Soul might
be set at rest in Hell.

EXCUNEATI,
Those who had no place in the Amphitheater, and were standing in the Corners
thereof to see the Games.

EXECRATIO,
See Excommunicatio.

EXEDRAE,
Halls with many Seats, whereupon the Philosophers, Rhetoricians and Men of
Learning sat, when they met for discourse or disputing. This Greek word is
variously interpreted by Writers. Alexander ub Alex. says, that it was an open
Gallery in form of Boxes. Accursius takes this word for a Window, but it
signifies literally, a place where many People are sitting upon Seats made
fast. It seems that Philander was of this opinion, when he says that the Exedra
of the Greeks was a place like that which is called a Chapter, in the
Cloisters of Religious Houses. And Vitruvius Cap. 9. l. 7. speaks of the
Exedrae, as if they were places open and exposed to the Sun.

EXPIATIO,
Expiation. When Men had their recourse to Temples, Altars and Prayers, it was
looked upon as the beginning of the expiation of a Crime. Homer relates the
Discourse of Phaenix to Achilles, to exhort him to forgive, because the greater
and mightier the Gods are, they are also the more merciful and more inclined to
pardon, when it is begged by Prayers; for the Prayers are the Daughters of
Jupiter, who disarm, in favor of the Petitioners, and oblige him to send the
Goddess of Revenge against the Men who will not be reconciled.

Ovid thinks it very odd, that our Crimes that are never inexpiable in respect
to the Gods, should be unpardonable in respect to Men; and that Augustus would
not forgive him a fault that God himself had pardoned him, because he sincerely
repented of it; and that the Fault he committed was more grievous to him, than
the banishment he suffered for the same.

Saepe levant paenas, ereptaque lumina reddunt,
Cum been peccati poenituisse vident.
Paenitet, o, si quid miserorum creditur ulli,
Paenitet and facto torqueor ipse meo!
Quamque sit exilium, magis est mihi culpa dolori,
Esque pati paenas, quam meruisse, minus.
Then according to this Poet, Crimes were expiated, either with temporal pains
which God sends to Men, or with grief and repentance of the guilty Soul, and a
pure love for Justice, which makes men fear the Crime more than the Punishment
which attends it.

Herodotus reports, that a Phrygian Prince of the Royal Blood, yet unfortunate,
came to the Palace of King Craesus, to desire him to purge him by Sacrifice,
which Craesus performed, according to the usual Ceremony of the Lydians, which
was very like the Ceremony used by the Greeks, in cases of Expiation.

Dionysius Hallicarnasseus says, that the people pardoned young Horace the
murder of his Sister, but that the King of Rome ordered, that he should be
purged with all the Expiations prescribed by the Laws of the Pontiffs, in cases
of involuntary murder. Then he relates the Ceremony of the Expiation: Altars
were set up, one to Juno, the other to Janus; they offered Sacrifices, and
young Horace went under the Yoke.

This Writer speaks still of another Expiation, when after a Fight between the
Citizens, they were obliged to purify the City, before they offered Sacrifices.

Here are many kinds of Expiations for Men and Cities, to abolish Murder, and
to prepare Men for Sacrifices; they had still other Expiations to purge the
Natives of the Country and the Foreigners: For the Scholiast of Aristophanes
says, that they instituted small Mysteries to purify Foreigners, because the
great Mysteries were not to be communicated to them. Diodorus Siculus observes,
that Hercules was admitted to the Mysteries of Ceres Eleusina.

Plutarch says, that Theseus, in imitation of Hercules, was purified, because
he had committed many Murders. The Mysteries of the Expiations were brought
from Egypt into Greece.

These mysterious Expiations were attended with Fastings; wherefore Clemens of
Alexandria says, that when those who were only taught the principles of these
profane Mysteries, answered the questions asked them, they affirmed that they
had kept themselves fasting: Symbolum mysteriorum Eleusiniorum, (jejunavi.)

Continency was also observed in these Expiations; wherefore St Hierome says,
that the Priests made use of Hemlock, to keep themselves more easily continent.

But the most common Expitation, was that of ablutions; and this plainly shows,
that all these Ceremonies of the Gentiles, were copied out of the Ceremonies of
the Hebrews.

There is nothing more common in the Poet's Writings, both Greek and Latin,
than the washing of Hands, and even the whole Body before the offering of
Sacrifice, and to make libations to the Gods.

Sophocles, in his OEdipus, Tyrannus affirms, that the Crimes, both voluntary
and involuntary, were expiated in Waters.

Euripides in his Hyppolitus introduces this chaste Lord, saying, that he thinks
himself defiled, because he was tempted to commit a Crime, and that he must
wash his Ears for the same.

Aeneas in Virgil desires his Father Anchises to carry his Dii Penates, because
he had defiled himself with Blood and Slaughter in the defense of Troy, and was
not yet purified. -- Donec me flumine vivo Abluero.


The Greeks had learnt these Laws of Expiation and Purification of the
Egyptians, and the Egyptians of the Hebrews.

EXQUILINUS,
See Esquilinus.

F.
F. The sixth Letter of the Alphabet, and the fourth Consonant, it is pronounced
effe, and its pronounciation is extended to the words derived of the Greek that
begins with Ph. Covarruvias says, that this Letter is the same with that which
the Greeks call Digamma Aeolicum, because it was formed with two Gamma's one
over the other. And that the Emperor Claudius Caesar prescribed that the Letter
F turned upside down, should serve for an V Consonant, which may be observed
still in old Inscriptions, as serkus, servus; Eale, vale. In the Civil Law two
ff's joined together signify Digest. This Letter among the Latins signified in
number 40. Sexta quaterdenos gerit haec quae distat ab Alpha.

And when there was a tittle over it, it signified 40 thousand.

This Letter is pronounced like ph, but not with so hard an aspiration, as
Terentianus tells us; wherefore Tully jeers a Gracian, who instead of Fundanius
pronounced ph undanius, i. e. with an aspirate P. However, in the decay of the
Language, these two Letters were promiscuously taken one for another, as we may
see in the Ancient Glosses, Falanx instead of Phalanx.

FABA,
A Bean, a kind of Pulse. Formerly they made use of Beans to gather the Votes
of the People, and for the Election of Magistrates. A white Bean signified
absolution, and a black Bean condemnation. There was also a Precept of
Pythagoras, ordering to forbear eating of Beans. This Precept was variously
interpreted, and some are of opinion, that Men should forbear Trials and
Verdicts, which were then brought by throwing Beans in the Urn. Lucian
introduces Pythagoras himself, handling this matter in the Dialogue of the
Philosophers exposed to public Sale; for after he had said, that he eats
nothing of what had life, but of all other things except Beans; they ask him
for what reason, and he answers, because they have something that is divine:
First, they resemble the privy parts, which you will easily observe, if you
take but one that is green, and shell it from its husk or cod: besides, being
boiled, and exposed to the Moon, for a certain number of Nights, they turn into
Blood; but what is most considerable, they make use of them at Athens in
election of Magistrates.

FABARIA,
A Sacrifice made with Bean-Flower and Bacon, offered upon the Kalends of June
on Mount Caelianus.

FABER,
A general Latin word, signifying a Workman, as we read in the Ancient
Monuments. Faber Agentarius a Goldsmith: Faber Ferrarius, a Smith or a
Blacksmith: Faber Tignarius, a Carpenter: Faber Eburarius, the worker in Ivory,
a Table-maker: Faber Navalis, A builder of Ships: Faber Balneator, a Keeper or
Builder of Baths. And Plautus taxing a Man with making counterfeit Money, says
ingeniously, Tace tu faber qui plumbos nummos cudere soles. The Greek word
(...) answers to the Latin word Faber; wherefore, those who said that Joseph
was rather a Smith than a Carpenter, don't observe that the word Teeton, made
use of in the Original, does not determine the signification rather to a Smith
than a Carpenter: And Hesychius explaining this word, says, that it signifies
all kind of Workmen; wherefore the vulgar Translation of the Bible, renders the
Text of St Matthew thus, Nonne hic est fabri filius. Hippocrates one of the
most Ancient Writers of the Greeks, speaking of Carpenters who saw Timber, he
calls them Tectones.

FABIANA FAMILIA,
The Fabian Family, Illustrious among the Romans, which has given many great
Men to the Commonwealth. This only Family, under the command of Fabius Caeso,
made war against the Veyentes, and lost 306 Men in an Engagement at Cremera.
This Family obtained seven several Consulats next after one another; from
whence you may conjecture that they were able to make up a great Army, with the
addition of their Friends, Clients and Freedmen.

The Veyentes having drawn the Fabians into an Ambuscado, defeated them, took
and plundered their Camp, and of the whole Fabian Family left alive only one
young man, fourteen Years old, the Son of M. Fabius, and the Offspring of all
the Fabians, who were since so serviceable to the Commonwealth, and
particularly Fabius surnamed Maximus; who seeing Rome divided in two Factions,
divided the People in four Tribes of the City, and by this means took away from
the People the Authority of bestowing Offices, upon those who gave them the
most, and of whom they expected greater rewards. This Fabius thoroughly routed
Hannibal with a prudent slowness, and repaired the losses that the Romans had
suffered by the Arms of Hannibal, whereupon he was called Cunctator the
delayer, because he did only keep Hannibal close, and encamped to his own
advantage, without engaging him; wherefore Ennius said. Unus cunctando qui
nobis restituit rem.


Q. Fabius Rutilianus, Colonel of the Horse, engaged the Samnites, during the
absence and against the order of the Dictator Papyrius, and routed them. The
Dictator prosecuted him, and would have him be punished with death, though the
Senate interceded for him; but at last Papyrius granted him his life, at the
request of the People, speaking thus to him. Live thou, Fabius, said he to him,
more glorious in this universal Love that the Roman people shows thee, than the
Victory which thou have obtained over the Enemy. And grant the Gods, that thy
bad Example be not prejudicial to the State.

C. FABRICIUS LUSCUS,
Who was sent against Pyrrhus. This Enemy of the Roman People attempted to
bribe the Loyalty of Fabricius, and made him very advantageous Proposals; but
Fabricius being a generous Roman, though needy, stood always firm to his
Country. Then Pyrrhus's Physician came secretly to him, and proffered him his
Service to poison his Master; but this Proposal struck him with such horror,
that he sent back this perfidious Servant to Pyrrhus; who admiring the
generosity of the Consul, set at liberty all the Roman Prisoners, taken at the
defeat of Livinius. And Fabricius also sent back all the Prisoners, who were
taken from Pyrrhus's Army. The Nations called Bruti and Lucani, having besieged
Turinum in Calabria, Fabricius marched directly to them, to force them to raise
the Siege; but while he was considering which way he should attack the Enemy in
their Intrenchments, a young man appeared at the head of the Legions with a
Ladder in his Hand, encouraging the Soldiers to scale the Rampart; whereupon
the Soldiers followed him without the order of their General, took the Rampart
by storm, and drove away the Enemy. After the Victory, the Consul being
informed of what had been done, sent to look for this unknown Man, to honor
his Valor, but he could never be found. Whereupon the Romans fancied that Mars
himself had assisted them. After the death of this great Man, his Daughters
were married at the charges of the Common wealth, because he was poor.

FABULA,
A Fable. Aphthonius the Sophist says, that the Poets were Authors of the
Fable, which is a Story made on purpose to instruct Men, being an Image fit to
represent the Truth. The Fable is called Sybiritica, Ciliciana and Cypriana,
from the several Countries of the Men, who were the Inventers thereof.

The Historians having no other aim but the Instruction of Men, thought that
the Fable was very fit to teach, not only young Men, but also to instruct all
sorts of Persons, who being always Men, have also, during all the time of their
Life, some remainders of Infancy, and will have Instruction it self be a
diversion to them. Wherefore, when the Authors of the Fable related Histories,
or unfolded the Mysteries of Nature, or taught moral Precepts, they intermixed
always something of the Fable with the Truth.

Plutarch has bestowed the whole beginning of his Treatise, of the manner of
reading Poets, to show that the Fable was very conducible to the instruction of
Men, both young and old, when it is handled to the purpose.

Clement of Alexandria observes, that this way of folding and unfolding the
Truth with Fables, is very proper to awake and whet the Wit, and inflame Men
with the love of Divine and Moral Truth.

Plutarch tells us, that the Egyptians wrapped up the Mysteries of their
Philosophy in Fables and Riddles; and had Sphinxes at the Gates of their
Temples to unfold them; and that the Pythagoreans understood the Unity by the
name of Apollo, and the number two by the name of Diana; the number seven, by
that of Minerva; and the Figure Cube by Neptune; to show that the Fables were
the Images of the Philosophical Truths, that were of great moment amongst the
Egyptians and Pythagoreans.

Salustius the Philosopher says, that the Fables have somewhat of Divine,
because they are made use of by Poets, who are animated with a divine Spirit,
and by the Philosophers, the Pontiffs, and the Gods themselves in their
Oracles. That the first use of Fables is to awake the mind, and raise it to the
unfolding of the meaning thereof; and he compares the Fable to the Divinity,
who exposes some of his Excellencies to the sight of all Men, and keeps some
others hid, which are discovered but by Contemplation.

Then this Philosopher distinguishes many kinds of Fables; some that have
relation to the Divinity, as when Saturn devoured his Children; the meaning
thereof is, that God, who is the supreme Intelligence, keeps in his bosom all
his operations: Some others are concerning Nature, as when Saturn, i. e. Time,
devours all his Productions and Temporal Natures. The others belong to the
Soul, who gets into herself all her operations like Saturn. And the fourth kind
of Fables concerns the Body, wherefore the Egyptians said, that Saturn was the
Element of the Water. In fine, there are mixed Fables made up of the foregoing.

We must not look upon Poets as upon mere Tale-bearers, but as Historians, who
adorned the ground of their History with many pleasant Fictions, to render it
more diverting to the Reader. And it is a false prejudice to think that Poetical
Narrations have nothing of Truth. Learned Men assert the contrary opinion, for
it is upon a solid ground of a true History, that Poets have wrapped up in their
Poems, some Stories that were not true, but likely.

Polybius, Strabo, and many other Historians affirm, that the ground of the
Iliad and Odysses of Homer is a true History, appearing to be so by the Ancient
Historians.

Poets have intermixed the Fable with the Truth, to adorn their Narrations, and
yet this ornament it self is grounded upon some Truth.

The most remarkable Writers, who have handled moral Fables, and introduced
Beasts and Trees speaking, were Aesop among the Greeks, and Phaedrus among the
Latins.

Philostratus in his Image of the Fables, relates in what manner Aesop received
of Mercury the Gist of writing Fables. Aesop, says he, being a Shepherd, was
often feeding his Flocks near a Temple of Mercury, wherein he entered
sometimes, and offered to the God some Milk, Hony-combs and Flowers, earnestly
begging of him some Beams of Wisdom. Many others met also in the same Temple,
to the same purpose, and made him considerable Presents. Mercury, to express
them his gratitude for their Piety, bestowed upon them the gifts of Sciences;
some of them he endowed with the gift of Astrology, others with Eloquence, and
some others with the gift of Poesy and Music. But he forgot Aesop. Yet having
a mind to reward him, he granted him the gift of writing Fables, because he
remembered, that being still in his Cradle on the Mount Olympus, the Hours who
nursed him up, told him the Fable of an Ox that had spoke to a Man, and had
inclined him to desire the Oxen of the Sun.

Phaedrus in the third Book of his Fables, dedicated to Utychius, speaks thus
Now I will declare in few words, to what purpose Fables were invented. Man
being in slavery and dependency, because he durst not utter his Mind, made use
of these fabulous Narrations, to declare the thoughts and agitations of his
Soul, and secured himself from Calumny with these pleasant Stories.

FABULINUS,
The little God Fabulinus, to whom Men offered Sacrifices, when their Children
began to speak. The God of Speech.

FACTIO,
Factions distinguished by Colors, Gruter in his Inscriptions mentions four
chief Factions; viz. Russatam, the Red; Prasinam, the Green; Venetam, the Blue;
Albatam, the White. It Is thought that the Ancients intended thereby, to
represent the four Seasons of the Year, when Nature puts on new Clothes; each
Faction or Troop of Horse representing one of the Seasons with his Color: The
Green represented the Spring; the Red, the Summer; the Blue, the Autumn; and
the white the Winter, covered with Snow and Ice. Domitianus says, Suetonius
added to these four Factions, the Gold and the Purple, i. e. two new Troops,
who went by the name of their Colors.

These Factions in the Games, grew sometimes so hot one against the other, that
they came to Blows. Zonoras tells us, that at Bizantium in Justinian's time,
two Factions conceived so factious an emulation one against the other, that
forty thousand Men of both sides were killed on the spot.

Caligula took a great fancy for the green Color, and had his Horse Incitatus
put among them.

FALCIDIUS,
A Roman Tribune, Author of the Law called Falcidia, so remarkable in the Roman
Law. This Law was made sometime before the Empire of Augustus, during the
Triumviratus.

By the Law Falcidia, it was ordered that Men should dispose by their last
Will, but of the three parts of their Estate, and were bound to leave the other
fourth part to their lawful Heir. And if they transgressed against this Rule,
the Heir deducted the fourth part of each particular Legacy, to make up the Sum
adjudged to him by this Law.

FALERNUM,
A Country in Campania near Capua, abundant in excellent Wine, so much
commended by Horace and others.

FAMA,
Fame. Ovid has left us a description of Fame, and the Graces that commonly
attend her, and represents her wonderful Palace, surrounded with a thousand
reports, true or false. Mistaque cum veris passim commenta vagantur
Millia rumorum.


Credulity, Error, false Joys, Fears, Suspicions and Seditions commonly meet
here.

FAMES,
Hunger. Poets have very ingeniously described Hunger, and in particular Ovid,
who has left us her Image in the eighth Book of his Metamorphoses, under the
shape of a tall lean Woman, with a dreadful Countenance, and hollow Eyes, her
Body transparent out of leanness, lying upon the ground and feeding upon Grass.
Virgil places her abode at the entry of Hell, with Griefs, Tears, Diseases and
Old Age.

Luctus and ultrices posuere cubilia Curae,
Pallentesque habitant Morbi, tristisque Senectus,
Et male-suada Fames.
FANNIUS,
A Roman Consul, Author of the Law Fannia, whereby the charges of public and
private Feasts were fixed, and Excesses and Superfluities forbid.

FANA,
Temples consecrated by the Pontiffs, pronouncing certain words, Fantur.

FANUS,
A God of the Heathens, protecting Travelers, accounted also the God of the
Year. The Phaenicians represented him, says Macrobous, under the Figure of a
Snake, with his Tail in his Mouth.

FARONIA,
See Feronia.

FASCES,
These Fasces were Axes fastened to a long Staff, tied together with a bundle of
Rods, which the Officers called Lictors, carried before the great Roman
Magistrates,

Romulus was the first who instituted Fasces, to inspire a greater respect and
fear in the mind of the People, and to punish Malefactors. J. Lictor expedi
virgas.

When the Magistrates, who by right had these Axes carried before them, had a
mind to show some deference for the People, or some person of a singular merit,
they sent back the Lictors, or bid them to lower the Fasces before them, which
was called submittere Fasces. For that same reason the Consul Publicola, a
great Politician, being ready to make a Speech to the Roman People, sent back
his Lictors; Fasces, says Livy, Majestati populi Romani submisit. And Pompey
the Great, coming into the House of Possidonius the Philosopher, when he was at
the Door, sent back the Lictors in honor of Possidonius's Learning.

FASCINUM,
A Man's Yard. At the Wedding the Bride sat upon the Knees of a naked Priapus,
to prevent by that Ceremony, charming and bewitching.

FASTI,
The Roman Calendar, wherein all days of Feasts, Games and Ceremonies were
marked. The six last Books of the Fasti of Ovid are lost. See Calendarium.

Fasti were also Table-Books, whereupon they wrote the Names of the Consuls,
and the most memorable things that were transacted in the Commonwealth. The
Consuls gave also some small Pocket-books of Silver or Ivory, wherein their
Names were written, as Sidonius Apollinaris says, speaking of the Consulship of
Asterius datique fasti.

FASTIDIES.
During these days the Romans were allowed to sue at Law, and the Praetor to
pronounce these three words, Do, Dico, Abdico.

FATUA.
See Fauna.

FATUM.
Fate, Destiny. It was represented as of a Goddess, treading upon the Globe of
the World, because all that is contained in it, is submitted to her Laws. She
holds in her hand a Vessel, or the fatal Urn, wherein (as Poets say) all the
names of mortal men were deposited. The Heathens complained in their Epitaphs,
of the malice, envy and cruelty of the Fates, that were inflexible, and could
not be moved with tears. It cannot be objected that the Latin word Fatum is not
of the feminine gender, and therefore the Destiny should not be represented by
the figure of a Goddess, for we see that many Divinities, as Venus, the Moon
and Bacchus were accounted both male and female. And this seems to have been
taken from the opinion of the Stoics, who maintained that the Gods were of
both Sexes.

And the Greeks themselves, who were Authors of the Roman Superstitions, called
Destiny by a feminine name, (...) as we learn of Phurnutus in his book of the
nature of the Gods. Destiny, says he, is that which disposes and rules all
things according to the order of an eternal principle. There is a Golden Medal
of Dioclesian, engraven in Pignorius's observations upon the Images of the
Gods, where the Destinies are represented on the reverse thereof by the figures
of three women: Procopius tells us, that the Temple of Janus was built at Rome
in the Marketplace near the three Destinies, called by the Romans Parcae. This
Writer, like Apuleius, confounds the Parcae with the Destinies.

The Ancients reckoned the Fates to be three in number, because, said they, all
things that are under Heaven have their beginning, progress and end. Wherefore
these same Fates are represented by three different female terms, i. e. by
three Women, represented only with half-bodies like the terms, as we may see by
the following Inscription. FATIS



For the terms were the Gods of bounds, and the Fates sets bounds to our Life,
and put an end to all our undertakings.

Lucan in many places of his Books has confounded Fortune with Fate.

Ovid introduces Jupiter speaking to Venus, and telling her, that it is to no
purpose to attempt to break the decrees of the three Parcaes which are
immutable and eternal, and rule all things that are done.

-- Sola insuperabile fatum,
Nata, movere pavas? Intres licet ipsa sororum
Tecta trium, cernes illic molimine vasto
Ex aere, and solido rerum tabularia ferro;
Quae neque concursum coeli, neque fulminis iram,
Nec metuunt ullas tuta atque aeterna ruinas.
Invenies illic incisa adamante perenni
Fata tui generis: legi ipse animoque notavi.
Lib. xv. Metam. But this Poet and all others have plainly expressed that the
will of Jupiter is Fate. For we must distinguish the fable of the three old
Sisters called the Parcae (which was but a Poetical fancy) from the universal
opinion of all Poets. Tully rejects the Fate of the three Sisters, which is a
fate of Superstition, and tells us, that Fate is the etetnal truth, and the
first predominant cause of all Beings. Wherefore the Idolaters represented the
Hours, and the Parcae placed upon the head of Jupiter, to show that the
Destinies obey God, and that both hours and time are at the disposol of his
will. Pausanias says to this purpose: In Jevis capite Horae and Parcae
consistunt; Fata enim Jovi parere and ejus nutu temporum necessitudines
describi nemo est qui nesciat. And he speaks thus somewhere else of Jupiter
surnamed (...), Parcarum Dux, not only as knowing the resolutions of the
Parcae, but also as being their Master.

Plutarch tells us, that these three Goddesses called Parcae, are the three
parts of the World, viz. the firmament of the fixed Stars, the firmament of the
wandering Stars, and that great space of the Air from the Moon to the Earth;
the concatenation of all the bodies and causes contained in these three parts
of the world, makes this Fate in a manner bodily, producing natural effects
according to the common course of Nature: but this is not performed without
some Divinity, who is like the foul of the world, and moves it by himself, and
the Intelligences whom he has set therein, and to whom he has given his order,
and are the intellectual Fate.

Diogenes Laertius affirms, that Zeno said that Jupiter, God, Fate and
Intelligence were all the same thing. It Is also the opinion of Epictetus and
many other ancient Philosophers.

FAVISSAE.
Festus by this word understands Cisterns to keep water in. But the Favissae in
the Capitol were Cellars under ground, or dry Cisterns, where they laid up old
decayed Statues, and other things that were grown out of use. Favissae, locum
sic appellabant in quo erat aqua inclusa circa templa; sunt autem qui putant
Favissas esse in Capitolio cellis cisternisque similes, ubi reponi erant solita
ea qua in templo vetustate erant facta inutilia. Aulus Gel. l. 2. c. 10. tells
us, that Servius Sulpitius a Lawyer, wrote to Marcus Varro, to inquire of him,
what was the meaning of these words Favissae Capitolinae, which he had observed
in the Books of Censors, but was not able to understand them. Varro sent him
word, that he remembered that Q. Catulus, to whom the care of repairing the
Capitol was committed, having a mind to lower the ground that was about the
place, could not perform it because of the Favissae, which were like dry
Cisterns, where they laid up old Statues and broken Vessels, and other things
appointed for the service of the Temple, Id esse cellas quasdam and essternas,
quae in area sub terra essent, ubi reponi solerent signa vetcra quae in eo
Templo collapsa essent.

FAUNA FATUA,
Sister and Wife to Faunus, and a Deity of the Romans. Lactantius speaking of
her says, l. 1. c. 22. Faunus instituted infamous Sacrifices to Saturn his
Grandfather in the Latin Country, and rendered divine honors to his Father
Picus, and his Sister and Wife Fatua Fauna: And C. Bassus tell us, that she was
called Fatua, because she foretold Women their destinies, as Faunus did to Men.
Varro tells us, that this Fatua was so chaste, that no Man saw her nor heard of
her, but her own Husband. Wherefore Women Sacrifice to her in private, and call
her the good Goddess.

Faunus in Latio Saturno suo avo nefaria sacra constituit. and Picum patrem
inter Deos honoravit, and sororem suam Fatuam Faunam eamque conjugem
consecravit, quam C. Bassus Fatuam nominatam tradit, quod mulieribus fata
canere consuevisset, ut Faunus viris. Eandem Varro tradit tantae pudicitiae
suisse, ut nemo eam, quoad vixerit, praeter virum suum mas viderit, nec nomen
ejus audiverit. Ideirco mulieres illi in operto sacrificant and bonam Deam
nemenant.

If Fatua never saw any other Man but her Husband, as Lactantius relates after
Varro, this certainly must be the reason why the Romans gave her the Name of
the good Goddess.

Justin says, that Fools were called Fatui, because they behave themselves like
Fatua, when she was transported with prophetic fury.

The good Character that Lanctantius and Varro give of Fatua's Chastity, does
not agree with what Plutarch relates in his Roman Questions, when he says that
she was given to drinking. Arnobius relates the same of her, in his sixth Book
upon the report of Sextus Claudius.

FAUNALIA SACRA,
Feasts kept the 5th of December in honor of Faunus, where the Country People
leaving off work, danced and were merry.

FAUNUS,
The Son of Picus, the first King of the Latins. This Faunus is sometimes
confounded with Pan, and it seems that Ovid himself makes no distinction of
them; however, Dionysius Hallicarnasseus says, that Faunus the Son of Mars
reigned in Italy, when Evander landed there, and that the Romans made him
afterward one of the Tutelar Gods of the Country. The same Historian says
somewhere else, that in progress of time the common opinion was, that Faunus
was that wild God, whose voice was heard by night in the Forests, and frighted
the People. Whereby it does appear that he ascribes pannick fears to Faunus,
and makes but one God, both of Faunus and Pan.

Eusebius reckons up Faunus among the Kings of the Aborigines, an ancient
People in Italy, for he accounts the number of them thus, Janus, Saturnus,
Faunus, Latinus. Notwithstanding the Latins made him a Genius, and a God
uttering Predictions, and this agrees with his proper name. For Faunus is
derived from (...), fari, loqui, and his Wife was named Fatua from the same
origin a fatu, as vates comes from (...).

Pan and Faunus were likely but one and the same, seeing that the name of Pan
is the same with that of Faunus in the Hebrew Tongue; for Pan in Hebrew
signifies Fear; and Fan, foun is the same thing.

Aurelius Victor is of the same opinion.

Virgil make Faunus a God of Oracles and Predictions. At Rex solicitus
monstris, Oracula Fauni
Fatidici genitoris adit, etc.


FAUNI,
Called also Satyrs, Pans and Silvans, were formerly taken for Genij and
Demigods, inhabiting Woods and Mountains; (according to the common opinion)
were the Sons of Faunus, King of the Alorigines in Italy. They were represented
with small Horns on their Head, and pointed Ears, and the rest of their Bodies
like Goats. The Country People worshipped them, and offered them Goats in
Sacrifice. These Demigods were only the Gods of the Latins, and were unknown
to the Greeks.

FAVONIUS,
The West-wind, that blows from the Equinoxial Line of the West, i. e. from
that place where the Sun sets in the time of the Vernal Equinox. The Greeks
call it Zephirus, i. e. bringing life, because it revives and renews Nature in
the Spring.

FAUSTA,
Sister to the Emperor Maxentius, and second Wife to Constantine the Great. She
fell in love with Crispu her Sonin-Law, and accused him of having attempted her
Virtue, because he refused to yield to her impure desires. The Emperor provoked
to anger, put him to death, without inquiring any further after the accusation
of his Wife. But a while after the Imposture being discovered, Constantine
ordered her to be smothered in a hot Bath.

FAUSTINA,
The Wife of Marcus Aurelius, who taking occasion from her Husband's kindness,
to lead a lewd life. Her Husband prudently winked at it; yet he cannot be
excused, for raising to the greatest Employments in the Empire, those who
defiled his Bed: Whereupon the People passed many Jeers upon him. And those who
were zealous for the service of their false Gods, were ashamed to see Faustina,
the lewdest of all women, ranked amongst the Divinities, served by Priests, and
worshipped in a particular Temple like Pallas, who was accounted a Virgin.

FAUSTULUS,
Numitor's Shepherd, who saved Remus and Romulus, two Children of Rhea the
Vestal, whom Amulius her Father had exposed on the River Tyber, and brought
them to Acca Laurentia his Wife, who brought them up secretly.

FEBRIS,
A Fever, an Ague, a Disease, proceeding from an excess of heat and drowth in
the blood and humors, which communicates it self from the Heart to the whole
Body, through the Veins and Arteries, and is known by a violent beating of the
Pulse. The Romans put her among their Divinities, and built her a Temple. Poets
banished the Diseases into Hell, as Virgil has done.

-- Primis in faucibus Orci
Pallentes habitant Morbi --
But the ignorant People place them among the Divinities. Clemens of Alexandria
speaks thus of them. The Romans offered Sacrifices to Hercules the Fly-driver,
the Fever and Fear; Romani Herculi muscarum depulsori, and Febri at Pavori
sacrificant: And St Austin says, that Felicity is received among the
Divinities, and joined with Priapus, Cloacina, Fear, Paleness, Fever, and many
others, that cannot be adored without Crime.

Whereupon Lactantius tells us, that it is a strange depravation to confound
these Gods and Evils together, though they pretend that some Gods are honored
for help, and others are respected lest they should do harm.

FEBRUA,
A Goddess who presided over women's Terms. This word is derived from the Latin
word Februa, i. e. to purify, to purge

FEBRUARIUS,
February the second Month of the Year, under the protection of Neptune. This
Month is not found in the Calendar of Romulus, the Year being then composed but
of ten Months only; but during the reign of Numa Pompilius, the Calendar was
reformed for the first time. Numa had discoursed very particularly with
Pythagoras concerning Astronomy, and made use of what he had learned of him, to
make this reformation, and followed very near the order kept then by the Greeks
for the distribution of time. Yet the common Years of the Greeks were but of
354 days; however, Numa made up his Year of 355 days, that it might be an odd
number, out of a superstition of the Egyptians, who accounted even numbers to
be fatal. Wherefore he took a day out of each of these six Months, April, June,
Sextilis, September, November and December, that Romulus had made up of 30
days, that they might be but 29, leaving to the other Months the 31 days they
had before. Then adding these six days to 51, which was wanting to the Year of
Romulus, which was 304 days, to make up his Year 355 days; he made 57 days of
them, which he divided in two other Months, and placed them before the Month of
March, viz. January of 29 days, and February of 28. He did not much matter that
the number of days of this last Month was even, because it was appointed for
the Sacrifices that were offered to the Infernal Gods, to whom this fatal
number seemed agreeable. He called this Month Februarius because of the God
Februus, who presided over the Purifications, or because of Juno surnamed
Februa, Februata or Februalis; for in this Month the Lupercalia were celebrated
in honor of her, where the Women were purified by the Priests of Pan Lycaeus,
called Lupercals.

And to make this more established and perpetual, Numa made use of the 45
intercalar days of the Greeks, and distributed them every two Years, and at the
end of the two first Years, there was a Month of 22 days set before the Feast
called Terminalia, which was kept the sixth of the Kalends of March. i. e. the
24th of February; and after the two other Years, the three and twenty remaining
days were set at the same day; so that in the space of four Years, the whole
intercalation of 45 days was made, and was even with that, which was practiced
by the Greeks in their Olympiades. This interposed Month every two Years, was
called by the Romans Mercedonius or Februarius intercalaris. See Annus.

At the Calends or the first day of this Month, was kept the Feast of June
Sospit who had a Temple on Mount Palatine, near the Temple of the Grandmother
of the Gods. The same day was solemnized the Feast of the Wood of Refuge called
Lucaria, which Romulus had instituted, that he might People his new Town. And
that day they sacrificed in the Temples of Vesta and Jupiter, surnamed the
Thunderera, to whom a Sheep of two years old was sacrificed in the Capitol.

This day there were also Sacrifices offered to the dumb Goddess, or the
Goddess of Silence. See Muta Dea.

There was still upon this day another Ceremony observed, called Charistia,
because all the Kindred of the same Family having the foregoing days performed
the Service for the dead, made among themselves a Banquet of Charity, whereby
they put an end to all Disputes and Controversies that might be amongst them.
As we learn from Valerius Maximus, lib. 2. c. 1. Convivium etiam solemn
Majores instituerunt, idque Charistiam appellaverunt, cui praeter cognatos and
affines nemo interponebatur, ut si quae inter necessarias personas querela
esset erta, inter sacra mensae tolleretur.

On the 21 or the 22 was kept the Feast of the Bounds, called Terminalia, in
honor of Terminus the God of Bounds. The Ceremony of this Feast was performed
in the Country upon Stones used for Bounds, and were accounted by them as so
many Gods; they offered them some Wheat Cakes, with the first Fruits of the
Fields, and sacrificed no Victims, lest they should shed Blood upon the Stones,
for the Bounds must be set by a mutual agreement. See Terminalia.

Some Writers tell us, that on this day was celebrated the Feast of new Wine,
called Vinalia priora, and was different from that which was kept in August.
See Vinalia.

The 24th a Feast called Regifugium, or the King's Flight, was solemnized in
remembrance of Tarquinius Superbus's Flight out of Rome. See Regifugium.

The 27th was a Feast called Equiria in the Field, solemnized with a Horse-Race.

The 28th the Games of the Bulls were represented in remembrance of the defeat
of Tarquinius by the Romans.

FECIALES,
A College of twenty Persons of Quality, skilled in Affairs of State,
instituted by Numa Pompilius, as Plutarch says, or by Tullus Hostilius, or
Ancus Martius, as some others tell us, the Duty of their Office was to make
Peace or proclaim War. The Greeks called them (...), i. e. Keepers of Peace.
Feciales, says Festus, a faciendo, quod belli pacisque faciendae penes eos jus
esset.

They did not suffer them to take up arms, till there was no hope of Agreement
and Peace, Primum de pace experiebantur: Wherefore they went themselves to the
Nations, who had done the wrong and injury to the Romans, and endeavored to
persuade them by Arguments to submit to Reason, and make amends for what they
had wrongfully done.

If they were not prevailed upon by their Arguments, they called the Gods to
witness their just demands, and declared War, throwing a Dart half burnt upon
their ground, and some Grass, in the presence of three Ancient Men, uttering
withal many Imprecations against them. The Romans durst not undertake a War
contrary to the opinion of these Men, for Livy tells us, that the Consul
Sulpitius consulted them about the War that he intended to declare against King
Philip; Consulti Feciales a Consule Sulpitio, quod bellum indiceretur Regi
Philippo.

But if the Enemy yielded to their demands, they granted them peace, which they
ratified by the sacrificing a Hog, which they struck with a Stone, repeating a
certain form of Prayers, related by Livy, in the Treaty of Peace concluded
between the Albani and Romans. The Patratus the chief of this College spoke
thus: Audi, Jupiter; Audi, Pater Patrats populi Albani; Audi tu populus
Albanus, ut illa palam prima postrema, ex illis tabulis cerave recitat sunt
sine dolo malo, utique ea hic hodie rectissime intellecta sunt, illis legibus
Populus Romanus prior non deficiet: si prior defexit publico consilio, dolo
malo; in illo die, Jupiter, populum Romanum sic ferito, ut hunc ego porcum hic
hodie feriam, tantoque magis ferito, quanto magis potes pollesque. Having
pronounced these words, he struck the Hog with a Stone, and the Albani did the
like on their side.

FELICITAS,
Felicity, a Heathen Divinity. She was the Daughter of Hercules, as Euripides
and Pausanias say, and deserved Divine Honors, because she sacrificed her self
for the Athenians against the Lacedaemonians, according to the answer of the
Oracle.

Public Felicity had many Altars and Temples at Rome, as it appears by Roman
Historians, and was called Faustitas, especially in relation to private
Felicity. In this sense Horace speaks of her, when he says, Tutus bos etiam rur
a perambulat,
Nutrit rura Ceres, almaque Faustitas.


St Austin speaks of this Goddess in the 4th Book de Civitate Dei, c. 18. and
shows that Felicity is the same with good Fortune, and that the Romans
acknowledged themselves, that Felicity, Virtue and Victory were neither Gods
nor Goddesses, but only Gifts of God, seeing that they demanded them of
Jupiter. Wherefore if we consider what they meant by adoring Felicity, Virtue
and Victory like Divinities, it is nothing else but the adoring the supreme
Divinity, as the dispenser of these great favors.

Felicity was represented like a Divinity sitting on a Throne, holding with her
right Hand Mercury's Wand, and with the left a Horn of Plenty, with this Motto
Felicitas Publica, as we see in a Medal of the Empress Julia Mammea. Lucullus
built her a Temple at Rome, and Julius Caesar began another, which Lepidus
finished.

The Ancients represented Felicity holding a Cup in her right Hand, and a
Scepter in the left, as appears by the Medals of Adrian and Alexander Mammeus.
But Moderns represent her under the Figure of a blindfold Lady, holding up a
Sword with one hand, and a pair of even Scales with the other.

FERALIA,
The Feast of the dead, noted in the Calendar on the 21st of February, viz. on
the 9th of the Calends of March, though Ovid puts it on the 17th of February, or
the 13th of the Calends of March. This Feast was instituted to render the last
Honors to the Dead, and pacify their Ghosts called Manes. Aeneas is accounted
the first Author of this Feast, and Numa the Inventer of all the Ceremonies
performed therein. This Feast was kept during eleven days in this manner. The
Kinsmen and Acquaintance of the Dead went to their Graves, and turned round
about them, making their Prayers; then they prepared an Entertainment upon a
great Stone, called Silicernium; and this Feast was commonly served with Honey,
Wine and Milk, they spread Flowers, and burnt Frankincense and other Perfumes,
according to the Quality of the deceased. Silicernium, says Donatus, coena quae
infertur Diis Manibus, quod eam silentes cernant, or quod epula, says Servius,
ponerenter super nudam silicem.

The Ancients were persuaded that the Souls of the dead suffered no pains in
Hell during the eleven days, that the subterranean Gods were invoked upon their
account, but were allowed to walk about their Graves, and feed upon the Feast
prepared for them.

During this time Marriages were forbidden, and the Temples of other Divinities
shut up, because they fancied that the Ghosts were walking, and that all was
then profane. This Ovid meant by these Verses.

Dum tamen haec fiunt, viduae cessate puellae;
Expectet puros pinea taeda dies.....
Di quoque templorum foribus celentur opertis,
Thure vacent arae, stentque sine igne soci.
Nunc animae tenues and corpora sancta sepulchris
Errant, nunc posito pascitur Umbra cibo.
This Feast having been neglected for some years, all the Graves were seen on
fire, and the Souls were heard both in the Town and the Country, complaining in
the night of being forsaken. Whereupon it was ordered to keep this Feast for
the future with more devotion and exactness; and immediately the Prodigies
ceased.

FERETRIUS,
An Epithet given to Jupiter, from the Latin word far, because the Spoils
taken from the Enemy were brought to his Temple; or from the word ferire,
because before they went to War, they prayed to that God, to enable them to
beat the Enemies of the Roman People. Romulus instituted this Ceremony after
the defeat, of the Sabins, and dedicated a Temple to Jupiter Feretrius.

FERIAE,
Holy Days, when People rested from labor, from the Verb feriari, i. e. to
rest, to cease from work, for the Feriae of the Ancients were Festival-days.
Now the Church marks the days of the Week, by the word Feria secunda, feria
tertia, etc. though these days are not Holy Days, but working-days; the occasion
thereof was, that the first Christians, to show their Joy at the celebrating of
Easter, were used to keep the whole Week holy, and forbear from all servile
work, that they might give themselves wholly to the contemplation of the
Mysteries contained therein; wherefore they called the Sunday the first
Holy Day, the Monday the second Holy Day, the Tuesday the third Holy Day, and
so forth; and from thence the days of every week, were afterward called Feriae
in the common Language of the Church, though they are not to be kept Holy.

The Romans had two kinds of Feriae, the public Feriae, common to all the
People in general, and the private Feriae, which were only kept by some private
Families.

The public Feriae were fourfold, Stativae unmovable, and Holy Days
Imperativae, commanded; Conceptivae moveable; Nundinae days for keeping Fairs.

Stativae Feriae were set Holy Days marked in the Calendar, which always fell
out upon the same day, the three chiefest thereof were Agonalia, Carmentalia,
and Lupercalia. I shall give an account of them in their order.

Conceptivae were Holy Days appointed every Year upon uncertain days, according
to the Pontiffs will; such were Feriae Latinae, Paganales, Sementinae, and
Compitales.

Imperativae, commanded, or extraordinary Holy Days, kept according as the
occasions of the Commonwealth required, either to give thanks to the Gods for
some extraordinary Favors, or to pacific their Wrath, and pray to them to keep
the People from public misfortunes. Unto these kind of Holy Days the
Processions, Games, Lectisternium, or the Bed of the Gods may be referred.

Nundinae, days for Fairs, and extraordinary Markets.

Before Flavius made the Calendar public, the unmovable Feasts were published
by the Curio's, who waited the Nones of each Month upon the King of Sacrifices,
to know what Holy Days were to be kept that Month, and then acquainted each
Parish with the same. And this was still practiced after the publishing of the
Calendar. As for the Ferae conceptivae and imperativae, they were published in
the public places by a Herald in these words, Lavatio Deum Matris est hodie:
Jovis epulum cras est, and the like. And these Holy Days were so religiously
kept, that the opinion of the Pontiff Mutius Scaevola was, says Macrobius, that
the breaking of a Holy Day was unpardonable, unless Men had done it out of
inadvertency, and in this case they were acquitted by sacrificing a Hog.

FERIAE LATINAE,
The Latin Holyday. Some Writers say that the Consuls Sp. Cassius and
Posthumous Caminius instituted these Holy Days, by a Treaty that they made with
the Latius in the name of the Senate and the Roman People. But Dionysius
Hallicarnasseus and almost all the Writers tell us, that Tarquinius Supurbus
instituted them; and that having overcome the Tuscans, he made a league with
the Latins, and proposed them to build a Temple in common to Jupiter surnamed
Latialis, where both Nations might meet every Year, and offer Sacrifice for
their common Conservation. Wherefore they chose Mount Albanus, as the center of
these Nations, to build there a Temple; and instituted a yearly Sacrifice, and
a great Feast in common; and among their Rejoycings, they swore a mutual and
eternal Friendship. Each Town of both Latins and Romans, provided a certain
quantity of Meat, Wine, and Fruits for the Feast.

A white Bull was sacrificed in common, and the Inhabitants of every Town
carried home a piece thereof. When this Ceremony was at first instituted it
held but one day, but after the Kings were expelled out of Rome, the People
demanded that another day might be added to it; afterward the Senate added a
third day, a fourth, and so on till they came to ten days.

After the Expulsion of Kings, the Consuls appointed a time for the celebrating
of this Feast; during which, the People left the guard of the City to a
Governor called Praefectus Urbis.

While this Feast was celebrated on Mount Albanus, there were Chariot-Races at
the Capitol, and the Conqueror was treated with a great draught of
Wormwood-drink, which is very wholesome, as Pliny says, La^norum feriis quadrigae
certant in Capitolio, victorque absynthium bibit; credo sanitatem praemio dari
homorifice.

FERONIA,
A Goddess of the Woods and Orchards. This Divinity took her name from the Town
of Feronia, situated at the foot of Mount Soracte in Italy, where a Wood and a
Temple were consecrated to her. It Is said that the Town and the Wood having
both taken fire, whereupon the People carrying away the Statue of the Goddess,
the Wood grew green again. Strabo relates, that the Men who offered her
Sacrifices, walked barefooted upon burning Coals, without burning themselves.
She was honored by freed-men as their Protectrefs, because they received in
her Temple the Cap, that was the Token of their Liberty.

FESTUM and FESTA,
Holy Days. The Romans kept many Feasts, as it appears by their Calendar. We
shall speak of them according to their Alphabetick Order. They were very
careful of observing Feasts, and during that time they did forbear to work.

Tibellus tells us, that the Romans abstain from working, upon the days of
Expiations and Lustrations of the Fields.

Quisquis adest, faveat, fruges lustramus and agros,......
Omnia sint operata Deo, non audeat ulla
Lanificam pensis imposuisse manum.
These words express the true end of ceasing from work, to employ themselves to
the service of the Gods and Religious Duties.

It Is not certain, if Pl^^ghmen rested from all kind of work, during the
Holy Days. Virgil relates many exercises, and other small things, that Men were
allowed to do in Holy Days,

Quippe etiam festis quaedam exercere diebus,
Fas and jura sinunt: Rivos deducere nulla
Relligio vetuit; segeti praetendere sepem,
Insidias avibus moliri, incendere vepres,
Balantumque gregem fluvio mersare salubri:
Saepe oleo tardi costas agitator aselli,
Vilibus aut onerat' pomis:
Georg. lib. 1. v. 270. as to make Drains to drain the water, enclose a Field
with Hedges, laying snares for Birds, set Thorns on fire, wash a Flock in the
River, and load an Ass with Fruits.

These works were not disagreeable to the celebrating of the Holy Days. And yet
working was not left to the liberty or humors of Men's fancy, but were
regulated by the Laws and Ordinances of the Pontiffs, who ruled matters of
Religion.

They were so exact in keeping Holy Days, that the following day was accounted
a day of bad Omen to undertake any thing. Wherefore the Romans and the Greeks
have consecrated the next day after the Holy Days, to the Genij or the dead.

And they were so careful of ceasing from work, that the keeping of their
Holy Days was an imitation of the rest of the Sabbath, commanded by the Law of
God. For the Greeks and the Romans kept some Holy Days during eight days
together, in imitation of the Hebrews, and had also their eight and nine days
of Devotion. For Polybius tells us, that to thank the Gods for a Victory
obtained at Sea, the Romans ordered to forbear from all kind of work for nine
days together.

FIBULAE,
Buckles, Clasps. This Latin word, generally taken, signifies All sorts of work
that joins two things together.

Fibula Architectonica, that which in Architecture we call a Nail, Peg, Key and
Ring, and all that is made use of to join Beams together, and other parts of
Buildings. In this sense Caesar makes use of this word, in the description he
has made of the Bridge that he built over the River Rhine: Binis utrinque
fibulis ab extrema part distinebantur.

In Anatomy Fibula is that we call a Cannelbone.

Fibula in relation to Clothes, means Buckles and Clasps, that keep close, or
tie up some part of our Clothes. The Greeks and Romans made use of them, and
often adorned them with precious stones. Men and Women did wear them upon their
Clothes and Shoes, and used them to keep up their Hairs, aliqua fibula comam
diffluentem colligans.

Fibula Gymnastica or Citharaedica, used only by Musicians and Comoedians, to
keep close the prepuce of Children, lest they should keep Women company, and
lose their voice, as we learn of Celsus. The same thing was used to Players
upon the Stage, to preserve their voice, as it is reported by Martial. Menophili
penem tam grandis fibula vostis.


An Ancient Interpreter of Juvenal observes upon this Verse of the sixth Satyr,

-- Nullius fibula durat
Vocem vendentis praetoribus......
Fibulam dicit circellos quos tragaedi, sive comoedi in pene habent.

FICULNEA VIA.
The way or the Street of the Fig Tree at Rome, called Momentania.

FICUS,
A Fig Tree. Pliny affirms, that the white Fig Tree is fortunate, but on the
contrary, that which brings brownish Figs is fatal.

The Fig Tree called Ruminalis, under which the Wolf suckled Remus and Romulus,
was at at Rome, about the place of the Assemblies.

FIDES,
Faith. A Goddess, whom the Ancients honored and placed in Heaven. Livy
relates, that her Priests were clothed with very white Linen, to show the
candor and sincerity of Faith. She was represented by two Hands joined close
together, and sometimes with two little Images holding one another by the hand.
See Fidius.

Dionysius Hallicarnasseus tells us, that Numa Pompilius was the first Man who
built a Temple to public Faith, and instituted Sacrifices in honor of her at
public charges. Her Priests or Flamines sacrificed to her without shedding of
Blood, clothed with white Robes, and drawn upon a Chariot, holding their right
hand open.

FIDIUS.
The Romans and the Sabins, respected this God, as the protector of the good
Faith that should reign among them.

There was a Temple at Rome on Mount Quirinalis built to this God, where his
Feast was kept every year upon the Nones of June. And his Image is still seen
at Rome, in an ancient Marble of three Figures, which are under a kind of a
Canopy. Honor stands at the right, under the figure of a middle aged Man;
Truth at the left, represented like a Woman crowned with Laurel, holding Honor
by the Hand; and Love is betwixt them both, under the shape of a young Child,
with this Inscription Simulachrum Fidii^.

FLAMINIUS,
Surnamed Quintius, the Son of T. Flaminius, whom Hannibal defeated near the
Lake Trasymenes. Being Consul, he marched against the Inhabitants of Milan, and
routed them. Then he made war against Philip King of Macedonia^, and vanquished
him in two pitched Battles, and by this defeat restored Liberty to all the
Cities of Greece, that King Philip had made his Tributaries. And being ready to
engage the Enemy, he received Orders from the Senate to return to Rome, to quit
his Consulate, because of some formalities wanting at his Election; but he put
the Packet into his Bosom, and did not open it, till after he had obtained the
Victory: The Senate resented highly his contrivance, and endeavored to deprive
him of the triumphal Entry; but the People opposed them, and allowed him the
Triumph. Wherefore this great General was attended in his Triumph, by a Crowd
of his fellow Citizens, whom he had made free, and followed his Triumphal
Chariot with Acclamations, which made the Glory of his Triumph shine the more.

Flaminius is not found among the Consuls, neither in the Calendars of Rome,
nor in the Roman Chronicles. The Senate doubtless deprived him of that Honor,
because he had not obeyed their Orders, when he was called back to Rome.

FLAMEN and FLAMINES,
in the plural number. Numa instituted these Priests of Jupiter, Mars and
Romulus or Quirinus, to perform the Religious Service, and called them
Flamines. Varro in his Book of the Latin Tongue tells us, that the Ancients had
as many Flamines as Gods. At first there was but one Flamen created, who was
called Flamen Dialis, or the Priest of Jupiter; then another was allowed to
Mars, called Flamen Martialis, and a third to Quirinus or Romulus, called
Flamen Quirinalis.

Afterward the number of Flamines was increased; but yet the first were called
Majores Plamines, and were all of Patrician Families; the others were called
Minores Flamines, and were of Plebeian Families.

There were likewise Flamines ordained for the Emperors, after they were ranked
among the Gods. The Emperor Augustus had one called Flamen Augustalis.

The People assembled by Curii chose these Priests, and often left their
Election to the Pontiffs. The High Priest consecrated them, and they were under
his subjection, as to their Discipline. Aulus Gellius relates the Ceremonies
observed at their Consecration.

First, the will of the Gods was consulted by Augurs, about the Man who should
be consecrated, then the High Priest took him up from the hands of his Kindred;
and this was called capere Flaminem, as we learn from Livy.

The Priests of Jupiter called Flamen Dialis, was the chief of all. And it must
be observed, that all these Priests were allowed to wear the Robe edged with
Purple, like great Magistrates, to keep the Ivory Chair, and to sit in the
Senate.

They did wear a kind of a Cap or Hat, that was particular to them. And Varro
tells us, that they had the name Flamen, because they wore a little Band of
Thread about their Head, Flamines dicti, quod filo caput cinctum habebant.

Servius mentions two kinds of Ornaments that the Flamines wore upon their
Head, one single for convenience in the Summer, viz. this little Band of
Thread; the other was the Hat, which covered their Head, during their
Functions: Verum festis diebus, filo deposito, pilea necesse erat accipere.

Scaliger, upon this Text of Varro, has described the form of the Hat of the
Flamines, and tells us, that it was called Flammeum, that the Crown thereof was
in form of a Pineapple, with a woollen Tuft on the top of it called Apiculum,
and from its brims hung woollen Bands, called Offendices, to keep it fast.

When the Wife of the Flamen Dialis died, he was obliged to quit his
Priesthood: uxorem si amisit Flaminio decedit.

He was not allowed to ride, nor to take any Oath, nor to lie out of the Town.
The paring of his Nails and Hairs were buried at the Foot of a Tree, subter
arborem Siliquam terra operiantur; and was forbid to name or touch a She-Goat,
a Hare, or Beans, and never entered into any place where dead Bodies lay, and
was bound to shift himself in private, lest Jupiter should see him naked.

FLAMINICA,
The Wife of the Flamen Dialis was invested with the Priesthood, like her
Husband, and was not obliged to observe the same Ceremonies that he observed
himself. She was not allowed to comb her Hairs, nor to put them in order, when
she went to the Ceremonies of the Argaei, celebrated in May, because she was
then in mourning. Her chiefest Ornament was a great Scarf of purple color,
with a Fringe about it. The Woman who waited on her was called Flaminia, and
the Men who attended upon her Husband Flaminii Camilli.

FLAMINIUS,
See before Flamen.

FLAVIUS.
Caius the Son of Cneus Flavius Libertinus, a Notary, was raised to the dignity
of Aedilis Curulis against the Patrician's consent, which they resented so
highly, that they left off their Ornaments, and refused to salute him in
contempt of his elevation. But to be revenged of them, he published the Roman
Law, which the Senate and Patricians had kept very secret among themselves, in
the Closets of the Pontiffs, and published also the Roman Calendars, and
dedicated a Temple to Concord. Whereupon the wrath of the Patricians was
increased, for they had then nothing left secret to deceive the simple People.

FLAVIANA,
Viz. FAMILIA, The Flavian Family, so called, from the color of their Hairs,
that were reddish. There were three Roman Emperors born of that Family, viz.
Vespatianus, Titus and Domitianus.

FLORA,
The Goddess Flora. Lactantius gives a description of Flora or Flaura, as if
she was a Courtezan, who left her substance to the Roman People; in
consideration whereof they ordained her extraordinary Honors, and Games called
Floralia, where she was entitled the Goddess of Flowers. But Varro recounts
Flora among the Divinities, who were before that time honored by the Sabins,
and were received at Rome, when the Sabins, together with their King Tatius
joined themselves to the Romans, to make with them but one and the same body of
People. Ovid describes her in his Fasti, as the Goddess of Flowers, the Wife of
Zephirus, whereby he means a natural Goddess, named Flora, instead of Cloris.
The Games Floralii were instituted five hundred and thirteen years after the
foundation of Rome; and yet were not kept annually: but in the year five
hundred and eighty, at the celebrating of these Games, Harlots danced naked,
playing a thousand lascivious postures.

FLORUS,
A Governor of Judaea for the Romans, who attempted to steal away seventeen
Talents out of the Treasury of the Temple. But the people disappointed his
design, and reproached him for his Tyranny; and to make him appear scandalous,
some men went from door to door begging in his name. But having been acquainted
with it, to revenge that affront, he marched with all his Forces and entered
Jerusalem, where his Soldiers plundered the Market, and many persons of
Quality's Houses. He commanded also that many Romans of the Equestrian Order,
should be whipped, and nailed to the Cross, without any regard to their quality,
because they were Native Jews. His barbarous dealing obliged the Jews to rebel,
whereupon Vespasianus destroyed their Capital City and Nation.

FLORUS,
An Historian, who has writ an Abridgment of the Roman History from Romulus to
Trajan, and lived in his Reign. Some Critics cannot bear his way of writing,
yet his Style is not altogether so much to be blamed, tho there are a great
many Faults in it, being wholly Poetical and full of quibbles. It Is uncertain
whether he is the Author of the Epitome of the Books of Livy.

FLUONIA,
An Epithet given to Juno, because she helped women in the time of their
monthly courses.

FONS,
A Fountain. There are hot Fountains, the water whereof is as good to drink,
says Vitruvius, as that which is drawn out of the Fountain of the Muses, or the
Spouting-waters of Martian's Fountain. All hot Fountains have a Medicinal
Virtue; for being warmed by the Minerals, through which they run, acquire a new
virtue, and are fit for other uses than common Waters are. For Sulphurous
Water is good for distempers of the Nerves, fortifying them, and consuming the
bad humors with their heat. The waters that run through Allum-mines, cure
bodies weakened with the Palsy, or some other like distemper, driving the
exorbitant cold out of the Limbs by heat, restoring them to their Natural
state; the bituminous waters being drunk, by purging expel distempers of the
internal parts of the body.

At Carthage there is a Spring, on the surface whereof there is Oil swimming
over, which smells like the scraping of a Lemon, the Inhabitants of the place
anoint their Cattle with it. Near Hieropolis in Phrygia there is a great
boiling Fountain which petrifies.

There are also springs of water that contract bitterness by the moisture of
the Earth, through which they run out, which proceeds from Mines of Sandarach,
that communicates its bitterness to the waters.

There was was a spring of Water at Terracina, called the Fountain of Neptune,
the Water whereof was so poisonous, that it immediately killed Men who drank of
it. In Thessalia there is still a Fountain shadowed by a Tree, the blossoms
whereof are of purple color, the Flocks refuse to drink of it. In the Country
of the Falisci, near the road of Naples, and a Grove standing in the middle of
a Field called Cometus, comes out a Spring, wherein are found bones of
Serpents, Lizards, and other venomous Beasts.

There are also some Fountains of acid waters, as the Fountains of Lyncestis
and Velino in Italy, Theano in Terra di Lavoro, and in many other places, which
being drank, dissolve stones in the Bladder and Reins.

Besides all these Fountains there are other Springs, the Waters whereof seem
to be mixed with Wine, as that of Paphlagonia, which, without any Wine mixed with
it, makes Men drunk.

In Arcadia, near a Town well known called Clitor, is a Cave under ground, from
whence flows a spring of Water that has such a Virtue, that Men hate Wine after
they have drank of its Water. Upon this Fountain there is an Epigram written in
Greek Verses, giving warning to the People that the Fountain is not proper for
bathing, and is an Enemy to the Vineyard, because Melampus having offered his
Sacrifice, purified the Daughters of Praetus in this Fountain, to cure them of
their Madness, and restored them to their former condition.

In the Isle of Clio there was a spring of water, that made those mad who drank
of it. Wherefore an Epigram was set on it, to give warning that the water
thereof was very pleasant to drink, but made the minds of Men as hard as Stone.

At Suza the Capital City of the Kingdom of Persia, another small spring of
water makes the Teeth fall out. And an Epigram is there written, to give notice
to the people, that the water of that Fountain is very proper for bathing, but
makes the Teeth of those who drink of it shed.

These two Fountains Arethusa and Hippocrene were often rehearsed by the Poets.
The name of this last Fountain signifies the Horse Fountain. This Horse was
also called (...), i. e. Fountain. It Is well known, that the Vapors of the
waters underground, ascend to the highest top of the Mountains by a continual
transpiration, and there thicken into small drops of water, which meeting
together make Springs. Vossius tells us, that this motion of ascending waters,
compared to a Horse, gave occasion to the Fable of Pegasus.

Arethusa is a Fountain in Greece, which was beloved by the River Alpheus, who
follows her running under ground as far as Sicilia, where Diana receives her in
the small Island of Ortygia. See Alpheus.

FONTINALIA SACRA,
The Feast of Fountains, which was solemnized at Rome, by crowning the
Fountains with Garlands of Flowers and Lamps, among the Sacrifices.

FONTINALIS PORTA,
A Gate at Rome called Capena, where Fountains and Conduits were built.

FORDICIDIA
or FORDICALIA, A Festival observed the 15th of April through all the Curiae,
on which they offered in sacrifice a Cow with a Calf called Forda.

FORNACALIA,
The Feast of Ovens, which was commonly celebrated the 18th, in remembrance of
the ancient Ovens, wherein Wheat was roasted, before the way of grinding Corn
and making Bread was found out. Upon that day they sacrificed to the Goddess
Fornax, to give her thanks for the good use of Ovens, invented by her.

FORTUNA,
Fortune, a Goddess which the Heathens esteemed the Ruler of all Events both
good and bad. For they distinguished two kinds of Fortune, one good and the
other bad.

The Greeks had many Temples dedicated to Fortune, recorded by Pausanias in
several places of his Books, called the Fortune of the Gods (...), and observes
that Homer has spoken well of Fortune or Tyche; and has placed her among the
Nymphs, the Daughters of the Ocean; but never allowed her a great power over
humane things; though he has in other places of his works described the Functions
proper to every particular Goddess.

Pausanias has also observed, that the imaginary omnipotency ascribed to
Fortune, and so much extolled by vain Men in following Ages, did not prevail
over the mind of Men, (at least of the Greeks) before the Age of Homer.
Pausanias observes still in many places, that Pindarus has often spoke of
Fortune, and ranked her at the head of the Parca. Facile enim mihi Pindarus in
suis Canticis persuadet, tum alia multa, tum vero unam esse Parcarum Fortunam,
and eam quidem potestate sororibus antecellere. The common Idea of a blind and
inconstant Fortune, cannot be represented by making her one of the Parcae; and
yet this representation comes near to the truth, for it gives to understand,
that all things are governed by a wise and absolute power, whose actions seem
sometimes casual to Men, because they cannot find out the secret and invisible
ways of his proceedings.

Pindar prays to Fortune as the Daughter of Jupiter, who has at her command the
ordering, motions and success in War both by Sea and Land, and presides at
public deliberations.

Horace places the management of all things in the hands of Jupiter, whose
secret and just designs are unknown to Men; and in general all things that the
vulgar ascribe to Fortune, is performed by Providence. Od. 34. l. 1.

Valet ima summis
Mutare, and insignem attenuat Deus,
Obscura p^omens. Hinc apicem rapax
Fortuna cum stridore acuto
Sustulit, hic posuisse gaudet.
It Is plain by these Verses, that God and Fortune are two names that signify
the same thing; for commonly Men ascribe to Fortune the Events that don't
depend upon them, and are performed by a superior cause unknown to them. The
following Ode is dedicated to Fortune; and it is most certain, that under that
name, he understands the supreme Dignity, not only because of the infinite
power he ascribes her, but also because he confounds Fortune with Necessity and
Fate, which is quite opposite to the Idea of Fortune.

Horace had doubtless read what Homer said, that at the entry of Jupiter's
Palace, there are two great Vessels, out of one runs upon us all good, and of
the other all evil, to show us that God is the dispenser of all good and evil;
favoring men with his good things, and punishing them, when he sends or
permits evil.

Ancus Martius, the fourth King of the Romans, was the first Man who built a
Temple at Rome to Fortune, with this Title Fortune virili, To the Viril and
courageous Fortune; because Courage is not less required than good Fortune to
obtain Victories Servius Tulli^s built her a Temple at the Capitol under the
Title of Primogenia.

There was a Statue of Fortune at Athens, holding betwixt her arms Plutus the
God of Riches. She is represented in Medals like a Goddess, holding with one
hand a Horn of Plenty, with the other the Helm or Rudder of a Ship, set upon a
Globe, to show that she governs the World. Fortune is still represented lying
or sitting, and holds under her left Arm her Horn of Plenty, and lays her right
hand upon a wheel, to denote her instability and inconstancy, with these words
Fortunae Reduci. Apeller drew her in that posture, and when he was asked the
reason why he had drawn her sitting, he answered, because she had never been at
rest.

We have still other Emblems of Fortune; in some whereof she is represented
with a Beard, Fortunae Barbata and in others carrying a Branch of Laurel with
her Horn of Plenty.

We read in Histories, that the Fortune of Gold commonly attended the Beds of
the Caesar's, and that when the Emperor was dying she was carried to his
Successors.

There was a brazen Statue of Fortune, in a Temple built to her by Sylla at
Praeneste, so well gilt over, that to express any thing that was well gilt,
it is said that it had been gilt at Praeneste.

The Ancients represented Fortune of both Sexes, Male and Female, as several
other Divinities.

The Pagans, says St Austin, esteemed so much the Goddess Fortune, that they
have left in Writing, that the Statue that Women had consecrated by the name of
feminine Fortune had spoken, and said more than one time, that they had done
well to render her that Honor.

There was a Temple built upon Mount Esquilinus consecrated to Fortune, St
Austin speaks of it in raillery, in the 4th Book of the City of God, c. 18. How
can Goddess Fortune be sometimes good, and sometimes bad? May be when she is
bad, she is not then a Goddess, but is changed on a sudden into a pernicious
Devil; Then there must be as many several Fortunes good and bad, as there are
men happy and unhappy. May be the Goddess is always good, and if it be so, she
is the same thing as Felicity. Why have then Men consecrated them several
Temples, Altars and Ceremonies? Because, say they, Felicity is that which Men
enjoy according to their deserts, but good Fortune befalls by chance both good
and bad Men, without any respect to personal Merit, wherefore she is called
Fortune. But how can she be good, if she befalls without distinction both good
and bad Men? And why Men should serve her, seeing she is blind, and offers
herself indifferently all Men, and leaves often those Men (...) serve her, to
stick to those who despise her; or if they say, that she sees and loves Men who
worship her, she has then regard to the deserts of Men, and does not happen out
of a mere chance? what will become then of the definition of Fortune? and how
can they say that she derives her name from Fors, because she is casual.

The Romans gave several Names to Fortune, and built her Temples and Aedicula,
by these several Names.

They called her FORTUNA LIBERA, REDUX, PUBLICA, PRIMIGENIA, EQUESTRIS; PARVA
FORTUNA; FORS or FORTIS FORTUNA; FORTUNA VIRILIS and FEMINEA.

FORUM,
This word signifies several things; viz. Marketplaces, and common places,
where the People met upon Business, and where they pleaded; for of all the
places that were at Rome, there were but three where Courts were kept. Forum
signified also, a Town where Fairs are kept, as Forum Julij, the Fair of
Frioul; Forum Livij, the Fair of Forly; and Forum Flaminium, the place where
was kept the Fair of Fuligny; for because of the great concourse of Merchants,
who came to these Fairs, they built Houses for their conveniences, and in
process of time, these places became Towns.

The public places in Greece are of square figure, with double and large
Piazza's round about, the Pillars whereof are close, and hold up the
Architraves made of Stone or Marble, with Galleries above; but this was not
practiced in Italy, because the old custom was to represent the Fights of
Gladiators to the People in these places. wherefore they set up their Pillars
at a larger distance one from another, that the People might see those Shows
the better, and that the Shops of the Bankers, that were under the Piazza's,
and the Balconies that were above, might have room enough for their Trade, and
the Receipt of public Revenues.

There were seventeen common places or Marketplaces at Rome, fourteen whereof
were appointed for the sale of Goods and Merchandises, called Fora Venalia.
There was Forum Olitorium, the Herb-Market, where Pulses were sold; Forum
Pistarium, the Market for Bread: Forum Piscarium, the Fish-Market; Forum
Equarium, the Market for Horses; Forum Boarium, the Market where Oxen were
sold; Forum Soarium or Suarium, the Hog-Market; Forum Cupedinarium or
Cupedinis, the Market for Dainties, where the Cooks, the Pastry-Cooks, and the
Confectioners kept their Shops. Writers don't agree about the Etymology of the
Name given to this place. Festus says, that this word is derived from capes or
cupedia, which signifies in Ancient Books, rare and dainty meat. Varro in his
4th Book of the Latin Tongue, tells us, that this place took its Name from a
Roman of the Equestrian Order, named Cupes, who had a Palace in this place,
which was pulled down in punishment of his Thefts, and the place where it
stood, appointed for the use of a Market.

All these Market-palces were surrounded with Piazza's and Houses, with Stalls
and Tables, to expose Goods and Merchandises to sale, which were called Abaci,
Plutei, Venalitij, and Operariae Mensae.

The Romans called the places where matters of Judgment were pleaded and
decided Fora Civilia or Judiciaria, the three chiefest whereof were, Forum
Romanum, which was the most ancient and most famous of all, called Latinum and
Vetus, where the Rostra was kept: Forum Julij Casaris and Forum Augusti, were
two places only added to the Forum Romanum, because it was not large enough to
hold the number of Lawyers and Clients, says Suetonius. These three places were
appointed for the Assemblies of the People, public Spechees and Administration
of Justice. There were still two places more added to these three above
mentioned; one was began by Domitian, and finished by the Emperor Nerva, and
was called by his Name Forum Divi Nervae, and the other was built by Trajan,
called Forum Trajani.

The Forum Romanum was situated betwixt Mount Palatinus and the Capitol, and
contained all that spot of ground, that extended from the Arch of Septimius
Severus, to the Temple of Jupiter Stator. In Romulus's time it was only a great
open place, without Buildings or any other Ornament; Tullus Hostilius was the
first who enclosed it with Galleries and Shops, and afterward this work was
carried on by other Kings, Consuls and Magistrates: And in the time of the
prosperity of the Commonwealth, it was one of the finest places in the World.
The chiefest parts thereof were, the place called Comitium, where the people
assembled for deliberations concerning public Affairs. The Magistrates called
Aediles and Praetors, ordered often Games to be represented there to divert the
people. Marcellus Junior the Son of Octavia, Augustus's Sister, caused it to be
covered with Linen, the year that he was Aedile, for the convenience of those
that were at Law, ut Salubrius litigantes consisterent, says Pliny. Cato the
Censor said, that this place ought to be paved with sharp Stones, that
litigious men growing weary of standing there, might be discouraged to go to
Law.

In this place of Assembly there were four stately Buildings, viz. the Palace
of Paulus; the House of Opimia, where the Senate men, the House of Julia, built
by Vitruvius, and the House of Porcia, erected by Portius Cato. At one corner
of this place, at the foot of the Tarpeian Rock, was a great and dreadful
Prison built by Ancas Martius, and since enlarged by Servius Tullius, with many
Dungeons, from whence it was called Tullianum. Over against that Prison stood a
great Coloss of Marble, vulgarly called Marforie, in the shape of a man lying
all along, representing, as some men say, the Figure of the River Nar; the
first letter N having been changed by corruption of Language into an M
Nardiforum and Marforio. Some other men tell us, that this Figure represented
the River Rhine, and was a piece of Architecture, supporting the Statue of
Domitian on Horseback, and was laid there after he had triumphed over Germany.
And some are of opinion that it was the Statue of Jupiter Panarius, the God of
the Bakers, whose Statue was set up there in remembrance of the Loaves that the
Soldiers threw down from the Capitol into the Camp of the Gauls, to show them
that they wanted no Provisions.

Just by this place of Assembly was the Court called Hostilia, where the Senate
assembled very often. Over against this Court was the Rostra Rostrorum, which
was a Pulpit set up and adorned with stems, or forefronts of Ships taken from
the Antiates. At the Entry of the place, or, as Tacitus says, near the Temple
of Saturn, was a Pillar called Milliarium aureum, from whence they took the
distance and measures of the Italian Miles. There was also a Gallery like a
Bridge of Marble, built by the Emperor Caligula, to go from Mount Palatinus to
the Capitol through the Forum Romanum. This Gallery was supported by fourscore
huge Pillars of white Marble.

FORUM JULII CAESARIS
was much finer than the Forum Romanum. He contrived the design thereof, being
yet a private man, and began to set men at work about it, when he was
Pro-consul of the Gauls. The adorning of this place cost him above a hundred
thousand great Sesterces, which is five hundred sixty two thousand five hundred
pounds of our Money. This place was behind the Temples of Peace and Faustina.

FORUM AUGUSTI,
was above the Forum Romanum. In the middle of this Forum, Augustus built the
Temple of Mars, by the Title of BISULTOR, i. e. Twice Revenger, because he had
helped him to revenge himself on the murderers of his adoptive Father, and to
subdue the Parthians. He built a double Gallery round about it, and set up on
one side the Statues of all the Latin Kings since Aeneas, and on the other side
he erected all the Statues of the Kings and Emperors of Rome, from its
foundation to his time.

FORUM Nervae,
was began by Domitian, and finished by Nerva. It was also named Forum
transitorium, because it was a passage to go to the other Fori. Alexander the
Emperor set up three Statues, of the height and bigness of Colosses, both on
Foot, and Horseback, in honor of the Emperors his Ancestors, and erected
brazen Pillars, whereon were engraved their Achievements,

FORUM Trajani
exceeded all the former; and the Gods themselves, says Ammianus Marcellinus,
gazed upon it as one of the wonders of the World, and were amazed at it, seeing
nothing but Heaven it self finer, and nothing else that came so near to it:
Singularem sub omni coelo structuram, etiam Numinum assensione mirabilem.
Apollodorus a skilful Architect, built it by Trajan's Order. In the middle of
this place, was a Pillar a hundred and twenty eight foot high, and Men ascend
to it by one hundred eighty five Steps, which were enlightened with forty five
Windows. Round about this Pillar were engraven the Achievements of this
Emperor, and the Victories he had obtained over the Daci. It Is the general
opinion, that the Senate consecrated this Pillar to him, while he was at War
against the Parthians, and that he never saw it himself; but dying of a
bloody flux at Seleucia a City in Syria, his Ashes were brought to Rome, and
set up in a golden Pilaster on the top of the Pillar, which is adorned with
several representations of Horses and military Standards gilded over, with
these words written upon them, EX MANUBIIS.

This Forum was situated between that of Nerva and the Capitol.

FRIGIDARIUM,
A place in the Baths to cool the People.

FRONTINUS,
An Historian, who was Overseer of the Waters and Aqueducts, in the time of the
Emperor Nerva.

FRUMENTATORES
and FRUMENTARIJ. Those who bought Corn in the Provinces, both for Cities or
Armies, or received and gathered the Corn, that some Provinces furnished the
Commonwealth with. These words signify also Purveyors for the Armies, who
distributed a certain quantity of Corn every day to each Soldier, in the like
manner as the Ammunition Bread is now distributed in the Armies to the Soldiers.

FUGALIA,
Feasts instituted in remembrance of the Liberty restored to the Commonwealth,
after the Kings were expelled out of Rome. These Feasts were kept in February,
the same day that King Tarquinius ^uperbus fled away to Porsenna.

FULGUR,
Lightning, a gross and sulphurous Exhalation, set on fire by the clashing of
the Clouds together, and coming out with violence makes a great noise, and has
extraordinary effects on the Earth. The Pagans have always armed their Gods
with a Thunderbolt, and specially Jupiter, and tell us, that Vulcan and
Cyclops forged the Thunderbolts in the Caves of Mount Aetna, where they placed
his Forge.

The Egyptians in their Hieroglyphics took Thunder for a power, which no
Creature is able to resist. Wherefore Apelles drew Alexander in the Temple of
Diana of Ephesus, holding a Thunderbolt in his hand, to show the extent of his
power, which no Creature was able to withstand.

The opinion of the Heathens was, that Jupiter never struck neither Men nor
inanimate Creatures with his Thunderbolt, but to punish their Crimes: and Men
struck therewith were deprived of Sepulture, and were buried only in the same
place where they were found dead, according to the Law of Numa, as Festus
relates. Sei fulmine occisus est, ei justa nulla fieri operteto.


They covered only their Corpse with Earth, at the same place where they had
been struck with the Thunderbolt, as Artemiderus tells us.

It was not allowed to Sacrifice to the Gods, with Wine of a Vineyard touched
with Thunderbolt, and the places that were struck with it were fatal and
unfortunate, till they were purified with Sacrifices, and then these places
became famous, by an Altar that was erected there. And those men; who were
employed to purify Trees smitten with Thunderbolt, are called by Festus
Strufertarii, Men making a Sacrifice with dough baked upon Ashes. An old table
of brass found at Rome, makes good what I say. These are the words mentioned on
that Table. IIII. ID. DEC.

The Tenth day of December the Fratres Arvalis assembled at the Grove of Juno,
on the great Road of Campania, five miles from Rome, by the order of C. Portius
Priscus Magnus, and there sacrificed, because some Trees of the holy Grove,
dedicated to the Goddess, were struck with Thunderbolt, etc.

The Romans distinguished two kinds of Thunderbolts, those of the day, which
they ascribed to Jupiter, and those of the night, which were in the power of
the God Summanus, Dium-fulgur, says Festus, Appellabant diurnum quod putabant
Jovis, ut nocturnum Summani. There was yet fulgur provorsum, which was heard
betwixt day and night, and was ascribed both to Jupiter and Summanus together.

The Thunder was made use of to take the Augurs, about things that were to come.

Some Thunders were called by the Romans Vana and Bruta, which signified
nothing at all, and made more noise than did harm; the others Fatidica, which
portended good and evil, joy and sorrow. Of these last some were called
Consiliaria, which happened while they were advising about some affair: others
Auctoritativa, which happened when the business was done, to give their
approbation to it, and countenance it. Others were called Monitoria, which gave
warning of what should be avoided. Pestifera, which threatened some evil or
danger. Deprecanea, which carried with them an appearance of danger, and yet
were without danger. Familiaria, which prognosticated the evil that was to
befall some Family. Publica, out of which they drew predictions for thirty
years; and Privata, by which they foretold things to come only for ten years.

FUNAMBULI,
Dancers on the Ropes. The Art of the Dancers on the Ropes is very ancient.
Terent makes mention of them in the Prologue to Hecyra.

Capitolinus, in the life of Marcus Aurelius, says, that the Emperors Marcus
Aurelius, and Lucius Verus, dressed in magnificent Habits, were Spectators of
the Games ordered for their Triumphs, and that among other marks of Marcus
Aurelius's kindness, he had that regard for the Dancers on the Ropes, to order
that Quilts should be laid along under the Rope, because of a little Boy who
dancing on the Rope fell down; and from hence comes, says he, that to this
present time, viz. to the time of Dioclesian, there were Nets spread under the
Rope. These Games were represented while Marcus Aurelius was Emperor, in the
18th year of his Tribuneship, the 164th year of our Lord.

Suetonius, in the life of Galba, relates a wonderful thing, which shows, that
not only Men but also Animals were capable of being instructed in the Art of
dancing on the Ropes. The 19th year of Tiberius's Empire, whic his the 32d year
of our Lord, Galba being Praetor, ordered the Games and Feasts called Floralia
to be kept, wherein he gave new shows to the people, viz. Elephants walking on
the Rope.

Afterward, in the Reign of the Emperor Nero, in the great Games instituted
for the Eternity of the Empire, as Suctonius relates, a great many persons of
both Sexes showed their Skill by several sorts of Games, and among others a
Roman of the Sequestrian Order, sitting on an Elephant, run per catadromum, i.
e. on a stretched Rope, as Casaubon interprets it. Pliny in the 8th Book, c. 2.
says, that Germanicus gave public Games of Gladiators, wherein Elephants
performed many Feasts of Activity, throwing Swords in the Air, and fighting
like Gladiators, and danced in Armor, and walked on the Rope; and in the
following Chapter, Pliny speaking of the docility of these Creatures, It Is a
strange thing, says he, that there are some so, skilful as to ascend a long
stretched Rope; and what is more incredible, to descend again backward, with
less trouble than they went up.

And if we take it from the first ages of our Lord, Petronius, Juvenal, and
Quintilian speak of dancers on the Ropes; Petronius gave this description of
them.

Stupea suppositis tenduntur vincula lignis,
Quae super acrius praetendit crura viator,
Brachia distendens, gressum per inane gubernat.
Before the coming of our Lord, Horace in the 2d Book of his first Epistle,
makes an allusion to the Dancers on the Ropes. Messala, who lived 260 years
before the coming of Christ, is the first man who has rendered the word
Schoenobates by that of Funambulus in Latin, as Acron relates in his Notes upon
Herace. It must be granted, that it is very difficult to determine precisely the
time that men danced first on the Ropes, yet it is to be supposed that this art
came into practice a while after the Games of the Stage and Comedy, which was
invented in the diversions, of the Vintage, by occasion of the Leather-bottles,
upon which they leapt and danced, Saliere per utres.

Shows of Dancers on the Ropes were never accounted among the public Games,
and this Trade was rather looked upon as the skill and diversion of private
men, than any thing else belonging to the Stage; for we never read that they
received any public reward like Players of Comedies, nor had any rule in their
Art. And yet there were some presents made to them; but these Presents were
made out of the liberality of the people, and not out of the public rewards
set for them, like those that were settled for Players.

Lipsius places Shows of Dancers on the Ropes in the rank of private
diversions; for tho they danced in the Chorus's of public Games,
notwithstanding their Dances were not an essential part of these Games, till
the Emperor Carinus's time.

The Cyzicenians had a singular skill in dancing on the Ropes, as says an
anonymous writer of Geography, who lived in the time of Canstans and
Constantius, whose Manuscript is kept in the French Kings Library. This
Manuscript informs us, that the Cyzicenians and their neighbors had so great a
skill in leaping and dancing, even on the Ropes, that they exceeded in that art
all other Nations, and accounted themselves to be the first Inventers and
Masters thereof

The Greeks had Dancers on the Ropes from the first institution of Scenic
Plays, which were invented about the time of Icarius, the Son of Erigonus, or
of Dimysius surnamed Liber Pater, and first introduced into Athens by Theseus.

The Dancers on the Ropes appeared first at Rome during the Consulate of
Sulpitius Peticus and L. Stelon, the first Introducers of Plays in Rome, acted
for Licinius the first time in the Isle of the River Tiber, and then
represented on the Stage by the orders of the two Censors, Messala and Cassius.

The Greeks called the Dancers on the Ropes by these several Names,
Schoenobates, Acrobates, Orebates, and Neurobates, as we read in the first Book
of Bullenger de Theatra, who tells us that there were four kinds of them. In
the first rank he places those who vaulted round about the Ropes, like a Wheel
about its Axle-tree, and hung themselves by the Feet or the Neck. Nicephorus
Gregoras says, that he saw in his time at Constantinople, some of these Dancers
tumbling about a Rope.

The second kind of these Dancers were those who let themselves slide downward
along a Rope lying upon their Breasts, holding their Arms and Legs stretched
out. Of these the Manilius Nicetas, and Vopiscus speak in the life of Carinus,
saying, Neurobatem, qui velut in ventis cothurnatus ferretur, exhibuit.

In the third order of these Dancers mentioned by the same Manilius, were
ranked those who run on a Rope, being stretched horizantally slanting.

The fourth kind were those who did not only walk on a bent Rope, but also
leapt and played many such tricks, as a Dancer might do on firm ground at the
sound of a Flute; and of these speaks Symposius, when he relates the Dances of
the Funambuli.

FUNDA.
A Sling, an Instrument of Ropes to fling Stones with a greater violence. In
former ages they tied Slings to the Balista. The Inhabitants of the Baleares
Islands were formerly excellent men at Slinging. Vegetius ascribes to them the
invention of the Sling, though others say that the Phaenicians found it out.

Florus and Strabo tells us, that there were three kinds of Slings, longer or
shorter, and that they made use of them according to the distance that they
were from the Enemy.

FUNDITORES,
The Slingers, men who slung Stones with a Sling. The Slingers were part of the
Roman Militia.

FUNEBRIS ORATION,
A Funeral Oration. The Roman custom was to have Funeral Speeches at the
burying of the great men of Rome, spoken from the Rostra in the Forum Romanum,
where the Funeral Parade stood. The man chosen to make the Speech published the
Praises of the Dead, and began with the greatness of his Ancestors, the
ancientness of his Family, the sweetness of his Manners, his Liberality, and
the Services he had rendered to the Commonwealth, both in time of Peace and of
War. The Children or the Relations performed often this duty, or the Senate
appointed some Eloquent Orator to perform the same. Augustus being but twelve
years old made a public Speech to praise his Grandmother, and being Emperor he
made another to praise Germanicus his Nephew. Tiberius, says Suetonius, made a
Speech at nine years of age in honor of his Father, and few years after he was
raised to the Imperial Dignity, he pronounced a Funeral, Speech in praise of
his Son. Caligula having not yet put on the Toga Viriliis, made a public
discourse in commendation of his Grandmother then dead, and Nero made also an
Oration to praise the Emperor Claudius his Predecessor.

Valerius Publicola, was the first man who made a Funeral Speech at Rome; for
Polybius relates, that Junius Brutus his Colleague in the Consulship, having
been killed at the Battle against the Toscans, he ordered his Corpse to be
brought on a Bed in the public place, and he went up into the Rofira, and set
forth in a discourse to the people, the Achievements of that great man.

We read in Alexander ab Alexandro, and in Plutarch, that this custom was
practiced, and that Quintus Fabius Maximus spoke the Funeral Oration of Scipio,
and of his own Children.

We learn of Livy, that this honor was also granted to the Roman Matrons after
their death, because they had formally offered to part with their Necklaces and
Jewels in atime that Money was scarce, and in acknowledgment of their Piety, it
was ordered, that Funeral Speeches in their commendarian should be allowed to
them.

Popilia was the first Roman Lady who received that honor, and Crassus her Son
made her Funeral Oration. Suetonius reports, that Julius Caesar being then
Quaestor, pronounced a public discourse of praise in the place called Rostra,
in honor of his Aunt Julia, and Cornelia his Wife.

FUNERATICUM,
The Funeral charges, which amounted sometimes to excessive sums of Money.
Nero spent for the Funerals of Poppea more Cinnamon and Cassia, than Arabia was
able to produce in a whole year; and Suetonius says, that the Funerals of Nero
came to a hundred thousand Sesterces, which according to the supputation of
Mursius amounts to seven hundred and fifty thousand pounds.

FUNICULUS,
An ancient measure of the Egyptians, being a distance or the space of a place
containing sixty furlongs in length, which are about seven thousand five
hundred paces, or 6 miles and a quarter of English measure.

FUNUS,
Funerals, Obsequies, Burial Ceremonies.

The eighth day after the death being over, a public Crier gave notice to the
people of the time of the Funerals in these words. N. QUIRIS LETHO DATUS EST:
ADEXEQUIAS QUIBUS EST COMMODUMIRE, JAM TEMPUS EST: OLLUS EX AEDIBUS EFFERTUR.
Such a Citizen is dead; those who have time to go to his Funerals, it is time,
they are ready to carry away the Corpse out of the House.

The Funerals thus published by the public Crier, were called Indictivae, but
this was practiced but at the Funerals of the Emperors or Persons of quality;
and to honor them the better, they gave Games and Shows to the people, to wit,
fights of Gladiators and Horse-races. Men are still thus invited in France at
the Funerals of Kings, Princes, Sovereign Courts, and other Ministers of State,
by fourscore sworn Cryers, together with the Great Masters of the Ceremonies.

The Ancient Romans had still other Funerals, where no body was invited, called
Simpludiarea or Simpliludiarea funera, then the Funeral Parade was only
attended by Vaulters and Buffoons, called Ludii and Corvitores.

Some hired Women attending the Funerals, named Praeficae, cried and mourned,
singing sad and mournful Songs, intermixed with the praises of the dead, and
moved other Women to imitate them, and some other men called Pantomimi,
counterfeiting the motions, actions, and the voice of the deceased person.
Whereupon Suetomius relates a pleasant fancy of a Buffoon called Fa^o, who
being invited to a Funeral, came masked with a Vizard and in a disguise, like
the Emperor Vespatian, who being taxed with convetousness, and counterfeiting
him according to custom, asked aloud before the Assembly, those who had the
management of the Funerals, how much the charges of the Burial came to? and
when he heard that it amounted to a hundred Sesterces, which is about seven
hundred and fifty pounds, he cried out, that if they would give him that sum
of Money, they might throw him after his death where they should think fit.

The Designator, or Master of the Ceremonies, having disposed all in a good
order, the Funeral Parade began to march with great pomp along the great
Streets and Cross-ways of Rome; then stopped in the place of the Rosira, where a
Funeral Speech was made in honor of the deceased person. They carried before
the Corpse vessels full of Perfumes and precious Liquors, to throw into the
wood-pile when the Corpse was burning, to prevent its bad smell. Afterward
Warlike men marched, carrying the Standards and Spoils of the Enemies, and
other Trophies of Arms; as Draughts of conquered Cities, names of the subdued
Nations, Titles of the Laws made by them, Military Presents, and other badges
of Honor. They carried also the Effigies of their Ancestors, made of Wax of
imbossed Work, which they kept in Niches at the entry of their Houses, and
crowned them with Garlands of Flowers, upon certain days of the year.

Then followed the Priests and Religions Orders; after them the Magistrates in
mouming, wearing the badges of their Magistracy, as also the badges of the
offices of the dead.

The Corpse dressed in a habit suitable to the condition of the dead, was
carried upon a Bed of State adorned with Ivory, and covered with a rich Carpet.
Besides this Bed of State, there were many other Beds ador^^d with Garlands and
Crowns of Flowers, and the Images of the Ancestors of the deceased person were
tied to their Beds; six thousand of these Beds were carried at the Funerals of
the Dictator Silla, and six hundred at the Funeral of M. Marcellus, the Son of
Octavia, Sister to Augustus, says Valeri^ Maximus.

After this Funeral Bed, carried by the nearest Relations of the dead, or by
his affranchised men, then marched those appointed to mourn, by the deceased
person, all dressed in long black Gowns edged with Scarlet, attended by
Torch-bearers and Lictors marching before them.

We read in Cornelius Tacitus, that the great Magistrates of Rome carried
sometimes the Funeral Bed of Emperors and Dictators; for the Bed of Sylla was
carried by Senators and Vestal Virgins; that of Paulus Aemilius, by the
Macedonian Ambassadors then at Rome; that of Metellus, by his seven Children,
of whom two had been Consuls, and two others had obtained the Honor of the
Triumph; and Trebius being dead in the Office called Edile, was carried to the
Wood-pile on the shoulders of the Roman People, because he had sold the Corn
cheap in a year of want.

The mourning Men were followed by Women, bemoaning and complaining all along
the way, and commonly led by the Mother, Daughter, or Wife of the deceased
person, all dressed in Mourning, walking along with dishevelled Hairs, and
their Face covered with a Veil; and the funeral pomp was closed by the People.
In the time of the Emperors, the Girls attended the Funerals of their Fathers
dressed in white Gowns, the Head uncovered, and their Hairs dishevelled; on the
contrary, the Boys had their Heads covered at the Funerals of their Fathers.
Plutarch tells us for reason of this custom, that the Boys were to honor their
Fathers as Gods, to whom the Romans sacrificed standing, and their Heads
covered; and that the Girls should mourn for them as for mortal Men.

The Funeral Parade was attended with many Torches, and by Men playing upon
Musical Instruments, as Flutes, Cornets, Drums, and Clarions, sounding sad and
mournful Tunes, when they distributed Largesses of Specie or Money to the
People.

All these Ceremonies were observed but at the Funeral Pomps of great Men of
Rome; for the people were carried to the Wood-pile, without all these
preparations in a Coffin, by the common Bearers or Sextons, called Vespillones
and Sandapilarii, and there burnt, without much ceremony.

Many Men ordered by their last Will, that they should be buried without
Ceremonies, as M. Aemilius Lepidus, who ordered that he should be carried to
the Grave on a plain Bed. Those who had performed great Acts for the service of
the Commonwealth, were buried at public Charges, as Valerius Publicola, the
protector of the Roman Liberty, who had triumphed three times over the Enemies.

There were also Funerals called Imaginaria, says Spartianus, i. e. Obsequies
in Effigies, because the Corpse of the dead was not there, but only his Effigies.

Antiquity has accounted burial of the Dead so sacred and honorable, that the
invention of burial was attributed to one of their Gods, viz. to the God called
by the Greeks Pluto, and the Latins Dis or Summanus, as we learn from Diodorus
Siculus, in the sixth Book of his Antiquities, c. 15. to show what Veneration
they should have for the Funerals of the dead, which had been taught by a
sovereign Divinity.

Wherefore, when Numa Pompilius, a wise and prudent Legislator, reformed the
Religion of the Romans, he not only received and approved of Funeral
Ceremonies, as being holy and commendable, but ordered that the Pontiffs should
take care of them, and teach them to those who should have occasion for the
same.

By the Pontifical Laws, it was not allowed to the High Priest to look upon a
dead Corpse, but if by chance he had seen one in his way, he was bound by the
law, before he went any further, to throw some Earth upon it, or bury it. And
all the Nations of the Earth have always accounted burial one of the chiefest
duties of Religion, which they denied neither to Friends nor Enemies, as we
learn of Historians; for Vegetius, l. 2. de Re Milit. cap. 20. tells us, that
each Legion had a Purse in the hands of the Ensign-bearer, wherein each Soldier
put a piece of Money, to contribute his portion toward the burial of the
Soldiers of that Legion, who died in War; we see also by the Testimonies, both
of Tully in the Oration for Milo, and of Cornelius Tacitus l. 1. that the
Generals who were victorious, allowed their Enemies to bury the Corpse of their
dead Soldiers, or else buried them themselves.

We read in Valerius Maximus, l. 1. c. 6. and in Livy l. 22. that Hannibal the
chief Enemy to the Romans, having defeated and killed with his own hand, near
the Perusian Lake, the Consul Gaius Flaminius and fifteen thousand Soldiers,
ordered his Men to seek for the Corpse of the Consul, which he honorably
buried, and rendered the like honors to many others, mentioned by Valerius
Maximus.

After the death of Hanno, General of the Carthaginian Army, the Consul Lucius
Cornelius made him a funeral pomp, and buried, his Corpse with great honor.

FURCA,
A Fork. Formerly they made the vanquished pass under the Yoke, made in the
form of a Gallows, otherwise called Fork, as the Sanmites made the Romans pass
at Furcae Caudinae. The Slaves and other Malefactors carried their Forks or
Gallows to the place of Execution, and in that condition they were so
grievously whipped, that they died sometimes under the lashes; and otherwise,
they were often nailed upon the very same Cross and Gallows they had carried
themselves; wherefore the Slaves were called Furcifcri, i. e. a great Rogue,
who deserves hanging for his Crimes. Justus Lipsius gives an accornt of these
Matters, l. 3. de Cruce.

FURIAE,
The Furies. This name is derived from the fury which they inspire.

The Greeks call them Erinnyes, from (...), discordia mentis. The opinion of
Vossius is, that Fury might be derived from the Hebrew Fara, i. e. vindicta.
But it is more likely that Erinnyes come from (...), i. e. male facere. There
were three Furies, Tisiphone, Alecto and Megera; the Etymology of these names
comes from the Greek (...), ultio caedis; (...), quietis nescia; (...), odiosa;
Tzetzes is Author of these derivations.

It Is very likely, that at the beginning Men intended to worship Justice the
revenger of Crimes, by the Name of Furies; but that Poets have still added some
circumstances thereunto, proper to represent the horrid Executioners of this
Justice. For Pausanias says, that near the Areopagus of Athens, there was a
Temple consecrated to some Goddess, called Severae, (...), whom Hesiod calls
Erinnyes; and that Eschilus the Poet is the first Man, who has represented them
with Serpents tied about them; in fine, that the Statues of these Goddesses,
and all others of the subterranean Gods, which are placed in that Temple, have
nothing dreadful to look on. This Historian tells us also, that the Statues of
these Goddesses Severae, were set up somewhere else, with the Statues of
Jupiter, Ceres, Minerva and Proserpina. And assures in some other place, that
Ceres herself was called Erinnyes, because she was transported with fury
against Neptune, when he attempted her Chastity; a verbo (...), quod furere
Arcadibus est. In fine, he speaks of the Temple of the Maniae, (...), who are
(as he fancies) the Euminides and Furiae. And relates, that they appeared
dressed in black Clothes to Orestes, after he had murdered his Mother; but
when the time of his fury was over, they showed themselves to him in white
dresses, whereupon he built a Temple to these white Goddesses.

Some Historians have observed, that the Areopagitae had the Statues of the
Goddesses Severae placed near their Tribunal, and that the Priests ordained to
attend the service of these Goddesses, (Demosthenes was one of them) were
chosen among the Areopagitae.

Homer had mentioned the Erinnyes before Hesiod; and has represented them in
one place of his Book, like the revengers of the wrong done to the poor. Virgil
has described them, according to the Idea that Eschilus had of them,

Continuo sontes ultrix accincta flagello
Tisiphone quatit insultans, torvosque sinistra
Intentans angues, vocat agmina saeva sororum.
Horace tells us very wisely, that the Furies do not begin to torment the mind
of Man after the Crime is perpetrated only, but also when the resolution is
taken to commit it, and the design is executed.

An tu reris cum occissa insenuisse parente?
Ac non ante malis dementem actum Furiis, quam
In matris jugulo ferrum tepefecit acutum?
FURINA.
The Goddess of Thieves or Robbers, otherwise called Laverna. They had
consecrated a Wood to her, and instituted Feasts in her honor, called
Furinales.

FURNALIA or FURINALIA,
Feasts kept in honor of the Goddess Furius, the 25th day of July: We read in
the Calendar Furrinalia.

FUSCINA,
The Trident of Neptune, with three points.

The word Fuscina signifies also an Iron Fork or a tagged Fork, such as are
used to remove Dung.

FUTILE,
A Vessel with a wide mouth and a narrow bottom, used in ancient Sacrifices to
hold the lustral water for the purifications. This Vessel is called Futile,
because what was put into it, was easily spilt, having but a narrow bottom to
set on the ground.

G.
G. Is but a diminution of C, as Quintilius tells us. Wherefore they have a
great affinity together, for of (...), we make Gubernator, and of necotium,
negotium. And Quintilian records, that in the words Gains, Gneius, it was not
perceived if it was a C or a G. From whence it comes that of Centum were formed
quadringinta, quingenta; and of porricere, a word used in sacrifices, was made
porrigere.

The common opinion is, that G was invented but after the first Carthaginian
War, because on the Pillar that Duillius erected then, C is always found
instead of the G;

MACESTRATOS, LECIONES, CARTHACINENSES, PUCNANDO. Which cannot be well
understood, but by pronouncing the C like a K.

The pronounciation of G before the E and the I, is now very much softened, for
it is pronounced in Regis and Rege, as Regent and Regir is pronounced in the
French Tongue; but in former Ages it is every where sounded hard, as in Rego.

They ask a question about the Letter G, whether the Romans pronounced the G
before the N, as the French do in these words Agnez, Magnifique, Espagnol, etc.

But in all likelihood the Romans pronounced the G not as the French do in the
abovesaid words, and that the G in Agnus was pronounced by them, as it is in
Agger, for the other pronunciation is so particular and different from the
common pronunciation of G, the Ancient Writers had otherwise never made use of
it.

And it is to be observed, that the G is so little pronounced in these words
Agnez and the like, that it does but denote a liquid N, as the same Letter G
shows in the Italian tongue the liquid L, Figlliola, Daughter; wherefore the
Spaniards write Segnor without a G, drawing only a little stroke upon the N, to
show that it is a liquid Letter, and that it receives that pronunciation,
writing thus Senor, and pronouncing Segnor. And Ramus in his French Grammar
marks this liquid N in French only with a little comma over it, instead of
joining the G to it.

Here arises still another difficulty, namely, to know if the Letter N is
changed by the Greeks into T in some words, as (...), and (...), etc. (...) is
then pronounced like an N. For it seems, says Honricus Stephanus, that it is an
Error of the Copists, who have made the (...) a little too broad in the
joining the small Letters, and have made a (...) of it. From whence comes that
in the M S. written in capital Letters, like those he has made use of to make
his Thesaurus, these whole words are found with an N, (...), ANKTPA, and the
like. For, says he, it seems absurd to say that N was changed into (...), to
the end that (...) might be pronounced like an N. Wherefore Scaliger tells us,
that if we read sometimes these words with an N, then we must be sure that it
is a fault of the Copists, who thought to express this pronunciation the better
by that Character, which pronunciation, as Vossius says, should require rather
some new and particular character.

The Latins had something like that in their Tongue, which Nigidius in Aulus
Gallius, calls a false N, as in the words Anguis, Ancera and others. Wherefore
Varro, as it is related by Priscian, affirms that Attius and the Ancient Writers
wrote these words with a double GG, like the Greeks, Aggulus, Aggens, and the
like.

The Letter G among the Ancients signified 400, and when there was a dash of a
Pen over it, then it denoted forty thousand.

GABALUS,
A Cross or Gallows of the Ancients.

GALANTHIS,
The waiting Maid of Alcmena, who delivered her Mistress from the Enchantments
of Juno, who would not suffer her to be delivered of a Child, whom she had got
by Jupiter. But Galanthis perceiving the Sorcery of Juno, came running to her,
and said, her Mistress was brought to bed, whereupon Juno unfastened her
Charms. Notwithstanding, Juno having afterward discovered that she had been
cozened, in revenge thereof changed Galanthis into a Weasel, who brings forth
her young at her Mouth, wherewith she had offended in telling a Lie, to procure
the lying in of Alcmena, to whom Juno bore hatred.

GALATEA,
The Daughter of Jupiter Celtes, wherefore she was called Celtina, and Wife to
Hercules of Libya, with whom she reigned 35 years in Gaul.

GALATEA,
A Sea-Nymph, whom Polyphemus the Cyclops loved: she was called Galatea because
of her whiteness, for (...) signifies Milk.

GALATES,
The Son of Hercules of Libya, and Galatea the Daughter of Jupiter Celtes,
reigned in Gaul, in the year of the World 2274. It Is recorded that the Gauls
and the Greeks assisted him in the Conquest of some Provinces of Asia, and that
Country was called Galatia, or Gallo-Graecia, as Diodorus Siculus and Berosus
tell us.

GALATIA,
A Country of Asia Minor, which took its Name from the Gauls, who joined with
the Greeks, came to inhabit this part of the World under the command of their
King Galates, in the time of Pyrrhus King of Epirus. The chiefest Cities of
that Country are Ancyra and Synope. The Inhabitants thereof were accounted to
be Cowards and Effeminate, like all the rest of the Nations of Asia. It was a
custom among them to throw Letters into the Wood-pile where the Corpse were
burnt, and they fancied that they should read them in Hell.

GALBA SERVIUS SULPITIUS,
was chosen Emperor in the room of Nero, by the Army commanded by him, being
then seventy years old. He attributed his Origin to Jupiter, and Pasiphae the
Wife of Minos King of Crete. He was of a brawny Countenance, a wrinkled
Forehead, a bald Head, and a Hawk-nose. His Debaucheries made him Gouty, the
Joints of his Feet and Hands were knotty to that degree, that he was not able
to hold a Book, or to put off a Shoe. His Hawk-nose gave him the Countenance of
an Eagle the King of Birds. Augustus observing that mark, while he was sitting
at Table with him, foretold that he should one time or another enjoy the
Sovereign Command; but that he should but in a manner taste of the Empire. That
will come to pass, said he, when Mules shall not be barren.

A long time after this Discouse, this prodigy was fulfilled. The Historians
tax him with a sordid covetousness, and a slavish submission to three
Favorites, who governed, and made have to make their Fortune under an old
Prince. However, some Writers relate, that he was only covetous before his
coming to the Imperial Government; and that as soon as he was Emperor, he was a
liberal Prince, bestowing Largesses upon his Subjects, and granting them
Privileges.

He was the first Emperor chosen by the Soldiers, tho he was not of the Family
of the Caesar's; and adopted Piso a young Man of great hopes, and having brought
him to the Camp, he declared the choice he had made to the Army; but spoke not
a word of bestowing Largesses upon the Soldiers; whereupon Otho caballed, and
got both Galba and his Successor murdered, after he had reigned seven Months
the tenth day of January, in the year 69, being then 73 years of Age.

GALEA,
A Helmet, a Headpiece, which covered the whole Face like a Mask.

GALERUS,
A Cap made of skin in the form of a Helmet. This Cap was for the use of
Mercury and the Priests of Jupiter, called Flamenidalis, who wore a white Cap
made of the skin of a white Sheep, sacrificed to Jupiter, called Albogalerus.

GALIENUS,
Gallen, born at Pergamus, Physician to M. Aurelius, and Lucius Verus. He was
very famous in Physic, and brought it to a method, now followed by the
greatest part of Physicians; yet many Men, who are not carried away by the
multitude and prejudice of opinions, condemn and reject his Method, as being
unfit to cure extraordinary Distempers.

He was an Enemy both to Jews and Christians, blaming them for believing very
hard things without any demonstration. Certainly he was a very great Man, and
so excellent in his Art, that having conveyed away a very dangerous defluction
by letting of Blood, and cured the Falling Sickness by tying the Root of Piony
about the neck, he was taxed of Magic, and forced to quit Rome, and died at
Pergamus, the place where he was born. Some Writers tell us that he was then
seventy years old, and others a hundred and four. It appears by two
Commentaries of his own Books, that he had writ two hundred Volumes, which were
burnt in the Fire of the Temple of Peace.

GALLIA,
See after Gallienus afterward.

GALLICAE,
A kind of Shoes, that the ancient Gauls were used to wear, like Wood or Cork
Galoches, worn by the Country people of Gaul in rainy weather; the upper part
of these Galoches was made of Leather, or Leather Straps, to keep them fast to
the Feet, like the Sandals of Begging Friars.

GALLIENUS PUBLIUS LICINIUS IGNATIUS,
The Son of Valerianus, associated by him to the Empire. They reigned together
about seven or eight years, till Valerianus was taken by Sapor King of Persia.
During his reign, the Empire was oppressed with several Calamities, which he
ascribed to the persecution of the Christians: wherefore he recalled the Edicts
made against them. This Prince was given to all kinds of Crimes. Claudius, who
commanded the Army against the Nation called Daci, not being able to bear any
longer with his infamous Debaucheries, caused him to be murdered at Milan,
together with his Brothers and Children, and seized upon the Empire.

GALLIA,
The Gauls. By the name of Gallia, Caesar means only the Gauls, which
comprehends three kinds of People, viz. Belgi, Celti or Galli and Aquitani.
This Gaul is called by Writers, who lived a little after the time of Caesar,
Gallia Comata. Here we must consider all that might be understood by the name
of Gaul, and observe its chiefest divisions and distinctions, that conduce to
the understanding the Commentaries of Caesar.

The name of Gaul was extended on both sides of the Alps. The Country which is
between the Alps and Mount Appenninus on both sides of the River Po, is called
Gallia, Cis-Alpina, and sometimes Gallia Togata; because in regard to the
Romans it is within the Alps; Togata, because the Inhabitants thereof, though
they were Colonies of the Gauls beyond the Alps, did wear the Roman Habit,
called Toga Romana. The Lands which are beyond the Alps, in regard to the
Romans, and between the Alps and the Pyrennean Mountains, the Mediterranean
Sea, the Ocean and the River Rhine, are properly Gaul, called by Caesar and
other Writers Transalpina; because it is beyond the Alps in regard to the City
of Rome. This Gaul thus called, is still divided in two parts; the nearest part
to Italy is called by Caesar, Provincia, and sometimes Provincia Romanorum, or
Provincia Ulterior, in respect to the Gauls within the Alps, called Provincia
Citerior. The other part of the Transalpine Gaul, is called plainly by Caesar,
Gallia, which he subdued to the Roman Empire, and has divided himself in three
parts, one inhabited by the Nation called Belgi, the other by the Aquitani, and
the third by the Celti, whom the Romans called Galli. All the Writers since
Caesar call this Gaul, Gallia Comata, the hairy Gaul, because the Inhabitants
thereof wore long Hair; and the other part, which is nearer to Italy and Spain,
was called Gallia Braccata, because the Inhabitants thereof wore Trowses.

Gaul is divided in three parts, that which is on the side of Italy is called
Gallia Togata; the second, which is between Italy and Spain, is called Gallia
Braccata; and the third, which is between the River Rhine and Spain, and from
the Alps to the Ocean, is called Gallia Comata.

Caesar divides likewise Gallia Comata into three parts, viz. Gallia Celtica,
extended from the Rivers Marne and Sein, to the Rivers Rhone and Garoone, and
from the Rhine to the Ocean. Gallia Belgica begins at the Frontiers of Gallia
Celtica, and is extended to the Rhine, drawing toward its mouth. Gallia
Aquitanica or Gasconia is included between the River Garonne and the Pyrenean
Hills, along the Coasts of the Ocean. The first is opposite to the North; the
second to the North and the East, and the third looks to the West or the North.

GALLI,
The Gauls. This Nation is very superstitious, and when in great dangers either
of War or Sickness, they sacrifice Men, or make vow to sacrifice some; which
they perform by their Druides: for they think that God cannot be otherwise
appeased, and that one Man's Life cannot be redeemed, but by another laying down
his for him.

In some places there are Idols of Wicker of a prodigious bigness, which are
filled up with Men, and often with Malefactors; then they set them on fire, and
sometimes for want of Malefactors, they burn therein innocent Men.

Of all the Gods, they especially worship Mercury, as the Inventer of Arts, and
Patron of Travelers and Merchants; they have many Statues of him among them.
After Mercury, the most respected by them are Apollo, Mars, Jupiter and
Minerva, and they have the same opinion of them as the other Nations have; viz.
That Apollo cures Distempers; Minerva presides over Manufactures; Mars is the
sovereign disposer of War; and Jupiter is the Sovereign of the Gods. Before
they engage the Enemy, they devote him the Spoils, and sacrifice to him all the
Cattle after they have obtained the Victory: The remainder of the Booty is
brought together, and consecrated in Temples and other public places, where it
lies in heaps, and it is forbidden to take away any thing of it, under very
severe punishment, or to conceal any part thereof after the Fight is over.

They account themselves the posterity of Pluto, according to the tradition of
their Druides or Priests, wherefore they reckon the time by Nights, and not by
Days, as we do; and if they reckon the Months or the Years, or solemnize their
Birthday, they begin always by Night.

Their Funerals are as stately as their Country can afford; they burn with the
Corpse of the dead, all that was most dear to him, even the Beasts, and formerly
the Slaves themselves, and their freed Men. Their Children never appear in
public in the presence of their Fathers, till they are fit to bear Arms. And
when they marry they are obliged to bring to the Commonalty an equivolent of
their Wives Portion, which is kept with the Revenues arising by it for the
Survivor. The Husband has power over the life of his Wife and Children.

GALLI CYBILES,
The Priests of the Goddess Cybele. They were called by that name because of a
River in Phrygia, the water whereof made those who drank of it mad. These
Priests were instituted to offer Sacrifices to this Goddess at the sound of
Drums and Kettle-Drums, running up and down like Madmen, holding Knives in
their Hands, and cutting therewith the Flesh of their Arms and Thighs. They
went begging from door to door, and were wont to carry their Goddess upon an
Ass with their Clothes. The chief of them was called Archigallus.

GALLUS VIBIUS TREBONIANUS,
An Emperor who succeeded Decius, and was chosen by the Soldiers, about the
year of Rome 251. He chose his Son Volusianus for his Colleague to the Empire.
The Soldiers murdered them both at Terny in Italy, in the year 254, having
reigned then two years.

GALLUS CAESAR
was the Son of Julius Constantius, Brother to Constantine the Great, and of
Galla, and Brother to Julian the Apostate. He was carefully brought up and
instructed in the Holy Scripture, and took Orders with his Brother, both of
them performing the Office of Priest in the Church. The Emperor Constantius
chose Gallus his Cozen Caesar, in the year 351, the fifteenth day of May, and
gave him his Sister Constantina for Wife, then Annibalianus's Widow, and
suppressed the superstitious worship of the Oracle of Apollo near Antioch,
called Daphnae, and placed the Bones of the Martyr Babylas in the room thereof.
But Constantius jealous of him, caused his head to be cut off, three years
after he had made him Caesar.

GALLUS,
A young man, Confident of Mars's Love with Venus. Mars having one day
commanded him to keep Centry at the door of his Mistress, lest Vulcan her
Husband should surprise them together; this young man fell asleep, and both
Venus and Mars were surpised by the Sun lying together, who presently
acquainted her Husband with the same; but Vulcan having some time before hung
imperceptible Nets about his Bed, they were both caught therein. And Mars to
take his revenge of the young man, turned him into a Cock. This Fable is thus
reported by Lucian in his Dream.

Mars had a fine Boy, confidant of his Love; and when he went to Bed to Venus,
he left him at the Door to awake him before day light: the pretty Lad being
fallen asleep, the Sun discovered the whole Mystery, and Vulcan caught the two
Lovers in his Nets; whereupon Mars out of revenge, turned this young man into a
Cock, who keeps still the Crest of the Headpiece, and the Spurs he had on when
he was changed: and since, his posterity, to repair him in his Honor, proclaim
the coming of the day.

GANIMEDES.
The Son of Tros King of Troy. Jupiter being transformed into an Eagle, took
him away into Heaven for his Beauty, and made him his Cup Bearer instead of
Hebe and Vulcan, and delivered him to Mercury, to make him drink Immortality,
and teach him how to present the Cup.

GEHENNA,
Rack, Torment. Hieronymus relates the true Origin of this word, when he tells
us, there was an Idol of Baal near Jerusalem, in the Valley called Tophet,
which signifies a Drum, Tympanum, lest the People should hear the cries of the
Children that were thrown into the fire, when they sacrificed them unto the
Idol. This Valley was also called Ge-ben-Ennon, and by abreviation Geenhon,
from Ge, which signifies a Valley, and Ennon, which comes from Naham, that
signifies to groan. Some are of opinion that it was Moloch the God of the
Ammonites, to whom they sacrificed their own Children. Wherefore Hell, the
place of eternal fire, is called Gehenna. The Ancient Writers did not make use
of this word, and it was first used in the Gospel.

GEMELLI,
A Constellation, and one of the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, called Castor and
Pollux the Sons of Laeda.

GEMONIAE
Scalae, or GEMONIJ Gradus, A Gibbet or Gallows. Vossius upon the Verb gemo
tells us, that there was a Well at Rome with Stairs to go down, wherein they
did cast the Bodies of Malefactors, having dragged them to that place with a
Hook. According to the opinion of Suetonius, they are rather Gallows, where
they hanged for a while the Corpse of the Malefactors, after they had drawn them
with a Hook, from the place of Execution to these Gallows; and then drawing
them again with a Hook, they cast them into the Tiber; Tandem apud Gemonias
minutissimis ictibus excarnificatus atque confectus est, and inde unco tractus
in Tiberim. This Historian seems to intimate that they were tied, there, before
they were dead. These Gallows stood in the fourteenth Ward of the City.

GENETHLIUS,
An Epithet given to Jupiter, because Poets represent him presiding over the
Generation and Nativities of Children.

GENIUS,
A Divinity, whom ancient Phllosophers esteemed to be the Son of God, and the
Father of Men. They allowed a Genius or Intelligence to each Province, Town and
Person, who took care of the Affairs of this World. They allowed also Genius's
to Forests, Fountains, Trees, Eloquence, Sciences, and Joy, and it appears by
several Medals, particularly one of Nero, GENIO AUGUSTI, GENIO SENATUS, GENIO
P. ROMANI, GENIO EXERCITUUM, Upon these Medals the figure of God Genius is
represented veiled at the middle of the Body, holding with one hand a Horn of
Plenty, and with the other a Cup for the Sacrifice; and before the Statue there
was an Altar, and a Fire thereon. Which agrees with the description that
Ammianus Marcellinus has given us of the same, in the 25th Book of the Emperor
Julianus's Deeds.

Censorinus in his Book entitled de Die Natali, says, that as soon as Men are
born, they are put under the tuition of God Genius; and Euclid tells us, that
Men have two Genins's, one good and the other bad. Plutarch relates in the life
of Brutus, that he saw by night in a Dream a Fantome, by the light of a Lamp
that was in his Chamber, and having asked him who he was, he answered him, that
he was his bad Genius.

Each person offered Sacrifice every year to his Genius, and particularly upon
Birth-days, with leven and salted Dough; and sometimes with a Pig two months
old, and scattered Flowers and sprinkled Wine to him: and the Sacrifice being
over, they made a great Feast for their Friends, and thus the Comedians was
called Genio indulgere, or Genio volupe facere.

In the beginning it was not permitted to swear by the Genius of the Prince;
but afterward the most solemn Oaths, were those that were sworn by the Genius
of the Emperor; and Suetonius assures, that Caligula put many to death, because
they refused to swear by his Genius.

Apuleius has writ a Treatise of the Genius or evil Spirit of Socrates. The
name of Genius among some who call themselves Christians, is given to the good
Angels attending Men or States.

The Pagans ranked Venus, Priapus, and Genius among the number of the Gods, who
are entrusted with the care of Men's Generation.

By these three Divinities, the Heathens understood nothing else but the
fecundity of nature, that brings forth every day so many living Creatures; as
Festus says, Genius est Deorum filius and parens hominum, ex quo homines
gignuntur; and propterea Genius meus nominatur, quia me genuit; the Genius is
the Son of the Gods and the Father of Men, and my Genius is called Genius,
because he has begotten me.

This worship was rendered to Nature, not only because of the celestial
Intelligence, who presides over our Generation; but also, because of the
fecundity of the Stars and Elements, giving Being to so many Creatures.

Censorinus affirms, that there was no bloody Sacrifice offered to Genius;
wherefore Persius says, funde merum Genio; for Men would not shed Blood upon
their birthday.

He is called Genius, because he is the God, who is entrusted with the care of
Men as soon as they are born. And this Author tells us still, that this Genius
never leaves Men, from the first instant of their life to the last; and has a
very great Authority over them; and that some Men confounded him with the God
Lar, and admitted two Genius's, in Houses where Husband and Wife lived
together: Eundem esse Genium and Larem multi veteres memoriae prodiderunt; hunc
in not maximam, quinimo omnem habere potestatem creditum est. Non nulli binos
Genios, in its duntaxat domibus quae essent maritae, colendos putaverunt.

The Tabula Caebetis says, that Genius directs those who come into the World
the way they should observe; that many forget the Directions; but that yet he
gives them warning, that they are not to mind the Goods of Fortune, which might
be taken away from them: Monet Genius id Fortuna esse ingenium, ut and quae
dederit, eripiat; and tells them still, that Men, who don't hearken to his
precepts, come to a bad end.

GERMANIA.
See after GERMANICUS.

GERMANICUS,
The Son of Drusus, and Nephew to the Emperor Tiberius. He married Agrippina,
the Granddaughter of Augustus, and had six Children by her, viz. three Sons
and three Daughters, Nero, Drusus, Caligula, Agrippina, Drusilla and Livia. In
the time he commanded six Legions in Germany, he refused the Empire that the
Legions offered him after the death of Augustus. He took the surname of
Germanicus, because he had subdued Germany, and triumphed over the Germans; at
last he died in Syrla, being poisoned by Piso's order, and was lamented by all
the Inhabitants of Syria and Neighboring Provinces thereof. A Hero, says
Tacitus, worthy of respect, both for his discourse and presence, whose Fortune
was without Envy, his Reputation without blemish, and his Majestic Countenance
without arrogance; his Funeral Pomp, though without splendour and great show, was
yet Illustrious, only by the commemoration of his Virtues, and celebration of
his Glory.

Some more nicely observing his Life, his Age, his Gate, and the Circumstances
of his Death, have compared him to Alexander the Great. Both fine Men, of good
mien and great birth, who died something more than thirty years old, by a
Conspiracy of their own Men in a foreign Country. Before his Corpse was reduced
to Ashes, it was exposed in the public place of Antioch, which was appointed
for his Burial. The Senate ordained great Honors to his Memory; viz. That his
Name should be solemnized in the Salian Hymn; that in all the places, where the
Priests of Augustus should meet, they should set him an Ivory Chair, and a
Crown of Oak upon it; that a Statue of Ivory should be carried for him, at the
opening of the Circian Games; that no body should be chosen Augur or Pontiff in
his room, but that a Triumphal Arch should be erected to his Memory at Rome,
Mount Amanus in Syria, and on the Banks of the River Rhine, and that his
Achievements should be engraven upon them, with this Inscription, That he Died
for the Commonwealth; That a Monument should be fet up for him in the City of
Antioch, where his Corpse was burnt, and a Tribunal at Epidaphne, where he was
dead. They ordered also his Picture, drawn in a golden Shield of an
extraordinary bigness, should be set up amongst the Orators. The Squadron of
the Youth was called by Equestrian Order, the Squadron of Germanicus; and they
ordered, that at the Ides of July, his Effigies should be carried in State at
the muster of the Equestrian Order.

GERMANIA,
Germany: Some Writers say that the word of Germany is but of late, and comes
from those Men who went first into the Gauls, and were called Tungri or
Germani, says Tacitus; or from the German word Gaar-Mannen, which signifies
Germany. V. Alemannia.

GERMANI,
The Germans. See Alemanni.

GERYON,
King of Spain, represented by Poets with three Bodies, because he reigned over
three Kingdoms, and had fed some Oxen he loved very much, having a Dog with
three Heads, and a Dragon with seven to look after them. Hercules by the
Command of Earisteus slew him, and delivered his Body to be devoured by his own
Oxen, as Diomedes was before eaten by his own Horses.

GIGANTES,
The Giants, the Sons of the Earth, begot, according to the Fable, of the Blood
that came out of the Genital parts of Goelus, that Saturn cut off; for the
Earth, to be revenged of Jupiter, who had struck down the Titans, brought forth
Monsters of a prodigious shape to attack him, and drive him out of Heaven. To
this purpose they met in Thessalia, in the Fields called Phlegraei, and there
heaping up Mountains upon Mountains, they scaled and battered Heaven with great
pieces of Rocks. Among others there was Enceladus, Briareus and Egcon, with a
hundred Hands flinging Rocks, which they took out of the Sea, against Jupiter;
yet a certain Typhaeus was very famous, exceeding all these Monsters in bigness
and strength; for he reached with his Head to the top of Heaven, and could
extend his Hands from one end of the World to the other; he was half Man and
half Serpent, and blew Fire and Flame out of his Mouth in a dreadful manner;
and frighted so much the Gods, who were come to the relief of Jupiter, that
they fled away into Egypt, and transformed themselves into several kinds of
Trees, or disguised themselves under the form of several Beasts. But Jupiter
pursued them so vigorously with his Thunderbolts, that he came off with Honor,
and crushed them under the weight of Mountains, shutting them up therein, and
punishing them in Hell with several Torments. This is the Fable, here is the
true Story.

The Fable of the Giants, who heaped up Mountains one upon another, to raise
themselves to Heaven, there to fight the Gods, is most commonly applied to
those Men, who after the Flood built the Tower of Babel. But holy Scripture
speaks of the Giants a long time before the Deluge, Genesis c. 6. There were
Giants on the Earth in those days.

And in another place it is spoken of the prodigious stature of the Giants, or
rather of those Men, whom the Scripture calls Giants even after the Flood; For
the Israelites having seen some of them, described them thus; All the People
whom we saw in the land, are Men of great Stature, and there we saw Giants, the
Sons of Anak, which are of the Race of the Giants, and we appeared to them like
Grasshoppers, and so we were in comparison of them: And to show us the
extraordinary height and shape of the Giants, Moses tells us in Deuteronomy,
that an Iron Bed of these Giants was nine Cubits long, and four Cubits broad,
according to the natural length of a Man's Cubit, which is a Foot and a half:
Only Og King of Bashan remained of the Race of the Giants: his Bedsted was of
Iron, it is in Rabbah of the Children of Ammon, being nine Cubits long, and
four Cubits broad, according to a Man's Cubit.

According to this description that the Scripture gives us of these Giants,
they might be about fourteen foot high. Solinus relates, that tho the common
opinion is, that the Stature of a Man cannot be above seven foot high, and that
Hercules did not exceed it, yet in the Reign of Augustus, Pusio and Secundilla
were more than ten foot high: and in the Emperor Claudius's time, the Corpse of
Gabbara was brought from Arabia, and was near ten foot high: and that the Corpse
of Orestes being found after his death, was seven Cubits long.

The Giants before the Deluge, were begotten by the Children of God, and
Daughters of Men; and the Hebrew Text makes use of the word Nephilim, to
express the Giants, which comes from Nephal, i. e. to fall.

The Giants after the Deluge are also called by the same name, because of their
likeness to the former; however, they are called by a particular name, which
may be observed in the Books of Numbers and Deuteronomy, where they are called
the Sons of Enacim: Palastine was their Country.

The learned Bochart observes, that from the Hebrew word Enacim or Anacim, the
Greeks have formed their words (...), which originally signified Men of
Gigantick Stature.

Pausanias relates, that the Body of the Hero Asterius the Son of Anax, who was
the Son of the Earth, was found in the Isle Asteria near Miletum; and that his
Corpse was ten Cubits in length. This Stature of ten Cubits agrees with that
mentioned in the Scripture. The word Anax is the same with Enac or Anac; for it
is well known that the change of Vowels is frequent, even in the same Tongue.
In fine, if Anac or Enac was the Son of the Earth, it was common to call the
Giants the Children of the Earth. And Ovid tells us, that they were so called,
because they came out of the Earth, moistened with the blood of their Fathers,
whom a just revenge had destroyed.

The Septuagints Translation has given the name of Giant to Nimrod, who first
reigned at Babylon. The Hebrew Text signifies only Potens venator, Gibbor
Tsaid; but the same word Gibbarim is used, to signify the Giants called also
Nephilim. Wherefore the Scripture says, that Nimrod was the first Giant,
because he was at the head of the rebellion of the Giants after the Deluge, who
were combined together for the building of the Tower of Babel.

The Greeks have sometimes called the Giants by the name of Titans, which shows
that they had this History, and the Fables contained in it, from the Scripture
and out of Palestine; for the word Tit signifies dirt in Hebrew; and they tell
us, that the Giants were formed out of the Dirt or Earth. Wherefore these three
words Titanes, Gigantes, (...), have the same signification, and signify the
Children of the Earth. Diodorns Siculus, unfolding the Theology of those who
Inhabit the Coasts of the Atlantic Sea, says, that according to their opinion,
the Titans were the Children of Uranus and Titaea, who gave them her Name, and
called herself the Earth: Gommune Titanum nomen a Titaea matre usurpabant:
Titaea autem post mortem in Deos relata, Telluris nomen accipit. These Giants
were Children of Heaven and Earth, and their name of Titans came either from
the Earth or Dirt, called by the Hebrews Tit. And these Giants being born
before the Deluge, the Pagans, who had but an imperfect knowledge of their
History, did not know their true Geneology, wherefore they made them Children
of Uranus and Titea, i. e. of Heaven and Earth.

Diodorus Siculus tells us also, that Phrygia, Macedonia and Italy had their
Giants, because of the Fires that are burning in those Countries. The occasion
seemed very fair to the contrivers of Fables, to say, that in all these places,
the Giants were still burning in those Flames, that Thunder, to revenge Heaven,
had kindled there to punish their Crimes. Justin speaking of the Tartesians of
Spain, shows there the place where the Titans engaged the Gods.

Pausanias confirms this opinion, speaking of Arcadia, and of a place where the
Fire comes out of the Earth, and tells us that the Arcaaians affirmed, that the
Giants had engaged the Gods in that very place: wherefore, they offered there
an Anniversary Sacrifice to Thunder and Storms.

Then this Historian examining the opinion of Homer and Hesiod upon the subject
of Giants, says, that Homer has not mentioned the Giants in his Illiads, but
only in his Odysses, where he represents the Nation called Lestrygones like
Giants, attacking the Fleet of Ulysses.

Hesiod in his Theogonia speaking of the Chaos, and producing out of it not
only all the Bodies of the Universe, both Beasts and Men, but even Gods
themselves, then he mentions the Children of Heaven and Earth.

Virgil in the first Book of his Georgicks, imitates Hesiod, holding the fifth
day of the Moon fatal, because upon that day the Earth brought forth the
Giants. He has also imitated him, when he has ascribed to each of these Giants
an hundred Hands, an hundred Shields, and fifty Mouths to blow out torrents of
Fire. In another place he represents the violent efforts and motions of
Enceladus, who lies buried alive under Mount Aetna.

Horace has left us a very fine description of the war and defeat of the
Giants; and Claudian says, that the shakings and Flames of Mount Aetna, are
glorious and eternal proofs of the triumphal Power and Justice of God over the
Giants. Aetna Giganteos nunquam tacitura triumphos,
Enceladi bustum.


Bochart and Vossius are of opinion, that the Giant Og, recorded in Scripture,
whom I have mentioned before, is Typhon or Typhaeus, described by the Poets,
the Hebrew word Og, and the Greek (...) having the same signification, i. e. to
burn: And Virgil affirms, that Typhon was struck with Thunder in Syria. --
Durumque cubile
Inarime, Jovis imperiis imposta Typhaeo.
Aeneid. lib. 9.

Virgil follows Homer's opinion, who says, that Typhaeus was struck with
Thunder in Syria, called in the Scripture Aram, and by profane Writers Aramaea.
These are Homer's words, (...), in Aremis, ubi dicunt Typhaei esse cubilia.

GLADIATORES,
The Gladiators, who fought in the Circian Games, and at the Funerals of the
great Men of Rome, one against the other, even to the loss of their Lives, to
give this cruel Diversion to the People, or to pacify the Ghosts of their
Kindred.

The origin of these bloody Fights, came from the Ancient Inhabitants of Asia,
who fancied that they very much honored their Relations, by spilling humane
blood with a brutish diversion. This superstition grew so great among the
Trojans, that Women cut themselves to get our some blood, to sprinkle upon the
Graves or the Wood-pile of the Dead. Junius Brutus, was the first Man among the
Romans, who performed these barbarous Duties to his Father; and we learn from
Tacitus, that Tiberius to honor the memory of his Ancestors, ordered two
Fights of Gladiators, one in the great public place, and the other in the
Amphitheater.

Those who made a trade of that brutish fury, were always esteemed of no worth;
for besides, that these Fights began at first by Slaves, who were miserably
wretched, and left to their ill destiny; those Men who were taught that Art and
were brought to it, never got any reputation by it; and to their great shame,
Malefactors were brought among them, as Victims devoted to the diversion of the
People, and sacrificed to their Madness, as to the fury of Wild-Beasts.

But tho the Infamy was equal, yet the fortune was very different; for the
Slaves made by War had no hopes left them. Malefactors were still used worse,
for they were exposed to the wild Beasts, and sometimes tied to posts to feed
the Lions, and to secure their punishments against the hazards of a vigorous
defense. Men brought up and chosen for Gladiators, because of their good mien
and strength, were not only well used, but also well taught in the Science of
Defense, and nothing was spared to keep them in good health and strength, to
contribute the better to the diversion of the people.

Pliny tells us, that they were fed with Barly-Bread, wherefore they were
called in jest Hordiarij, and that their Drink was Water with Ashes mixed with
it; but this is not probable. There were many Families of these Gladiators.
Some were called Sequatores, Retearii, Threces, Myrmillones, Hoplomachi,
Samnites, Essedarii, Andabatae, Dimachaeri, Meridiani, Fiscales, Postulatitij.

The first were armed with a Sword and a Club, in the end whereof was Lead.

The second carried a Net and a Trident, and endeavored to enclose their
Antagonist with it.

The third had a kind of a Hanger or Scymetar, and were called by the name of
their Country.

The fourth, called Mermillones instead of Mermidones, were the Heroes of
Achilles, whom the Romans accounted to be Gauls, wearing a Fish on the top of
their Helmet. The Gladiator Retiarius or Net-bearer pursuing him, cried out,
non te peto Galle, sed piscem peto.

The fifth were armed all over, as the Greek word signifies.

The sixth had their name from their hatred to the Samnites, who armed the
Gladiators according to their fashion.

The seventh fought riding in Chariots, and were called Essedarii.

The eighth fought on Horseback and blindfold, and took their name from their
way of Fighting.

The ninth fought holding two Swords in their hands, from whence they are
called Dimacheri, a Greek word, which signifies two Swords.

The tenth were those who had been exposed to wild Beasts, and having got clear
of them, were obliged to kill one another to divert the People.

The eleventh had their name from Fiscus the Exchequer, because they were
maintained at the public charges.

The twelfth were the most valiant of all, and appointed for the Emperor's
diversion, wherefore the people beg often that they might be ordered to fight.

All these Gladiators did their best to kill their Adversary, or to dye
valiantly, and bravely defended their life.

After they had well acquitted themselves of their duty, they obtained of the
Emperors, and those who gave the Games, either their discharge or freedom, or
some considerable reward.

The discharge granted unto them, was only a dispensation from fighting or
serving, otherwise but willingly or out of compliance; and for a Token thereof,
they gave them a Switch called Rudis; Rudae dmobantur.

They gave them also a kind of a Hat called Pileatie, for a badge of their
freedom granted to them.

Constantius, and after him the Emperors Arcadius and Honorius forbad these
Fights.

GLAUCUS
Ponticus, a Fisherman of the Town of Anthedon, who having once caught
abundance of Fish, and laid them on the Bank, perceiving that these Fishes
having touched a kind of Herb that was upon the shore, received new strength,
and leapd again into the Sea; which Glaucus perceiving, tasted of the Herb
himself, and presently leapt into the Sea after them, where he was transformed
into a Triton, and became one of the Sea Gods. Pausanias calls Glaucus the
Genius of the Sea.

Paliphatus relates this otherwise, and says that Glaucus was a Fisherman, and
an excellent Diver, who to get the name of being a God, threw himself often in
sight of all the people, from the top of a great Rock into the Sea, and
appeared further off; then at last stole himself quite from the sight of Men,
and retired on some remote shore, from whence he came again some days after,
and persuaded the people that he had conversed with the Gods of the Sea, and
related extraordinary things of them. But in fine, being lost in the Waters of
the Sea, the People persuaded themselves he was become a God. Some say that he
was turned into a Fish, other into a Sea Monster, and some others affirm, like
Philostratus in his description of Glaucus Ponticus, that he was half Man, and
half Fish.

Hyginus records, that Glaucus was much loved by Circe, but he despised her,
and yet he fell in love with Scylla. Whereupon Ciru transported with jealousy,
turned Scylla into a Monster, having poisoned the waters where she was used to
bath herself, as Homer has described it in the twelfth Book of his Odysses.

There was also another of that name, who was Grandson to Bellerophon, and came
to the Trojan's relief, and showed a great folly in his conduct, having
exchanged his Golden Armor for that of Diomedes, which were of Brass. From
whence it is said in a proverbial way, to show an inequal change, it is the
exchange of Glaucus and Diomedes.

GNOMONICE,
The Art of making Sun dials, so called from the Greek word (...), which
signifies to show, because the Gnomon is a style or a Needle, which by its
shadow shows the Hours, the elevation of the Sun, and the Sign wherein he is.

GOMER,
The Father of the Italians and Gauls, under several names of Gallus and
Ogyges, and was the eldest Son of Japhet. The Babylonians took him for the
Grandfather of Ninus, though he was but his Grand-Unkle. Some are of opinion
that he is Saturn. He came into Italy in the year 1879, a mundo condito, the
2539 of the Julian period, and 2175 years before the birth of our Lord, and
populated the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea, Greece, Italy and Gallia. He
taught Religion to his people, as he had received it of Japhet and Noah.

GORDIANUS,
and his Son were both chosen Emperors in Africa, and the Senate approved of
their Election, but they did not enjoy long that honor; for the Father was too
old to be serviceable to the Commonwealth, being then fourscore years of age;
and though his Son was but forty six years old, yet he was not able to defend
the Empire against Capellianus Prefect of Mauritania.

Gordianus was the Richest and the most magnificent of the Romans. During his
Quaestorship he ordered Games of vast charges to be represented every month to
the people. He had a Park well stocked with all kinds of fallow Dear, procured
from all parts of the World, and appointed a public hunting day, where every
Man carried away the Game he had killed.

Gordianus junior, Grandson to Gordianus who died in Africa, was raised to the
Empire at sixteen years of age. He gave the Office of Prefect of the Praetory
to Philip a Man of low extraction, who soon forgot his Benefactor's kindness;
for he caused him to be murdered on the Frontiers of Persia, where he pursued
Sapor, who had invaded Syria.

GORGONES.
Hesiod in his Theogonia, and Hyginus say, that the Gorgones were three
Sisters, Daughters to Phocus a Sea-God, who had all three but one eye, serving
them all by turns. They had great Wings, and their Head attired with Adders,
their Teeth were like the Tusks of Wild-Boar's, coming out of their mouth, and
were armed with sharp and crooked Claws. They were named Stenyo, i. e. strong,
mighty; Medusa, i. e. care of the State; and Euryale, i. e. having command upon
the at Sea. Perseus being covered with the shield of Minerva cut off Medusa's
head, which was placed in the shield of Minerva, the sight whereof is mortal,
and turns into stones those who look at it, as it befell Atlas.

Fulgentius relates after Theocritus an ancient Historiographer, that King
Phorcus left three very rich Daughters; that Medusa the eldest and most
powerful was called Gorgon, because she applied herself very much to manure the
ground; that a Serpents head was ascribed to her, because of her prudence; and
that Perseus attacked her with his Fleet, (from whence Poets represent him
winged) seized upon her Dominion and killed her; and took away her Head, viz.
her Strength and Riches, which he made use of to subdue the Kingdom of Atlas,
whom he put to flight; and having forced him to retire into the Mountains, from
whence it is said he was metamorphos'd into a Mountain.

GRACCHUS,
A Surname of the Sempronian Family, the offspring of so many Illustrious
Romans who supported the People against the Nobility; as Tiberius Gracchus, who
got the Agrarian Law to be received, and distributed to the Romans the Riches
that King Attalus had left him by his last Will; and Caius Gracchus, who added
to the Senate three hundred Men of the Equestrian Order, to administer Justice.

GRAECIA,
etc. See after Gratiae.

GRATIAE.
The Graces in the time of the Pagans were three fabulous Goddesses represented
young and naked, attending Venus, called Aglaia, Thalia and Euphrosine,
Daughters of Jupiter, and Mercury's Companions. They were also named Charites.

GRAECIA,
Greece, so called from King Graecus, who succeeded Cecrops, who commanded only
in Attica, which was one of the fine Countries of Europe, called Hellas.

Ancient Writers have severally set the bounds of this Country; yet it is
commonly agreed, that it is bounded by the Ionian Sea at the West, by Libya at
the South, the Aegean Sea or Archipelagus at the East, and at the Mountains
which divide it from Thracia, upper Mysia and Dalmatia.

Greece contains four great Provinces; viz. Macedonia, Epirus, Achaia,
Peloponnesus, together with all the Islands of the Ionlan Sea. They also join
to it that part of Italy, which was formerly called Great Greece, now Calabria
superior. This Country exceeded all the Countries of Europe, for its
temperature, good air, and plenty of all kinds of Fruits. The most famous
Cities of Greece were Athens, Lacedemonia, Delphos, Argos, Mycene, Corinth.
There were those Mountains, so famous in the Writings of the Poets, viz. Athos,
Olympus, Pelion, Parnassus, Helicon, Cytheron. Greece is esteemed the Mother of
Arts and Sciences, that her Inhabitants had learnt of the Assyrians and
Chaldaeans. She was conquered by Cyrus, and afterward by the other Kings of
Parsia.

After the death of Perseus the last King of Greece, the Romans subdued that
Country.

GRAECI,
The Greeks, the Inhabitants of Greece, who are differently named by Writers
Achaij, Argivi, Danai, Dolopes, Helleni, Ionij, Mermidones, Pelasgi, according
to the Cities they inhabited, and their several Factions.

Eusebius affirms, that Hellen the Son of Deucalion, repopulated this Country
after the Deluge, that happened in the time of Moses, about the year 3680. a
mundo condito. They very much improved Arts and Sciences, that they learned of
Eumolpus and Orphaeus, the Assyrians and Phaenicians. The Greeks increased the
number of Gods, and shared the Empire and Administration of the World,
appointing several Gods for Corn and Vines, to Plants and Flowers; which gave
occasion for all the chimerical divisions of Gods, relating imaginary
particulars of them, and giving them names, without any other ground, but their
own vanity and presumption.

The Phaenicians having disguised the true Histories of the Bible, and composed
their Fables of it, the Greeks also appropriated the Phaenicians Fables to
Greece.

Pliny affirms, that Cadmus, about the year 2520 a mundo condito, brought from
Phaenicia sixteen Letters into Greece; viz. A, B, C, D E, F, G, H, I, L, M, N,
O, P, Q, R, S, T, V, to which Palamedes added four, during the Trojan War, O,
Z, ph, X.

GRAECOSTASIS,
A, Palace at Rome, adjoining to Mount Palatine, where the foreign Prince's
Ambassadors were lodged. This Palace took its name from Greece, because the
Greeks were the most considerable of all the Strangers; the House of the
Ambassadors.

GRATIAE
See above, before Graecia.

GUTTUS,
A little Vessel used in Sacrifices, to pour Wine by drops

GYGES,
A Lydian, who killed his Master by a Ring that made him invisible, by turning
the stone within toward himself, for then he could see all, and was seen of
none, Ovid mentions another Gyges, a Giant who had a hundred hands, Son to
Heaven and Earth, and Brother to Briareus. Centimanumque Gygen, semibovemque
virum.
4. Trist.

GYNAECONITIS,
An Apartment for the Women in Greece.

GYMNICI LUDI.
Exercises of the Greeks.

In these Games, there was in the first place the Race, which has been of old,
and the chief of all Exercises; secondly, leaping; thirdly, Discus or Quoits,
made of Stone, Iron or Brass, cut in a round figure, and of a great weight, the
Gamesters who threw it highest or furthest carried the Prize; the fourth kind
of Game was wrestling, wherein two Wrestlers, having their Bodies stark naked,
and anointed all over with Oil, took hold one on another, each of them making
all his efforts to throw his Adversary on the ground; the fifth sort of Game
was boxing, these Gamesters had their Fists covered with Leather Straps, with
pieces of Lead or Iron fastened to it, called Cestus. Lucian speaks of these
Games in the Dialogue of the bodily Exercises, where he introduces Anacharsis
discoursing thus with Solen. Anacharsis. What mean these young fellows, thus to
collar and foyl themselves, and wallow in the mire like Swine, and strive to
throttle and hinder one another breathing? they oyled and shaved one another
pretty peaceably at first, but on a sudden stooping with their Heads, they
butted each other like Rams: Then the one hoisting his Adversary aloft into the
air, hurls him again upon the ground, with a violent squelsh, and falling upon
him, he hindered him from rising, pressing his neck with his elbow, and
punching him with his legs, so as I was afraid he had stifled him, though the
other struck him on the shoulder, to desire him to let him go, as owning
himself overcome. Methinks they should be shie of fouling themselves thus in
the dirt, after they had been steek'd; and they make me laugh to see them like
so many Eels, slip out of the hands of their Antagonists. Look yonder is some
doing the same in the face of the Sun, with this difference only, that it is in
the Sun they roll, like Cocks before they come to the skirmish, that their
Adversary may have the better hold, and his hands not slip upon the Oil or the
Sweat. O see you others also fighting in the Dirt, and kicking and fisting,
without endeavoring (like the former) to throw one another. The one spits out
of his Teeth with sand and blood, from a blow he received in his Chaps, and yet
that Officer attired in purple, who sets President, as I suppose, at these
Exercises, does not trouble himself about parting them. These others make the
Dust fly, by kicking up their Heels in the air, like those who dispute for the
prize of running.


Solon. This here is the place of Exercises, and the Temple of Apollo Lycius,
whose Statue you see upon that Column, in the posture of a weary Man, leaning
upon his Elbow, having his Head supported upon his right hand, and holding his
Bow in the left. Those whom you see wallowing in the mire, or crawling in the
dirt, are skirmishing at a match of Wrestling, or at Fisticuffs in the Ring or
Lists. There are still other Exercises, as Leaping, Quoits, and Fencing, and in
all such Games the conqueror is crowned.




These Games were played four times every year; viz. at Olympia in the Province
of Elis, wherefore they were called Olympic Games, in honor of Jupiter
Olympius; in the Isthmus of Corinth, called Isthmian Games, in honor of
Neptune; in the Nemean Forest, called Nemean Games, in honor of Hercules; and
the Pythean Games, in honor of Apollo, because he had killed the Serpent
Pytho. The Masters of these Games were called Gymnastae. I shall speak
severally of these Games, according to their Alphabetick Order.

GYMNO SOPHISTAE.
Gymnosophists, a Sect of Indian Philosophers, who adored the Sun, and were
called by this name, because they went naked.

H.
H is the eighth Letter of the Alphabet. Grammarians dispute whether the H
should be in the number of Letters or not; because, say they, it is but an
aspiration.

Though H be but an aspiration, yet it is a true Letter, because all Characters
invented by Men to distinguish our Pronunciation, ought to be accounted a true
Letter, especially when it is set down in the Alphabet among the other Letters,
as H is: And there is no reason to fancy that H is not a true Letter, because
it is but an aspiration, since in the Oriential Languages, there are three or
four Letters, which they call Guttural Letters, which are of no other use, but
only to express the several aspirations.

H supplies in Latin, all that which is denoted by the Greeks with sharp tones,
and aspirated Consonants: And it serves for two general uses; the first is
before the Vowels beginning the Syllables, as in the word honor; and the second
is after the Consonant, as in the word Thronus.

Doubtless the H appeared plainly in the Roman pronunciation, as it is perceived
in the French tongue, in the words that are merely French, as Hardiesse,
Hauteur, etc.

As for the H after the Consonants, Tully in his Book de Oratore affirms, that
the ancient Writers made no use of it, but only before the Vowels, which
inclined him to pronounce Pulcros, Triumpos, Cartaginem. But concealing his
opinion, he conferm'd himself to the custom of the people in his pronunciation,
and that yet they pronounced always Sepulcra, Lacrimae, without H, because it
did not offend the Ears.

Quintillian tells us, that often ancient Writers put no H before the Vowels,
writing ircus; but that in his time they were come to another excess,
pronouncing Chorona, Praechones. However, the Language must be considered as it
was in its purity.

Wherefore, as this H after the Consonants was only introduced in the Latin
Language, but to supply the aspirated Letters of the Greeks, it ought to be
used but after four Consonants, viz. C, P, T, R.

The Latins have taken their H from the Greek (...), as the Greeks had it of
the Phaenicians, and the Phaenicians of the Syrians, who pronounced formerly
Hetha instead of Heth: which plainly shows, that we ought to pronounce Eta in
Greek, and not Ita.

But in the beginning this H was only used for an aspiration, wherefore they
wrote (...) instead of (...), instead of (...) HEKATON instead of (...) centum:
From whence it comes, that the H formerly denoted one hundred in number.

H was also joined with weak Consonants, instead of an aspiration; for the
aspirated Consonants were found out since by Palamedes, they using to write
(...) instead of (...), and the like.

The F is often written instead of the H, as Faedum instead of Haedum, Fircum
instead of Hircum, Fariolum instead of Hariolum, Fostem instead of Hostem,
Heminas instead of Feminas, Hebris instead of Febris.

HAMADRYADES.
Certain Divinities of Trees and Forests, who lived and died with them, as the
fabulous Antiquity tells us. Notwithstanding the respect the Pagans had for
these Hamadryades, was but a kind of worship rendered to some Intelligent
Divinity, or some Genius whom they fancied to be present, or residing in these
Trees.

HARMONIA,
Harmony, the Daughter of Mars and Venus, and Wife to Cadmus, both turned into
Serpents.

HARMONIA,
Harmony. A consort of Voices or Musical Instruments. The Platonists fancied,
that celestial Bodies made a real Harmony. Vitruvius speaks of the harmonical
Music of Aristoxenes, the Scholar of Aristotle, opposite to that of the
Pythagoreans; because these Philosophers judged of the tones, only by reasons
of Proportions, and the others were of opinion, that the ears should also have
their share in that judgment, because it belonged especially to them, to
regulate what concerns Music.

The same Writers give us also an account of three kinds of Songs, which the
Greeks call Enarmonick, Chromatick and Diatonick: the Enarmonick singing is a
way of turning the voice, and disposing the Intervals with such an art, that
the melody becomes more moving: The Chromatick singing consists in keeping the
Intervals close by a subtle artifice, which makes the voice sweeter and softer:
and the Diatonick as the most natural, makes easy Intervals, which renders it
more easy than the others.

HARPOCRATES,
The Son of Osiris and Isis; the God of Silence, who was commonly represented
holding his finger upon his mouth, to make a sign to hold the tongue and keep
silence. Varro protests, that he will tell nothing else of this God, lest he
should break silence commanded by him: The finger which he holds upon his mouth
is the second finger, called by the Latius Salutaris, commonly used to command
silence. And Apuleius says, Lay the Finger that is next the Thumb upon the
Mouth, and hold your Tongue. Ausonius recommended Silence thus, Aut tua
Sigalion Aegyptius oscula signet.


The Statues of Harpacrates were placed in Temples and public places, and the
Egyptian Sculpto represented him upon several precious Stones, which they
ingrav'd under certain Constellations, and upon Metals, proper to receive and
keep the impression of each Star, that they might use them to cure Distempers,
and preserve Men from dangers. The Romans adorned their fingers with them, as
Pliny has observed: 'The Romans, says he, begin already to wear in their Rings,
Harpocrates and other Egyptian Gods.

M. Spon, in the seventh dissertation of the Inquiries after Antiquities, has
given us several Sculptures of Harpocrates, p. 124. On one of these he is
represented setting upon an Ostrich, and on the reverse thereof the Sun and
Moon are ingrav'd, for Harpocrates was accounted their Son; since Osiris and
Isis, the Father and Mother of Harpocrates, were esteemed by the Egyptians,
what the Son and the Moon were by other Nations. And yet we may say that the
Pagans ranked Harpocrates the God of silence among the other Gods, to silence
those who should affirm, that all their Gods were but mortal Men; or else to
show us, that all the Gods whom they adored, were comprehended in an only one,
who commanded silence.

The Letters of the reverse of the Medal are fantastical Characters of
Heretics, both Basilidians and Gnostics, who did mix the Mysteries of the
Christian Religion with Pagan superstitions.

In another figure Serapis and Harpocrates are represented with these Letters,
Conservate me; which shows that it was a kind of a Talisman, which they wore
about them, to beg of these Divinities the conservation of their Health, and
their preservation from all Evils.

On another stone Harpocrates is represented setting upon the Flower called
Lotus, an Herb dedicated to the Sun, because its flower opens of it self at the
rising of the Sun, and shuts again at his going down; The Letters Engraven on
the reverse thereof, are some Basilidian Mysteries.

Harpocrates is still drawn with the head of a Lion, some Birds about him, and
the head of the Moon. Alexander Hales tells us, that these Birds were Angels,
whom the Basilidians ascribed to celestial Globes of the Planets, and that they
called Saturn, Cassiel; Jupiter, Sachiel; Mars, Samuel; the Sun and the Moon,
Michael; Venus, Anahel; Mercury, Raphael.

Likewise Harpocrates is figured setting on the head of an Ass, the mouth
whereof is turned upwards, with these Letters on the reverse of the Medal
(...), i. e. strong and invincible, which Epithet the Basilidians gave to their
Jao, or Jehova, to preserve them from dangers, and protect them against their
Enemies.

The same God is yet engraven with seven Greek Vowels, signifying the word
Jehova. These are the representations of Harpocrates, drawn from Sculptures and
Medals: But we shall describe the copies, which were taken after the old small
Statues of Brass, kept in the Virtuoso's Closers.

The old Statues of Harpocrates were holding their Finger upon their Mouth; but
some are represented with a Horn of Plenty, and a Basket on the head, which was
the common ornament of Serapis, who according to the opinion of some Writers,
was the same as Osiris the Father of Harpocrates.

Others represent him with a glittering head, some have dressed him in a Gown,
which hangs down to the heels, carrying on his Head a branch of a Peach-tree,
which was a Tree consecrated to Harpocrates, because the Fruit thereof
resembles the Heart, and its Leaves are like the Tongue, as Plutarch has
observed; whereby old Writers signified the perfect correspondency that should
be between the Tongue and the Heart: Some others figure him with a particular
Ornament on his Head, having the badges of Harpocrates, Cupid and Esculapius,
for he holds his Finger on his Mouth, he carries Wings, and a Quiver with
Arrows, and a Serpent twisted about a stick. The union of Harpocrates with
Cupid, shows that Love must be secret; and the union of Harpocrates with
Aesculapius gives us to understand, that a Physician must be discreet, and not
discover the secrets of his Patient. The Pythagoreans made a Virtue of silence,
and the Romans a Goddess, called Tacita, as it is related by Plutarch.

HARPIAE,
The Harpyes, fabulous Birds only mentioned by Poets, who describe them with
the face of a Virgin, and the rest of the body a Bird, with crooked feet and
hands: Virgil's description of them runs thus, in the third Book of his Aeneid.
v. 213.

-- Quas dira Celaeno,
Harpyae colunt aliae.......
Tristius haud illis monstrum, nec saevior ulla
Pestis and ira Deum Stygus sese extulit undis;
Virginei volucrum vultus, foedissima ventris
Proluvies: uncaeque manus, and pallida semper
Ora fame.
The truth of the Story is, that Phineus King of Paeonia having lost his sight,
and his Sons being dead, the Harpyes his Daughters, were spending his Estate,
till Zethes and Calais his Neighbors, Sons of Bordas, drove these Ladies out
of the City, and reestablished Phineus in possession of his Estate.

HASTA,
signifies all kind of offensive Arms, that have a long staff or handle, as
Pike, Spear, Javelin, etc.

'Twas said in the Roman Law Hastae subjicere, to signify thereby, to
confiscate, or to sell by public sale; and sub hasta venire, to be sold by
Auction; for Romulus had ordered that this Pole should be set before the place,
where the confiscated Goods were sold.

HASTA PURA,
A Half-pike, without Iron at the end, used for a Scepter and a badge of
Authority, and not a Pike armed with Iron, used in the war.

HEBDOMADA,
A Week, the numof seven days. Four Weeks make up a Month, because of the four
chief and more apparent Phasis of the changes of the Moon. And as these four
changes of the Moon, are in a manner the space of seven days one from another,
it is very likely that from thence the first Egyptians and Assyrians have taken
occasion to divide time by intervals of seven days, which therefore were called
Weeks. As for the Hebrews, their way of reckoning the time by weeks, has a most
august Origin, and the Law commanded them to forbear from all kind of work the
seventh day, to imprint in their memory the great Mystery of the Creation of
the World, in which God had wrought during six days, and rested the seventh,
whereupon it was called the Sabbath Day, which in their Language signifies a
day of rest. The other days took their name from that day; for the following
day was called by the Jews prima Sabbati, the first day of the Sabbath; the
next day, the second of the Sabbath; then the third and fourth, etc. till the
sixth, called otherwise Parasceve, which signifies the day of preparation for
the Sabbath.

This way of reckoning by Weeks, was, properly speaking, used only by the
Eastern Nations, for the Greeks reckoned their days from ten to ten, or by
decads, dividing each month in three parts; the first part was reckoned from
the beginning of the Month, the second was the middle of the Month, and the
third was the rest of the Month, from the middle to the end thereof. And thus
the Romans, besides the division of the Month by Kalends, Nones and Ides, made
use also of a political distribution of a series of eight days, distributed
from the beginning of the year to the end thereof.

The names of the days of the week used by the Primitive Christians, were
founded on a more holy principle, viz. the resurrection of our Lord, which has
given the name of Dominica, or the Lord's Day, to the day called the Sabbath by
the Jews. And because they, to show their joy in the celebration of the Feast
of Easter, i. e. of the Resurrection, were used to keep the whole week holy,
resting from all servile work, which is called in Latin Periani, therefore they
called the day following immediately after the Holy Sunday Prima Feria; and the
second day Secunda Feria; the third day Tertia Feria, and so forth; and from
thence the days of all the weeks were afterward improperly called Foriae in
practice of the Church.

The Origin of the names commonly given to the days of the week, being names
of Divinities adored by superstitious Antiquity, comes from a more remote
principle: for it is likely that these names passed from the Assyrians to the
Greeks, and from the Greeks to the Christians.

And we may reasonably presume that the Chaldeans, who were esteemed the first
Men who addicted themselves to study Astronomy, have also given the name of
their Gods to the Planets, or at least the same names, which they have
afterward ascribed to the Gods whom they adored: and that they might give more
authority to that art which they profess, and by which they foretold things to
come, by the observation of the Stars. They attempted to ascribe them an
absolute Empire over the nature of Men, allowing to each of them several
Offices and Employments, to dispense good and evil; and that lest that dreadful
power which they ascribed to them, should be kept in the only extent of their
spheres, they had very much enlarged the bounds of their Dominions, submitting
to them, not only the several parts of the Earth and the Elements, not only the
Fortunes, Inclination and Secrets of the most close Men, overthrow of States,
Plagues, Deluges, and a thousand other things of that nature; but endeavored
also to set them up for the absolute Masters of time, allowing a Planet to
preside over each year, another to each month, to each week, each day, each
hour, and perhaps to each moment.

From thence each day of the week has took the name of the Planet ruling over
it, and Monday, which is in Latin dies Luna, i. e. the day of the Moon, was so
called, because the Moon presides that day; dies Martis, i. e. the day of Mars,
which was under the direction of Mars; dies Mercurii, ruled by Mercury; dies
Jovis, under the conduct of Jupiter; dies Veneris, under the direction of
Venus; dies Saturni, under that of Saturn; dies Solis, ruled by the Sun.

It Is true, that the order that the Planets follow in the week, is quite
different from that which they observe in Heaven; for according to the
disposition of their Spheres, Jupiter is immediately below Saturn; Mars below
Jupiter; the Sun under Mars; Venus according to the vulgar opinion, beneath the
Sun; Mercury below Venus; and in fine, the Moon the lowest of all beneath
Mercury: But in the order of the week Sunday, called the day of the Sun, comes
after Saturday, which is the day of Saturn, in the room of Thursday the day of
Jupiter; and Monday the day of the Moon, follows the day of the Sun instead of
Friday, the day of Venus; likewise instead of Saturday or the day of Saturn,
which according to the Planets order, should follow the Monday or the day of
the Moon; they reckon Tuesday the day of Mars; and after Tuesday comes
Wednesday the day of Mercury, instead of Thursday the day of the Sun, and so
forth. Whereby it does appear, that the disposition of the Planets in the days
of the week, is very different from the order and situation of their Orbs.

But the Ancients having not only committed the days, but also the hours of
each day to the care of some Planet, it is very likely, that the day was called
by the name of the Planet, that had the direction of the first hour: Wherefore
Saturday or the day of Saturn was thus called, because the first hour of that
day was under the direction of Saturn; and as the following hours came on
successively, under the power of the following Planets, the second hour was for
Jupiter, who immediately followed Saturn; the third was for Mars, the fourth
for the Sun, the fifth for Venus, the sixth for Mercury, and the seventh for
the Moon, and afterward the eighth hour returned under the power of Saturn;
and according to the same order, the same Planet Saturn had still the fifteenth
and the two and twentieth hours under his direction; and by consequence the
three and twentieth hour was under the command of Jupiter, and the four and
twentieth, viz. the last hour of the day, was found under the direction of
Mars: So that the first hour of the following day came under the dominion of
the Sun, who consequently gave his name to the second day; and following always
the same order to the eighth, the fifteenth and the two and twentieth hour did
always belong to the Sun, the twenty third to Venus, and the last to Mercury:
wherefore the first hour of the third day appertained to the Moon, called for
that reason the day of the Moon, to which also was referred the eighth, the
fifteenth, and the two and twentieth hours of the same day; and therefore the
twenty third hour was ascribed to Saturn, (for from the Moon we must return
again to Saturn) and the last to Jupiter; from whence the first hour of the
fourth day was found under the direction of Mars, (who gave also his name to
the day) as also the eighth, the fifteenth and the two and twentieth; and
consequently the twenty third hour belonged to the Sun, the twenty fourth to
Venus; and the first of the fifteenth day to Mercury; and so forth, following
the same order, whereby we see the origin and the necessary series of the
names given to the days of the week, and the reason why the day of the Sun
comes after the day of Saturn, viz. Sunday after Saturday, the day of the Moon
after the day of the Sun, or Monday after Sunday; the day of Mars after the day
of the Moon, or Tuesday after Monday; Wednesday after Tuesday; then Thursday,
Friday, and at last Saturday, and so of all the rest.

There is still another ingenious reason that might be given for these
denominations of days; for the names of the Planets given to the days of the
week, follow one another in proportion with the musical harmony, called in
Greek (...), which was the Origne and principle of all the good harmony of the
Ancients, the nature whereof consists betwixt two tones of four voices, or
three intervals or sounds, different one from another; wherefore there are
always two silent tones betwixt both. And it is likely, that the Ancients to
leave us some idea of this admirable Music, have disposed the days of the
week, which follow one another according to their musical harmony; wherefore
the Planet which comes immediately after another, leaves two others behind,
which are silent; viz. after Saturn comes the Sun, leaving Jupiter and Mars;
and after the Sun follows the Moon, overrunning Venus and Mercury; after the
Moon appears Mars; after Mars, Mercury, without mentioning either the Sun or
Venus; after Mercury, Jupiter, without reckoning either the Moon or Saturn;
next to Jupiter, Venus, leaving Mars and the Sun; and the last of all next to
Venus comes Saturn; and by this perpetual revolution, we know why Sunday the
day of the Sun, follows Saturday the day of Saturn, and why after Sunday comes
Monday, etc.

HEBDOMAS,
The name of an Orator mentioned by Lucian, who once a week gave a play-day to
his Scholars, and played himself wanton tricks among the people, as Schoolboys
do upon Holy Days.

HEBE,
The Daughter of Jupiter and Juno, or of Juno alone without the knowledge of a
Man; for Apollo having once invited her to a Feast, the Fable tells us that she
eat such a quantity of Lettice to cool her self, that she got a great Belly,
and was brought to bed of Hebe, a Girl of an extraordinary beauty, who was in
Heaven Jupiter's Cup Bearer. After Hercules was taken up among the Gods, he
married her. The Ancients took Hebe for the Goddess of Youth, and consecrated
to her several Temples. The Corinthians offered her Sacrifices in a Grove,
which served for a place of Refuge to all the Malefactors, who repaired
thither; and freed men tied to the Trees, their chains and other marks of
bondage. This Goddess was represented by the Image of a young Girl, crowned
with Flowers.

HECATE,
A Divinity of Hell, Writers report her birth variously. Orpheus tells us, that
she is the Daughter of Jupiter and Ceres; others say, that she is the Daughter
of Jupiter and Asteria; and Apollodorus's opinion is, that Hecate, Diana, the
Moon and Proserpina are all one and the same, wherefore they call her triple
Hecate, or the Goddess with three heads, being the Moon in Heaven, Diana on
Earth, and Proserpina or Hecate in Hell. She was called Trivia, because her
Image was set up in cross-ways, either because of the noise that was made in
the night, to imitate the howling of Ceres seeking after Proserpina, or because
she was the Moon in Heaven, and Diana on Earth, and Proserpina or Hecate in
Hell, as the Scholiast of Aristophanes reports: Hecaten coluere antiquitus in
trivies, propterea quod eandem and Lunam, and Dianam, and Hecaten vocarent.

Servius tells us the same thing upon this Verse of Virgil,

Nocturnisque Hecaten triviis ululata per urbes.
She was represented with a dreadful countenance, her Head attired with
Serpents; and was called upon in Magic, they sacrificing to her Victims, the
blood whereof was shed in a Ditch, dug in the ground for that purpose.

HECATOMB,
A Sacrifice of an hundred Oxen, from the Greek word, (...) i. e. a hundred.
Strabo relates, that this Sacrifice comes from the Lacedaemonians, who having an
hundred Towns in their Country, sacrificed every year a hundred Oxen in honor
of their Divinities; but the charges of these Sacrifices being too great, they
were reduced to five and twenty Oxen; for they fancied by a childish cunning,
that each of these Oxen having four feet, it was enough to keep up the name of
Hecatombs to these Sacrifices, to keep to the number a hundred in these parts.

And yet afterward they offered in their Hecatombs other four-footed Beasts,
easier to be procured than Oxen, as She-Goats and Lambs; wherefore Homer speaks
in his Illiads, of Hecatombs of She-Goats and first yean'd Lambs. It Is also
reported, that an Ancient Man, having in stormy weather made a vow to Sacrifice
an hundred Oxen if he should escape the danger, and afterward seeing that he
was not able to perform his Vow, he offered to the Gods, an Hecatomb of a
hundred small Oxen made out of Dough. Some ascribe this false Hecatomb to
Pythagoras; and Diogones Laertius reports, that this Philosopher having found
out some new demonstrations of Trigonometry offered an Hecatomb of these
artificial animals, in the room of a hundred living Oxen, whom he so expressly
forbid to kill.

HECTOR,
The Son of Priamus King of Troy, and Hecuba his Wife, the most valiant of all
the Trojans, who so bravely defended the City of Troy against the Greeks. Homer
in the xxii Book of his Illiads, relates, how Priamus and Hecuba desired Hector
to avoid fighting with Achilles, and yet he pursued him vigorously. Jupiter
took pity of Hector, and put it to deliberation whither he should prolong his
life. But Minerva was against it, seeing that he was mortal. However, Apollo
stood for him. At last Jupiter put into a pair of golden Balances, the
destinies of Achilles and Hector. The fate of Hector was brought down even to
Hell. Then Apollo forsook him, and Minerva took Achilles into her protection.
Hector perceived that Minerva was against him, and that Jupiter and Apollo had
cast him off, as being near the fatal moment of his death: Notwithstanding he
behaved himself with a very great courage, and at last having received a mortal
wound by Achilles, he foretold him before he died, that Paris and Apollo should
kill him. Achilles had resolved to expose the Corpse of Hector to be devoured by
the Dogs; but Venus kept off the Dogs from his Body, and Apollo covered it with
a Cloud. Wherefore he only dragged his Corpse round about the Grave of
Patroclus, and Apollo took care of it, and kept it from being torn in pieces;
and complained also of the other Gods, who sufferr'd Hector to be insulted,
even after his death; upon which, Jupiter moved with compassion, sent Thetis to
Achilles, to persuade him to deliver up the Corpse of Hector to his Father,
which he performed for a great Sum of Money.

HECUBA,
The Wife of Priamus. After the sacking of Troy, Ulisses took Hecuba for his
share of the Booty; but having seen Polyxena her Daughter sacrificed on the
Tomb of Achilles, and provoked by so many misfortunes, and especially the death
of her Son Polydorus, barbarously murdered by Polemnester, his Son-in-law, she
fell upon him in rage, and tore out his eyes, then endeavoring to escape from
the hands of her pursurer, she was turned into a Bitch. Ovid the 13th Book of
his Metamorphoses.

HELENA,
Helen, the Daughter of Jupiter and Tyndarus King of Lacedemonia and Leda, and
Sister to Castor and Pollux. Lucian speaks thus of her in the judgment of
Paris. Venus. She is the Daughter of that fair one, of whom Jupiter being
enamored, turned himself into a Swan to enjoy her. You may well imagine that
she is not black, being come of a Swan, not fat or bulky, being produced out of
an Egg-shell. If you had seen her dance stark naked, after the manner of her
Country, you had been charmed with her agreeable motion, and the gracefulness
of her person. Wars have already been made for the love of her; for she was
stole by Theseus, when but ten years old. Since, she is augmented in Beauty, as
well as in Age, and has attracted to her the eyes of all Greece. She has been
courted by a thousand Lovers; but Menilaus was preferred before all his Rivals:
Nevertheless I will give her you, if you are so inclined. For thou shall go
into Greece, under pretense of seeing the Country, and as soon as thou art
arrived at Lacedemon, Helena will see thee; leave the rest to my care and
management




And the same Lucian in the praise of Beauty, speaks thus of her: Men hold it
in such great esteem, that Theseus, who was one of the greatest Heroes, did not
think he could be happy with all his Virtue, unless he possessed Hellen, and
stole her away, before she was at an Age fit for Marriage, without having
regard to the puissance of her Father, or the danger he ran by this attempt.
That same Hellen being since returned to her Father's House in Theseus's
absence, all the Grecian Princes fell in love with her; and for fear this Love
might be fatal to their Country, they all vowed together, to serve him who
should be preferred, and hence employed all their Forces, to put that fair one
into Menelaus's hands. Paris himself preferred her before all the Grandeurs,
and Advantages promised him by Pallas and Juno: And the Trojaus seeing all
Greece pouring upon their backs, and at liberty of avoiding of that War, by
restoring Hellen, yet resolved to keep her, at the very peril of their lives,
and the ruin of their Country.

Dion Prusianus says, that he was told by the Egyptian Priests, that Helena the
Daughter of Tyndarus, the fairest young Lady of all Greece, was courted by the
young Grecian Princes, and that the fame of her Beauty went as far as Phrygia;
but Paris Alexander Son to King Priamus, one of her Lovers, having been
preferred to all the other Princes, for the sake of his Beauty, and the
magnificence of his Equipage, married her, and presently brought her to Troy.
Menelaus and the other Grecian Princes provoked by this choice, raised a
powerful Army under the command of Agamemnon, and sat down before Troy. But
Achilles was killed in this War, and the Greeks forced to make a Peace with the
Trojans, by the mediation of Ulysses; and to repair the damage they had done
before Troy, they offered a wooden Horse gilt over to Minerva, and returned
into Greece without Hellen, whom Hector, after the death of Paris gave in
marriage to Deiphobus; but a while after she was murdered by Orestes the Son
of Agamemnon.

Herodatus reports, that after Menelaus was deceased, Nicostratus and
Megapenthus, two Lacedemonian Lords drove Helena out of the City, and the
Kingdom of Sparta; and she retired to Rhodes, where she was kindly received by
Poypbo, then Widow of Tlepolemus King of that Island, who was killed by
Sarpedon at the siege of Troy. As first Polypo entertained her very honorably;
but in her absence her Maid of Honor hanged her upon a Tree. Pausanias calls
this Queen Poliho native of Argos, and says, that her Maids being dressed like
Furies hanged Helena by the order of their Mistress, while she was bathing
herself.

Menesius speaking of the Island of Spatara relates, that Helena there granted
her first favors to Paris, and that on the banks of the firm Land opposite to
it, this fortunate Lover after this agreeable conquest, built a Temple to
Venus, for a Monument of the transports of his Joy, and in acknowledgement of
Venus's kindness, to whom he gave the attribute of Migonitis, and called his
Territory Migonion, from a word that signified the Amorous Mystery that passed
between them; and that Menelaus the unfortunate Husband of this Princess,
eighteen years after she was stolen away, came to visit this Temple, the
Territory whereof had been witness of his Misfortune, and the infidelity of his
Wife; but he did not destroy it, but only set upon both sides thereof the
Statue of Venus, and the Images of two other Goddesses, viz. Thetis and the
Goddess Praxidica, i. e. the Goddess of Punishments, to show that he would not
pass by that Affront unpunished. But, says the same Author, he had not the good
fortune to see himself revenged of Helena, for she outlived him; however,
Menelaus revenged himself on Priamus the Father of the Ravisher, and utterly
destroyed his Kingdom. As for Helena, she made a very tragical end of her life,
for having retired herself to Rhodes, near Prolixo her Kinswoman, there she was
hanged to a Tree by her orders.

HELENUS,
The Son of Priamus, and a very experienced South-sayer, whom the Greeks spared
in the sacking of Troy. He had married Andromache, whom he divorced, taking for
his second Wife Hermione, the Daughter of Menelaus, and Wife to Orestes, and
then retired into Chaonia, and there built a City after the Draught of the City
of Troy, where Aeneas landed. Thus Virgil speaks of it: Being embarked, they
sailed along the Coasts of several Islands, and among others, along the Isle
where Helenus the Son of Priamus reigned, with Andromache the Wife of Hector.
There they landed, and Helenus foretold them from Apollo, that before they
should arrive in Italy, they should go ashore in Sicily, and that Aeneas should
descend to Hell.

HELEPOLIS,
An Engine, used formerly to batter Towns, invented by Demitrius. This Engine
was a wooden Tower, covered with a contexture of Hair and fresh Hides.

HELIADES,
The Daughters of the Sun and Clymene, and Sisters to Phaeton: who being very
much concerned for the loss of Phaeton their Brother, whom Jupiter had struck
with his Thunder, were turned into Poplar-trees, out of compassion of the Gods,
and their tears changed into Amber, as the Fable tells us.

HELICE,
or Calisto, the Daughter of Lycaon King of Arcadia, whom Diana changed into a
She-Bear; because, being one of her Attendants, she let herself be corrupted by
Jupiter; but taking pity of her, he turned her into a Constellation, called
the great Bear.

HELICON,
A Mountain in Baeotia, near Mount Parnassus in Phocis, both dedicated to
Apollo and the Muses, called by the name of this Mountain Heliconides.

HELIOGABALUS,
called Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, a natural Son to the Emperor Caracalla. He
was elected Emperor by the Army, in the room of Macrinus. Historians commonly
call him Heliogabalus, and yet in many Medals he is named Heligabalus, because
before his election to the Empire, he was a Priest of the Sun in Phaenicia,
where the Sun is called after that Name. When he came to Rome he brought his
God along with him, and ordered the people to worship him exclusive of all
other Gods; and Lampridius tells us, that he sacrificed to him humane Victims,
both Boys and Girls. He was vicious to a superlative degree, and his
profuseness and effeminacy were beyond bounds, for he was served at Table with
two and twenty Courses of Meat, with all sorts of Fowls and Rarities unknown at
Rome, and fetched from the most remote Provinces. He burned Balm in his Lamps,
and kept sweet waters in his Vaults. He privately married a Vestal Virgin,
called Aquilia Severa, that he might beget a Celestial Posterity, being himself
the Priest of the Sun. His Lewdness and Debauchery grew to such an excess, that
the description thereof in History makes the Reader blush. The Soldiers
murdered him and his Mother in the Camp, and their Bodies were dragged along
the Streets of Rome, and thrown into a Kennel, and then into the Tiber;
wherefore he was called Heliogabalus Tiberinus. He had established a Senate of
Women, to decide differences arising amongst Ladies.

HELL,
The Daughter of Nephele, and the first Wife of Athamas King of Thebes, whom
Ino his second Wife attempted to destroy, whereupon he fled away with her
Brother Phryxus, riding on a Ram, whose Fleece was of Gold; but crossing over
the Sea, she fell into that Sea, which was called after her name Hellespontus.

HEMINA.
(...), say the Ancient Glosses. Hemine, i. e. half a pint English Measure;
these two words are reciprocal, and the Ancient Lexicon has translated (...) by
the word Hemina. Festus the Grammarian tells us the reason thereof. Hemine,
says he, is so called from the Greek (...) dimidium, because it is the half of
the Sextarius. This is confirmed by Aulus Gellius, who says, that if an Hemine
is poured out of a Sextarius, half a Sextarius was poured out, and not that a
Sextarius was divided by the half, dimidium, non dimidiatum Sextarium.The
Hemine was then the half of a Roman Sextarius. The Roman Hemine, says Garaut
the Commissioner of the Mint, is the same measure, with that which is called at
Paris, Dimisetier, holding eight ounces of Liquor. Fernelius tells us the same.
Hemine was also a measure of Wheat, holding about four Bushels of Paris measure.

Apuleius tells us also, that Cotyla and Hemine were synonymous among the
Ancients, and both taken for the half Sextarius: Hemine, says he, is the half
of a Sextarius, wherefore the Greeks call it Cotyle, i. e. incision or
division, because, it divided the Sextarius in two.

The Ancients often confounded these two words, and sometimes called Hemine the
Italian Cotyle; and Cotyle the Hermine of the Greeks, because Hemine was the
half of the Sextarius of Italy, as the Cotyle was likewise the half Sextarius
of the Greeks.

They kept also the Originals of the Measures in the Temples, and had recourse
to them, to verify the other Measures used amongst the People; and in this
sense the Holy Scripture speaks of the Weights of the Sanctuary, which were the
Rules for other Weights.

Varro reports, that the Balance used to weight the Coin, was kept in the
Temple of Saturn.

We read in Fannius's Writings, that the Amphora containing eight Congia, i. e.
forty eight Sextarii, was dedicated by the Ancient Romans to Jupiter upon the
Tarpeian Mount, where stood the Capitol. Quam ne violara liceret,
Sacravere Jovi, Tarpeio in monte, Quirites.
And the Emperor Vispationus having repaired the Capitol after the Civil Wars
of Vitellius, he placed therein again the Original Measures.

The Congium did hold ten Pounds, viz. a hundred and twenty Roman Ounces; which
were about three Quarts English Measure.

HERACLIDAE,
or the Posterity of Hercules, who being driven out of Greece by Euristeus,
retired to Athens, and fled for refuge to the Altars. Demophon Prince of
Athens, would not permit any Man to force out from of their shelter; however,
being afraid that Euristcus should make war against him, he consulted the
Oracle, who told him that he should sacrifice a Virgin to Ceres, to secure
himself the Victory, but Demophon refused to offer his own Daughter or any
other Virgin in sacrifice; whereupon Macaria, who was of Hercules's Family,
voluntarily submitted herself to the Oracle, and was sacrificed. The Athenians
encouraged by this sacrifice went to meet the Enemy, resolved to defend
valiantly the sanctity of their Osylum, and the liberty of the Heraclidae.
Joalus, who was Hercules's fellow Traveller, and had managed the whole
Negotiation for the liberty of the Heraclida, as his own, was at last rewarded
by the Gods, who restored him to his former strength, and granted him a
perpetual youth.

HERACLITUS,
A Philosopher, who always wept at the Miseries of the World and mortal Men,
saying that their condition was very sad, nothing being durable here below, but
all things obnoxious to a perpetual change; asserting withal that all the
pleasures that Men enjoyed are nothing else but grief, their knowledge
ignorance, their grandeur meanness, and their strength infirmity.

HERCULES,
There were several of that Name. But Hercules of Tyrus, and Hercules of Egypt,
were the most ancient of all those called by that name.

Sanchon Ciathon, who has written the pedigree of the Phaenician Gods, has
recorded Hercules amongst them, and tells us that he was the Son of Demaron,
and was called Melchartus, which signifies the King of the City, both in Hebrew
and the Phaenician Languages. We learn the same thing of Hesychius, for Melec
signifies King, and Cartha a City.

Herodotus seems inclined to place Hercules of Egypt in the first rank of
Antiquity; for he tells us, that he is one of the twelve first and principal
Gods, and that on his account a great many Ages since, the Grecks set up for
their Hercules the Son of Alcmena, and Jupiter or Amphitrion.

Jesephus in his Antiquities of the Jews has preserved a fragment of Menander
of Ephesus, who speaking of Hiram King of Tyrus, who supplied Solomon with
Timber, for the building of the Temple of Jerusalem, assures us, that he built
also himself some new Temples in Tyrus, to Hercules and Assarte, having first
demolished the ancient Temples. Hercules of Egypt was much older, as Macrobius
relates: Deus Hercules religiose quidem apud Tyron colitur, verum sacratissima
and augustissima Aegyptij eum religione venerantur. Ipse creditur and Gigantes
interemisse, etc. If Hercules of Egypt was living in the time of the War of the
Giants, the Glory of Antiquity must be allowed to him. Salust mentions Hercules
of Libya, who had founded the City of Capsa; and Orosius calls him the
Phaenician Hercules.

Eusebius relates a passage of Diodorus Siculus, who tells us in general, that
the Greeks have ascribed to themselves the Heroes and the Gods of Egypt, and
amongst others Hercules. Diodorus reports this discourse, as he heard it from
the mouth of the Egyptians, and their proofs bore a great weight. For since all
agree that Hercules was in the Engagement with the Giants, this Hercules cannot
be the Grecian Hercules, who lived but a hundred years before the siege of
Troy.

Hercules was armed with a massy Club, and coveted with a Lion's skin; these
Arms are very ancient, before offensive or defensive Arms were found out.
Hercules cleared the Earth of many prodigious Beasts, and consequently this was
performed before the Deluge, and in Egypt, which is well stocked with monstrous
Beasts.

Diodorus mentions three Hercules's. The first and the most Ancient was in
Egypt, and subdued one part of the World, and erected a Column in Africa. The
second at Crete, who erected the Olympic Games. The third was the Sun of
Jupiter and Alcmena, who executed what Euristhius had commanded him, and set up
a Pillar on the Frontiers of Europe. But these Hercules's having been recorded
one after another, all that was proper to the former was ascribed to the last:
and their names being the same, gave occasion to ascribe to a single man all
that was performed, by all those that were called by that name, as if they were
all but one Hercules. Nominis vero and studiorum similitudo effecit-ut post
obitum antiquorum res gestas huic soli, ac si unus per omne aevum Hercules
tantum extitisset, posteritas ascriberet.

The same Writer in another place describes the Birth and the Works of the
Grecian Hercules, and brings him to discourse with the famous Astrologer Atlas,
and afterward to communicate Astrology himself to the Greeks; from hence the
Greeks took occasion to say, that they had both supported Heaven. And he tells
us also, that after his death, he was honored first like a Hero, then like a
God, to whom the Athenians and all other Nations after their Example
sacrificed. But what he says of the passage of Hercules through Gaul, seems to
be a Fable of the Greeks. And we might say the like of Hercules's Travels in
Italy, were they not related by so many Writers.

There is more certainty in what he tells us of the magnificent Temple of
Hercules of Tyrus, built by the Phaenicians in the Isle of Gades in Spain.
Wherefore it is a common opinion, that the Pillars of Hercules on the Limits of
Europe, were rather set up by the Phaenicians in remembrance of their Hercules,
or by their Hercules himself, than by the Grecian Hercules. As to the Indian
Hercules mentioned also by Diodorus, it is more likely that he was the Hercules
of Egypt, who extended his Victories further than any other of that name, viz.
in the Eastern Provinces, called East Indies remote from Egypt.

Strabo does not speak with judgment of the Pillars of Hercules. For he tells
us, that some Authors thought, that which was called the Columns of Hercules,
was the Banks of the straight of Gibralter; others the Isle of Gades; others
two Mountains; and some others thought that these Pillars of Hercules, were
eight Columns of Brass, erected by the Phaenicians, in the Temple of Hercules
of Gades, whereupon they writ the charges of the building of the Temple.

Pliny says, that the Mounts Abila in Africa, and Calpe in Europe, are the
Pillars of Hercules; and that the Inhabitants of those places fancy, that
Hercules divided these two Promontories, and procured a free passage into the
Lands, to the Sea called the Mediterranean Sea.

Plutarch speaking of the Hercules of the Greeks in the life of Theseus, say
many things, which might be as justly applied to the other Hercules's. For he
observes that in these ages of ignorance, many Men of extraordinary strength
and valor, such as were Hercules and Theseus, proposed to themselves in their
expeditions to free the world of many Monsters of Iniquity, who infested
Mankind, and to bring all wild Nations to a due civility, politeness and
Religion. Tully proposes Hercides for the most perfect model of Virtue, who
exposed himself to all kind of dangers, and bore all possible Evils for the
good of Mankind. Dionysius Halicarnasseus represents the Grecian Hercules like
a virtuous Hero, who subdued all the Earth, out of a strong passion to
re-establish every where peace, concord and justice; and Aelianus says, that an
Oracle assured Hercules that he should be ranked in the number of Gods, for a
reward of doing good to all Men.

Pausanias affirms, that the Temple which Hercules (as some said) had built for
himself, was more ancient than the Hercules of Greece; and that it was well
known, that the Inhabitants of Creete had another Hercules, as well as the
Tyrians and those of Erythraea in Ionia. We may think that the Hercules of the
Erythraeans, and that of the Arabians and Assyrians is the same; for the
ancient Erythraeans were Idumaeans or Arabians. And we know that the Red Sea
was called either Erythraeum in Greek, or Idumaeuns in the Phaenician tongue,
because the word Edom signifies red. In fine, the Hercules of Egypt was not
unknown to this Author, for he says that the Hercules of Greece not being able
to prevail with the Priests of Delphus, stole away the holy Tripos, and that
then she cried out, that it was plain that he was the Grecian Hercules, and not
the Egyptian: Nam and ante Aegyptius Hercules Delphos venerat Pausanias brings
in another place an instance, how these several Hercules in series of time were
confounded in one Man; and says, that the Thasians who were come from Phaenicia
into Greece, at first adored there Hercules of Tire, but being mixed at last
with the Greeks, they worshipped Hercules of Greece.

Arrian assures us, that there were formerly three Hercules's, The Tyrian
Hercules is much older than the Hercules of the Greeks; but that of Egypt is
still more ancient; and that the Hercules, who was reverenced at Tartassus in
Spain, where Hercules's Pillars stood also, was the Tyrian Hercules, because
that City was built by the Tyrians; and the Sacrifices there offered, were
offered after the Tyrian way.

They ascribe a Dog to Hercules of Tyrus, and to this Dog is referred the
invention of purple color, the blood whereof makes this admirable color.
Poets feigned that Hercules was conceived during three nights, without the
interruption of day, to imitate the prolongation of the day obtained by Josbua
to utterly rout the Enemies of the people of God.

We read in Lycophron's Cassandra, that Hercules was devoured by a Sea-Dog,
named Carcharias, whom Neptune had sent against him. And the Scholiast of
Lycophron tells us, that this great Fish being ready to swallow Hesions the
Daughter of Laomedon, Hercules advanced, and threw himself armed into the mouth
of the Monster, and having tore his Intrails, he got out of his belly, having
lost nothing but his Hair, and that from hence Hercules was called (...);
because he was three nights in the belly of that Monster. Th^^philoct mentions
this Fable, and applies it to Jonas swallowed by a Whale.

HERCULES
the GRECIAN was the Son of Jupiter and Alcmena the wife of Amphitrio, being
yet in the Cradle he choa^ed two Serpents, which Juno out of jealousy against
his Mother, had sent to destroy him. They relate twelve Prodigies
extraordinary, called the twelve Labors of Hercules.

Euristheus the Son of Helenus King of Myce^^ having a mind to be rid of
Hercules, sent him first to stop the incursions of the Lion of the Nemean
Forest, who was fallen from the Heaven of the Moon, and destroyed all the
Country: Hercules pursued him, and having driven him into a Den, he seized upon
him, and tore his Mouth with his own hands, and ever after wore the skin of
that Lion.

After this Expedition he was sent to the Lake of Lerna near Argos, to force
the Hydra, a dreadful Serpent with seven Heads, and having cut off one Head
thereof, two arose in the place, wherefore Hercules cut off her seven heads at
once.

Then he marched against a fierce Wild-Boar, inhabiting Mount Erymanthus in
Arcadia, who spoiled all the Fields. He took him alive, and brought him upon
his shoulders to Eristheus, who was almost frighted to death at the sight
thereof.

He also caught running the Hind of Menalus's Hills, the Feet whereof were of
Brass, and his Horns of Gold, after he had pursued her a whole year.

He likewise drove away the Birds of Sty^^phalus's Lake, that were so numerous,
and of so prodigious a bigness, that they stopped the light with their wings, and
took up Men to devour them.

He engaged the Amazons inhabiting Scythia, near the Hircanean Sea, and took
their Queen Hypolita prisoner, whom Theseus married.

He cleansed the Stables of Augias King of Elis, where a thousand Oxen were
kept, the Dung whereof infected the air: and to compass this work, he turned
the course of the River Alpheus, and conveyed the Waters thereof through the
Stables, which carried away all the Dung.

He seized upon a Bull casting out fire and flames, that Neptune had sent into
Greece, to revenge some affront he had received from the Greeks.

He took Diomedes King of Thrace, and gave him to be eaten by his own
Man-eating Horses, to punish him for his cruelty toward Strangers, whom
likewise he delivered up to be devoured by his Horses, and made Geryon, who had
three Bodies, suffer the same punishment, because his Oxen devoured Travelers.

He brought to Euristeus, the golden Apples out of the Garden of the
Hesperides, and killed the dreadful Dragon that guarded them.

He went to Hell, and brought thence with him the Dog Cerberus, and delivered
Theseus, who was gone thither to keep company with Pirithous his Friend; and
this was the last of his Exploits.

Many other performances both of Justice and Courage are still ascribed to
Hercules; for he killed Busiris the Son of Neptune, who used to cut the Throats
of Travelers; and killed Cacus a three-headed Man, the Son of Vulcan, a famous
Robber, who infested Mount Aventinus, and the Country round about with his
Robberies; and passing by Mount Caucasus, he delivered Prometheus whom Jupiter
had ordered to be tied thereon, and killed the Eagle who was devouring his
Liver, and smothered in his Arms Anteus the Son of the Earth.

In the latter end of his life he was much given to Women, and Omphale Queen of
Lydia made him spin, and beat him with her Distaff, and after all his great
Achievements, he put an end to his Life on Mouut Oeta; for having put on the
Garment of Nessus the Centaur, which Dejanira his Wife had sent him by Lycas;
the malignity of Nessus's blood, which was a strong Poison, put him into so
violent a rage, that he cast himself into a burning pile of wood, and there was
consumed.

HERCULES
the LIBYAN, or HORUS. Several Illustrious Men went by the name of Hercules;
yet amongst them there were three very famous, two whereof signalized
themselves in Italy, viz. Hercules the Libyan and Hercules of Greece, the Son
of Alomena and Jupiter, whom we have lately mentioned.

Horus or Hercules the Libyan, the Son of Osiris and Isis, as Berusus and
Natalis Comes tells us, applied himself to deliver Men from oppression and
injustice. To that purpose he went into Libya, where he put Antaeus to death;
from Lybia he passed over into Spain, where he killed Geryon the Tyrant, and
from Spain he came into Italy, where he reigned thirty years. Herodotus
reports, that he was the last of the Gods, and says that he reigned twelve
hundred years; wherefore Diodorus Siculus tells us, that the Egyptians reckoned
their years by the course of the Moon, and that their years are like our months.

HERCULES GALLICUS, or OGMIUS.
The Gauls draw him with a white Beard, bald, wrinkled and tawny like old
Mariners, or rather like Charon himself, or Japetus, who is reckoned the most
ancient of Men. In short, to see him, you would take him for any thing rather
than Hercules, tho he wears the same Ensign, viz. a Lion's skin, a Massy-Club,
with a Bow bent in his left hand, and a Quiver at his back. I thought at first,
says Lucian, they did it out of mockery, or out of revenge for the incursions
he made into their Country, in his Expedition of Spain. But I have not yet told
you of the greatest mystery of the Picture; which is, that he held enchain'd by
the ears, an infinite number of People, who are tied to his Tongue, by small
twists or wires of Gold, as by so many chains, and follow him willingly,
without struggling or hanging back, insomuch that a Man would say they
delighted in Captivity. As I was wondering with some Indignation at this
spectacle, a Doctor of that Country, who spoke very good Greek, told me he
would unriddle me the mystery that was contained under that Aenigma, and begun
in the manner following. We do not with the Greeks believe, that Mercury is the
Symbol or rather the God of Eloquence, as he is styled, but rather Hercules,
who is much more powerful; and our opinion is, that he affected all that we
admire, not by the strength of his Arm, but by that of his Reason. Wherefore we
paint him under the figure of an old Man, because Reason is not accomplished
until that Age. This God holds all Mankind tied by the Ears, which is the
effects of Ratiocination, and his Tongue to which they are fastened, is the
Instrument of their Captivity. His Darts are the force of his Reasons, being
feathered, because that words are winged, as Homer calls them.

Many Temples and Altars were erected to Hercules the Gaulish at Tyrus, in
Spain, and at Rome, and one of these Altars was called Aramaxima, because of
the great quantity of Stones employed in the building thereof, whereon they
took solemn Oaths, and offered the tenth part of the Booty. And a Merchant whom
Hercules had rescued from the Hands of Pirates, built him a Temple of a round
figure, under the Title of Deo Herculi Invicto. It Is reported that neither
Flies nor Dogs entered into this Temple, because he had driven away Myagros the
God of Flies, and had left his Massy-Club at the entrance of this Temple.

Hercules was represented stark naked, except the Lion's skin, which covered
his Body, or twisted about his Arm, and holding with one hand his Massy-Club.

He is yet expressed by a figure holding three Golden Apples in his right hand,
and his Club in the left. And a great brass Figure of Hercules holding an Apple
in his hand, was lately found at Rome, in the Market for Oxen.

The Poplar-tree was dedicated to him, as Virgil says, Populus Alcidae
gratissima; and Phaedrus, populus Herculi; wherefore his Figure is yet visible
on a Greek Medal, crowned with Branches of Poplar-tree, and a Lion's skin about
his neck.

The Emperor Commodus slighted the surname of his Family, and instead of
Commodus, Son to Marcus Aurelius, took the name of Hercules the Son of Jupiter;
and leaving off the Imperial Badges, he put on a Lion's skin and wore a
Massy-Club, the badges of Hercules, and appeared publicly in this dress: And
yet not contented with it, he ordered that Coins of Gold, Silver and Brass,
should be stamped with his Effigies on one side crowned with a Lion's skin; and
on the other side a Massy-Club, a Bow, a Quiver and Arrows, with this
Inscription Herculi Romano Invicto, and when he wrote to the Senate he styled
himself Romanus Hercules, and had the Massy-Club and the Lion's skin carried
before him, in his Travels.

HERE IS,
An Heir, one who succeeds to Lands or Estate, either by right of Family or by
a last Will. The Roman Laws established three kinds of Heirs. The necessary
Heirs, were the Slaves made Heirs by their Masters who freed them, and are
called necessary, because being appointed by their Masters, they were forced to
accept of his Will, and were not allowed to quit the Inheritance, though it was
very much encumbered with Debts, and subject to great charges. The other kind
of Heirs called Sui and Necessarij, were the Children who were in the power of
the deceased Person in the time of his death, and were called necessarij,
because willing or unwilling they are Heirs; and Sui, because they are the
Testator's own and proper Domestics, and the owners of the Lands and Estates
of their Parents. The third kind of Heirs were Strangers, viz. those who were
neither Children nor Slaves to the deceased person; and these were voluntary
Heirs, for they were free to accept or quit what was left them.

As for the former, who were the Slaves of the Testator, they are freed and
Heirs by the only benefit of the law, without any other act of acceptance, and
are not admitted to refuse the Will: On the contrary, they are bound to pay all
the Debts, even out of the Estate or Goods, that they had purchased since they
had obtained their freedom, unless the Praetor granted them a benefit of
separation.

And the Children, who were under the deceased person's authority in the time
of his death, they were like Slaves, as to the necessity of accepting the
Inheritance, being necessary Heirs to their Parents; and after the death of
their Father, the Inheritance was rather a continuation of Patrimony, than a
new purchase.

The third kind of Heirs, called Strangers, who were neither Slaves nor
Children to the dead Person, were free to accept or quit the Inheritance, which
was performed by a deed in law. In the text of the Roman Law, there was three
several ways of purchasing or accepting of an Inheritance, viz. Aditio
Hereditatis, which was a solemn Deed performed before the Magistrate; Gestio
pro Herede, Deeds of owners, as to fell Estates, receive Rents and Debts, and
gather Fruits. This manner of accepting an Inheritance, is severally expressed
in the Roman Law; for in the person of strange Heirs, it is called gestio pro
herede; but in the person of Children, it is called immixtio; and the third way,
is a single and plain will of accepting or refusing.

There were also three contrary ways to quit an Inheritance, viz. Repudiatio,
which is a Deed in Law, performed in the presence of the Magistrate; Abstentio,
which was for the Children; and the last was only a single Will, when a man
declared that he was unwilling to be Heir.

Formerly they allowed an hundred days for claiming an Inheritance.

HERE IS
Ex ass, an Heir or sole Legate. See As.

HERMAPHRODITUS.
An Hermaphrodite, one that is both Man and Woman, called by the Greeks
Androgyne. Poets tell us that Hermaphroditus was the Son of Mercury and Venus,
and that meeting in a Fountain with the Goddess Salmacis, she fell in love with
him; and while she was embracing him, she found herself fastened to him by an
indissolvable tie, both Bodies making but one with both sexes. This word comes
from the Greek (...), Mercurius and (...), Venus, i. e. composed of Mercury and
Venus both Male and Female.

Monsieur Spon in his curious inquiries after Antiquity, has shown us two
precious stones, whereon the Fable of Hermaphroditus is engraven. The first is
a Cornelian, where he is represented in the Bath, ready to embrace his dear
Nymph Salmacis, and becoming but one body with her, that yet keeps both Sexes.
On the second he is already turned in the like manner that he is represented at
Rome, by Marble and Brass Statues. By this Figure the Ancients represented a
mixed Deity, composed of Mercury and Venus, called by the Greeks (...), to join
Eloquence with Pleasure; or to show that Venus was of both Sexes; for Calvus a
Poet, calls Venus a God.

Polentemque Deum venerem.
And Virgil in the second Book of his Aenids. Discedo, ac ducente Deo flammam
inter and hosts, Expedior.


Levinus speaking of this Divinity, ascribes her both Sexes. Aristophanes calls
her (...) in the Neuter Gender, and Hesychius (...) in the Masculine. And in
the Isle of Cyprus near Amathus, she is represented by a Statue, with a Beard
like a Man.

HERMES,
A Surname given to Mercury. The Hermae were Statues of Mercury commonly made
of Marble; and yet sometimes of brass, without either Arms or Feet, set up by
the Greeks and the Romans in cross ways. Servius in his Commentary on the
eighth Book of the Aeneids of Virgil, tells us the Origin of the word Hermes,
and says, that Shepherds found Mercury, called Hermes, asleep on a Mountain,
and cut off his hands; whereupon he was afterward called Cyllenius, as well as
the Mountain where this Act was performed; because (...) signifies, that which
has no Arm, or which is mai^ed of some Member; and from hence, says he, some
Statues which have no Arms, are called Hermae. But this Etymology, says Mr.
Spon, taken from the Epithet Cyllenius, given to Mercury, is contrary to what
ancient Writers report, for they derive this word from the place were he was
born, called Cyllene, a Town in Arcadia, or a Mountain of the same name.
Wherefore Pausanias in the Description of Greece, l. 8. says, that Mount
Cyllene is the most famous of Arcadia; and that on the top thereof, a Temple
was built to Mercury Cyllenius, and that the name of the Mountain, and the
Surname of Cyllenius given to Mercury, comes from Cyllenus the Son of Elatus, a
Hero of that Country: And this Etymology comes nearer to the truth, than that
related by Servius.

Suidas, morally explains this manner of making Statues of Mercury without
Arms. The Hermae, says he, were Statues of Stone, erected by the Athenians at
the Porches of their Temples, or entrance of their Houses: For Mercury being
esteemed the God of Speech and Truth, was represented with square and cubical
Statues, because square Figures cannot be set but upright, like Truth that never
changes.

The Hermae were first found out and used at Athens, wherefore Suidas tells us,
that they were peculiar to that City. Aeschines in his Oration against
Ctesiphon, mentions the porch of the Hermae, which was in his Time at Athens,
where among others there were three very remarkable Hermae set up in honor to
the Athenians, who had routed the Persians, near the River Stymon. The
Inscriptions of these Hermae were Encomiums of the Athenians valor;
nevertheless, out of a wise policy, the names of the Athenian Generals were not
mentioned in these Inscriptions; lest this Nation, jealous of their liberty,
should raise the ambition of these Great Men, and give them occasion to aspire
to the Sovereign Power.

The chiefest Hermae of Athens, were the Hipparchians, which Hipparchus the Son
of Pisistratas Tyrant of Athens, had erected in the City, the Suburbs and the
Villages of Attica, with engraven moral Instructions and Sentences, to
encourage Men to virtue, as it is related by several Authors. Cornelius Nepos in
the life of Alcibiades, tells us, that one night the Hermae then at Athens were
all cast to the ground, only one excepted, that stood at the door of the Orator
Andocides, who says in his speech of the Mysteries, that it was dedicated by
the Tribe Egeida.

The Hermae were also set up in cross ways and great Roads, because Mercury the
messenger of the Gods presided over the high ways. Wherefore he was surnamed
both Trivius from the word trivium, i. e. a cross way; and Viacus, from the
word via, i. e. way, in an Inscription of Gruter.

Tully, a great lo^er of Antiquity, being informed by the Letters of his Friend
Atticus then an Athens, that he had found some Hermae; writes thus to him, in
the seventh Letter of the first Book. Your Hermae of Marble of Mount
Rentilicus, with their head of brass, rejoice me before hand; wherefore you
will oblige me very much to send them to me, with the Statues and other
curiosities that you can find at Athens, of your own liking and approbation.
The Women honored much the Hermae, and adorned them with Flowers, that they
might obtain of them a happy fecundity, as we see in a basso relievo of
Boissard's Antiquities.

HERM-ATHENAE,
Were Statues set upon square feet like the Hermae; but represented Mercury and
Minerva, this word being compounded of Hermae and Athenae, which signifies
these two Divinities. Pomponius Atticus having found at Athens one of these
rare Statues, writes to his Friend Tully, that he would send it to him to adorn
his Library. And Tully answers him thus, Epist. 3. l. 1. What you write of the
Herm-Athenae is very acceptable to me, and I have appointed an honorable place
for them in my Academy, whereof it shall be the Ornament; seeing that Mercury
is the general protector of all Academies, and Minerva presides particularly
over mine. Wherefore you cannot oblige me more sensibly, then to procure me
these kind of Rarities to adorn this place.

It Is no wonder to see Mercury and Minerva joined together in this Statue; for
it was usual to keep Holy Days and offer Sacrifices that were common to them
both, because one presided over Eloquence, and the other the Sciences; and that
Eloquence without Erudition is but a mere sound; and Learning without
Eloquence, but an unprofitable Treasure. Therefore the Athenians, who were the
most Learned, most Eloquent and most Valiant Men in the world, did wisely to
erect and dedicate this figure of Hermathcna.

This Hermathena is the reverse of a Medal dedicated to Adrian, who boasted of
his Learning and Eloquence.

HERM-ANUBIS,
is represented two several ways; for in some Figures it is represented with the
Head of a Sparrowhawk, and in others with the head of a Dog. This strange Idol
mentioned by Plutarch, was a Divinity of the Egyptians, representing Mercury
and Anubis; the Caduceum which he holds in his hand being the common badge of
Mercury, and the head of a Sparrow-hawk the Symbol of Anubis, because Anubis
was a great Hunter; wherefore he is also expressed with the head of a Dog, and
Ovid calls him Latrator Anubis.

HERM-HERACLES,
is a Deity represented like the Hermae, with the Lion's skin and the
Massy-Club of Hercules, the Greeks call him Heracles; which has a relation to
the custom of the Ancient Greeks, who erected the Statues of Mercury and
Hercules in the Academies, because both presided over the Exercises of Youth,
viz. Wrestling, Running, Boxing, and other Combats of Champions. The union of
Mercury with Hercules, showed that Strength must be backed with Eloquence, and
that Eloquence had the art of overcoming Monsters.

Mercury was often expressed at Athens, by a square figure of an unpolished
Stone, whereon they set up the head of any other God whatsoever. The origin of
this custom was, that in former times the Statues of Mercury were placed upon
square Bases, to show the solidity of the works of Art, and especially of
Eloquence, invented by him. Wherefore in series of time, these square Bases
were taken for his representation, though there were no Statues whatsoever set
upon 'em, because these bases were peculiar to him. But afterward to honor
the other Gods Statues, they placed them upon these bases, to show that they
were famous only by Mercury, who chief business was to carry their Errands, and
execute their Orders. And the whole figure of these two Gods joined together,
was called by the name of the Deity, whose figure was set upon the Basis;
wherefore Herm-Heracles was the figure of Hercules, placed upon the
representation of Mercury.

HERM-EROS,
is a Statue of Brass, representing a God made up of Mercury and Cupid, called
by the Greeks Eros. This God is expressed by the figure of a young Boy, holding
the Caducaeum and the Purse, the two Badges of Mercury. The Ancients doubtless
intimated by this Emblem, that Eloquence and Money were two necessary things to
a Lover. Pliny speaking of fine Carver's work, mentions the Hermaerotae of one
Tauriscus; and the word Hemero's, was often used by the Romans and the Greeks
for a surname; as we may see by the Inscription of an Epitaph found at Rome.
HFRMEROTI

To the Memory of Hermeros, Infranchised by the Emperor, Overseer of the
Secretaries of the Camp; Ampliatus Freed-man of the Emperor, has dedicated this
Monument to his very good Brother.

HERM-HARPOCRATES,
The Figure of Mercury and Harpocrates, with wings at his heels like Mercury,
and holding his Finger upon his Mouth like Harpocrates, the God of silence
among the Egyptians, to show that sometimes silence is eloquent, especially
amongst Lovers, who often express themselves better with their eyes, than by
word of Mouth.

HERMA-MITHRA.
Her Figure is represented upon a Medal, that Mr. Spon has brought from the
Isle of Maltha, the Head whereof is a Woman with a Veil: On the Reverse are
three small Figures; the middle one is a Statue drawn half way, with a Mitre
on, and set upon a Term, the Inscription whereof consists only in three Punid
Characters. The Head covered with a Veil represents Juno, the Mitred head
Mercury and Apollo joined together.

HERMOGENES
was very famous in the art of Orarory. At fifteen years of age he taught
Rhetoric with general applause; and at four and twenty he forgot all that he
knew before: wherefore it was said of him, that in his youth he was a perfect
Man, and in his old age a Child. After his death his Corpse was opened, and his
Heart was found hairy, and of an extraordinary bigness.

HERODOTUS,
A Greek Historian, of a rare and singular merit, who considering with himself
which way he might become famous, he thought fit to present himself at the
Olympic Games, where all the Greeks were assembled, and there he recited his
History with so much applause, that his Books were called by the name of Muses;
and when he was passing by they cried out every where, There is the Man, who
has so deservedly sung our Victories, and celebrated the Advantages that we
have obtained over the Barbarians. His Writings were admired for the elegancy
of the Discourse, the grace of the Sentences, and and the polite style of the
Ionick Dialect.

HEROPHILUS,
He lived in the seventh Age. Pliny tells us, that he opposed the Principles of
Erasistratus, and grounded the difference of Diseases on the Rules of Music.

HEROES,
A Hero was in former ages a great and illustrious Person; and although he was
of a mortal Race, was yet esteemed by the People a partaker of Immortality, and
after his death was put amongst the Gods. Lucian defines a Hero, by one who is
neither God nor Man, but both together. St Austin in the tenth Book de Civitate
Dei, says, that it is very likely that Juno had a Child called by that name;
because, according to the opinion of the Ancients, virtuous persons after their
death inhabit the vast space of the Air, which were Juno's Dominion, according
to the Fable. Isidorus says, that the Heroes were called by that name, as if
one said Aereos or Aeres, persons raised by merit, and worthy of Heaven. Pl^^o
derives that word from the Greek (...), amor; because, says he, the Heroes came
by the conjunction of a God with a mortal Woman, or of a mortal Man with a
Goddess. The Heroes were Men, who by their Eloquence moved the People which way
they pleased, giving them an aversion against Vice, and leading them by their
discourses and examples into the way of Virtue.

HESIODUS
of a single Shepherd became a great Poet, by chewing some Laurel leaves upon
Mount Helicon. Lucian has left us a little Dialogue between Hefiod and himself,
wherein he jeers him, because he bragged of his Commerce with the Muses

Lucian. Your Verses. Hesiod, sufficiently evince you a great Poet, for all you
write is noble and lofty, and we easily perceive you have received a branch of
L'aurel from the Muses's hands. But you having said, that this divine Present
would teach things passed and the future; I would fain know, why having
descanted on the one, you have told us-nothing of the other; for you have sung
the Geneology of the Gods, beginning from the Heaven and Earth, the Chaos and
Love; you have afterward set down the precepts of Astrology for Sailors and
Husbandmen; you have treated of rural Life, of Women's Virtues, and other such
like matters; but you have not bolted so much as one word of futurity, which
had better manifested your inspiration, and redounded more to the advantage of
Men. Is it that you imposed upon us? or are you willing to conceal your secret?
or else are not your Prophecies transmitted down to us? for there is no
likelihood that the Muses should keep but that part of their promise, and
neglect to teach you futurity, which was the main thing.


Hesiod. It is easy to answer you, that having said nothing but by the
inspiration of the Muses, it is to them to give you an account of their Actions;
but if you desire to know something of my Calling, I will tell you what I know
of Agriculture. As the Gods reveal themselves to whom they please, so they
reveal only what they please, and have not taught me the least of what you
desire to know. Moreover, an Historical Truth is not expected from Poets, nor a
reason asked them of all their Fictions; besides, they are used to add many
things, for the filling up the measure of their Verses, or to cause the more
admiration; or if you should retrench them of this liberty, you would curb
their Genius. But without taking notice of the beauty of invention and
expression, which are the principal Talents, you make it your business to cavil
at the words, as you would do with those of a contract, which is the sign of a
carping quirking Wit. I forbear to mention, that you will find in my Poem
entitled The Works and Days, several Predictions, which I bestow on those, who
are good and bad Husbandmen.


Hesiod was killed by some Locrians, and then thrown into the Sea; but his body
was got off and buried near the Nemean Temple. Some Writers tell us, that he
lived in the time of Homer; others say that he was before him; and some others
report, that he lived after him.

HESIONE,
The Daughter of Laomedon, whom he exposed upon the Rocks of the Sea, to
pacisie the anger of Neptune and Apollo, whom he had not paid their wages, for
having helped him to build the Trojan Walls. Hercules offered himself to
deliver Hesione, upon condition that he should give him the Fairy Horses begot
of divine Seed; but having broke his word with him, Hercules besieged him in
his own Dominions, and took him prisoner with his Son, and stole away his
Daughter Hesione, whom he married to Telamon King of Salomina.

HESPERUS,
The Son of Japetus and Brother to Atlas, who came to settle in Italy, called
after his Name Hesperia. Being one day on Mount Atlas contemplating the Stars,
the Fable tells us, that on a sudden he vanished away, and was turned into a
Star, called Lucifer in the morning, and Hesper or Vesper in the evening.

HESPERIDES,
The Daughters of Hesperus, who by Juno's order kept a Garden or Orchard
bearing golden Apples, which Hercules took away, having killed the Dragon,
which stood at the entry in defense thereof.

HESPERIA,
Italy was thus called from Hesperus the Son of Japetus. This name was common
both to Italy and Spain, because of the Star Hesper, which appears at our West.
Notwithstanding Spain is called Hesperta ultima, because it is more western than
Italy.

HETRURIA,
A Country in Italy, now called Tuscany; formerly famous for Augures, and
Divinations or Southsayings.

HIEROPHANTAE,
Athenian Priests, Overseers of Sacrifices and holy things. Hieronymus affirms,
that they used Hemlock to keep themselves chaste.

HIEROGLYPHI,
Mysterious Figures, wherewith the Egyptians kept their Policy an Ethick
secret; for they communicated the secrets of Nature, and the particulars of
their History and Morality, only to the Priests of the Sun, and those Men who
were to succeed to the Crown or public Ministry, and yet this was performed in
a cabalistick manner. The wisest Men of Greece went to consult them, and inform
themselves of those things that they could not learn, neither by tradition nor
books, and even Moses himself was instructed in all their Sciences.

There are also Hieroglyphi in the Theology of the Pagans, Jews and Christians,
because they are only Images and representations of divine, holy and
supernatural things, as the Symbols are Images of sensible and natural things.

HIEROPHANTAE.
See before, after Hesperia.

HIPPOCENTAURI,
Which Poets and Painters have represented like Monsters, half Men and half
Horses. Lucretius denied that there ever were any; however, Plutarch relates in
the Feast of the seven Wisemen, that a Shepherd brought a Child in a Basket,
who was foaled by a Mare, and had the upper parts of Men, and the lower parts
like a Horse: Many were amazed at it, and thought fit to make an expiation for
that Prodigy. But Thales, the wisest Man of them all, answered, that the best
way to prevent the like mischief, was to let the Women look after the Mares.

Pliny also assures us, that he has seen a Hippocentaur, who was brought from
Egypt to Rome, imbalm'd with honey, according to the fashion of that time.
Phlegon of Trallis relates the same story.

St Hieronymus has described the Hippocentaur, whom St Anthony met in the
Wilderness, when he was seeking for St Paul the Hermit: Conspicit hominum equo
mixtum, cui opinio Poetarum Hippocentauro vocabulum indidit; St Anthony having
made the sign of the Cross, asked the Monster where about the holy Solitary
Paul inhabited; the Monster presently showed him the way with his hand, and
immediately run away. Some Nations of Thessaly inhabiting near Mount Pelion,
called Hippocentauri, have given occasion to this Fable; for being the first
Men who knew the art of riding on Horseback, their Neighbors fancied that the
Man and the Horse were but one body.

HIPPOCRATES,
Born in the Isle of Cos, was Disciple to Pythagoras, and esteemed the Prince
of Physic; he restored again that Science, which had been very much neglected
since Aesculapius. We have many fine Treatises of Physic and Aphorisms of his
own Writings. The Greeks decreed him the same Honors with Hercules all over
their Country. He died the hundred and fourth year of his Age, and all the time
of his Life, he enjoyed a perfect and vigorous Health.

HIPPOCRATIA,
Holy Days kept in honor of Neptune. Dionysius Halicarnasscus reports, that
the Romans erected a Temple to Neptune the Horseman, and instituted him a
Festival, called by the Arcadians Hippocratia, and by the Romans Consualia.
During that day Horses and Mules were kept from working, and led along the
Streets of Rom magnificently harnessed, and adorned with Garlands of Flowers.

HIPPOCRENE,
Otherwise Aganippe, a Fountain near Mount Helicon, dedicated to the Muses,
which sprung out of a Rock, struck with the hoof of Pegasus.

HIPPODAMIA,
She being marriageble, her Father Oenomaus King of Elis, who saw her so fair,
fell in love with her like the other Princes of Greece; and that he might keep
her for himself, he made a very wicked proposal; For his Chariot being the
lightest, and his Horses the swiftest of all the Country; under pretense of
seeking for a Husband worthy of his Daughter, he proposed her for a prize, to
him who should overcome him at the Race, but upon condition, that all those
whom he should vanquish should suffer death. And he would have his Daughter
ride in the Chariot with her Lovers, that her Beauty might surprise them, and
divert their thoughts from making haste. And by this cunning device, he
overcame and killed thirteen of these Princes.

At last, the Gods provoked with the vile action of this infatuated Father,
granted immortal Horses to Pelops, who run the fourteenth Race, was victorious,
and possessed the beautiful Lady. Some others say, that Oenomaus being
acquainted, that Pelops (who courted his Daughter) should be one time or
another the cause of his death, refused to marry her to him, but upon condition
that he should overcome him at a Race: Pelops accepted the Challenge, having
first bribed the Coachman of Oenomaus, that his Chariot might break in the
middle of the Race. Whereupon Oenomaus being overcome, killed himself, leaving
his Daughter Hippodamia and his Kingdom to Pelops, who gave his name to the
whole Country of Peloponnessus.

There was also one Briseis the Daughter of Briseis, who was called Hippodamia,
whom Agamemnon stole away from Achilles.

That name was also given to the Wife of Perithous, whom the Centaurs attempted
to steal away, the day of her Wedding; but Hercules secured her, and killed
them.

HIPPODROMUS,
An Hippodrome, a place for Races, or exercising Horses.

HIPPOLYTE,
Queen of the Amazons and Theseus's Wife, of whom he begot Hippolytus, thus
called after his Mother's name: Theseus afterward married Phaedra, Minos's
Daughter, who fell in love with Hippolytus her Son-in-law; but having refused
to consent to her amorous desires, the accused him to Theseus of having
attempted her Chastity. Theseus gave credit to her scandalous report, and
banished Hippolytus out of his presence, and desired Neptune to revenge his
Crime. Whereupon Hippolytus, to avoid his Fathers wrath, fled away riding in a
Chariot; but meeting a Sea Monster on the shore, his Horses were so frighted by
it, that they threw him down to the ground, and drew him among the Rocks, where
he miserably perished.

Phaedra, sensibly moved with his loss, and pressed by the remoise of her
Conscience, discovered the whole truth to her Husband, and killed herself out
of despair; but afterward Aesculaptus touched with compassion, restored
Hippolytus to life, and called him Virbins, as being a Man a second time.

Diodorus Siculus reports what is commonly said of Hippolytus, as one part of
the true History of Theseus. Pausanias adds the tradition of some Inhabitants
of Italy, and especially of Aricia, who say, that Hippolytus was restored to
life again, or recovered his health by the care of Aesculaplus; and not
enduring to think of a reconciliation with his Father, came into Italy, where
he founded a little Government at Aricia, and there dedicated a Temple to
Diana. Pausanias tells us also, that the custom in his time was, that the
Priest appointed for the service of that Temple, was always a Man, who in a
Duel or single Combat had killed the Priest, to whom he succeeded; but that
none but fugitive Slaves undertook the Combat. The same Author assures a little
after, that Diomedes was the first Man who dedicated a Grove, a Temple and a
Statue to Hippolytus, and sacrificed to him; and that the Inhabitants of
Troezen affirmed, that Hippolytus was not drawn with Horses, but the Gods had
honored him with a place among the Stars, and turned him into a Constellation,
called by the name of a Carter. Ovid calls him Vi^bius after his Apotheosis.

Euripides has written a Tragedy of Hippolytus, wherein he relates his History.

Theseus an Athenian Prince, who begot Hippolytus of one the Amazons, and after
her death married Phaedra, Daughter to Minos King of Crete, absented himself
from Athens. Venus resolved the ruin of Hippolytus, because he was very chaste,
and incited Phaedra to love him. Whereupon Phaedra discovered her love to her
Nurse, who was also her Confidant. The Nurse made many attempts upon
Hippolytus, to persuade him to yield to Phaedra's love, yet he continued
inflexible. Wherefore out of shame and despair Phaedra hanged herself, having
first tied some Letters to her Clothes, wherein she charged Hippolytus with the
Crime, she was herself only guilty of; Theseus, too credulous, banished
Hippolytus, and besought Neptune to destroy him, in performance of one of the
three promises, this God had passed his word to grant him. Neptune heard his
request, and was the ruin of Hippolytus. But Diana appeared to Theseus, and
discovered to him the innocence of Hippolytus, ordaining withal, that he should
be honored like a God.

HIPPOMANES,
A famous poison of the Ancients, which is one of the Compositions in amorous
Philters. Authors don't agree about what it is.

Pliny says, that it is a black Flesh-Kernel in the Forehead of a Colt newly
foaled, which the Mare eats up as soon as she has foal'd. Servius and Columella
report, that it is the venembus issue of a Mare, when she is fit to be covered.

HIPPONA,
A Divinity honored by Grooms in Stables, where her figure is kept. This
Goddess was called upon on account of Horses.

HIPPOTAMUS,
A River-Horse, living principally in the Rivers Nile, Indus, and other great
Rivers mentioned by Pliny. This Creature has a Cloven-foot like an Ox; the
Back, the Mane and the Tail of a Horse, and neighs like him. His Teeth are like
the Teeth of a Wild-Boar, but not quite so sharp; the skin of his back when
it is dry resists all kind of Arms. Scaurus in the time of his Office of Edile,
brought the first alive to Rome.

HISTRIO,
A Stage Player or Buffoon. This word is only used to signify the merry Actors
in the old Comedies of Plautus and Terence; and they are so called, says
Festus, from Istria, because the first Farcers came from that Country. Plutarch
tells us, that the Romans having sent for many Dancers out of Tuscany, there
was one amongst them, who excelled above others, called Hister, who left his
name to all those of his profession. And we may also add, that those whom the
Romans called Ludios, were called Histriones by the Tuscans.

HOMERUS,
Homer. Velleius Paterculus reports, that Homer was the wittiest Man that ever
was born, and that he deserved the Name of Poet by excellency; that as he never
had imitated any one that was before him, so after him none had been able to
match him; and in fine, that he and Archilochus were the only Men who had begun
a great work, and had carried it to its perfection. Homer has left us two
incomparable Works, one of the Trojan War, entitled Iliads; and the other of
the long and dangerous Voyages of Ulysses, under the Title of Odysses, each of
them divided into four and twenty Books. Alexander the Great ordered them to be
laid up in a Case, inlaid with precious Stones, he got amongst the Spoils of
Darius King of Persia. Yet it is uncertain where Homer was born, and many Cities
of Greece ascribe to themselves the honor of his birth. Lucian speaks thus on
this account. It Is neither known what Homer was, nor what he did, nor his
Country, nor his extraction, nor the time wherein he lived; otherwise there
would not be so much dispute, as there is on this subject; nor would the people
doubt whether Colophon was his Country, or Chio, or Smyrna, or Cumae, or
Thebes, or a hundred other Cities; nor whether his Father is Maeonis the River
of Lydia, or some Man of that Name, and his Mother Menalepis, or some Nymph of
the Dryades, and whether he lived in or since the time of the Hero's. For it is
neither known, whether he is more ancient than Hesiod, under the name of
Melesigena, or whether poor or blind, as is the common rumor.

The same Lucian, in the description of the Island of the Blessed, says again:
When I had been two or three days in that Country, I accosted Homer, and
desired him to tell me where he was born, because it was one of the greatest
Questions amongst the Grammarians, he told me, they had so perplexed him upon
that subject, that he himself knew nothing of the matter, but that he believed
he was of Babylon, and there called Tigranes; as Homer amongst the Greeks,
being delivered to them for an Hostage. I then asked him whether he made those
Verses, which are disallowed and damned as none of his. He told me he did,
which made me laugh at the impertinence of those that will needs deny them. I
also inquired why he had begun his Poem with anger, and he said it was done
without design, and that he did not write his Odysses before his Illiads, as
several held. As for his pretended blindness, I did not speak to him on it,
because I plainly saw the contrary.

Tatian, one of the most ancient Apologists of the Christian Religion, reports
that Homer was before all Poets, Philosophers and Greek Historians, and is the
most ancient of profane Writers. However, he affirms that Moses is more ancient
than Homer himself.

Tertullian has observed that the Pagans did not deny, that the Books of Moses
were extant many ages before the States and Cities of Greece, before their
Temples and Gods, and also before the beginning of Greek Letters. In fine, he
says, that Moses lived five hundred years before Homer's time; and the other
Prophets who came a long while after Moses, were yet more ancient than all the
Wise men, Lawgivers and Philosophers of Greece. And by consequence the Holy
Scripture is without comparison much older than Homer; and as the Poesy of
Homer, who lived so many ages before all the Philosophers, Historians and Greek
Writers, was a pattern to them, so in the like manner Homer has followed the
truths of the holy Scripture, as they were then spread abroad in the World.

Aelian assures us, that Ptolomeus Philopator King of Egypt, having built a
Temple to Homer, he set up therein his Figure upon a Throne, with the
representation of all the Cities that pretended to the honor of his birth; and
that Galaton drew the picture of Homer with a Torrent coming out of his Mouth,
at which all Poets were drawing water.

We learn from Plutarch, that Alexander had always the Illiads of Homer under
his Pillow with his Dagger, and laid it up in a little Casket of an
extraordinary value, that was found amongst the Spoils of Darius.

Horace has written in one of his Epistles, an Encomium on the Illiads and
Odysses of Homer, and declares at first, that neither Chrysippus nor Crantor,
who excelled amongst the Stoics and Academick Philosophers, and had set down
the most perfect rules, of Morals, had never so well conceived nor so happily
explained the nature and the laws of honest and profitable, virtue and vice, as
Homer himself had done in his Illiads, Trojani belli scriptorem, etc. Horace
gives reason for what he did, saying, that the Illiads represented wonderful
well the passions, and the fatal consequences of the foolish conduct of many
Kings and Nations. Cur ita crediderim, nisi quid te detinet, audi.


In the City of Troy, Antenor pretended that Helena should be restored, and
Paris opposed him, and sacrificed his own Country to his brutish passion. In
the Grecian Army Achilles and Agamemnon fell out; one follows the passion of
his Love, and the other the transports of his Anger: Nestor endeavors to bring
them to an Agreement, but to no purpose. On the contrary, the Odysses
represents in the person of Ulysses, a perfect model of Wisdom and Virtue, when
after he had took revenge of the unchastness of Paris upon the City of Troy, he
runs for a long while so many dangers at Sea, overcomes Storms and Adversities,
and resists the Enchantments of Mermaids and Circe, viz. Voluptuousness, which
stupifies those who give themselves over to it: On the other side, the Noblemen
of Ithaca, who pretended to marry Penelope, show us the effeminate life and the
fatal end of voluptuous Men; for at last they washed with their own blood the
wrong they had done to Ulysses during his absence, and the infamous
debaucheries they had committed in his Palace.

Of all the great Men of Antiquity, none had so great honors performed to them
as Homer: For, besides the Statues erected to him, and Medals stamped with his
Effigies, they erected also Temples and Altars to his honor, where they
offered him Sacrifices. And a Sect of Christians, called Carpocratians, adored
and burnt Frankincense to Homer's Image, in the like manner as they did to the
Images of our Lord and St Paul, as St Austin and St John Damascen, and the Book
ascribed to the Emperor Charles the Great tells us.

We have still many ancient Monuments of the divine honors that were performed
to this great Poet, and amongst others a very ancient Marble, which was found
in the Territory of Terrentium. M. Cuper tells us, that Archelaus of Priene,
who made that work, as it appears by the Inscription thereof, endeavored to
express thereby the Apotheosis of Homer. He is represented by this figure
setting on the top of Mount Olympus, holding a Scepter in his right hand,
crowned with a Diadem, and an Eagle by him. There were eleven Images of Women
round about Homer, representing the nine Muses, and his Illiads and Odysses set
in the rank of the nine Muses. Behind him are the Figures of Time and Harmony,
setting a Crown on his head. Not far off is an Altar, and near it on one side
is represented the Fable, and on the other the History; and further off are set
in order Poesy, Tragedy, Comedy, Virtue, Memory, Faith and Wisdom.

The Singers, who formerly sung the Poems of Homer, were dressed in red clothes
when they sung the Illiads, and in blue Clothes when they sung the Odysses, and
some wrapped up the Illiads in a red Parchment, and the Odysses in a blue one.

Tully, l. 3. de Orat. says, that Pisistratus Tyrant of Athens, was the first
who set the Illiads and Odysses in the order we now have them.

Apollinarius wrote a Poem in imitation of the Illiads of Homer, containing the
whole History of the Old Testament to the Reign of Saul; and divided also his
work in four and twenty Books, according to the four and twenty Greek Letters.
Besides this Poem, he wrote Comedies like those of Menander, Tragedies in
imitation of Euripides, and Lyrick as Verses fine as those of Pindar.

Pythagoras being come down into Hell, saw the Soul of Hesiod tied with chains
to a Brass Pillar, and that of Homer hung to a Tree, both exposed to the biting
of Serpents, in punishment of what they had writ of the Gods.

Strabo tells us, that of all the editions of Homer, that which is called e
Narthecio is the most correct and most esteemed, being the work of Calisthenes
and Anaxarchus. Aristotle gave this Edition to Alexander, and it was called
after that name, because Alexander kept it in the rich and precious Box of
Darius.

HONOR,
Honor, a Divinity always represented with Virtue; wherefore no man could get
into the Temple of Honor, but by passing first through the Temple of Virtue,
whereby the Ancients represented to us that Honor proceeds from Virtue; and to
that purpose M. Marcellus built two square Temples joined together, one to
Virtue and the other to Honor, because true Honor arises from solid Virtue.
These two Divinities are represented on the Medals of Vitellius, by two
engraven figures; one of them stands on the right side half naked, holding an
Half-pike with one hand, and a Horn of Plenty with the other, and a Helmet
under her right foot: the other figure is on the left side, and has a Helmet
on, holding a Scepter with her right hand, and a Dart with the left, treading
with its right foot upon a Tortoise, with this Inscription, Honos and Virtutes.

HORAE,
The Hours. Poets tell us, that they are the Daughters of Jupiter and Themis;
and Homer calls them the Door-keepers of Heaven; that is the Fable, the Truth is,

The Hours that divide the Day in four and twenty parts, were during five
hundred years unknown to the Romans. For till the first Punick War, they
reckoned the day by the rising and setting of the Sun; then they added Noon;
and in fine, they found out the division of the civil day into four and twenty
hours.

However, there are two kinds of hours; for some are equal, and others unequal.
Equal hours are those that are always in the same state, as the hours we make
use of, each of them making the twenty fourth part of the natural day. They are
to the number of four and twenty, whereof twelve are for the day, and twelve
for the night. Unequal hours are longer in Summer, and shorter in Winter, in
regard to the day; or on the contrary as to the night. When I speak of unequal
hours, one must not think that one of these hours are longer than the other;
but only in respect to the several Seasons, those of the Summer being longer
than those of the Winter, in regard to the day; and as for the night, those of
the Winter are longer than those of the Summer. And dividing this way the
artificial day in twelve equal parts, the sixth hour will fall at noon, and the
third will be the middle of the foregoing time, from the rising of the Sun to
noon; as the ninth hour is the middle of the following time, from noon to
Sunsetting; and thus of the others.

The Romans divided the hours of the day in to four, viz. Prima, Tertia, Sexta,
Nona. Prima began at six a Clock, Tertia at nine, Sexta at twelve, and Nona at
three of the Clock in the Afternoon. Wherefore the Canonical hours were called
Prima, Tertia, Sexta, Nona, used by the Church to honor the sacred Mysteries
performed at these Hours.

Likewise, the Romans divided the twelve hours of the night into four Watches,
called Vigiliae, a Latin word taken from Military Discipline, wherefore Pliny
calls them Castreases. Vegetius tells us why there are four Vigiliae in the
night, and why each Watch was of three hours. It was not possible, says he,
that a Soldier should keep Centry a whole night, wherefore it was divided into
four Vigiliae, and at each of these Vigiliae they relieved the Centries, and
set fresh ones in their rooms.

Now we must consider how the Romans reckoned their hours. Prima began at six a
Clock, and comprehended three hours. And if one asked how they reckoned the
seventh and the eighth hours; we answer that they were distinguished amongst
themselves, and had their peculiar name, viz. prima, secunda, tertia, quarta,
quinta, sexta, septima, octava, nona, decima, as Martial tells us.

Prima salutantes, atque altera continet hora,
Exercet raucos tertia causidicos:
In quintam varios extendit Roma labores,
Sexta quies lassis, septima finis erit:
Sufficit in nonam nitidis octava palaestris,
Imperat extructos frangere nona toros:
Hora Libellorum decima est, Eupheme, meorum,
Temperat ambrosias cum tua cura dapes.
The twelve hours of the day in the Equinox, are here set down according to
their order. The first hour of the day was from six to seven; the second, from
seven to eight; the third, called Tertia, happened at nine a Clock. And by
these words Inquintam extendit, was comprehended the fourth and the fifth hour,
viz. eleven a Clock in the morning; Sexta befell always at noon; the seventh
hour, was from noon to one a Clock; the eighth, from one to two; the ninth, was
from two to three; and the tenth, was from theee to four; and the rest was
extended to the first Watch of the Night, which began at five and six of the
Clock in the Evening inclusively.

The hours of the night were reckoned in the like manner as those of the day;
at the sixth hour was midnight.

The Romans explained also the several times of the night in other undetermined
terms. For when the Sun was setting, they called that time Solis occasus; from
the Sunsetting to dark night, Vesper or Vespera, from the Evening-star. The
beginning of the night was called Crepusculum, after that they lighted the
Lamps, and that time was called Prima fax, Prima lumina; when they went to bed,
Concubitum, or Concubia nox; the time of the first sleep, Nox intempestia, or
silentium. The middle of the night was called Media nox; then Gallicinium, the
Cocks crowing; then Conticinium, when the Cock had done crowing: After that
came Diluculum the dawning of the day; and at last Aurora, and Solis ortus.

HORATIUS,
Horace. There were many of this name.

HORACE,
called COCLES, or one eyed. A Roman Captain, who sustained the efforts of the
Enemy, attempting by force of Arms to restore King Tarquinius into Rome, till
the Sublician Bridge was broke, and then cast himself into the Tiber, and thus
escaped the Enemies fury. The Consul Publicola erected him a Statue in the
Temple of Vulcan.

HORACE,
Surnamed Flaccus, Native of Venusian a Town in Apulia, a Lyrick Poet, and
intimate Friend of Maecenas, a great Lover of Learned Men. He has left us four
Books of admirable Odes, wherefore the Romans have no occasion to envy the
Greeks Pindar; besides a Book of Epods, two Satyrs, and several Epistles, with
a learned Treatise of the Art of Poetry, which have made him famous to
posterity. He died the 57th year of his age, and 746 after the foundation of
Rome.

There were also three Brothers of that name, who fought for the Roman Liberty,
with three Brothers called Curiatii, of the City of Alba, the Inhabitants
whereof pretended to the Sovereign Power. Two of the Horace's lost their Lives
in the fight; but the third who remained alive, himself killed the three
Guriatii, and thus the Inhabitants of Alba became Subjects to the Romans.
Horace came victorious to Rome, and was received with the Acclamations of the
people; but he blasted his Victory by the death of his Sister, who was to marry
one of the Curiatii, not being able to bear the reproachful words of an angry
Maid for the death of her Lover.

HORMUS,
A kind of Dance of Girls and Boys, where the Boy leads the Dance with
Masculine and Warlike Postures, and the Girl followed him with soft and modest
steps, to represent an Harmony of two Virtues, Power and Temperance.

HOROLOGIUM,
A Clock, an Engine that moves of it self, or has the principle of its motion
in it self, used to measure Time, and show the hours of the day and night.

At first the Romans had no certain Rule for the time of their Employments,
they measured it only by the Course of the Sun. Pliny reports, that in the Laws
of the twelve Tables, that were collected in the Year 301, there was nothing
mentioned concerning time, but only the rising and the setting of the Sun, and
Noon.

Papyrius Cursor set up a Sun-Dial at the Temple of Quirinus, but it did not
prove right. Thirty years afterward, the Consul M. Valerius Messola, as Varro
relates, after the taking of Catana in Sicily in the Year 477, during the first
Punick War, brought from thence to Rome a Dial, which he fastened to a Pillar
near the Rostra; but the Lines thereof not being drawn according to the degrees
of the latitude of the pole, it did not prove exact, yet they made use of it
during the space of eleven years, when Martius Philippus, Censor with L.
Paulus, set up another more true.

The Greeks were also a long time without either Clocks or Sun-Dials.
Anaximenes Milisius, Anaximander's Scholar, was the first Inventer of Sun-Dials
amongst the Greeks. Pliny says, that Thales showed the use thereof to the
Lacedaemonians. The Greeks called them (...), and the Romans Solaria. But how
exact so ever these Dials were, yet in the night or in cloudy weather they were
of no use. Wherefore Scipio Nasica, the Colleague of Lanatus, to prevent this
inconveniency, found out the Clepsydra or Water-Clock, (...) i. e. to steal
Water, because it passed so insensibly, that it seemed to steal upon the sight.

Pierius in the sixth Book of his Hieroglyphics says, that the invention of
the Clepsydra, was found in the Town of Achanta, beyond the River Nile, where
three hundred and sixty Priests were every day pouring water out of the Nile
into a Vessel, out of which they let the water drop by little and little to
measure the hours of the day.

And though the word Horologium commonly signifies Clocks that go by Weights, and
have Wheels, and a Balance with a Bell; yet those that are made with Wheels,
and fit to carry about, called Watches, and those called Sciotherick Dials, or
Sun-Dials, which shows the hour by the shadow of a Needle elevated upon
different surfaces, falling upon lines disposed in order by Gnonomicks, may be
called also by the name of Horologia, as well as the Clepsydra's, and Clocks
with Wheels and Bells.

Vit^uvius speaks of many kinds of Sun-Dials.

The Hemicyclus or the half Circle, is a Dial hewn into a square, and cut to
incline like the Equinox; Berosus a Chaldean was the inventer thereof.

The Hemisphere Dial was found out by Aristarchus Samius. The Dials called
Scaphia, were hewn in a round Figure, having an elevated Needle in the middle.

The Discus of Aristarchus was an horizontal Dial, the sides whereof were
somewhat raised, to prevent the inconveniency, found in the Dials that had
their Needle upright and perpendicularly elevated upon the Horizon; for their
sides thus raised up, keep the shadow from extending it self too far off.

The Spider invented by Eudoxus, is the same as the Anaphoric Horologium. Some
say that Apollonius has found out the Plinthus or Dial-post, which was set in
the Circus Flaminius. Scopas Syracusanus made the Dial called (...), used for
places mentioned in History. Parmenion was the inventor of the universal Dial,
fit for all Climats. Theodosius and Andreas Patrocles invented the Pelecynon,
which is a Dial made in the figure of a Hatchet, where the opposite lines, that
show the Constellations and the Months, are close toward the middle, and
stretched toward the sides, which make the form of a Hatchet with two edges.
Dionysidorus found the Cone; Apollonius, the Quiver, which are vertical Dials,
opposite to the East and West, and being broad and obliquely set, represent a
Quiver.

There were yet many other kinds of Sun-Dials invented, as the Gonarcus,
Engonatus, Antiboreus. These are not mentioned, neither in Greek nor Latin
Authors The Gonarcus and Engonatus seem derived from the Greek, and signify
Dials made upon several surfaces, some whereof being horizontal, others
vertical, and some others oblique, make many Angles; wherefore these angular
Dials are called by the word (...), i. e. Angle or Knee. The Antiboreus is an
Equinoxial Dial, turned toward the North.

An Hourglass, used to measure time by the running of sand, is made with two
small Glasses joined together by the ends; one of them is full of very small
sand, which runs through a little hole of a thin plate of Brass, which is at
the joining of both Glasses.

Clepsidrae or Water-Clocks, were commonly used by the Ancients in Winter, and
were of several kinds, as we may see in Vitruvius. They had this common, that
the Water did drop insensibly through a little hole from one Vessel into
another, wherein raising by little and little, it raised up a piece of Cork,
which showed the hours several ways.

The Ancients had still a third kind of Clock, called Clocks for the Night,
invented by Plato. It was a Clock which gave to understand by hearing, what the
eyes were not able to perceive in the dark of the night; and this Engine was
composed of many Flutes.

Eginard, Secretary to Charles the Great, speaks of a Clock made after the like
manner, which was sent to this Emperor by the King of Persia, and tells us that
it was a Clepsydra, which dropping from time to time brass balls, into a Basin
of the same Metal, struck the hours.

The Clocks with Wheels and striking were unknown to the Romans. Ctasibius the
Son of a Barber of Alexandria, gave occasion, to the finding out of striking
Clocks. The common opinion is, that one Pacificus Archdeacon of Verona was the
inventer thereof.

HOROSCOPUS,
the Horoscope, the Degree of the Ascendant, or the Star ascending above the
horizon, at the moment you intend to predict any thing, as what weather it will
be, what may be the fortune of a Man, who is coming into the World. They give
also the name of Horoscope to the figure containing the twelve Houses, wherein
they observe the disposition of Heaven and Stars at a certain moment, to
predict Men's fortune.

HORTA,
otherwise called ANGERONA and STIMULA. A Divinity of the Ancients, who
inclined Men to well doing; Plutarch says, that her Temple was always open.

HORTENSIUS
called QUINTUS, was a famous Roman Orator, endowed with an admirable
Eloquence, and a very singular and graceful way of speaking. He was raised to
the High-Priest's dignity; Tully has made his Encomium in his Works. His
Daughter called after his name Hortensia, was also very eloquent, and pleaded
the cause of the Roman Matrons with such force of Eloquence, that half of the
Tax, that the Trium viri had laid upon them, was remitted.

HORTUS,
A Garden. The Romans under the name of a Garden, did not only mean a piece of
Ground planted with Trees and Flowers, but also Country Houses, with an extent
of Ground divided into Gardens, Parks, Meadows and Vineyards. In this sense
ancient Writers speak of the fine Gardens of Caesar, Salust and Maecenas, which
were built in and out of Rome, with great Magnificence, in regard to both
Structures and Gardens.

The Gardens of the Romans were principally adorned with several Walks, Trees,
Beds of Flowers, Orchards, Waterworks, and other Ornaments.

They had also other Gardens, called Pensiles, hung up and carried upon Wheels,
which were planted with Fruit Trees, Vines, Melons, and Cucumbers; and they
removed them from one place to another, according to the weather. Those Gardens
were covered with Ising-Glasses, and the Sun darting his Beams upon the
Glasses, made the Fruitripen naturally, as we learn by this Epigram of Martial.
l. 8. Ep. 4.

Pallida ne Cilicum timeant pomaria brumam;
Mordeat and tenerum fortior aura nemus:
Hibernis objecta notis specularia puros
Admittunt soles and sine fece diem.
We may read also upon this subject, the 68th Epigram of the same Book, where
he compares the Vines that Entellus kept in Wintor, as green and full of Grapes
as in Autumn, with the Apple Trees that Alcinous King of the Phaeaces,
preserved by the art of Ising-Glass. Pliny reports, that Tiberius kept also his
Fruits and Cucumbers by the same Art: Nullo quippe die contigit ei, pensiles
little hortos premoventibus in soles rotis olitoribus. rursusque hibernis diebus
intra specularium, etc.

They raised likewise Gardens on the top of their Houses, in imitation of the
Gardens of Babylon, built by a King of Babylon and Syria called Cyrus, to
please the humor of a Persian Courtezan, whom he loved. This Garden was of a
square figure, and born up with Pillars raised one upon another, and founded
upon beams of stone sixteen foot long, and six foot broad, whereupon was laid
the first Bed made with Reeds, joined and cemented together with a kind of a
liquid Bitumen taken out of a Lake, the property whereof was to unite so
strongly the parts cemented therewith, that it was impossible to separate one
from another. There was another Pavement of Brick laid upon the first; and in
fine, a third of Tiles and Lead; and upon these Beds they laid the Earth.

HORUS,
The Son of Isis, in whose name the Sun was adored by the Egyptians. Some
Writers report, that he was King of Assyria and a great Philosopher, who
divided the Seasons of the Year, the Days and the Hours, which were called
after his Name Horae.

Some are of opinion that Harpocrates is also the same Divinity with the Sun
and Horus; and this conformity appears by his Birth, seeing he is the Son of
Isis, famous among the Egyptians. M. Tristan mistakes, when he says, that his
Mother made him immortal by suckling him; and that for this reason they were
used in the pomp of Isis, to carry a small golden Vessel full of Milk, to make
Libations.

It Is true that Mercury became immortal, because Juno suckl'd him; but Diodorus
Siculus affirms only, that Isis rendered her Son immortal, by virtue of an
Unguent she had found out. This conformity is yet evidenced, by the several
symbols of these Divinities. For they dedicate the same Plant to both of them,
and they are represented with the same Animals and the same Attendance.
Sometimes the Sun is expressed by the figure of a Soldier, because he was
called by that name in the Mysteries, and those who were initiated were also
called by that very name: And the Sun and the Moon, instead of riding in a
Chariot like other Gods, had a Ship, because Men fancied that the Sea afforded
them their Food.

Harpocrates carried over his head Fruit encompassed with some open leaves,
like leaves of Cliver, because it was the custom to crown therewith the
Egyptian Divinities; besides that Herb opens of itself at Sunrising, and shuts
of itself at Sunsetting. This God holds a Finger upon his Mouth, to show the
silence religiously observed by the Pagans in their Mysteries.

The Wings of Harpocrates are another Argument, to prove that he is the Sun;
for this Star is commonly represented with Wings, to show the swiftness of his
Course.

The figure of Harpocrates is armed with a Quiver, which agrees with the Sun,
darting Beams upon the Earth like so many Arrows. This Effigies carries on its
arm a small Vessel, to show that humidity, joined to the heat of the Sun, is
the cause of all Productions.

At the left foot of Harpocrates there are representations of Geese, because
the natural heat of these Creatures represents the heat of the Sun, and he
carries a Massy-Club twisted about with a Serpent, because this Animal is in a
singular manner dedicated to the Sun. At his right foot is the figure of a
Hare, which was also consecrated to the Sun, because of his fecundity and
swiftness. It Is reported, that Hares never shut their eyes night nor day, which
is an emblem of the Sun, which never ceases to afford light to some part of the
World.

The Ancients were used to ascribe a Raven and a Swan to the Sun, to represent
his light by the whiteness of the Swan, and his darkness by the black feathers
of the Raven. And this Harpocrates was covered on one side, and naked on the
other, because when the Sun gives light to our Hemisphere, the other is covered
with darkness.

HOSTIA,
A Victim sacrificed to a Deity. The Aruspicina of the Ancients was performed
by looking into the Intrails of the Victims. The word Hostia comes ab hostibus,
because they sacrificed Victims, either before they engaged the Enemy, to beg
the favor of the Gods; or after they had obtained the Victory, to give them
thanks.

Writers give two different significations of these words Hostia and Victima.
Isidorus l. 6. c. 18. says, that the Animal that the Emperor or the General of
the Army sacrificed before he engaged the Enemy, to render the Gods favorable
to him, was properly called Hostia, deriving that word from Hostis, Enemy, and
from Hostire, to strike the Enemy. Hostiae apud veteres dicebantur sacrificia
quae fiebant antequam ad hostem pergerent; victimae vero sacrificia quae post
victoriam devictis hostibus immolabantur. And to confirm this opinion, he
brings in the Authority of Festus, who says that Hostia dicta est ab hostire to
strike, as if by that Hostia, they had begged the favor of the Gods, to beat
and overcome the Enemy.

The word Victim comes from the Sacrifice offered by the Emperor to the Gods,
after a Victory obtained over the Enemy, a victis and profligatis hostibus.
Ovid gives us this Etymology in the first Book of his Fasti v. 335. Victima
quae cecidit dextra victrice vocatur;
Hostibus a victis, Hostia nomen habet.


Aulus Gellius tells us, that Hostiae might be indifferently sacrificed by
every Priest, but that the Victim was only sacrificed by the vanquisher of the
Enemy. Isidorus reports also l. 5. c. 13. that the Victim was offered for great
Sacrifices, and taken out of the great Cattle; but Hostia was sacrificed for
the least, and taken out of a Herd of Sheep. To this custom Horace alludes, Ode
17. l. 2. where he exhorts Maecenas to perform his vow for the recovery of his
health, and offer Victims, while on his part he will sacrifice a Lamb. Reddere
victimas,
Aedemque votivam memento;
Nos humilem feriemus agnam.


What difference soever might be between these two words, they were often
confounded, and promiscuously taken one for another by ancient Writers.

Two kinds of Hostiae were offered to the Gods; some to know their will by
looking into the Intrails and Inwards of the Sacrifices; in other Sacrifices,
they contented themselves to offer the life of the Victim, wherefore these
Sacrifices were called animales Hostiae. As we learn of Trebatius, l. 1. de
Relig. apud Macrob. l. 3. c. 25. Hostiarum duo genera fuisse docet, alterum in
quo voluntas Dei per exta disquirebatur, alterum quo sola anima Deo sacrabatur,
unde and animales Hostias vocabant Aruspices.

Virgil speaks of these Sacrifices in his Aeneid. Pecudumque reclusis
Pectoribus inhians spirantia consulit exta.
l. 4. v. 64

And the same Virgil, l. 5. v. 483. Hanc tibi Eryx meliorem animam pro morte
Daretis,
Persolvo.


The Ancients had many kinds of Hostia; called Hostiae ^urae, Praecidaneae,
Bidentes, Injuges Eximiae, Succidaneae, Ambarvales, Amburbiales, Caneares,
Prodigae, Piaculares, Ambegnae, Harvigae, Harugae Optata, Maxima, Medialis.

HOSTIAE PURAE,
Were Lambs and Pigs ten days old, as Festus reports, l. 1. Agnus dicitur a
graeco (...) quod significat Castum, eo quod sit hostia pura and immolationi
apta: And Varro. l. 11. De Re Rust. Porci a partu decim^ die habentur puri, ab
eo appellantur in Antiquis sacris, tum quod ad sacrificium idonti dicuntur.

HOSTIAE PRAECIDANEAE;
Thus called from prae and caedo, i. e. to sacrifice or kill before, because
they were sacrificed the eve of the solemn Feast, as Aulus Gellius relates;
Praecidanea quae ante sacrificis solemnia pridie mactabatur: And Praecidanes
Porca, a Sow offered in sacrifice to Ceres by way of expiation before the
Harvest, by those who had not exactly performed the Funerals of a deceased
person of their Family, or purified the House where some body was dead,
according to the usual custom. As Festus assures, Porca etiam praecidanea quam
immolare soliti antequam novam frugem inciderunt. This is confirmed by Aulus
Gellius, Porca etiam praecidanea appellata, quam piaculi gratia ante fruges
novas fieri ceptas immolari Cereri mos fuit, si qui familiam funestam aut non
purgaverant, act alitur eam rem quam oportuerat, procuraverant.

Varro tells us, in the Book of the Life of the Roman People, that no Family
was purified but by offering of that sacrifice, which the Heir was obliged to
offer to Tellus and Ceres, Quod humatus non fit, heredi porca praecidanea
suscipienda Telluri and Cereri, aliter familia pura non est.

HOSTIA BIDENS,
A Sacrifice of two Years old, at which age they were commonly sacrificed,
having then two teeth higher than the six others. Wherefore Bidentes is the
same thing as Biennes, and is used not only for Sheep, but also for Hogs and
Oxen; with this restriction, that Bidentes alone is to be understood only of
Sheep; and when it is applied to signify other Animals, the Substantive is
added to it, as we may observe by what Pomponius says: Mars, tibi voveo
facturum si unquam redierit, bidenti verre.

HOSTIAE INJUGES,
Were those that were never under the yoke, nor tamed. Virgil calls them, Et
intacta totidem cervice juvencae.


HOSTIAE EXIMIAE,
The finest Victims of a Herd, separated from the rest, and appointed for the
Sacrifice, as Donatus says: Eximia pecora dicuntur quae a grege excepta sunt ut
uberiijs pascantur, sed proprie eximii sunt porci majores qui ad sacrificandum
excepti liberiijs pascantur. Etenim boves qui ad hoc electi sunt egregii vel
eximii dicuntur, and oves lectae. As Virgil observes, Mactant lectas de more
bidentes.
Virg. 4. Aeneid. v. 57.And in another place: Quatuor eximiot praestanti
corpore tauros.
4. Georg. v. 537.

HOSTIAE SUCCIDANEAE,
thus called from the Verb Succedo, or rather of sub caedo, i. e. to kill
afterward, Victims successively sacrificed after others, i. e. a reiteration
of Sacrifice, when the first was not of good Omen, or some essential ceremony
was omitted. Paulus Emilius preparing himself to engage Perses King of
Macedonia, sacrificed twenty Bulls one after another to Hercules, before he got
a lucky Victim; at last the one and twentieth promised him the Victory,
provided he should only stand in a posture of defense: Si primis hostiis
litatum non erat, aliae post easdem ductae hostiae caedebantur: quae quasi
prioribus jam caesis luendi piaculi gratia subdebantur and succidebantur, ob id
Succidantae nominatae. Aul. Gel. l. 4. c. 6.

AMBARVALES HOSTIAE,
Victims sacrificed after they had led them round about their Fields, in a
procession made for the preservation of the Fruits of the Earth: Ambarvalis
hostia, says Festus, est quae rei divinae causa circum arva ducitur ab it is qui
pro frugibus faciunt.

AMBURBIALES HOSTIAE,
Victims led round about the limits of the City of Rome, says the same Festus.

HOSTIAE CANEARES, or CAVIARES,
Victims offered in Sacrifice every fifth Year, for the College of the
Pontiffs, viz. they offered the part of the Tail called Caviar. It seems that
this Sacrifice is the same, or at least very like that which was offered in the
Month of October to Mars, in the Field called by his name, where a Horses Tail
was cut off, and carried into the Temple called Regia.

HOSTIAE PRODIGIAE,
They were so called, because they were wholly consumed by Fire, and nothing
remained thereof for the Priests.

HOSTIAE PIACULARES;
Victims offered to make expiation for a Crime, or some ill Action.

HOSTIAE AMBEGNAE, or AMBIEGNAE,
Cows that had calved two Heifers, or Sheep that had brought forth two Lambs at
one Litter, offered in Sacrifice with their young ones to Juno.

HOSTIAE HARVIGAE, or HARUGAE,
Victims offered to predict future events, by looking into the Entrails of the
Sacrifices.

HOSTIAE MEDIALIS;
Black Victims offered at Noon time.

HOSTILIUS TULLUS,
The Son of Tullus Hostilius, Native of the City of Medulia, a Colony of the
Sabins, who came to settle themselves at Rome, after Romulus had took Medulia.
He married Hersilia, who made peace betwixt the Romans and the Cures. Of this
Marriage came Hostilius, who was King of the Romans after Numa. The people
preferred him to the Sons of Numa, and set him upon the Throne, though he was but
Numa's Son-in-law. He built Mount Coelianus, and made war with the Inhabitants
of Alba, and it was brought to an end by the famous Combat of the three
Horace's on the Roman side, and three Curiatii on those of Alba, which remained
subject to the Romans, by the victory obtained by one of the Horatii.

HOSTILIUS MANCINUS,
Besieged Numantia; but having despised the Augurs, he went one day out of his
Camp, which the Inhabitants of Numantia taking advantage of, made a sally out
of the Town, possessed themselves of his Camp, and forced him to accept of a
shameful peace, which the Romans refused to ratify; and sent him back to
Numantia with his hands tied behind him.

HYACINTHUS,
The Son of Amiclus, beloved of Apollo; but this God being at play with him at
Coits, Zephyrus jealous of their Love bore away the Coit, and therewith broke
his head, whereupon he died. Apollo to comfort himself for his loss, out of his
Blood that was spilt produced a Flower, which was called after his name
Hyacinthus.

HYADES,
The Daughters of Atlas and Aethra, who nursed and brought up Bacchus, and in
reward thereof, were transported into Heaven, and turned into seven Stars, made
famous by the Poets. These Stars bring rainy weather, and are placed in the
head of the Constellation Taurus. At their rising, if the Sun or Moon meet
opposite to them, they certainly bring rain Wherefore Virgil calls them,

Pluviasque Hyadas. HYDRA,
A fabulous Monster, represented by Poets with many Heads, growing again as
soon as they were cut off. Hercules overcame this Monster in the Lake of Lerna,
and slew her; and to prevent the growing of her Heads, he applied fire to the
place as he cut them off.

HYDRAULIS,
A Science teaching how to make Water-Conduits, and Waterworks, and for other
uses. Heron describes many Water-Engines, called Hydraulicae Machinae. The word
Hydraulicus signifies sounding water, because when Organs were first found out,
Bellows were not yet in use, wherefore they made use of falling waters, to get
wind into the Organs and to make them sound. Athenaeus says, that Ctesiblus was
the inventer of this Engine, or at least brought it to perfection; for the
invention thereof is due to Plato, who found out the Nocturnal Clock or
Clepsydra, that caused Flutes to play, and give notice of the time of the Night.

HYDROMANTIA,
A Southsaying performed by way of water, wherein the Images of the Gods were
seen. Varro tells us, that this kind of divination was found out by Perses, and
that Numa Pompilius, and after him Pythagoras the Philosopher made use of it,
and that thereby Spirits are also conjured up by spilling blood, and this
performance was called by the Greeks Necromantia. These kinds of South-sayings
were rigorously forbid by the Laws of all Nations, even before the coming of
our Lord. However, by this means, Numa learned the Mysteries that he
instituted; and because he used water to perform his Hydromantia, it was said
that he married the Nymph Egeria, as Varro tells us.

HYLAS,
The Son of Theodamus, beloved of Hercules for his Beauty. Being fallen by
misfortune into a Fountain where he was drawing water, he was drowned;
whereupon Poets feigned that Hylas was ravished by the Nymphs enamoured with
his beauty. Hercules run through all Mysia to seek for him. The People of Prusa
instituted a Feast to him, at which they ran through the Forest and Mountains,
crying Hylas, Hylas.

HYMEN or HYMENAEUS,
A fabulous Divinity of the Pagans, presiding over Marriages. This God was
called upon in the Wedding-Songs. Poets call him fair Hymenaeus.

HYMNUS,
A Hymn or Ode, sung in honor of Divinities. These Hymns were commonly
composed of three kinds of Stanza's, one whereof was called Strophe, which they
sung walking from the East to the West; the other was named Antistrophe,
walking on the contrary from the West to the East; and then standing before the
Altar they sung the Epode, which was the third Stanza.

The Greek Poets have written many Hymns, in praise of the false Gods of the
Pagans.

HYPERION,
The Son of Heaven, and Brother to Saturn, and one of the Titans, esteemed by
the Ancients the Father of the Sun and the Moon, he is often taken for the Sun
by the Poets.

HYPERMNESTRA,
One of the fifty Daughters of Danaus King of Egypt, the only one of all, who
the first Weddingnight spared the Life of Lyncaeus her Husband; for all her
other Sisters murdered their Husbands, the Brothers of Lyncaeus, and Sons to
Aegyptus, Danaus's Brother.

HYPOCAUSTUM,
A Stove under ground, used to warm the Baths both of the ancient Greeks and
Romans.

I.
I, The third Vowel, and the ninth Letter of the Alphabet, was accounted by the
Ancients a numeral Letter, signifying one hundred.

This Letter was the only Vowel that was not marked over with the stroke of a
Pen, to show that it was long, as Scaurus himself testifies. Notwithstanding,
to denote its quantity, it was drawn in length a Letter bigger than the rest.
PIso, VIvus, AedIlis. Wherefore of all the Letters, the I was called long by
Senecdoche.

And from thence comes that Stamphilus in Plautus's Aularium, being resolved to
hang himself, says that he should make a long Letter of his Body. Lipsius
explains it thus, and this explanation seems more likely than that of Lambinus,
who understands of it all kind of great Letters.

Lipsius says expressly, that the I was double, to make it long as the other
Vowels; and it is the opinion of the most Learned, though many Instances to the
contrary might be found, perhaps out of corruption, as Divl Augusti in an
Inscription in the time of Augustus.

Wherefore as the I by its length only was equivolent to a real ii, i. e. that
they should be marked in the Discourse, as Manubjs instead of Manubiis; Djs
Manibus instead of Diis Manibus. And from thence come the contractions that are
common and allowed to Poets. Di instead of Dij; urbem Patavi instead of Patavij.

But the Ancients noted also the quantity of this Letter by the Dipthong e^, as
Victorinus says, and it was the same thing to write Divl or Divei, the I long,
and the ei having the same pronunciation, or very like the same. And this is
testified by Priscian, when he says, that this was the only way to express the
I long. This pronunciation of ei was become so common amongst them, that they
used it even in short words, which shows that it was not so much perhaps to
note its quantity, as a certain pronunciation more full and more pleasing.
Wherefore in old Books we find still Omneis, not only instead of Omnes in the
plural number, but also instead of Omnis in the singular.

Wherefore Victorinus tells us, that no way of Writing was controvers'd by the
Ancients but this. Lucilus and Varro made their endeavors to distinguish it,
setting a Rule to write the i alone in the singular, and the ti in the plural
number.

However, Quintilian finds fault with this way of writing, because, says he,
it is superfluous, and too troublesome to those who begin to write. From whence
we may conclude that the pronunciation was altered, and that there was no
difference then between the ei and the i.

This Letter I is also a Consonant; and then its Character is lengthned
downwards thus J.

JACCHUS,
One of Bacchus's names, from the Syriack word Janko or Jacco, i. e. puer
lactens; and thus Bacchus was often represented. And these words of Virgil,
Mystica Vannus Jacchi, may be understood of Bacchus's Cradle. Some Writers
derive this word from the Greek (...), i. e. to make a noise by crying, to
howl, as the Bacchantes did at the Orgia or Feasts of Bacchus.

JANICULUM,
A Mountain beyond the Tiber, where Janus settled himself and built a Fortress.
There Numa placed his Tomb, and since Statius the Poet. The Country of Latium,
where Janus was honored, and where Janiculum was built, which afterward made
a part of Rome, was called by the Ancients OEnotria tellua, i. e. the Wine's
Country.

JANUARIUS,
January. This Month was not set down in the old Calendar of Romulus, but was
brought in by Numa, who placed it at the Winter-Solstice, in the room where
Mars was before, whom Romulus placed at the Vernal Equinox. This Month was
named Januarius in honor of Janus, because the Romans had established this God
to preside at all beginnings, and that the new Year began at this Month; or
because Janus being represented with two Faces, to show by that his singular
prudence, which considered both the time past and the time to come, they
thought fit to dedicate a Month to him, which was at the end of the Year that
was past, and at the beginning of the Year to come.

And though the Calends or the first day of this Month was under the protection
of Juno, like other first days of the Months, yet this was in a peculiar manner
consecrated to Janus, to whom they offered that day a Cake; made of new Meal,
called Janualis, and of new Salt. The Frankincence and Wine presented to him
were also new.

This day all Workmen began their works, every one according to his Art and
Trade, and the Scholars did the like; being persuaded, that having thus begun
the Year by working, they should be diligent and laborious all the rest of that
Year: As we learn of Ovid in the first Book of his Fasti, v. 165.

Postea mirabar, cur non sine litibus esset
Prima dies. Causam percipe, Janus ait,
Tempora commissi nascentia rebus agendis,
Totus ab auspicio ne foret annus iners.
Quisque suas arts ob idem delibat agendo,
Nec plus quam solitum testificatur opus.
The Consuls appointed for that Year, took possession on that day of their
Office, and began the functions thereof, especially since the Emperors, and
some time before, during the Consulship of Quintus Fulvius Nobilior, and Titus
Annius Luscus, in the Year of the foundation of Rome DCI: Wherefore they went
up to the Capitol, attended by a great crowd of People, all dressed with new
Clothes, and there sacrificed to Jupiter Capitolinus two white Bulls, that
never were under the Yoke, and spread perfumes and sweet smells in his Temple.

The Priests called Flamines, together with the Consuls, made vows, while the
Sacrifice was performing, for the prosperity of the Empire, and the safety of
the Emperors, having first taken the Oath of Allegiance, and ratified all that
they had done during the foregoing Year.

Likewise the other Magistrates and the People made the same Vows, and took the
Oath. And Tacitus tells us in the sixteenth Book of his Annals, that Trafea was
impeached, of having purposely absented himself from the Assemblies, where the
Magistrates took the solemn Oath, and Vows were made for the safety of the
Emperor.

Ovid in the first Book of his Fasti, observes more distinctly all these
Ceremonies.

Cernis odoratis ut luceat ignibus ether,
Et sonet accensis spica Cilissa focis?
Flamma nitore suo templorum verberat aurum,
Et tremulum summa spargit in aede jubar.
Vestibus intactis Tarpeias itur ad arces:
Et populus festo concolor ipse suo est.
Jamque novi praecunt fasces, nova purpura fulget,
Et nova conspicuum pondera sentit ebur,
Colla rudes operum praebent ferienda juvenes,
Quos aluit campis herba Falisca suis.
This day the Romans laid down all animosity, and were very careful to speak no
word of ill Omen, as we learn of Pliny; Cautum erat apud Romanos ne quod mali
ominis verbum Calendis Januariis efferretur.

Friends sent Presents that day one to another, which were called Strenae, New
Years-Gifts; and this custom was first instituted by T. Tatius King of the
Sabines, after he had made his agreement with Romulus; for it is reported, that
to show the esteem he had for those who had served him in his Quarrel with the
Romans, he sent to every one of them, at the beginning of the year, a branch of
Laurel, taken out of the Grove of the Goddess Strenuae, with a Compliment
wishing them a happy Year. It Is thus related by Symmachus in the 10th Book,
Epist. 28. to the Emperors Theodosius and Arcadius: Strenuarum usus adolevit
auctoritata Tatii Regis, qui verbenas folicis arboris ex Luco Strenuae anni
novi auspices primus accepit. We will speak more at large of this word in its
Alphabetick order.

The Romans above all things took care to be merry and divert themselves this
first day, being persuaded that all the rest of the year should be like that
day; thus much for the first day of January, we come to the other days of this
Month, and the Holy Days kept therein.

The 2d day, called by the Latins postridie Calendas, or quarto Nonas, the next
day after the Calends or the fourth of the Nones, was a pleading day, but
accounted fatal for the War, called for that reason Dies ater, a fatal day.

The 3d and the 4th were comitial days, or days of Assembly.

The 5th, which was the day of the Nones, was a day for Pleading.

The 6th called the VIII. of the Ides, was esteemed unlucky.

The 7th and the 8th were days of Assembly. On the 7th the Romans solemnized
the coming of Isis; and the 8th was consecrated by the Athenians to Neptune.

On the 9th, which is the V. of the Ides amongst the Latins, they celebrated
the Feast called Agonalia, instituted by Numa Pompilius in honor of Janus, and
the King of Sacrifices sacrificed a Ram to Janus. See Agonalia, according to
the Alphabetick order.

The 10th, or the IV. of the Ides, was a day divided in two, thus marked in the
old Calendar En, and in the new Calendar media Hyems.

The 11th, or the III. of the Ides, was the Feast called Carmentalia, in honor
of the Goddess Carmenta Mother to Evander; they offered her Sacrifices every
year before noon; wherefore that day is marked in the Calendar Nefastus primo,
to signify that it was not allowed to do any thing that morning. This Sacrifice
was offered in acknowledgment to this Goddess, because she had foretold a great
many things to the advantage of the Roman Empire. The same day was celebrated
the dedication of the Temple of Juturnus in the Field of Mars.

The 12th was a Meeting-day, and some time this day they kept the Feast of
Compitalia or Cross-ways.

The 13th, or the day of Ides, consecrated to Jupiter, was marked in the
Calendar by these Letters, N. P. Nefastus prima part diei, which was only kept
holy in the morning. They sacrificed to her a Sheep, called Ovis Idulis. This
day Caesar Octavius took the Name of Augustus, by the advice of Munacius
Plancus.

The 14th, or the XIX. of the Calends of February was expressed by these
Letters EN in the Calendar, to denote that it was divided half into a Festival,
and half into a day of Work.

The 15th, or the XVIII of the Calends of February, they solemnized for the
second time, the Feast called Carmentalia secunda, or repetita and relata, in
honor of Carmenta the Mother of Evander. See below Carmentalia.

The 16th, or the XVII. of the Calends of February, was the Feast of the
Dedication of the Temple of Concord, not that which the Praetor Manlius vowed,
and which Caius Attilius Duum-vir had dedicated, nor that which the Secretary
Flavius did likewise dedicate in Foro Vulcanis, but of the great and
magnificent Temple vowed and dedicated by Camillus, and adorned by Livia
Drusilla, with a great many Statues and a noble Altar.

From the 16th to the Calends of February are the Comitial or Assembly-days; if
you except

The 24th, For that day the Feriae Sementinae were celebrated for the
Sowing-time.

The 27th they kept the Feast of the Dedication of the Temple of Castor and
Pollux, near the Lake called Juturna the Sister of Turnus.

The 29th there were Horse-Races, called Equiria, in the Field of Mars.

The 30th was the Feast of the Peace, they sacrificed then a white Victim, and
burned abundance of Frankincense.

JANUS.
Writers don't agree upon the Etymology of the word Janus. Some derive it from
the Latin Verb ire, or its Gerund eundo, as if one said Eanus, because God
presided at the beginning of all undertakings; wherefore the Preface of Prayers
was directed to him, by whom they had access to the other Gods; and because the
Doors of Houses are the entries, through which, one must pass to go into the
most remote Apartments, they were therefore called Januae from Janus, and were
dedicated to him. This is reported by Tully, in his Book De. Not. Dcorum.
Cumque in omnibus rebus vim haberent maximam prima and postrema, principem in
sacrificando Janum esse voluerunt, quod ab eundo nomen est ductum, ex quo
transitiones perviae Jani, foresque in liminibus profanarumae diuns Januae
nominantur.

Vossius says, that the word Janus seems to be derived from the Hebrew Jain, i.
e. Wine.

The birth and origin of Janns is no less controverted; some tell us, that
Janus is the same as the World and the Sun; others say, that he is the same as
Ogyges an ancient King, who built Thebes fifteen hundred years before the
foundation of Rome; and some others, as Ovid, confound Janus with Noah, and
ascribe to him the glory of the origin of the World, having been the only Man,
who saw the old and new World before and after the Deluge. However, the
Authors, who report that Noah divided all the Earth to his Sons after the
Flood, and gave Europe to Japhet for his share, say more likely, that Japhet
was called Janus, and settled himself in Italy, where he taught a great many
things, very useful to Mankind.

Fabius Pictor reports, that the ancient Tuscans learned to improve the Vine of
him, to sow Corn, and to make Bread; and that he also taught them to build
Temples and Altars to the Gods; for the Ancients to that time, worshipped Gods
only in Groves.

He was the first who consecrated the boundaries of Towns, both without and
within: Wherefore, when Romulus built Rome, he sent for some Men out of
Tuscany, who observed exactly all the formalities and ceremonies they had
learned of Janus for that purpose. And to set up better the service of the
Gods, he drew Rituals and Formulars of Prayers to their honor; wherefore the
preface of Sacrifices was directed to him, and he was the first called upon, as
a Being who presented their Prayers to the Gods, and to whom the first
libations of Wine and Wheat were offered. It Is reported that he was the
Inventer of Locks and Keys, for the security of Houses and of folding Doors,
which in his Honor were called Januae. It Is said yet that his Wife was called
Vista, and that she instituted the holy fire, committed to the care of certain
Virgins, called after her name Vostals.

In short, Janus was a very wise King, who governed his People by just Laws;
wherefore his Subjects placed him after his death in the rank of the Gods, and
gave him many Names, because of his great Qualifications; for they called him
Deus Deorum, because they esteemed him the first of Gods, on account of the
good Ordinances he had made during his Reign; and was surnamed Bifrons and
Quadrifrons, because they took him for the World, the two chiefest parts
whereof are the East and the West, and the other two are the South and the
North. He was still called Junonius (Consivus, Patuleius, Clusius,) because the
Calends of every Month were consecrated both to him and Juno; and for that
reason, as Varro says, there were twelve Altars in his Temple, in respect to
the twelve Months of the Year: Consivus a conserendo, either because he was the
reparator of Mankind, who had been drowned in the waters of the Deluge, or
because he had taught Men to plant the Vine, and sow Corn: Patuletus, because
in time of War the Gates of his Temple were always open; and Clusius, because
they were shut up in time of Peace.

In the Hymns sung by the Salii the day of this great Feast, he was called upon
by the name of Deus D^o^um, as being the most Ancient of all the Gods; and by
that Jane Pater, because he had been a true Father to his Subjects.

To what we have said of the origin of Janus, Jacobus Ausolus opposes some
Arguments, taken out of Chronology, whereby he proves that Noah was dead in
that time, But if Wine and Vine might clear this point of controversy, Pliny
will assure us, that under the reign of Numa Wine was very scarce in Italy; and
yet it is true, that Numa reigned a thousand three hundred and forty one years
after Janus.

Dionysius Halicarnasseus affirms also, that there was but a little Wine in
Italy in the reign of Ascanius, who reigned at Alba eight hundred eighty five
years after Janus. Wine is a Liquor so much sought after, that if it had been
known in Janus's time, it is very likely that Men had improved the Vines; and
that Wine had not been scarce in the time of Ascanius and Numa.

Peucer tells us, that Janus is Javan the Son of Japhet, and indeed the
likeness of the name carries a great weight with it. In fine, let it be either
Janus, or Noah, or Javan, if he has planted the Vine or not, Pagan Historians,
who dive into the most remore Antiquity, agree that Janus reigned in Italy. Now
here is the History taken out of Dionysius Halicarnasseus, and Sextus Aurelius
Victor.

Ericteus King of Athens, had a Daughter called Creusa, of so extraordinary
Beauty that Apollo fell in Love with her. The Lady was not cruel, but yielded
to the passion of the God, and got a great Belly by him; yet she kept it so
secret, that few people knew she was brought to Bed. Her Son, whom she called
Janus, was likewise brought up very secretly. Creusa was afterward married to
Xipheus, but had no Children by him. Ericteus, grieved for the barenness of his
Daughter, begged continually of the Gods, an Heir worthy to succeed him after
his death: Apollo by an Oracle pronounced on the Tripos of Delphi, ordered him
to take for his Son the first Man he should meet at his return. By chance, or
more likely by the care of Creusa, he met young Janus: Ericteus adopted him,
and brought him up like the Heir of a King. Janus being grown a Man, was
impatient to stay so long for the Crown of Athens, and moved by his great
courage went over into Italy, where he reigned, says Macrobius, together with
Cameses Native of Italy; and the City of their abode was called Janiculum,
after the name of Janus; and the Country Camesene, by the name of the other
King: Regnum Janus obtinuit cum Camese aeque indigena, ut Regio Camesene,
oppidum Janiculum vocitaretur.

Cato in some Fragments remaining of his Books of Origines, having complained
of the fictions and vanity of the Greeks, assures us, that the Scythians did
populate Italy under the conduct of Janus, and that this Prince governed his
Subjects by so good and just laws, that his Posterity placed him in the number
of the Immortal Gods. Plutarch favors this opinion, and gives this high
Encomium of Janus. Whatever, says he, Janus was, either God or King, he was a
wise and great Politician, who tempered the Manners of his Subjects, and taught
them Civility: Wherefore he was esteemed the God of Peace, though he was never
called upon but during War.

Janus was one of the first Kings of some Inhibitants of Italy, first called
Aborigines, and then Latins. He was compared to Noah, because he was the first
who cultivated this wild Country, and there planted the Vine: Wherefore they
made an allusion of the name of Janus, to that of Jain in the Phaenician
Language, and to that of (...) in Greek, which signifies Wine. It Is said that
he received Saturn in Italy, because the first Man who began there to manure
and dung the ground was called Saturn; and this happened in the same time that
Janus cultivated the Vine. Plutarch assures us, that Janus came from Greece
into Italy; and for that reason he was represented with a double Face, as being
both Greek and Italian, or because he changed the gross manners of the
Inhabitants of Italy into a more sweet and civil policy.

The Romans built but three Temples and a little Chapel to Janus. The first
Temple was built by Romulus, after he had concluded a Peace with the Sabins,
and there he erected a Statue of Janus with two Faces, to show that both the
Roman and Sabine Nations were joined together, or else to signify, that the
two Kings Romulus and Tacius, were but one head to govern the same
Commonwealth. This Temple was built in the Roman Field; and Procopius says,
that in his time, it remained yet in the middle of that Field, over against the
Capitol, with a little niche of Brass, and two doors like a Tabernacle, wherein
a Statue of Janus five foot high was set up. Numa ordered that the Gates of the
Temple should be shut up in time of Peace, and open in time of War For the
Consul appointed to command the Army being upon his departure, went into this
Temple attended by the Senate, the chiefest of the City, and his Soldiers in
military dresses, and opened the Gates of the Temple. This Ceremony was but
seldom performed, for this Temple continued open, during the space of seven
hundred and twenty four years, till the time of Augustus, who took possession
of Egypt. This Temple was shut up but three times; the first time was during
the reign of Numa Pompilius; the second in the time of the Consulate of Titus
Manlius Torquatus, and C. Attilius Balbus, seven or eight years after the first
Punick War, and the third time was about seven hundred twenty four years after
the foundation of Rome, nine and twenty years before the birth of our Lord, and
toward the end of the Reign of Augustus.

The new Consuls took possession of their Office in this Temple; wherefore it
was said that they opened the year.

The second Temple of Janus was built by Cn. Duillius in the Herb Market, after
the first Carthaginian War, but being half ruined, it was built again by the
Emperor Tiberius, as Tacitus says.

The third Temple was erected under the name of Janus Quadrifrons, some say by
Numa, and others by Augustus, in the Ox-market in a little Valley called
Velabrum, betwixt the Capitol and Mount Aventinus. Marlianus affirms, that this
Temple was built neither by Numa nor Augustus, because in his time it was still
almost entire, it being incredible it had lasted so long, had it been built by
one of them. However, it may be said that it was built by Numa, and rebuilt by
Augustus. This Temple was of a square figure of the Ionick order, all Marble,
dedicated to Janus Quadrisrons, or four Faced.

The Romans, after the taking of the City of Faleria in Tuscany, having found a
Statue of Janus with four Faces, made one after its likeness for the City of
Rome, and erected them a Temple with four Fronts, and twelve Altars, to
represent the four Seasons, and the twelve Months of the Year.

Besides these Temples, there was also a Chapel called Aedes Jani Curiatii,
dedicated to Janus by the Horace, who killed the three Curiatii.

There were three Statues of Janus in the Roman Field. The first was at the
entry thereof; the second in the middle, before the Palace of Paulus, and the
place called Rostras; the third was at the coming out of the Forum Romanum. The
Statue that stood in the middle of the place was the most famous of all; for
the Merchants and Bankers, and those who took Money at Interest met there.
Wherefore, when Writers expressed by a Periphrasis, the Trade of a Banker, they
said, ad Janum medium sedet; and Horace says of a Man, who had lost his Estate
by borrowing Money at great Interest,

Postquam omnes res mea Janum
Ad medium fracta est, aliena negotia curo
Excussus propriis.
Having lost all that I had, by borrowing Money at Interest, I am obliged to do
other Men's business having nothing to do for my self.

JAPHETUS,
One of Noah's Sons. The name of Japhet signifies a great extent, according to
the blessing of Noah, God shall enlarge Japheth. Wherefore the Scripture says
that Wisdom is wider, i. e. of a greater extent than the Seas. But instead of
Japhet mentioned in the Holy Scripture, the Greeks have found out Japetus.
However, the Japetus of the Greeks, is nothing like the Japhet of the
Scripture; for the Greeks tell us, that Japetus was Brother to Saturn, and that
Jupiter threw him headlong into Hell with the other Titans. They represent him
like an old decripit Man, and proverbially say, older than Jopetus; (...)
notwithstanding he was younger than Japhes the Son of Noah, for they say, that
Japetus was the Grandfather of Deucalion, who lived: in Moses's time.

JASION,
The Son of Jupiter and Electra, beloved by Ceres, by whom she had Plutus the
God of Riches.

JASON,
The Son of Aeson King of Thessalia by Alcimede. When Aeson died, he left the
government of his Kingdom to Pelias his Brother, till his Son Jason came to
age, and entrusted him with the care of Jason's Education. Pelias sent him on
the expedition to fetch the golden Fleece, which was in the possession of Aeta
King of Colchis, and was guarded in a Wood consecrated to Mars, by
brazen-footed Bulls, casting fire out of their Mouths. Jason ordered a Ship to
be built for this Expedition, which he called Argos, after the name of Argus
the builder of it. Jason went on board of her, accompanied with fifty
Noblemen: And having run many dangers at Sea, at last arrived at Colchis, and
seized upon the Golden Fleece by the Artifices of Medea, who by her Magic,
enchanted the Monsters that guarded the Treasure, wherefore Jason married her,
and begot two Sons on her: But afterward he fell in love with Creusa, the
Daughter of Creon King of Athens, and married her; whereupon Medea, to revenge
herself, set his Palace on fire, where he was consumed by the flames, together
with his new Wife. But some say, that Jason and Medea were reconciled. The
Fable runs thus; here is the History.

Strabo reports the Expeditions of Phryxus and Jason, or the Argonaustes into
Colitus, to fetch from thence Treasures, and especially the Gold, that the
Inhabitants of that Country had got out of the Sands of the River, by sifting
them through a Ram's Skin; and from thence concludes, that all that is related
by the Poets concerning the same is a true History, either of the nature of
those Countries, or the several Voyages made there. Thus this learned Man
proves by Arguments, taken from the Cities and other Monuments. called still by
the Names of Phryxus and Jason, that both these Lords had undertaken the
acquiring the Riches of Golchus.

Bochart tells us, that perhaps Poets have expressed the Treasure of the King
of Colchis by the word of Fleece, because the word Gasa is of an ambiguous
signification in its original Tongue, viz. Syriack; for it signifies a
Treasure; and in this sense it was communicated to the Latins, and all its
Dialects; and it signifies also a Fleece; whereupon Poets have grounded their
allusions: And we may say also, that the two Oxen that guarded the Treasure,
were the two Walls which encompassed the Castle where it was laid up; for the
Syriack word- Sour, signifies an Ox and a Wall. The Dragon that watched the
Treasure, was nothing else but the Iron Gate of the Fort, because Nachas
signifies Dragon, Iron and Steel. Here is in short the true History and
Physiology, whereupon was grounded all the Fictions that we read in the
Argonauticks of Orpheus and Apollonius.

ICARUS,
The Son of Daedalus, who being escaped, together with his Father, out of the
labyrinth where King Minos had shut them up, by the help of Wings joined with
Wax, flew higher than he should, and approaching too near the Sun, melted his
waxen Wings, and fell into the Sea, which therefore was called the Icarian Sea,
as Ovid says, Icarus Icarias nomine fecit aquas.


The Truth is, that Daedalus embarked with his Son Icarus to avoid Minos's
anger; and the Ship that carried them away is represented by Wings.

There is still another Icarus, Son to OEbalus, and Erigonus's Father, who
treated some Shepherds of Attica with Wine; but the Shepherds having never
before that time drank of that Liquor, and being persuaded they were poisoned
with it, killed Icarus, and cast him into a Well. His little Bitch called Mera,
went back to his Daughter Erigone, and brought her to the place where the body
of her Father lay; and having pronounced many Curses against the Murderers of
her Father, hanged herself, not being able to bear her grief; and the little
Bitch died also out of sorrow. But the Gods took pity of them, and turned the
Bitch Mera into the Dog Star, Icarus into the Constellation called Boats, and
Erigone into of Virgo.

IDA,
A Mountain of Troas in Lesser Asia, the highest of all the Mountains of the
Hellespont, covered all over with Timber fit for the building of Ships. Athenus
reports, that out of this Hill issue fifteen Rivers, wherefore Horace calls it
Ida undosa.

There was also another Mountain in the Island of Crete, which the Corybantes
or Idaei called Ida, because of their ancient dwelling place on Mount Ida. in
Phrygia. The Dactyli Idaei found out the invention of forging Iron.

IDOLOLATRIA, IDOLOLATRAE, and IDOLA,
Idolatry, service and worship tendered to Idols or false Gods.

Some Writers refer the beginning of Idolatry to Ages more remote than we do
our selves. St Epiphanius ascribes the beginning of Idolatry to the time of
Serug, Rehu genuit Serug, caepitque inter homines Idololatria, and says, that
Tharah the Son of Nachor made the first Statues, which were worshipped. Nachor
genuit Tharam. Tunc simulacra ficta sunt figlino opere ex argilla. Nachor begat
Tharah: Then Statues were made of Potter's Clay.

Abraham's Ancestors were Idolaters, as Joshua says to the Israelites: Our
Fathers dwells on the other side of the Flood in old time, even Tharah the
Father of Abraham, and the Father of Nachor; and they served other Gods.
Idolatry was common in Chaldea, and began not long after the Deluge, and from
the Chaldeans it passed into Egypt, where they adored Beasts and their Images,
as Mola tells us; and Juvenal reports, that they worshipped the Plants of their
Gardens, as Leeks and Onions.

Porrum and caepe nefas violare aut rodera morsu:
O sanctas Gentes, quibus haec nascuntur in hortis
Numina.
Eusebius assures us, that the Phaenicians and Egyptians taught Idolatry first,
and began to render divine honors to the Sun, Moon and Stars: and that having
forsaken the true God, to follow shining and luminous Bodies, they adored also
reasonable Beings, which are to be preferred to Bodies merely animated.
Wherefore the Phaenicians and Egyptians communicated to other Nations not only
the worship of the Stars, but also the adoration of other Gods, which were at
first but emblems of Stars under the figures of Animals, as it appears by the
Constellations; then they worshipped the Animals themselves, as living symbols
of the Stars; and from thence they easily came to adore Men and their Images.

Tertullian says, that there were formerly Idolaters without Idols, and that in
his time there were still Temples without Idols, where false Divinities were
adored. For it must be observed, that although Idolatry has preceded Idols,
because Idolatry was invented before Painting and Carving; yet it was much
increased since these Arts have been improved. This Father takes also notice in
another place, that in Numa's time, there were neither Idols nor Temples at
Rome, but only Altars made with earth and green turfs, erected for prefent
occasions, as it was practiced before Moses's time, as we learn in the
Scripture. Silius Italicus speaks thus of Jupiter Ammon,

Inrestincta focis servant altaria flammae;
Sed nulla effigies, simulacrave nota Deorum,
Majestate locum and sacro implevere timore.
By which he means, that the Temple of Jupiter Ammon was without Idols, and
consequently more venerable, because the eternal fire represented better the
Divinity than any other Image whatsoever.

Clemens Alexandrinus, a Greek Author, says the same thing concerning unformed
matter; that was adored, before the art of perfect representations was found
out, which led Men into a new abyss of Errors, and that that kind of worship is
an adoration of Art and Matter, not of Gods or Devils; and tells us, that
according to Berosus's opinion, Artaxerxes the Son of Darius, Ochus's Son, was
the first who proposed the Image of Venus to be adored. Epiphanius assures us,
that painted Images were invented before Statues, and that Thara the Son of
Nachor ordered first the worship of Statues.

Sanchuniaathon repores, that the first Statues of stone that were adored, were
but unpolished and unformed, which he calls Baetylia. It Is very like that this
word come from Bethel, which is the name given by Jacob, to the stone whereupon
he laid his head during night, and erected it the next morning in the form of a
Statue, and consecrated it to God, by pouting Oil or some rich perfume upon it,
in remembrance of the mysterious Ladder he had seen in that place, and this
action of Jacob was afterward imitated. Therefore it is no wonder, that the
first Statues of Idolaters were but Pillars or Stones without form. Pausanias
speaks of Statues of Hercules and Cupid, which were but unpolished Stones: And
Clemins Alexandrinus tells us, that before carving was found out, Idols were
but Columns: Antequum statuae esseut affabre formatae, veteres erexerunt
columnas easque colebant ut Dei simulacra. And still after Carving was brought
to perfection, the old Statues made of rough stone were yet adored. The God
Heliogabalus, who very likely was the Sun, was nothing else but a great round
stone, broad below and ending in a Cone, as Herodian tells us, in the
description he has given thereof, Lapis est maximus, ab imo rotundus, and
sensius fastigiatus.

The worship of Idols is very ancient, at least in the East. The Precepts of
the Decalogue, which forbids Idols is an argument thereof.

But if we come out of Phaenicia, Syria and Egypt, we shall find a great number
of Nations who had no Idols. Herodotus reports, that the Persians had neither
Temples, nor Altars, nor Idols, and that they rallied the Greeks, who chose Men
for their Gods. This Historian relates somewhere else, that in the famous
Temple of Bell at Babylon, there was two distinct Chapels; one below, wherein
a great Golden Statue of Jupiter was erected, and in the highest part of the
Tower, but without any Statue, but only a Bed and a golden Table, and here (as
the Priests affirmed) this God came down by night. Hercdotus says again, that
he heard in Egypt, that the Egyptians were the first who erected Altars and
Statues to the Gods, and made representations of Animals in stones. And if
Idols were first set up in Egypt, Phaenicia and Syria, the reason thereof is,
that Carving and other like Arts, were first invented and improved in those
Countries.

This same Historian in another place, giving an account of what he had learned
of the Egyptian Priests, says after them, that during ten thousand three
hundred and forty years, no God had been represented by any shape of a Man,
even without excepting the Kings of Egypt. And this shows us, that Men passed
from the worship of the true God, to that of the Stars and Nature, as seeming
to be his most perfect Images, then they came to worship Animals as emblems of
the Stars; and when Carving was found our, they substituted the figures of
Animals instead of the Animals themselves; but came to the worship of Men and
Images thereof but very lately.

In fine, Herodotus-speaking of the Scythians Religion, having mentioned the
Earth, Jupiter, Venus, Apollo, Mars, he tell us, that this worship was
performed without either Altars, or Temples, or Statues, only they erected a
kind of a Statue to Mars, which was only a Sword of Steel. And the Scythians
had only an Idol of Mars, but none of other Gods; because the Idol of Mars was
but a Sword, and this warlike Nation was not ignorant of the art of making
Swords; but being Barbarians, they had no skill to carve true Statues. Justin
affirms, that Antiquity adored Spears instead of Statues, and that in
remembrance of that practice, the Gods were always represented in their Statues
with Spears.

But if the Scythians represented Mars by a Sword, the other Nations
represented commonly their Gods by Stones. Pausanias reports, that in a place
of Greece, near a Statue of Mercury, there was thirty square stones, called by
the name of several Gods. Then this Another tells us, that formerly all the
whole Nation of Greeks, used unpolished Stone instead of Statues to represent
their Gods; for the art of melting Metals came very late to the Greeks and
other remote Nations. Wherefore at first they used Stones without form for
Idols, then they polished Stones, and made Figures of them; at last the art of
melting Metals was found out, and then they made Statues thereof.

In short, we learn of this Author, that the Inhabitants of Chaeronea had a
very particular veneration for a Scepter or Spear that Vulcan had forged for
Jupiter, as it is reported by Homer.

Straba tells us, that Moses blamed the custom of the Egyptians, who
represented their Gods by the figures of Beasts, and condemned the Greeks, who
ascribed them the figure of Men; showing that the Divine Nature cannot be
represented by corporal Images, but that they should build him a Temple without
Idols.

The Author of the Dea Syria says plainly, that the ancient Temples of the
Egyptians had no Statues, that the first Statues were of their invention, and
that they had communicated all this superstitions policy to the Syrians and the
Greeks. He adds still, that it was not allowed to make any Statue either of the
Son or the Moon, because they may always be seen in the brightness of their own
light.

Plutarch assures us, that Numa settled Religion at Rome upon the same Maxims,
that were afterward put forth by Pythagoras, viz. that God was invisible and
immaterial, that it was impossible to represent him by any Image: and for that
reason, the Temples of the City of Rome were one hundred and therescore years
and more without any Statues.

Varro the most learned of the Romans tells us, that the ancient Romans adored
the Gods near two hundred years, without making any Images to them: And if
this, says he, was still observed, the Service of the Gods would be more pure;
and brings the example of the Jews, and says, that those who first taught Men
to represent the Gods by Images, have taken away reverence, and increased
error, fancying that it was easy to be inclined to despise the Gods, by the
consideration of the impotency of their Statues.

IDUS,
The Ides, a word used by the Romans in their Calendar, to distinguish the days
of the Month. They commonly fell out the 13 of every month, except in the
months of March, May, July and October, for in these the Ides were the 15th of
the Month. This word is said to be derived from the Hetrurian word Iduare, i,
e. to divide, because the Month is in a manner equally divided in two parts by
the Ides; and that the Nones were perhaps called from Nono Idus the ninth of
the Ides, because they were in the room of the ninth of the Ides.

Some others observing, that there were three considerable different varieties
in the motion of the Moon: the first when she is quite hid under the beams of
the Sun; the second, at the first day of her appearing, when we see her in an
Evening, with her Horn^^ proceeding out of his Rays; and the third, when she is
in her full light. The common opinion was, that from thence Romulus had took
occasion to divide the days of the months, which he began always by the
Calends, in the time that the Moon sub radii^ Solis celaretur was hid under the
beams of the Sun, and then gave the name of Nonae or Nevae Lunae to the day of
the first appearing of the new Moon, and Idus when she was full, and appeared
in her beauty, from the Gre^^ word (...), i. e. from Beauty.

From thence they draw an Argument for the inequality of the days of the Nones;
for as it falls out by the composition of the motions of the Sun and the Moon,
that the Moon comes out of the beams of the Sun, sometimes sooner and sometimes
later: and that this diversity is commonly included in the space of two days;
it is likely, say they, that in the time that Romulus instituted his Calendar,
the Moon was kept a longer time hid under the beams of the Sun, in the month of
March, May, July and October; wherefore he allowed seven days to the Nones in
these four Months, and five days only to the others; during which, it may be
the Moon got off from these beams, and appeared sooner.

Others draw the word Idus from Idalium, which was the name of the Victim
offered to Jupiter, the day of the Ides that was consecrated to him. Some
derive this word from the Tuscan word Itis, which signifies amongst that
Nation, the same that Idus amongst the Romans.

IGNIS,
Fire. The Chronicle of Alexandria assures us, that Nimred, who was Ninus the
first King of the Assyrians, ordained the worship and the Religion of Fire. And
as the City of Ur was famous in the Province of Babylon, and that Ur signifies
fire, they fancied that the worship of fire was first instituted in this City.
Eupolemus reports, that Ur was accounted to be the same that Camarina, which
took its name from the Hebrew word Camar, i. e. Flagrarae astuare: And her
Priests were also called Camarins. The Hebrews themselves, as Hieronymus says,
feigned, that these words of the Scripture, saying that Abraham came out of Ur
of the Chaldeans, showed that he came miraculously out of the Fire, where the
Chaldeans had cast him, because he refused to adore it. Lucac's opinion is,
that the Chaldeans worshipped Fire, Chaldaeos culture focos.


Herodetus affirms that the Persians adored Fire as a God, wherefore they made
scruple to burn the Corpse of their dead, lest they should feed their God with a
dead Body.

It Is very likely, that the Chaldeans, Persians and other Eastern Nations, who
adored the Sun and the Stars as eternal Fires, kept also a Symbol of them in a
perpetual Fire, always burning on their Altars; and that in process of time,
the simple people adored the fire itself that was burning on the Altars as
their Gods, having no others to adore. However, few Writers ascribe the worship
of Fire to the Chaldeans, and other Ancient Inhabitants of the East. Julius
Firmicus says only, that the Persians preferred Fire to all other Elements, and
had it carried before them. Quintus Gurtius shows, that the Persians and their
Wise men kept an eternal Fire upon silver Altars, as a Symbol of Jupiter, i. e.
the Sun.

As the Greeks and the Romans were not so much given to the worshipping of
Stars, as the Eastern Nations, so they adored Vesta and Vulcan, as the
terrestrial and elementary Fire, distinguishing the fire of the Earth from that
of Heaven; taking Vesta for the Earth, in the center whereof (according to
their opinion) an eternal Fire was burning. This is reported by Ovid in his
Fasti. And this Poet tells us also afterward, that the perpetual Fire was the
only Image they had of Vesta, being impossible to have a true Image of Fire;
and that it was a custom formerly to keep a fire at the entry of Houses, which
therefore has ever since kept the name of Vestibulum; and that they sat at long
Tables to take their Meals in these Entries, where the Fire represented the
Gods.

Esse diu stultus Vestae simulachra putavi,
Mox didici curvo nulla subesse tholo.
Ignit inextinctus templo celatur in illo,
Effigiem nullam Vesta nec Ignis habent.
Ante focos olim longis considere scamnis
Mos erat, and mensae credere adesse Deos.
This Fire was not only watched and kept by the Vestal Virgins, but the care
thereof was also committed to the High Pontiff, and was a function of his
Office, even in the time that the Imperial Purple was joined to the Pontifical
Dignity; as we learn of Ovid, who gives us this reason for the same; that this
Holy Fire being the same that Aeneas brought from Troy, as an assurance of the
eternity of the Empire, it was wisely left to the care of the Emperors who were
Aeneas's Posterity, and more concerned than any others about the eternity of
the Empire.

This eternal Fire kept at Rome came from Troy, where it was in the like
veneration, as Virgil has often testified.

And he introduces the Ghost of Hector speaking to Aeneas, to persuade him to
retire from the Ruins of Troy, and carry along with him the Gods called
Penates, and the holy Fire.

Sacra suos quae tibi commendat Troja Penates,
Hos capae fatorum comites.....
Sic ait and manibus vittas, Vestamque potentem,
Ae^^numque adytis effert penetralibus ignem.
And doubtless other Nations kept a perpetual Fire on their Altars, to imitate
these Israelites. For God commanded Moses that an eternal Fire should be kept
on his Altar, saying, Aaron shall burn thereon sweet Incense, and he shall burn
Incense upon it, a perpetual Incense before the Lord. And it is very likely,
that the severe punishment that was inflicted on the two Sons of Aaron, befell
them, because they had neglected the holy Fire of the Altar, and attempted to
light it again with profane Fire. The Vestal Virgins were also very severely
punished, when they let out the Fire of Vesta, as it is reported by Livy; for
they were persuaded that the eternity of the Empire depended upon the Eternity
of that Fire.

Dionysius Halicarnasseus says, that Numa built at Rome a Temple to Vesta, to
keep a Fire therein by the ministry of Virgins, like that which was kept at
Alba by the like ministry of Virgins; that it might be a sacred Fire common to
the whole City, reunited together by that means, as if it was but one Family,
for each Family had its own holy Fire; though Romulus had allowed only so many
Altars and Fires, as there was Wards in the City of Rome, called Curiae. The
same Author tells us still, that Numa found a conformity betwixt the chastity
of Virgins and the purity of Fire, and that that Fire was consecrated to Vesta,
because Vesta denoting the Earth, and being in the middle of the World, she
affords Food with her Vapors to the Stars, which are the perpetual Fires
thereof.

Plutarch reports, that Numa committed the care of the eternal Fire to the
Vestal Virgins, because purity and barrenness are common both to Fire and
Virgins. We learn also of him and of Pausanias, that perpetual fire was
likewise kept at Delphi and Athens, the care whereof were not committed to
Virgins, but Widows, who were bound to live chaste.

Every Town of Greece had its Prytanium, but that of Athens was the most famous
of all. The most likely etymology of this word is (...), the place where the
Fire was kept. (...) ^rytaneum's were the fire of the Lamps consecrated to
Vesta, which were never let out. Pliny observes the custom of the Ancients, to
hang up Lamps in their Temples to adorn them. Atheneus tells us, that Dionysius
Junior Tyrant of Sicily, consecrated in the Prytaneum of Tarentum a Candlestick
(...), that had as many Lamps as days in the Year. These Lamps were constantly
kept burning, and very chargeable, for they were so abundantly supplied with
Oil, that to express the perpetual duration of a thing, it was commonly said,
it is like the Lamps of the Prytaneums (...). And this shows us that these
eternal Fires and Lamps were kept in imitation of the Temple of Jerusalem, or
the first Tabernacle which Moses built by the order of God. The Learned agree,
that before Men used to burn Oil in their Lamps, they burnt Wood all night to
give them light, as it is observed by Virgil, Urit odoratam uocturna in lumina
cedrum.


Servius says, that formerly Fires were not kindled on Altars, but drawn from
Heaven by Prayers made for that purpose: apud majores arae non incendebantur,
sed lgnem divinum precibus eliciebant.

Diodorus Siculus observes, that when the Persian Kings died all the Fires were
put out, and were kindled again, either with Glasses, as Plutarch says, or by
Magic Artifice, as Servius seems to insinuate.

The fire that was burning in the Temples came from Heaven, either by Lightning
or Burning-Glasses, or by boring or rubbing a piece of Wood with violence, as
Festus relates: Mos erat tabulam felicis materiae tandiu terebrare, quousque
exceptum ignem cribro aeneo, virgo in aedem ferret.

The fire of the Stars seems to have been honored in the person of Jupiter,
called in Greek (...) and in Phaenician Language Cham; both these names being
derived from heat and fire. But the fire of the sublunary world was represented
either by Vesta or Vulcan. They called Vesta the fire of private Families, that
was a part of the Gods Penates; or the public and perpetual fire kept in the
Temples, representing either celestial Fires, or the Fires that are in the
center of the Earth.

They ascribed to Vulcan the Fire of the Clouds, wherefore they said that
Vulcan forged the Thunderbolts of Jupiter, or the fire of Mountains casting out
Flames, for they supposed that Cyclops or Smiths were working therein, or fire
used in all kinds of Arts.

ILITHYIA,
A Divinity called upon by Women in labor; we learn of (...) that this Goddess
was Diana. Tauc cum matura vecabis
Praepositam timidis parientibus Ilithyiam.


The word Ilythyia comes from the Hebre^^ not from the Greek (...), as if this
Goddess came to help. Dionysius Halicarnass^^ speaks thus of her: Ilithyiam
Romani Voc^^ Junoners luciferam; but Orpheus in his Hym^^ Diana Ilythyia, and
casta eadem Prothuraea: (...) Plutarch says plainly, that this Goddess is the
Moon, Unde censeo etiam Dianam Lochiam (...) Partns praesidem and Ilithyiam, ut
quae non alia (...) a Luna, esse nominatam.

IMAGINES,
Images and Portraic^^ of Ancestors, which noble Romans kept under the Porches
of their Houses, in wooden cases made for that purpose, which wor^ carried at
their Funeral Pomps or Triumphal Entries.

These Images were commonly made of Wax or Wood, and some of them were of
Marble or Brass; and when the House was sold, it was not allowed them to remove
(...) out of their places.

Appius Claudius was the first who placed them in the Temples of the Gods, 259
years after the foundation of Rome, with Inscriptions mentioning the Origines
of those Ancestors and their brave Archievements.

Polybius a Greek Historian reports, that these Images represented Faces in
basso relievo to the life, so that they were shut up in wooden cases, which
were open in days of solemn Feasts and public Sacrifices; and that they were
adorned suitable to their Dignities, and crowned with Garlands of Flowers.
Flovius Vopiscus assures us, that amongst the public Rejoycings at Rome, when
the Senate elected Tacitus Emperor, the Romans in all their Houses opened the
cases of the Images of their Ancestors, and offered white Victims in sacrifice.

Cornolius Tacitus writes, that in the Funeral Parade of Junia, Cato's eldest
Daughter, Cassius's Wife, and Sister to Brutus, they carried the Pictures of
twenty Illustrious Families, viz. the Quintilians, Manlians, and other great
Families of the Empire. We read also, that Julius Caesar, to show the greatness
of his Family, ordered that the Pictures of Marins should be carried at the
Funeral Pomp of his Aunt; and that at the Funeral Parade of Drusus, Tiberius
commanded they should carry the Pictures of the Caesar's Family, since Aeneas
and the King of Alba; till Romulus the Founder of the Empire, and that after
them the Images of Appius Claudius, and the whole Family of the Claudians
should be carried in a long and sumptuous March.

However, it was not allowed to all Men, who had the Pictures of their
Ancestors in their Houses to have them carried at their Funerals; this was only
granted to those, who had honorably performed the functions of their
Magistracies; for if they had failed in any point, they forfeited the
privilege of being attended at their Funerals by the Effigies of their
Ancestors; and if they had committed some great crime, all these Pictures were
broke in pieces.

These Figures carried on Chariots attended the Funeral Pomp, and were set upon
Ivory Chairs in the Field called Rostra.

INDIGITES,
Gods called Indigites, were great Men and Heroes, placed in the number of Gods
for their Great and Heroic Actions. The Tutelar Gods, protectors of any place,
were called by that name. The Romans had a great number of these Demigods, as
Hercules, Aesculapius, Faunus, Quirinus, Carmenta, Castor and Pollux, Acca
Laurentia, and others.

INFERUS,
Hell, a place under ground. Lucian has given us a fabulous description of that
place in his Treatise of Mourning. The people, says he, abused by Poets; and
particularly Hesiod and Homer, came to be persuaded, how there was below, a
subterranean place very deep and gloomy, where the dead were detained in
eternal and invisible bands, without ever any being suffered to stir from
thence, excepting some few, through all extent of Ages, says Virgil; nay, and
that a particular favor too, and for reasons of great importance, for the
whole Country is surrounded with great Rivers, whose very names are terrible,
Styx, Phlegeton, Cocytus, without mentioning Acheron, a great Lake just at the
entrance, which exhales so gross a vapor, that Birds cannot fly over without
dying presently. First, at the descent you find an Adamantine Gate, guarded by
Aeacus the Cousin German of Pluto, in the company of Cerberus, a triple headed
Dog, that fawns and caresses highly all the comers, but barks terribly at those
who would go out. Beyond this Meadow is a great Field of Daffodils, through
which glides the River Lethe, a mortal Enemy to Memory, if we may pin our Faith
on such persons, as formerly returned from thence; though it is somewhat strange,
how they could remember it, after having drank thereof, and recount all those
dismal things, which we only know by their Narrative Pluto and Proserpina sway
the Scepter in those Regions: The latter the Daughter of Ceres, kidnapp'd
forsooth, and carried away by force; and the former Jove's Brother, who had
this Empire for his share; and is entitled Pluto, which signifies Wealth,
because he is rich in Ghosts, as a Man told me, who fancied to know it well.

His Ministers are Pain, Horrors and the Furies, without mentioning Minos and
Rhadamantus, both Cretans, who are very severe in their execution of Justice.
As for Mercury, he is only there as a Sojourner. Good Men are sent into the
Elysian Fields, a Colony of Felicity and Delights, and the Wicked into eternal
Dungeons, where they are wracked and tormented suitably to their several
Crimes, some in the Fire, others upon Gibbets or on Wheels; this Man for his
punishment, is constrained to roll Stones that run back again, against steep
Hills, or fetch Water in a Pot full of holes; another is preyed upon by a
Vulture, or dies of thirst, as Tantalus, without being able to squench it, though
he is up to the very Chin in water. The rest, that have done neither Good nor
Evil, strowl in the Meadow above mentioned, where they are fed with such Meat,
as are carried to the dead, and the oblations and effusions, that are poured
upon their Sepulchers; though after all, they are no more than shades, that have
only the figure of the Body, and when touched vanish like smoke.

The same Author has also left us a description of Hell, in the second Book of
the true History.

At our going out of that sweet and fragrant Air, we entered one thick and
stinking, which distilled Pitch instead of Dew. We smelt afar off Sulphur and
Brimstone, with an exhalation like unto that of dead Bodies broiling upon the
Coals. Amidst of all this we heard the lashings of a Whip, the gingling of
Chains, and the roarings of the damned. We touched at one of these Islands,
which was all encompassed with craggy Cliffs and Precipices. Having made shift
to scramble up through a craggy and thorny Cliff, we arrived at the place of
punishments, which was all sowed with points of Swords and Spears, and
surrounded with three Rivers, the one of Blood, the other of Mud, and the third
of Fire, but of a rapid stream like unto a Torrent, and subject to Tempests
like the Sea. We went in, and there we saw many Kings tormented. After this
away we went, not being able to suffer the stench, nor the horror of the place.

We have a large account of Hell, as it is represented by Poets, in what
Diodorus Siculus reports of the Funerals of the Egyptians.

The Corpse being put into a Boat guided by a Pilot, called in the Egyptian
Language Charon, Proreta quem sua lingua Charontem vocant; they stopped in a
Lake, where every body was allowed to charge the dead with Accusations.

If the Crime was proved, they pronounced Sentence against him, whereby he was
deprived of Burial. If the Impeacher was not able to prove his Accusations, he
was punished; and the Kindred of the deceased left off Mourning, sung his
Praises, commended not his Birth and Family, but his Virtue and Piety toward
the Gods, praying the Gods of Hell to receive him in their company, and then
they buried him. The same Author speaks of the piece of Money, that was put in
the Mouth of the dead to pay the Ferry-man, and gives an account of the Temple
of Hecate, Cocytus, the Gate of Truth, and the Statue of Justice, without
either Head or Eyes, to show that Justice had no regard to persons. There are
Judges who examine the Crimes and Virtues of this present Life, inflict
punishments to the Malefactors, and send just Men to the Elysian Fields. Virgil
mentions Minos, Quaesitor Minos vitas and crimina discit.


After the Sentence is pronounced, the punishment follows.

Continuo sontes ultrix accincta flagello
Tisiphone quatit insultans, torvosque finistra
Intentans angues, vocat agmina saeva Serorum.
6. Aeneid. The Rivers represented by Poets flowing in Hell, are Rivers of
Arcadia or Italy, or the Eastern Countries. Homer Odysse. l. 10. places these
four following Rivers in the Cimmeria, viz. Acheron Phlegeton, Cocytus and
Styx, and tells us, that the Country inhabited by the people called Cimmerii,
one days Journey from Mount Circaeeum in the Country of the Latins, is
accounted to be Hell.

The Italians, who have taken their Fables from the Greeks, have represented
them as Rivers in Italy: The Styx was in Arcadia near Nonacris, and its Waters
were so extreme cold, that they were present poison, and Historians report that
Alexander the Great was poisoned with them. Pausanias l. 8. makes a long
description of the River Styx in Greece, and refers the two places, where Homer
and Hesiod makes mention of them. All Geographers place also the Rivers Acheron
and Cocytus in Epirus, adjoining to Arcadia. All these Names, Acheron, Cocytus,
Avernus, or rather Aornus, Phlegeton and Styx signify in the Greek Tongue, the
same they should to represent the emblems of Hell. Wherefore it is certain that
the Latins have borrowed their Hell from the Greeks, and the Greeks from the
Funerals of the Egyptians, as Pausanias reports.

INO,
The Daughter of Cadmus and Hermione, who took for her second Husband Athamas
King of Thebes, who had married Nephele of whom he had two Children Phryxus and
Hell. This cruel Stepmother attempted to destroy her two Children; but
Phryxus to prevent her design, got a Ram with a golden Fleece, and riding upon
him with his Sister Hell, fled away, and crossed over the Sea, but this fair
Lady, frightened by the depth of Waters, let go her hold, and fell into the Sea,
which thereupon was called by her name Hellespontus. As for Phryxus, he safely
arrived at Colchis, where he sacrificed his Ram to Jupiter, who placed him in
the number of the twelve Constellations of the Zodiac, and the golden Fleece
was left to King Aeta, who placed it in a Wood consecrated to Mars, under the
guard of a dreadful Dragon and two Bulls, casting fire and flame out of their
Mouths. This is what Lucian reports of the same in the Dialogue of the
Sea-Gods, where he introduces Neptune and Amphitrite, speaking thus.

Nept. Let the Sea where this fair Lady is fallen, be called after her name
Hellespontus; and let the Nereids carry her Body into Tr^^^, where the
Inhabitants of the Country shall take care to erect her a Monument.


Amph. I think we should do better to bury her here; for her fate, and the
barbarous dealing of her Stepmother break my heart.


Nept. But she cannot lie in the bosom of the waves, and it would not be decent
to bury her in the sand. It Is comfort enough for her, that her Mother-in-law
shall be attended by the same fate, and pursued by Athamas, she shall cast
herself down from the top of Mount Cytheron into the Sea, together with her Son
Melicerta.


Amph. But how came it to pass that this fair one fell off the Ram she was
riding upon, and her Brother did not?


Nept. It Is no wonder that a Man should ride better than a Maid; besides, that
she was frightened by the depth of Waters she saw under her Feet.


Amph. Why did not the Clouds help her in this encounter.


Nept. No body can avoid their bad Fortune.


The Bodies of Ino and her Son Palamus were carried by a Dolphin on the shore
of Schenuntia, from whence Amphimacus and Donacinus brought them to Corinth,
and honored them like Gods, Ino by the name of Lucothoe or Matuta, and her Son
under the name of Melicertes or Portumnus, and instituted solemn Games in their
honor, kept every fifth year at the Streights of the Isthmus of Corinth. As we
learn of Ovid, in the 6th Book of his Fasti, v. 541.

Laeta canam: gaude defuncta laboribus Ino,
Dixit, and huic populo prospera semper ades.
Numen eris Pelagi, natum quoque pontus habebit:
In vestris aliud sumite nomen aquis.
Leucothoe Graiis, Matuta vocabere nostris.
In portus nato jus erit omne tuo.
Quem nos Portumnum, sua lingua Palemona dicet:
Este precor nostris aequus uterque locis.
This same Poet explains at large this Fable, in the 4th Book of his
Metamorphosis.

Lactantius does not question the History of Ino, called Leucothea or Matuta,
and her Son, who had also three names, at least after his Apotheosis; for to
put out of Men's memory that they were Men themselves, they changed their names
after their consecration: Solent enim mortuis consecratis nomina immutare,
credo ne quis putet eos homines fuisse. Ino postquam se praecipitavit,
Leucothea, materque Matuta, and Melicertes filius ejus Palaemon atque
Portumnus. Ino and Semele were the Daughters of Cadmus and Hermione; wherefore
they were all Natives of Phaenicia, Cadmus himself being a Phaenician. The name
of Melicertes is also a Phaenician name, and signifies also the King of the
Town. And thus of the three names of the Mother and the Son, one was
Phaenician, Ino and Melicertes; the other Greek, Leucothea and Palemon; and the
last was Latin, Matuta and Portumnus. These three names show, that the same
History was brought from Phaenicia into Greece, and from Greece into Italy.

Pausanias describes the fury of Athamas against Ino his Wife, whom he took to
be the cause of the death of Phryxus, and the flight of Ino, who run away with
her Son, and cast herself headlong with him into the Sea, and tells us, that
the Dolphins received Melicertes, and carried him to the Isthmus of Corinth,
where he was named Palaemon, and there the Isthmian Games were dedicated to
him: As for Phryxus, Ino his Stepmother had really conspired his ruin; and to
compass her wicked designs, she employed the Priests of Delphi to persuade the
people, that the State of Thebes should enjoy no tranquillity, till Phryxus was
sacrificed to Jupiter; whereupon Phryxus fled away with his Sister Hell, who
fell into the Sea called by her name; and retired himself to King Aeta at
Colches. This is related by Apollodorus.

INSCRIPTIO,
An Inscription. The Ancients ingrav'd on Pillars the principles of Sciences,
or the History of the World. Porphyrius mentions Inscriptions kept by the
Inhabitants of Crete, wherein the Ceremony of the Sacrifices of the Corybantes
were described. Euhemerus, as Lactantius reports, had written an History of
Jupiter and the other Gods, collected out of the Titles and Inscriptions, which
were in the Temples, and principally in the Temple of Jupiter Triphilianus,
where, by the Inscription of a golden Column it was declared, that that Pillar
was erected by the God himself. Pliny assures us, that the Babylonian
Astrologers made use of Bricks to keep their observations, and hard and solid
Matters to preserve Arts and Sciences.

This was for a long time practiced; for Arimnestus, Pythagoras's Son, as
Porphyrius relates, dedicated to Juno's Temple a brass Plate, whereon was
engraved the Sciences that were improved by him: Arimnestus, says Malchus,
being returned home, fixed in the Temple of Juno a brass Table, as an Offering
consecrated by him to posterity; this Monument was two Cubits diameter, and
there were seven Sciences writ upon it.

Pythagoras and Plato, according to the opinion of the Learned, learnt
Philosophy by the Inscriptions of Egypt, engraven on Mercury's Pillars.

Livy tells us, that Hannibal dedicated an Altar with a long Discourse,
engraven in the Greek and Punick Language, wherein he described his fortunate
Achievements.

The Inscriptions reported by Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus shows
sufficiently, that the first way of instructing People, and transmitting
Histories and Sciences to posterity, was by Inscriptions. And this particularly
appears by Plato's Dialogue entitled Hyparchus, wherein he says, that the Son
of Pisistratus, called by the same name, did engrave on Stone Pillars, Preceps
useful for Husbandmen.

Pliny assures us, that the first public Monuments were made with Plates of
Lead; and the Treaties of Confederacy made between the Romans and the Jews was
written upon Plates of Brass; that, says he, the Jews might have something to
put them in mind of the Peace and Confederacy concluded with the Romans.
Tacitus reports, that the Messenians in their dispute with the Lacedaemonians
concerning the Temple of Diana Limenetida produced the old division of
Peloponnessus, made amongst the posterity of Hercules, and proved, that the
Field where the Temple was built fell to their Kings share; and that the
Testimonies thereof were yet seen engraven upon Stones and Brass. An. l. 4. c.
43.

INTERPRES,
An Inteepreter. There was an Interpreter appointed, whose Office was to
explain to the Senate the Speeches of Ambassadors, who could not speak Latin.
The Magistrates who commanded in the Provinces had also an Interpreter, to
explain their Orders to those to whom they were directed; because it was not
allowed to these Magistrates, says Valerius Maximus, in all the functions of
their Office, to speak in any other Language but Latin; wherefore the Praetor
of Sicily reproached Tully, that he had spoken Greek in the Senate of Syracuse.

IO,
The Daughter of Inachus, debauched by Jupiter, and then turned into a Cow,
whom Juno committed to the care of Argus, and though Argus had a hundred Eyes,
yet Mercury having lulled him to sleep with his Caducaeum and his Flute, stole
her away; whereupon Juno being much vexed, made Io mad, and obliged her to run
through many Countries, and to cross over the Bosphorus of Thracia, thus called
after her name. From thence she came again into Egypt, where, Jupiter moved
with compassion for her misfortune, restored her to her first shape, and then
she married King Osiris. From that time she was called Isis, and honored by
the Egyptians; and after her death, ranked in the number of the Goddesses, and
honored by the name of Isis. Herodotus writes, that the Egyptians consecrated
to her Cows, and the Females of all Cattle. Diodorus and Philostratus say, that
she was represented with Ox's Horns. The Nation called Eubaei had an Ox's head
for a symbol, in remembrance that Io was brought to bed of Epaphus in a Den,
called for that reason (...), the Ox's Den. Plutarch writes, that Horus out of
passion, having taken the Royal Ornament from the head of his Mother Isis,
Mercury gave her another, made of an Ox's Head, in form of an Headpiece.

Lucian in his Dialogue of the Gods, brings in Jupiter talking thus with
Mercury.

Jupiter. Do thou know Io?


Mercury. Who, the Daughter of Inachu^?


Jupit. Yes, her; Juno out of jealousy has turned her into a Heifer, lest I
should love her, and has committed her to the guard of a Monster, that never
sleeps; for as he has an hundred Eyes, there is always some watching. But thou
art cunning enough to get me rid of him; go and kill him in the Nemean Forest,
where he watches this fair one; and after his death, thou shall carry Io by Sea
into Egypt, where she shall be adored by the name of Isis. I will have her
preside over the Winds and the Waves, and be the Patroness of Seamen.


JOCASTA,
The Daughter of Creon King of Thebes, who being warned by the Oracle, that he
should perish by the hand of one of his Children, bad Jocasta, who married
Laius, to murder all her Sons. OEdipus being born, was delivered to a Soldier
to murder him, according to the King's order. But the Soldier, struck with
horror for the murder of an innocent Child, contented himself to run a twig of
Ozier through both his Feet, and tie him to a Tree, his Head downwards: A
Shepherd of Polybus King of Corinth having found him, untied him, and presented
him to the Queen, who carefully brought him up. Being grown a Man, he went into
Phocis, according to the Oracle, to discover there his Father. There was then
in that Country a Monster called Sphinx, who had a Face and Voice like a
Maiden, the Body like a Dog, the Tail like a Dragon, the Claws like a Lion, and
Wings like a Bird, and devoured all Passengers, who were not able to expound
the Riddles she proposed to them, which was very troublesome to Thracia: But
OEdipus cleared the Country of that Monster, and forced her to kill herself,
having expounded her Riddle, viz. What Creature is that, that in the Morning
goes with four Feet, at Noon with two, and at Evening with three: OEdipus
answered it was a Man, who in his Infancy went on all four, to wit, his Hands
and Feet; in his middle Age on two Legs; and when he is old on three, that is,
he used a Staff OEdipus was unknowingly advanced to his Mother's Bed, for
having delivered Thebes of that Monster. And thus Laius King of Thebes, and
Jocasta his Wife, endeavoring to prevent the prediction of the Oracle, saying,
their Son should kill his Father and Marry his Mother, were themselves the
Instruments and Ministers of the fulfilling of the Oracle. For OEdipus
unknowingly killed Laius his Father, and married his Mother Jocasta, Laius's
Widow, whom Creon had promised to the Man, who should expound the Riddle
abovementioned.

IPHIGENIA.
The Grecian Fleet being bound at Aulis by contrary winds, the Southsayer
Calehas declared, that Diana would hinder favorable winds, till Iphigenia,
Agamemnon's Daughter should be sacrificed to her. Agamemnon obeyed the Orders
of Heaven, and sent for Iphigenia, under pretense of marrying her to Achilles.
Clytemnestra brought her Daughter Iphigenia, and having notice of Agamemnon's
design, she opposed him vigorously, as also Achilles, who resented his name
being made use of to cover an untruth. In fine, Iphigenia determined the
Controversy, by the great desire she had to be sacrificed for the Service of
Greece. All the preparations being made for the Sacrifice, Diana substituted a
Hind in her room, and carried her away to Tauros, where she was made Priestess
to Diana, and sacrificed to her all the Foreigners, who landed upon that
Country.

The Sacrifice that Agamemnon offered of his Daughter Iphigenia, has so great
conformity with that of the Daughter of Jeptha, that it is plain, that
Agamemnon's sacrifice was but a copy of the other. The name it self of
Iphigenia seems to imitate, that she is the Daughter of Jephta, as if she was
called Jephtigenia.

But we must confess, that Poets have taken to themselves a sovereign Authority
to disguise History into Fables, and have confounded the Sacrifice of Jephta's
Daughter with the Sacrifice of Isaac, and as God himself saved Isaac, whom he
had ordered to be offered to him in sacrifice, and that a Ram was substituted
in Isaac's room; so the Fable says, that the Virgin Iphigenia being ready to be
sacrificed to Diana, this Goddess took her away, and substituted a Hind to be
sacrificed in her room; as Ovid reports.

The Vow of Agamemnon, and the Sacrifice of Iphigenia, as they are related by
Tully, have yet a greater conformity with the History of Jephta. For he says,
that Agamemnon vowed to offer in sacrifice to Diana, the finest Creature that
should be born that year, wherefore he was obliged to sacrifice his own
Daughter.

Tully assures us, that Iphigenia was really sacrificed, like the Daughter of
Jepht; and that Poets, being wiser than Agamemnon, have substituted a Hind to
be sacrificed in her room.

IRIS,
The Rainbow, one of the most wonderful Meteors of the Air. Plutarch reports,
that Plato writes, that she was esteemed the Daughter of Thaumas, because of
her wonderful beauty. And Hesiod in his Theogonia has made Iris the Daughter of
Thaumas and Electra. Tully agrees with Plato's opinion: Cur autem Arcus species
non in Deorum numero reponatur? Est enim pulcher, and ob eam causam, quia
speciem habet admirabilem, Thaumante dicitur esse nata.

Poets call her Nuncia Junonis the Messenger of Juno, because she gives us
notice of the disposition of the air, represented by the name of Juno. And God
himself in Genesis, has given the Rainbow for a token, that there never shall
be any more Flood. And although the Rainbow might have appeared before the Flood,
yet it was not seen at all in the time of the Deluge, all the Sky being then
covered with very thick Clouds, where the Rainbow was not able to appear,
because its fair Colors shine only upon a thin Cloud. Wherefore it was a token
naturally proper to signify, that living Creatures should never any more be
destroyed by a Flood.

Servius observes, that Mercury and Iris being both Messengers of the Gods, the
Errands of Mercury are always tending to Concord, and the Messages of Iris to
War and Discord, from whence she was called Iris. And this Grammarian wisely
observes, that Iris does not always raise Discords, for her first institution
was to declare the Treatise of Pacification between God and Man.

As for the Etymology of the word Iris, Plato is rather to be believed than
Servius, when he says that it comes from (...) dicere, annunoiare, because it
predicts fair weather. What Vossius says is not to be omitted, viz. that the
name of Iris may be derived from the Hebrew word Ir or Her, which signifies an
Angel or Messenger; for this name is given to the Angels in the Holy Scripture,
because of their watchfulness. For the proper meaning of the word Her is Vigil.

However it must be granted, that Servius has grounded his opinion upon
Hesiod's report, when he derived the word Iris from (...); and said that her
Errands were tending to discord: And this Poet tells us still, that when any of
the Gods has told a lie, Jupiter sends Iris to fetch water from the River Styx
in a golden Vessel, whereupon the Liar must take the Oath, and if he forswears
himself, he remains a whole year without life and motion, but a long year,
which contains many thousand of years. Therefore the Errand of Iris supposes
indeed some discord, but yet conduces to pacify it.

Statius seems to give another reason why Iris is the Messenger of the Gods,
viz. her situation, one part of her touching Heaven, and the other Earth.

ISIS,
Queen of Egypt: It Is certain by the testimony of many Writers, that the
Goddess called by the Greeks Io, and the Egyptians Isis, is the same whom the
Romans honored by the name of Cybele, viz. the Earth, or Nature herself,
married by the Egyptians to Osiris, who was the Sun, to make her fruitful, and
Mother of all productions, which are formed in her bosom. It Is both Plutarch
and Apuleius's opinion, who introduces Isis speaking thus, Rerum natura, parens
sum omnium elementorum. Macrobius says also, that Osiris is nothing else but
the Sun, and Isis the Earth and Nature.

And truly, there is such likeness between the Pictures and Representations,
that the Ancients have given of these two Divinities, viz. Isis among the
Egyptians, and Cybele among the Romans, that it is easily to be perceived that
both were the same Cybele, as we see by the reverse of many Medals. Cybele wore
a Turret on her head, and was attended by Lions, holding in her hand a musical
Instrument like a Tabor, with this Title Matter Magna, the Great Mother, viz.
Nature. Isis had also a Turret on her head, as it appears by a great many of
her Statues, and particularly in that which was found at Rome in the time of
Leo the tenth. She is also accompanied with many Lions, as we may observe in
that famous piece of Cardinal Bembo, representing Isis, which Kircher caused to
be engraven. She holds a Sistrum in her hand, which is a musical Instrument,
and in fine, she is called Earth and Nature herself. Wherefore she is often
represented with many Breasts.

Apuleius reports, that this Goddess was had in veneration all over the World,
but under several names and representations, for she is named Diana, Ceres,
Venus and Proserpina. And it must be observed that Isis was a Queen of Egypt,
who reigned there with King Osiris her Husband in the time of the first
Israelites; for Tacitus tells us, that during the reign of Isis, the multitude
of Jews being extraordinarily augmented, they went to settle themselves in the
neighboring Country, under the command of Jerusalem and Juda.

And as Isis was a woman of great wit, and courage to undertake the most
difficult things, she ordered a Ship to be built, and fitted out for her to
travel; and went into the most remote and barbarous Countries, such as Gaul and
Germany; and Tacitus assures us, that she penetrated into the Country of
Suabia; and having met there but very gross and wild Nations, she taught them
to honor the Deities, to till the Ground, and sow Corn. And thereby she was in
so great esteem among these Nations, that they took her for the Goddess of the
Earth, to whom they were much obliged, for having taught them Agriculture and
Religion, which were at that time unknown to them.

Tacitus observes also in this place, that the Germans of Suabia adored her
under the figure of a Ship, in commemoration, doubtless, of the Ship that had
brought this Queen into their Country to do them so good an Office.

We have some Egyptian Medals of Julian the Apostate, wherein he is represented
in a Ship; and there are some of her. Figures found in Kircher and others,
wherein she carries a Ship in her hand. Diodorus and Apulei^^^ assures us, that
she governed over the Sea; and the last ascribes these words to her: Navigabili
jam pelage facto, rudem dedicantes carinam, primitias commeatus libant mei
Sacerdotes: as if she had been the first who found the Art of Navigation, or at
least the use of Sails.

Some Authors, not being able to discover from whence the Arms of the City of
Paris are derived, which is a Ship, ascend as far as Isis to find the origin
thereof, and the name of that City. For many were of opinion that the name of
Paris was a Greek word, and came from (...), near the famous Temple of Isis,
since we must suppose, that a Temple was dedicated to this Goddess, in the
compass of the ground that belongs now to the Abbey of St Germain in the
Fields; and this Temple remained till the establishment of Christianity in
France: And when it was demolished, they kept out of curiosity the Idol Isis,
who was there adored, and laid it in a corner of the Church of St Germain in
the Field, when it was built by Childebert, and dedicated to St Vincent. This
Idol was kept there till the year 1514, that Cardinal Briconnet, who was then
Abbot of that Church, being informed that some good old Woman, out of
simplicity and superstition, had offered some Candles to the Idol, caused it to
be removed from that place, and broke in pieces.

This Temple, so famous, was served by a Chapter of Priests, who lived,
according to the common opinion, at the Village of Issy, in a Castle, the Ruins
whereof were yet seen at the beginning of this Age. Plutarch speaks of these
Priests of Isis, they observed, says he, Chastity; their Head was shaved, and
they went about bare foot, and clothed with a linen Habit: Wherefore Juvenal
calls them Linigeri. Nunc Dea Linigera colitur celeberrima turba.
Qui grege Linigero circundatus, and grege calvo.


Isis had many Temples at Rome; one near the Baths of Caracalla at the end of
the new Street, with this Title upon an old Marble, Saeculo Felici Isias
Sacerdos Isidi Salutaris Consecratio: Another at the Garden of St Mary the new,
with this Title, Templum Isidis Exoratae. P. Victor and Sextus Rufus mentions
another by the name of Patrician Isis, near Mount Esquilinus, and Lampridius in
the Life of Alexander Severus tells us, that this Emperor has adorned the
Temple of Isis and Seraphis, Isim and Saraphim decenter Ornavit. Josephus
writes, that the Emperor Tiberius ordered, that the Temple of this Goddess
should be levelled to the Ground, her Statues cast into the Triber, and her
Priests hanged, for having been too favorable to the amors of a young
Gentleman, with a Lady called Paulina.

The Emperor Commodus had a singular veneration for Isis, as Lampridius has
observed in his Life, Sacra Isis coluit, ut and caput raderet and Anubin
portaret; because of the Debaucheries committed in her Sacrifices.

Here is an Encomium of Isis related by Diodorus, as it is engraven on a Column.

I am Isis the Queen of Egypt, instructed by Mercury. No body can abolish what
I have established by my Ordinances. I am the Wife of Osiris, I have first
invented the use of Corn. I am the Mother of King Horus. I shine in the
Dog Star. By me the City of Bubasti was founded: Wherefore rejoice thou, Egypt,
rejoice thou, thou have brought me up and fed me.

The Egyptians ascribed the overflowings of the Nile, to the tears that she
shed for the death of her Husband Osiris.

We have a statue of Isis habited like a Roman Matron, having a Half Moon on
the top of her Head, her right Hand turned toward Heaven, and her left toward
the Earth, to inform us, that she receives the influences of Heaven. We have
also a Medal of the Emperor Commodus, where Isis is represented with a Half
Moon, holding a Sphere with her right hand, and a Vessel full of Fruits with
her left. The Sphere denotes Astrology, wherein the Egyptians excelled; and the
Fruits the fecundity of Egypt.

For the Egyptians were the first who made Gods of the Sun and Moon, calling
the Sun Osiris, and the Moon Isis, holding a Sphere in her Hand, as the Mother
of Arts and Sciences, and an Amphora full of ears of Corn, to represent the
fertility of the Country.

The Egyptians adored the Earth, by the name of the Goddess Isis. Servius and
Isidorus after him, speak thus of her, Isis liugua Egyptiorum est Terra; quam
Isim volunt esse. They ascribed many Breasts to Isis, wherefore she was called
(...), to show that the Moon or the sublunary world affords food to all
Creatures. The opinion of Julius Firmicus is, that according the Egyptian
Poetry, Isis was the Earth.

Isis was also the same with Ceres, as Herodotus says Isis secundum linguam
Graecorum est Ceres, etc. ut Aegyptia lingua Isis est Ceres. St Austin declares
that this was the opinion of the Egyptians: Isis invenit hordei segetem, atque
inde spicas marito Regi, and ejus conciliario Mercurio demon, travit: unde
eandem and cererem volunt.

ITALIA,
Italy, a very famous Country of Europe. Italy had several names, sometimes it
was called Hesperia, either from Hesperus, brother to Atlas, King of
Mauritania, or Hesperus the Star of Venus, called Lucifer, at the rising of the
Sun; and Hesperus or Vesper in the evening when the Sun sets. Wherefore the
Greeks have called the Western parts of Italy Hesperia magna, to distinguish it
from Spain called minor Hesperia.

Italy was also called Oenotriae, of Oenotrus King of the Sabins, or Oenotrus
the Son of Lycaon King of Arcadia, or rather from the Greek word (...) Wine,
which Janus brought into this Country, by planting there the Vine. They gave
her also the name of Ausonia, from Ausonius the son of Ulysses and Calypso.

That Country is now called Italia, Italy, either of Italus King of Sicily, or
from Oxen called (...) in the old Greek, Italiam dixisse minores.
Virg.

Strabo, speaking of Italy gives it this following encomium. There, says he,
men breathe a temperate air; there are abundance of fountains, the waters
thereof cure several distempers, and preserve health. There are all sorts of
excellent Fruits, and quarries of Marble of several colors. The Inhabitants
thereof are witty, subtle and cunning, fit for learning, and principally Poetry
and Eloquence; but are great dissemblers and revengeful, even to the very
Altars. The chiefest City of Italy is Rome, famous for the birth of several
great men both in War and Peace:

The Romans have represented Italy in their medals like a Queen sitting upon a
Globe, holding with her right hand a horn of plenty, having the other arm and
the breast uncovered. With this title Italia.

ITALUS,
surnamed Kitim, or Marsitalus, left his son Sicor in Spain, and came into
Italy, where he asurped the throne of his brother Hesperus. Natales Comes says,
that he was one of the Captains of Hercules, whom this Hero left Governor of
Italy. Cato and Fabius Pictor tell us, that these two brothers, one called
Hesperus and the other Italus, reigned both in Italy, wherefore that Country
was called by their names, sometimes Hesperia and sometimes Italia.

The word Kitim, says Bochart, signifies hid, which is the proper name of
Latium a latendo.

Wherefore Dionysius Hallcarnassius and other Writers who will derive the
Etymology of Italy from a noble origin, take it from the name of that King,
but others derive it from a Calf that Hercules lost at his return from Spain:
whereupon he called it Vitalia, and since Italia. This is Cato's opinion upon
the origin of the word Italia.

ITALUS
had a daughter called Rome, whom he established Queen of the Aberigines, who
built the City of Rome, as it will be said upon the word Roma.

JUBA,
King of Mauritania, whom Julius Caesar vanquished, and reduced his Kingdom
into a Province. This Prince is represented in one of his Medals, with a long
face, and an arrogant and cruel air, his hair curled and set by degrees. It was
the custom of the Kings of that Country to curl their hair, and powder it with
Gold powder. Petretus and this King killed one another, lest they should fall
into the hands of Caesar, after the defeat of Pompey, whose part they had taken.

JUBAL,
the posterity of Cain, mentioned in the Book of Genesis, invented Musical
Instruments, Jubal was the father of all such as handle the harp and organ.

The opinion of Vossius is, that Jubal mentioned in the Scripture is Apollo,
whom the Ancients esteemed the inventer of Song and Music.

JUDAEI.
The Jews. Some Authors, says Tacitus, reports that the Jews came from Candia,
as if the word Judea, was made of the word Ida, which is a mountain in that
Island, and says that they were driven out of that place when Saturn was
divested of his Empire by Jupiter; and went to settle themselves in the
furthermost parts of Libia. Others write that they came from Egypt, and that
during the reign of Isis, their number being extraordinarily increased, they
inhabited the neighboring Country under the command of Jerusalem and Juda. And
many others assure us, that they came out of Ethiopia, either out of fear or
hatred of King Cepheus; some say also, that the Jews were a multitude of
Assyrian Mob got together, who not being able to live in their Country,
possessed themselves of a part of Egypt, and built afterward the Towns of
Judea in the neghbouring Syria. Some allow them a more illustrious origin, and
affirm that they were already famous in the time of Homer, and call them
Solymes, from whence came the name Solyma or Jerusalem, notwithstanding the
greatest number of writers agree in this point, that Egypt being infected with
leprosy, King Bocharis, by the advice of the Oracle of Hammon, drove them out
of this Country, as a multitude unprofitable and odious to Diety, and that
being scattered in the wilderness, and courage failing them, Moses one of their
Leaders advised them to expect no relief neither from Gods nor Men, who had
forsook them; but to follow him as a celestial Guide, who should deliver them
out of dangers, which they did without knowing where he led them. They say that
nothing was more troublesome to them than thirst, and that they were ready to
perish for want of water, When on a sudden a herd of wild asses, that came from
feeding, got into a Rock covered with a wood; which Moses having perceived he
followed them, fancying that he should meet with some fountain in a place
covered with green; which succeeded according to his desire, for he found there
abundance of water, wherewith they quenched their thirst After they were thus
refreshed they continued their Journey for the space of six days, then they
found a cultivated Country, and took possession of it, having driven away the
inhabitants thereof, and there they built their Temple and City. Moses, the
better to get their affection and fidelity, instituted a Religion and
Ceremonies amongst them, contrary to those of all other Nations. For all that
is holy amongst us, is accounted profane by them, and all that is forbid to us
is lawful to them. Moses consecrated in the Sanctuary the Figure of the animal
that was their guide, and offered in sacrifice the Ram out of the hatred he
bore to Jupiter Hammon; and the Ox, because it was adored in Egypt; and forbad
them to eat any flesh of swine, because they were subject to leprosy. He
instituted many fasting days, in remembrance of the hunger they had suffered in
their Travel, and ordained unleavened bread, for a token that they had lived
upon rapine. And ordered them to keep the seventh day holy, because upon that
day they had made an end of their labors; but as men are inclined to idleness,
they keep also holy the seventh year. Some Writers tell us, that it is an
honor rendered to Saturn, with whom they were driven out of Candia, or because
they revere his Planet, which is the highest and most large of all; besides,
that most part of the celestial bodies observe the number of seven in their
course and influences. But by what means sooner this Religion was introduced,
it is certain that it is more ancient than any other Religion whatever. These
Jews never dwell nor eat with any men, but those of their own Religion, and
abstain from foreign women, tho they are much given to luxury. They have
invented circumcision; for a distinction from other nations, and those who
embrace their Religion are tied to the observation of that ceremony. They bury
their dead standing, after the example of the Egyptians, instead of burning
them like other Nations, and have the same opinion, as the Egyptians,
concerning Hell, but have quite another belief concerning the Diety. For the
Egyptians adore several animals under different shapes, but the Jews adore but
one God in Spirit, accounting all those Idolaters who represent him like a man
that they believe; he is eternal and immutable, and will not suffer any image
neither in their City nor in their Temple. Some fancied that they adored
Bacchus the conqueror of the East, because a Golden Vine was found in their
Temple, and that their Priests did beat the Drum, and played upon the Flute,
and are crowned with Ivy; but their ceremonies are quite different from those
of Bacchus, which are attended by mirth, feastings and rejoicing; for the
ceremonies of the Jews are filthy and absurd.

This whole discourse of Tacitus is contrary to the holy Scripture in the main
circumstances, as it is easily observed; for this Nation adored the true God,
and came out of Egypt by his own order under the conduct of Moses, who
performed several Miracles to oblige Pharaoh to let them go into the Desert,
and Moses got the Waters to come out of the Rock with his mystical Rod; and God
gave to this Nation, whom he had chosen to himself, a Land abounding in all
kinds of wealth, which is Palestina or Judea, as he had promised to their
Forefathers.

Tacitus reports also, that this Nation have Arabia on the East, Egypt on the
South, Syria on the North, and Phaenicia and the Sea on the West. Their Bodies
are healthy and strong; their Country very plentiful, tho they have but little
rainy weather, and bears the same things that grow in Italy, and besides that,
the Palm Tree and the Balsome-tree; the first of these Trees is great and fine,
the other small, but of great use in Physic; when its Branches are full of
moisture, they make an incision therein, with a Stone or Potsherd, (for it
abhors Iron) and distills a most precious Liquor. The chiefest Mountain of that
Country is Libanus, always green, and covered with Snow in very hot weather,
which is a miracle of Nature. There is the Spring of the River Jordan, which
running through two Lakes, loses it self in the third, which is as large as a
Sea, but of a very bad taste, and a pestiferous smell. Its Waters are not
agitated by the Winds, and neither River Birds nor Fishes can endure it;
whatsoever is cast into it floats over, and Men who cannot swim never sink under
its Waters; however, no Man knows the cause of this wonder: At certain times it
casts forth Bitumen, which experience has taught Men to gather like other
things; it is a black Liquor, which is congealed by Vinegar, and floats over
water: The manner of loading Ships with it, is to draw it up the sides of the
Ship, just to the Deck, and so it will follow successively, and run down, if
not interrupted, into the Hole. It Is thus reported by the Ancients, but the
Inhabitants of the Country assure us, that Bitumen is gathered by heaps, is
either driven by the winds, or drawn to the shore, where it is dried, both by
the heat of the Sun and the exhalations of the Earth, and being thus grown
hard, it is cut like stone or wood. Near this Lake are those fruitful and well
peopled Plains, the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha, which were consumed by Fire.
It Is said that the marks of the wrath of Heaven remains there still, and that
the Earth is burnt, and has not strength to produce any thing. That all that
grows or is planted there, either bearing Blossom or Fruit, grows black and is
turned into ashes, which is caused, according to my opinion, by the corruption
of the air and earth, occasioned by the neighboring Lake; notwithstanding, I
do not deny, that the fire of Heaven might have destroyed whole Cities. The
River Belus disembogues itself into the Sea of Judaea, and at its mouth they
take up Sand, with which they make Glass, by mixing Niter with it; and tho the
River be but a very small one, yet it is never exhausted. This Country has many
Villages and few Cities, whereof Jerusalem is the chiefest: and is encompassed
by three walls; the first incloses the City, the second the Palace, and the
third the Temple, which is a very stately building, and which might serve for a
Citadel. The Jews are not allowed to go further than into a Gate thereof, and
the Priests only are permitted to go into it. This people was always despised
by other Nations, first by the Assyrians, then the Medes and Persians: but
under the Macedonians, Antiochus attempted in vain to govern them, by taking
away their superstition, and introducing the Greek customs amongst them, for he
was prevented in his design by the rebellion of the Parthians. Wherefore they
took opportunity, by the falling of this Empire, and the rising of the Empire
of the Arsacides, to elect their own Kings to govern them.

Pompey was the first of the Romans who conquered Judea, and entered the Temple
by the right of Conquest, and ordered that the Walls of the City should be
pulled down, but he preserved the Temple, and all that was therein.

JUGATINUS,
A God presiding over Marriages, at the conjunction of Husband and Wife.

JUGERUM,
An Acre of ground, so much as a yoke of Oxen will plough in a day; it contains
in length 240 foot, in breadth 120, as Quintilian says.

JUGUM,
A Yoke, a piece of Timber, made use of to join two Oxen together to draw a
Plough or a Cart. The Romans ordered the enemies whom they had overcome to pass
under the yoke, which was accounted to be a great disgrace; that is to say,
that they passed under a kind of a fork like a Gallows. This Fork, or Pike, or
Halberd lay on the top, and was supported by two others set upright.

JULIA.
There were many Roman Matrons called by that name.

JULIA,
The Daughter of Augustus, who for her wantonness was banished by her Father,
first into the Island of Pandatauria, then into the Town of Reget, about the
Streights of Sicily. She was first married to M. Agrippa, of whom she had
Agrippina, Nero's Mother; then she married Tiberius, whom she despised, as
being unworthy of that honor; and this was the chief cause of her long exile
in the Isle of Rhodes. But when Tiberius was raised to the Empire, he so
barbarously revenged that affront, that she died of hunger and misery, after
she had been banished, and had lost all her hopes after the death of her son
Agrippa. She was debauched by Sampronius Gracchus during her marriage with
Agrippa, and this constant adulterer still kept company with her, after
Tyberius had married her, and maliciously provoked her against him. And it was
a common report that he was author of the Letter she wrote to her Father, so
full of reproaches and injuries against her Husband.

JULIA,
called Medullina and Camilla, designed to be the second wife of the Empefor
Claudius Caesar, but she died on her wedding day.

JULIA,
wife to the Emperor Severus, and the mother of Geta and Caracalla. She is
called in an inscription brought from Barbary,

Juliae Dominae Aug. Spartianus, Eutropius, and Aurelius Victor assure us, that
Julia was but Caracalla's mother in law, and that he married her after the
death of his father Lucius Septimius Severus, but yet this is not mentioned by
the Writers of that time: on the contrary, Dio tells us, that Julia was the
mother of Caracalla, and speaking of the temper of this Emperor, he says, that
he had the malicious mind both of his mother, and the Syrians, and consequently
Julia was his mother; and when the two brothers Caracalla and Geta fell out,
she used them both alike, and spoke to them in these words, related be Herodian
You have, my dear children, divided betwixt you the Land and the Sea, but how
will you share your Mother? If she had been but their stepmother the argument
she brought to reconcile them, would bear no weight. Philostratus who was very
great at the Court of Severus, calls also Caracalla the son of Julia.

JULIA,
the daughter of the Emperor Titus, whom Domitian her Uncle stole away from her
Husband to marry her; but he caused her to miscarry, whereupon she died.

JULIANUS
surnamed the Apostate, because he forsook the Christian Religion, after he had
made profession thereof. The Emperor Constantius his Cousin elected him Caesar,
and having adopted him, gave him his Sister Helena for his wife. He was
learned, chaste, valiant, laborious, sober, watchful, liberal, and a great lover
of learned men. With these qualifications he got the affection of the Legions,
who proclaimed him Emperor in the City of Paris.

Constantius was much troubled at the hearing this news, and leaving off his
design against the Persians to oppose Julian, he came to Tharsus, where he had
some fits of a fever, and from thence to Mopvestus in Cilicia, where it
increased so much that he died. Ammianus Marcellinus writ that he named Julian
for his successor; but St Gregory of Nazianzen says on the contrary, that in
this last period of his life, he repented to have elected Julian to the Empire.
As soon as Julian saw himself absolute master by the death of Constantius, he
ordered that the Temple of the false Gods should be opened, and their service
set up again; and took upon him the office of High Priest, re-establishing all
the Heathen ceremonies, and restored those Priests to all their former
Privileges. He repaired the ruins of Idolatry, ordering that the Temples which
were pulled down during the Reign of Constantine and Constantius should be
built again, and new ones added to them.

He ordered also that the Images of the Gods should be set up amongst his own,
to deceive the Soldiers when the Donative was made; for it was a custom to
offer Frankincence to the Images of the Emperors at the time of that ceremony.
At first few of the Christian Soldiers took notice of it, yet those who
perceived that they honored the false Gods, tho they designed only to honor
the Emperors, were so much concerned at it that they refused the largess of the
Prince, throwing at his feet in a scornful manner the money they had received
from his liberality.

Sozomen reports that by his own orders Jupiter was represented near him, as if
he was come from Heaven on purpose to give him the badges of the Empire, and
Mars and Mercury's images were looking upon him, insinuating by that posture
that he was eloquent and valiant. And this Author observes, that he intended by
these means to bring his Subjects under pretense of the honor due to him, to
the adoration of the false Gods, who were represented with him. Wherefore St.
Gregory of Nazianzen says, in his invective against Julian, that the ignorant
people being deceived were brought to adore the Pagan Images. Besides, to
flatter his own vanity, he commanded that he should be adored under the Image
of Serapis, in imitation of Domitian, who ordered that he should be represented
by the figure of Pallas, and Nero who commanded a marble figure of his head to
be set upon the body of a Coloss. Julian is represented on a medal with a
beard, contrary to the custom of his age; upon which account the Inhabitants of
Antioch reproached him with ridiculous affectation; whereby he intended, it may
be, to imitate Marcus Aurelius, who did wear a Philosophers beard. For
Eutropius assures us that he affected to be his imitator, and was ambitious of
the title of a Philosopher. At last, having engaged the Persians, his army was
routed, and himself mortally wounded, and brought into his Camp, and the
following night having held a long discourse with Maximus and Priscus
concerning the immortality of the soul, he died at one and thirty years of age,
having reigned but one year and seven months. It Is reported that when he found
himself wounded, he took some of his blood in his hand, and flung it against
Heaven, pronouncing these words: Thou have overcome, Galilean; for thus he
called our Savior in derision.

The Works he has left us show both his Wit and Learning. The Panegyricks he
had writ both in Prose and Verse, collected by Eunapius are lost; and there
remains little of him, but the Invectives the Fathers have writ against him.

JULIUS,
Julius Caesar, of whom I have spoken under the name of Caesar. He was both
Dictator and High Priest, and ordered the Roman Calendar to be reformed,
wherefore it was called the Julian Calender, or the Calender of the Julian
Correction. Marc. Antony during his Consulat, ordered that the Month Quintilis,
wherein Julius Caesar was born, should be called by his name, for the future
Julius, or July, under Jupiter's Protection.

JULIUS,
viz. MENSIS. July: This Month was called in the Calender of Romulus,
Quintilis, because it was the fifth Month of the Year, according to this King's
Calender, who made up the Year of Ten Months only, beginning the Year with the
Month of March: But afterward this name was changed by the orders of Marc.
Antony, and it was called Julius, in honor of Julius Caesar who had reformed
the Calender of Romulus.

The first of this Month was a time appointed for removing Lodgings, and paying
Houses Rents, as we learn by this Epigram of M^^tial, l. 12. Epigr. 32.

O Juliarum dedecus Calendarum,
Vidi, Vacerra, sarcinas tuas, vidi:
Quas non retentas pensione pro bima
Portabat uxor rufa crinibus septem.
He means that his House Goods were so inconsiderable, that the owner of the
House refused to keep them for payment of Two Years Rent due to him.

The fifth of this Month, or the third before the Nones, was a Holy Day called
Poplifugia, the flight of the People, when Romulus was killed, and a dreadful
storm put them to flight.

The seventh, or the day of the Nones, was called Caprotinae Nonae, from the
Latin Word Caprificus, a wild Fig Tree, in remembrance of a Servant Maid called
Tutola, or Philotis, who got upon a wild Fig Tree, holding a burning Torch in
her hand, as a token to the Romans, to surprise the Army of the Latins.

The next Day after this Feast, they kept another rejoicing Day, called
Vitulatio, in honor of the Goddess Vitula; because the following Day after the
Victory obtained over the Latins, there were public Rejoycings all over the
City.

The 12th was Julius Caesar his Birthday, kept holy.

The Games called Apollinarii Circenses, and Minervalus were represented in
this Month. And a Temple was Dedicated to Female Fortune, in acknowledgment of
the great Service that Veturia and Volumnia, the Mother and the Wife of
Coriolanus, had done to the Commonwealth, by hindering him to take revenge of
the affront of his Banishment.

At the Ides of the Month they made a general Muster of the Roman Knights,
called Transvectio, Crowned with Branches of Olive Tree, and riding their own
Horses from the Temple of Honor to the Capitol. The Censors were present at
this Ceremony, to see if their Horses were in good case, and if they marched in
good order

The same Day the Feast of Castor and Pollux was kept in their Temple, built by
the Son of Aulus Posthumous, in the great place of Rome, because they had
fought for the Romans against the Latins, who attempted to restore Tarquinius
Supurbus to Rome.

The 18th was accounted fatal, because upon that Day the Romans were defeated
near the River Allia, and put to flight by the Gauls.

The 23d Women with Child offered a Sacrifice to the Goddess Opigena, and
carried small Wax Figures into her Temple, and prayed to her to grant them a
happy Deliverance.

The 24th, the Feasts of the Pontifs were kept.

The 25th, they went in Processions about the Fields, which were called
Ambervalia.

The 28th, a Sacrifice of Wine and Honey was offered to Ceres; and the
remainder of the Month was bestowed to Sacrifice reddish Dogs to the Dog Star,
to moderate the excessive heat of that Season.

JULUS,
The Son of Aeneas and Creusa, surnamed Ascanius, who came with his Father into
Italy, and Reigned there after him. He built a City called Alba Longa, in a
place where he had found a wild Sow with her young ones.

JUNIUS,
June, the sixth Month of the Year, wherein the Sun enters the Sign Cancer,
which makes the Summer Solstice. This Word comes from the Latin Junius, which
some derive a Junone, as Ovid in the 5th of his Fast, introduces this Goddess,
saying, Junius a nostro nomine nomen habet.


Others take the Etymology of this word a Junioribus from young people.
Junius-est Juvenum. Ovid.

And some others from Junius Brutus who expelled the King of Rome, and settled
the government upon the people. This month was under the protection of Mercury.

The first day of the month they solemnized four feasts, one dedicated to Mars
out of the City, because upon the like day, F Quintius Duumvir of the
Sacrifices had dedicated a Temple to him out of the gate Capena on the via
Appia, by the title of Mars Extra-Muranus. The other feast was kept in honor of
Carna, in remembrance of the Temple that Junius Brutus consecrated to him upon
mount Celius, after he had driven away Tarquinius. The common opinion was that
this Divinity presided over the heart of children, and inclined them which way
she pleased. They offered Pap, Bacon, and Beans to her in Sacrifice.

The third feast was celebrated in honor of Juno Moneta, to perform the vow
that Camillus had made, to build her a Temple.

The fourth feast was solemnized in honor of Tempest, and instituted in the
time of the second Punick war.

The fourth, or the day before the Nones, the feast of Bellona was kept,
whereof I have spoken under the word Bellona. This same day a feast was
celebrated in honor of Hercules, and the Senate dedicated him a Temple in the
Circus by Sylla's Order, who gave stately entertainments to the people, and
presented Hercules with the tenth part of his wealth.

The 5th, or the day of the Nones, they offered a sacrifice to God Fidius, to
whom the Romans built a Temple on mount Quirinal, after the peace was concluded
with the Sabins; and they honored this God, because the oaths taken in his
name were inviolably kept.

Upon the 7th day happened the Fishermens Feast, which was solemnized in the
field of Mars with games, mirth and banqueting.

The 8th, or the 6th day of the Ides, a solemn sacrifice was offered to the
Goddess Men's in the Capitol, to whom Attilius Crassus vowed a Temple after the
defeat of the Consul C. Flaminins at the lake of Trasimenes, praying her to
remove out of the mind of the Romans the fear occasioned by the rout of the
Consul.

The 9th, or the 5th of the Ides, was kept the great feast of the Goddess
Vesta, whereof I shall speak in its place.

The 11th, or 3d of the Ides, was solemnized the feast of the Goddess Matuta,
which shall be mentioned afterward.

Upon the Ides of June fell out the feasts of Jupiter surnamed Invictus or
Invincible, to whom Augustus dedicated a Temple for the victories he had
obtained. And this same day was kept the feast of Minerva called Quinquatrus
minores the Fiddlers feasts, mentioned in this book according to its order.

The 19th a sacrifice was offered to Pallas on mount Aventinus. The 20th,
another was offered to Summanus, to whom a Temple was dedicated upon such a day
during the war of Pyrrhus. The 22d was reckoned a fatal day, because that day
F. Flaminius was overcome by the Carthagimans. The 23 Syphax was vanquished by
Masinissa, and the same day was called Dies Fortis Fortunae, because King
Servius dedicated her a Temple out of the City beyond Tiber, where Workmen and
Slaves crowned with flowers went by water to divert themselves and be merry, as
inhabitants of great Cities commonly do upon holy days.

The 27th was the feast of the Lares or household Gods'. The 28th the feast of
Quirinus was celebrated on the mount of the same name, and the 30th the feast
of Hercules and the Muses were kept in a Temple dedicated to them both.

JUNO,
The daughter of Saturn and Rhea, and Sister to Jupiter. It Is reported that she
was born at Argos a Town of Greece, whereupon she was surnamed by Poets Argiva
Juna. Others assure us, that she was born at Samos, and have called her Samia.

She Married her Brother Jupiter, who got into her bosom, according to the
Fable, under the shape of a Cuckoo, and then re-assuming his own form, enjoyed
her upon condition he should marry her, which he performed. The truth is, that
in that time Brothers and Sisters married together, after the custom of the
Persians and Assyrians. Wherefore Juno is represented by the Figure of a
Goddess setting on a Throne, holding a Scepter in her hand, with a Cuckoo on
the top of it.

Poets don't agree among themselves, neither about the number of Children she
had of Jupiter, nor the way she conceived them. Pausanius reports, that she had
Mars, Ilithyia and Hebe by him. Lucian asserts in one of his Dialogues, that
she was brought to Bed of Vulcan without having lain with her Husband; and that
she was big with Hebe for having eaten too much Lettice.

Dionysius Halicarnasseus writes, that King Tullus ordered that a Piece of
Money should be brought into her Temple at Rome, for every one that was born,
as they were obliged to bring one to the Temple of Venus Libitina, for all
those who died; and another to the Temple of Youth for those who put on the
Viril Gown. And thus they kept in their Records a very exact account of all
those who were born, or died at Rome, or were at an Age fit to bear Arms. This
Juno who presided over the birth of Men, was named by the Romans, Lucina, and
by the Greeks, Ilithyia: Statuit quanti pretii nummos pro singulis infer
deberent cognati: In aerarium Ilithyiae, Romani, Junonem, Lucinam, (...)
vocant, pro nascentibus; in Veneris ararium, in Luco situm, quam Libitinam
vocant, pro defunctis, in Juventutis pro togam virilem sumentibus.

Some Writers report, That Lucina is either Diana, or another Goddess than
Juno; but the Pagans confound often the Goddesses with Juno. Here is what
Lucian says about this matter, in his Deo Syria. In Syria, not far from
Euphrates, stands a Town called the Holy City, because it is Dedicated to Juno
of Assyria. Within are the Golden Statues of Jupiter and Juno, both in a
sitting posture; but the one is carried upon Oxen, and the other upon Lions.
That of Juno has something of several other Goddesses, for she holds a Scepter
in one hand, and a Distaff in another: Her Head is Crowned with Rays, and
Dressed with Turrets, and her Waste girt with a Scarf, like the Celestial
Venus. She is adorned with Gold and Jewels of diverse Colors, that are brought
from all parts. But what is most mavelous, is a precious Stone she has upon
her Head, which casts so much light, that by Night it illuminates all the
Temple; for which reason they have given it the name of Lamp; but by day it has
hardly any light, and only seems like Fire.

And indeed, as some Men have confounded all the Gods with Jupiter, those who
made the Image of Juno, mentioned by Lucian, had the like design to Incorporate
all the Goddesses in Juno's Person.

Lactantius tells us, that Tully derives the names of Juno and Jupiter, from
the help and sucour that Men receive of them a Juvando.

Juno presided over Weddings and Women's Labors, and was called upon in these
Exigencies; as we see in Terence, where Glyceria being in Labor has recourse
to her Juno Lucina, far opem.

When the Roman Matrons were barren, they went into her Temple, where having
pulled off their Clothes, and lying on the Ground, they were lashed by a
Lupercal Priest, with Thongs made of a Goat's Skin, and thus became fruitful;
wherefore Juno was represented holding a Whip in one hand, and a Scepter in the
other, with this Inscription, JUNONI LUCINAE.

Poets have given many Epithets to Juno, calling her Lucina, Opigena, Juga,
Domeduca, Cinxia, Unxia, Fluonia.

She was called Lucina, a Luce, because she helped Women to bring forth
Children, and show them the Light: and for the same reason she was also named
Opigena and Obstetrix, because she helped Women in Labor.

Juga, Juno was called, because she presided at the Yoke of Matrimony, and
consequently over the Union of Husband and Wife, and because of that
Qualification, she had an Altar erected to her in one of the Streets of Rome,
therefore called Vicus Jugarius, the Street of Yokes.

Domiduca, because she brought the Bride to the House of her Bridegroom.

Unxia, because of the Bride's anointing the side Posts of the Door of her
Husband going in thereat.

Cinxia, because she helped the Bridegroom to unite the Girdle the Bride was
girded with; in fine she was called

Fluonia, because she stopped the flux of Blood in Women's Labors.

In one word, Juno was like a Guardian Angel to Women, in the like manner that
God Genius was the keeper of Men; for according to the Opinion of the Ancients,
the Genius's of Men were Males, and those of Women Females: Wherefore Women
swore by Juno, and Men by Jupiter.

The Romans gave her several other names, and called her sometimes Juno
Caprotina, Meneta Sospita, and sometimes Regina and Calcadaris.

She was surnamed Caprotina, because, as Plutarch reports in the Life of
Romulus, the Gauls having taken the City of Rome, the Sabins and several other
Nations of Italy, fancying that the Romans were weakened thereby, took this
opportunity to destroy them: Wherefore they raised a considerable Army, and
proclaimed War against them, unless they would send them their Virgins to sport
with them. The Romans unwilling to comply with their demand, accepted the
Proposal of Philotis a Maid-Slave, who offered herself to go over to them with
her Companions; promising withal, that she would give warning to the Romans,
when their Enemy should be deeply engaged in Debaucheries: Which she performed
thus, She got up into a wild Fig Tree, from whence she gave a Signal to the
Roman Army, who thoroughly routed the Enemy. In remembrance of this Victory the
Romans ordered a Feast to be kept every Year, at Nonae Caprotinae, in honor of
Juno, called also Caprotina, from the wild Fig Tree, a caprifico, at which time
the Maid Slvaes diverted themselves, played the Ladies, and entertained their
Mistresses.

JUNO MONETA,
Juno was called Moneta a monendo, i. e. to advise, or because when the Gauls
took Rome, she advised the Romans to Sacrifice to her a Sow great with young,
or because that the Romans being at War with Pyrrhus, they called upon Juno, to
be relieved with Money. Wherefore having driven Pyrrhus out of Italy, they
built her a Temple, with this Title, JUNONI MONETE, and in that Temple the
Money was kept.

JUNO REGINA,
or Queen Juno. Under this Title, Camillus after the taking of the City of
Veiae, where she had a very rich Temple, asked if she was willing to come to
Rome there to be adored, and her Statue having made a sign that she consented
to it, he built her a Temple upon Mount Aventine.

JUNO CALENDARIS,
Because the first days of every Month, called the Calends, were consecrated to
her, and a White Cow, or a She Goat was commonly Sacrificed in her Honor,
wherefore she was surnamed Aegophagos, or She-Goats Eater.

She was represented with Birds that were under her protection, viz. the Goose,
the Peacock, and the Vulture.

The Assyrians and Affricans, and after them the Greeks and Romans have given
the name of Juno to the Air; and for that reason some Writers assure us, that
the name of Juno in Greek (...), is but a transposition of (...). Tully
speaking of the nature of the Air, explains the Fable of Juno: Aer, ut stoici
disputant, interjectus tuter mare and caelum, Junonis nomine consecratur. The
Air between Heaven and the Sea, is called by the name of Juno, quae est sorer
and cusjux Jovis, quod ei similitudo est atheris, and cum eo summa conjunctio.
And hereupon is grounded the Kindred and Marriage between Jupiter and Juno, i.
e. Heaven and Air. And this is plainly discovered in a Fable of Homer, wherein
he tells us, that Jupiter tied Juno to a Chain, with two Anvils hanging at her
Feet, to show that the Air is independent on Heaven, and the Earth and the Sea
are dependant on the Air. In fine, Poets have ascribed to Juno the quality of
(...), albis ulnis, because of the transparency of the Air.

JUNONALIA,
A Holy Day kept in Honor of Juno, not mentioned in the Fasts of Ovid, but
fully described by Livy, 1. 7. Decad. 3. This Feast was instituted on occasion
of certain Prodigies that happened in Italy: Wherefore the Pontiffs ordered,
that seven and twenty young Girls, divided into three bands, should walk
singing a Song, composed by Livius the Poet. But, while they were learning the
Song by heart in the Temple of Jupiter Stator, the Thunder fell upon the Temple
of Queen Juno, on Mount Aventine: Whereupon the Southsayers having been
consulted, answered that the Roman Matrons were concerned in this Prodigy, and
that they should pacify the Goddess by some Sacrifices and Offerings:
Wherefore they collected Money, and bought a Golden Basin, and presented the
Goddess with it on Mount Aventine. Then the Decemviri appointed a day for a
solemn Sacrifice, which was thus ordered. Two white Cows were led from the
Temple of Apollo, into the City through the Gate called Carmentalis, and two
Images of Queen Juno, made of Cyprus Wood, were carried. Then marched seven and
twenty Girls, clothed with long Gowns, singing an Hymn in Honor of the
Goddess. Then followed the Decemvirs crowned with Laurel, and clad with Robes,
edged with Purple. This pomp passed by the Vieus Jugarius, and stopped in the
great Field of Rome; where the Girls fell a Dancing, keeping time with the
Hymn. From thence they marching by the Tuscanstreet and Velabrum through the
Market for Oxen, they arrived at the Temple of Queen Juno, where the Victims
were Sacrificed by the Decemviri, and the Images of Cyprus Wood set up therein.

JUPITER.
Varro reckons three hundred Jupiters, of several sorts and Countries. The
great Multitude of these Jupiters is doubtless grounded upon the first who went
by that name, who had been kind to Men, and had assisted them in their wants;
wherefore after his Death, each Nation gave the surname of Jupiter to their
King, either out of flattery, or because he was really a good Prince, and
imitated the Virtues of the true Jupiter, by the name whereof Poets meant the
true God. In the like manner that the name of Hercules was abscribed to all
great Men, because the first of that name was very valiant and generous, as the
Roman; did, who gave the name of Caesar to all their Emperors, though they were
not of Julius Caesar's Family.

Tully, lib. 3. de natura Deorum, records but three Jupiters, two whereof were
born in Arcadia; one the Son of Ether, and the other of Caelus, who begat
Minerva. The last was a Native of Crete or Candia, the Son of Saturn and Rhea,
or Ops, to whom all the actions of the two other are ascribed, and was called
Jupiter, quasi juvans Pater, as Macrobius and Aulus Gellius report, and not
from the word Jehova, i. e. God, for the Romans had then no acquaintance at all
with the Hebrews.

After his Mother Rhea was delivered, she did not put him to Death as she had
promised Saturn, but sent him to the Curetes, Inhabitants of Mount Ida, where
he was secretly Nursed up: and she put in his room a Stone wrapped up in
swaddling Clothes, which, as it is said, Saturn swallowed down, thinking it was
his Son. This Child was then delivered up to the Nymps to take care of him, and
Amalthea suckled him with the Milk of a She Goat; which Jupiter, being grown
up, ranked amongst the Number of the Celestial Signs, in acknowledgment of her
kindness, by the name of Olenia Capella, from the Town of Olenus in Baeotia.
Oleniae surget sidus pluviale Capellae,
Quae fuet in cunis Officiosa Jovis.


Some relate, that Rhea being afraid that her Son should not be safe upon Mount
Ida in Phrygia, sent him to a Mount of the same name in Candia.

Jupiter being grown up, delivered his Father Saturn, and his Mother Rhea from
the hands of the Titans; for having got together a Troop of Creteans, he
marched against the Titans, routed them, and restored his Father to the Throne.

Before he went to this Expedition, as he was offering Sacrifice in the Isle of
Naxos, an Eagle came flying before him, which he took for a good omen; and
after he had obtained the Victory, he ordered that the Eagle should be
consecrated to him. Poets say that he turned himself into an Eagle to steal
away Ganymedes upon (...) Ida. However, Saturn resoved the ruin of Jupiter;
but Prometheus having acquainted him with his design, he tied him up with
Woollen Bands, as the Fable says, gelded him, and threw him headlong into Hell;
from whence being got out, he came to Janus in Italy, of whom he was kindly
received. Primus ab aetherio venit Saturnus Olympo,
Arma Jovis fugtens and Regnis exul ademptis.


In the mean while Jupiter took possession of the Kingdom of Crete: Then
maintained a War against the Giants, under the command of Aegon, who had an
Hundred Arms, and as many Hands, and blew Flames out of as many Mouths. But
Jupiter, with Mercury's assistance, defeated them in the Phlegrean Fields in
Thessalia, and amongst others punished severely Typheus, laying whole Sicily
over his Body, and Mount Oeta over his Head. After this famous Victory, Jupiter
made War against Tyrants, and protected Men in trouble, whereby he got a great
name: For he governed his Dominions by good and just Laws, and shared his
Kingdoms with his Brethren, giving the Empire of the Sea and Rivers to Neptune;
the Government of Subterraneous places to Pluto, and kept for himself the
Empire of Heaven, with the general Government of all that is done upon the
Earth, according to the Fable. The truth is, that Jupiter possessed himself of
the Empire of the East, and left the command in the West to Pluto, and to
Neptune the Government of the Seas. And though the name of Jupiter was granted to
these three Brothers, yet it was with this difference, that the name of
Jupiter, absolutely taken, signifies the King of Heaven; also called Supremus
Rex hominum atque Deorum; but some Epithet is always added when that name is
bestowed upon the two other; for when they speak of Pluto, he is called Jupiter
Infimus or Stygius, and Neptune is surnamed Jupiter Medius.

The Philosophers, who have Physically Interpreted this Jupiter by a natural
Cause, understand by him, the highest Region of the Air, where the Elementary
Fire is placed, and the Fire it self; which warming the inferior Air
attributed to Juno, is able to produce all things. Others have taken this
Jupiter for the Air in all its extent; from whence comes this way of speaking,
Sub Dio, i. e. under Jupiter, or in the Air; for the Greek Word (...), the
Genitive whereof is (...), signifies Jupiter. Wherefore Horace says, Manet sub
Jove frigido, he is exposed to the Air.

Lactantius reports, That Jupiter was called (...) or (...), because he was the
eldest of Saturn's Sons then living; his eldest Brothers having been all
devoured by their Father: Quod primus ex liberis Saturni maribus vixerit. And
that Euhemerus of Messina in Peloponnesus has written his History, as well as
that of the other Gods, taken out of the ancient Titles and Inscriptions he
found in the Temples; that Ennius translated that History into Latin; and that
these Histories are true, tho adorned with new inventions of Poets. That
Jupiter reigned on Mount Olympus, the name whereof is sometimes given to
Heaven, because of his height: wherefore Poets fancied that he was King of
Heaven. That he gave the Government of the Sea, and some Islands in the
neighborhood of his Dominions to Neptune, which gave occasion to Poets to
represent Neptune as the King of the Seas. That, in fine, Jupiter died and was
buried, as Lucian and Euhemeris report, in Crete, with this Inscription, (...),
Jupiter Saturni. At last Lactantius says, that Jupiter having traveled over
all Provinces, and gained the Friendship of all Princes, persuaded them to
build him Temples after his departure in token of Hospitality.

Every Nation had their Jupiter, called by several names, but the Greeks and
Romans called the Sovereign God of each Nation by the name of Jupiter. Pliny,
speaking of the God of the Ethiopians in Africa, called Assabi nus, says that
he was esteemed to be Jupiter.

Osiris, The most famous King of Egypt, ranked in the number of Gods, was also
known by the name of Jupiter, as it is recorded by Diodorus Siculus.

The Phaenicians had their Belus, or the Sun, whom the Greeks called Jupiter,
as Eusebius reports. Dagon the God of the Phaenicians of the City of Axotus,
was called by the Husbandmen Jupiter, because he had taught them how to manure
the ground, and cultivate Wheat. Dagon quod frumentum and aratrum invenisset,
nuncupatus est Jupiter Aratrius. Jupiter the Son of Neptune was a God of the
Sidonians, called Maritimus, because this people was wholly given to Navigation.

Stephanus assures us, that the same who was called Marnas at Gaza, was named
Jupiter at Crete, for Marnas or Maranasin in the Phaenician Language, signify
King of men.

There was a Jupiter Belus amongst the Babylonians, and a Jupiter Indiges
amongst the Latins, which shows, that what Varro affirms, as Tertullian relates
in his Apologetick, is true, that there were three hundred Jupiters, i. e.
three hundred Kings, and King's Fathers, who called themselves Jupiter, to
immortalize their name, and obtain Divine honors.

Notwithstanding it must be granted that the Jupiter of Crete, the Father of
Minos, was one of the most famous, and most ancient Jupiters of the West.
Callimachus the Poet, and his Scholiasts have written, that Minos having been
buried in that Island, with this Inscription, that he was the Son of Jupiter;
the name of Minos was put out, and that of Jupiter left. Wherefore the
Inhabitants of Crete said, that they had the Sepulcher of Jupiter.

The Dactyli of Mount Ida, the Curetes and Corybants, were ascribed to this
Jupiter, because they had taken care of his Education.

Jupiter Ammon was also very famous, and was represented with a Ram's-head,
because of his intricate Oracles, if we believe Servius. Herodotus gives us a
better reason for the same, when he says that the Ammonites had that worship
from the Egyptians, who inhabited the City of Thebes, where Jupiter was
represented with a Ram's-head.

Jupiter Ammon was a King of Egypt, ranked by the Egyptians in the number of
Gods, and adored in the most remote Provinces. Diodorus Siculus reporting the
tradition of the Inhabitants of Libya, gives us a quite different account of
him, which yet comes to the same; for he says that Jupiter Ammon was a great
King, who, after his death, was reckoned a fabulous God, and a Chimerical
Oracle. This Historian mentions still another Writer more ancient than himself,
who wrote that Ammon reigned in Libya, and married Rhea the Daughter of Caelus.
Sister to Saturn and other Titans, and that Rhea being divorced, she married
Saturn, and induced him to make War against Ammon, whom he vanquished, and
forced him to make his escape by Sea, and retired to Crete, where he possessed
himself of the Kingdom.

Then the same Author tells us, that Dionysius having conquered Egypt,
established young Jupiter King of that Country, and gave him Olympius to be his
Governor, from whence Jupiter was named Olympius.

Strabo writes, that the Arabians had also their Jupiter; however this Jupiter
was but one of their Kings, as it appears not only because he was associated
with Bacchus, but also by the undertaking of Alexander. For this Prince being
acquainted that the Arabians honored but two Divinities, Jupiter and Bacchus,
resolved to subdue them, that he might be their God amongst them.

Poets tell us that Jupiter married several Wives, and even Juno his Sister,
according to the Assyrian and Persian Fashion, and that being a fruitful Lover,
he begat a great many Children, both legitimate and natural, turning himself,
sometimes into a Bull, sometimes into a Swan, or an Eagle, or into Gold, to
enjoy his Amors; wherefore Lucian introduces Momus rallying thus. Your fine
Metamorphoses made me sometimes afraid, left you should be brought to the
Shambles, or put to the Plough, when thou were a Bull, or that a Goldsmith
should melt thee down, when thou were Gold, and when a Swan, lest they should
have put thee upon the Spit and roasted thee.

It Is also reported, that he brought forth Minerva out of his Brain, which
Vulcan opened with an Axe, as Lucian relates in the Dialogue of the Gods, where
Vulcan and Jupiter speak thus. Vulcan. Here is a very sharp Axe, I bring you;
what am I to do with it?


Jup. Prithee strike hard, and cleave my head asunder.


Vul. You have a mind to see whether I am mad or no, I warrant: but tell me in
good earnest, what will you employ it about?


Jup. To divide my Skull, I say, I am not in jest, and if you refuse, I will
plague you. Strike with all thy might; for my Head is ready to split with pain;
and I suffer such torments as if I was in labor with a Child.


Vul. It Is against my will, but I must obey. Great Gods! No wonder your
headache was so great, having such an Amazon with a Sphere and a Shield lodged
in it.




It Is still recorded that Bacchus came out of his thigh, where he had been
lodged, to perfect his time, after he was taken out of his Mother Semele's
Womb, being yet but half formed. Wherefore an incision was made in his Thigh,
when the pains of labor seized him, to give a free Passage to little Bacchus.
And this is yet reported by the same Lucian in the Dialogue of the Gods.

The Nations of the World built him a great many Temples, and honored him like
a God, under several names, according to his several performances.

He is called Jupiter Inventor, an Epithet that Hercules bestowed upon him,
because by his means he had found again the Cows which Cacus had stole away
from him, and erected him an Altar, whereupon he offered him sacrifices.

Romulus called him Jupiter Feretrius, because he had strengthened him to
overcome his Enemies, and get the spoils which he consecrated to him in a
Temple built at the top of the Capitol under the Title of Jupiter Feretrius:
Livy gives us the words of this dedication: Jupiter Feretri, haec tibi victor
Romulus Rex regia arma fero, templumque his regionibus, quas modo animo metatus
sum. dedico; sedemque op^mis spol^^s quae Regibus Ducibusque hostium caesis me
auctorem sequentes posteri ferent. This was the first Temple that was
consecrated to Jupiter in Rome, whither the spoils taken from Kings or
Commanders of the Enemies Forces were brought.

JUPITER STATOR;
a Sistendo, i. e. to stop, because upon the day of the engagement between the
Romans and the Sabins, Romulus perceiving that his Soldiers lost ground, and
were upon the point of running away, begged earnestly of Jupiter to stop them,
and raise their Courage, promising him withal to build another Temple to his
honor: which being granted to him, he built a Temple at the foot of Mount
Palatinus, under the Title of Jovi Statori.

JUPITER ELICIUS.
Numa gave him this title, upon this occasion. For in his time Mount Aventinus
being not yet inhabited nor enclosed into Rome, and that Hill being covered
with Springs of Water and thick Groves, frequented by Picus and Faunus, two
Satyrs, who cured most desperate Distempers by Enchantments; Numa having heard
of them, desired to see them and learn their secrets; wherefore by the advice
of the Nymph Egeria, he ordered that Wine should be poured into the Fountain,
and men should lie in wait to seize upon the Satyrs at their coming to it. Both
Satyrs according to their custom came thither, but being got drunk with the
Wine of the Fountain, they fell asleep, and were easily seized upon, and
brought to Numa, who learned of them the secrets how to bring down Jupiter upon
the Earth, Elicere Jovem. And Numa having immediately tried it, Jupiter came
down, whereupon he commanded that a Temple should be built to his honor by the
title of Jupiter Elicius.

JUPITER CAPITOLINUS,
Thus called, because of the Temple vowed by Tarquinius Priscus, in the War
against the Sabius; he laid only the foundations of it, and it was finished by
Tarquinius Superbus. The Temple was of a square Figure, having 220 Foot every
way, and eight Acres of ground in compass. There were three Chapels in it, the
Chapel of Jupiter in the middle thereof, that of Minerva at the Right hand,
near the place where the Nail was driven in every year to reckon the number of
years, and that of Juno, which was on the Left hand. The admirable Building,
and the rich Ornaments of this Temple, made it the most famous in Rome; and all
the Provinces subdued to the Roman Empire, and the Confederate Kings in
emulation one of another, sent Presents thither.

JUPITER LATIALIS
had a Temple on Mount Albanus, which Tarquinius Superbus caused to be built to
his honor after the defeat of Turnus. This Temple was common to all the
Confederates, and a Sacrifice was therein offered every year in common, to the
Feriae Latinae.

JUPITER SPONSOR,
The Temple built to him by this Title, was consecrated to his honor by
Tarquinius, in the Wood of Bellona, and dedicated by Sp. Posthumus Consul, in
pursuance of a decree of the Senate, in the year cclxxxvii.

JUPITER PISTOR,
Thus called, because the Gauls having besieged the Capitol, and the Romans
being very much straightened by the enemy, and pressed with hunger, Jupiter
inspired them to make Bread with the remainder of their Corn, and throw it into
the Camp of the enemy. Which having performed, the enemy lost all hopes to
starve them, wherefore they raised the Siege and retired; and in
acknowledgement of this good advice, the Romans erected him an Altar under the
title of Jupiter the Baker, Jovi Pisteri. There was also in the Capitol a
Figure of Jupiter Imperator, which Titus Quintius Dictator, brought from the
Town of Praeneste, and placed there with a Table, whereupon were engraven his
great Achievements.

JUPITER VICTOR,
Jupiter the Conqueror, to wom L. Papyrius Cursor built a Temple by this
title, because he had overcome the Samnites and the Gauls.

VE-JUPITER, or VE-JOVIS
had a Temple between the Tarpeian Rock and the Capitol near the Asylum. His
statue was made of Cyprus Wood, holding a Dart in his hand ready to be flung.

JUPITER TONANS,
Jupiter thundering, an Epithet that Augustus gave him; for having built a
Temple to him upon the Capitol, he dedicated it to him under that name; and
erected therein three statues, one done by the hand of Buthyraus Disciple to
Miron; the other by Locras, and the third was made of Brass. Augustus caused
this Temple to be built in honor of Jupiter Tonans, because going once by
night against the Inhabitants of Biscay, the Thunder fell by his Litter, and
killed one of his Servants, who carried a Torch; whereupon the Emperor vowed a
Temple to Jupiter Tonans, for having preserved him in so great a danger Jovi
Tonanti, says Suetonius, edem consecravit, liberatus periculo, cum expeditione
Cantabrica, pur nocturnum iter lecticam ejus fulgor perstrinxisset, servumque
praelucentem exanimasset.

JUPITER ULTOR,
Jupiter the Revenger of Crimes had a Temple dedicated to him by M Agrippa.

JUPITER HERCEUS,
from the Greek (...). The Jupiter of private houses, where an Altar was
erected. This privilege was only allowed to the Citizens of Rome, says
Arnobius; Quicunque Herceum Jovem habebant, jus civitatis etiam habebant.

JUPITER AMMON,
or Hammon, had a Temple in Libya, and a Statue under the Figure of a Ram, from
whence he was called Corniger Hammon. This Temple was very famous on the
account of his Oracles.

Jupiter is represented on several Medals, sometimes carrying Victory in his
right hand, and a Spear instead of a Scepter in the left; sometimes riding on a
Kam, or a She Goat, with this Inscription, JOVI CRESCENTI, because he had been
Nursed up with her Milk; sometimes sitting in the midst of the Four Elements,
holding a Dart with one hand, and laying the other upon the Head of his Eagle;
with two Figures that lay along under his Feet, which represent the Two
Elements of Water and Earth, having the Zodiac round about him, where the
Twelve Signs are represented.

JUPITER OLYMPIUS,
surnamed Eleus, famous for his Oracle, and the public Games performed in
Elis, called Olympic Games.

On the Silver Medals of Lucius Lentulus, and Caius Marcellus, both Consuls, is
represented the Head of Jupiter, holding his Thunder Bolt with his right hand,
and his Eagle with his left; having before him a little Altar, and the Star of
Jupiter. This Medal was stamped to pacify Jupiter after the Thunder was fallen
upon the Capitol.

Jupiter, Conservator, was also represented holding his Thunderbolt with one
hand, and a Dart with the other, and the Figure of the Emperor under his
Thunder, to show that he was under Jupiter's protection; or else his Figure was
Engraven, laying upon a Globe, and holding Victory, which he endeavors to
Crown, and the Eagle at his Feet, with these words, JOVI CONSERVATORI
AUGUSTORUM NOSTRORUM. On the Medals of Nero and Vespasian, Jupiter was named
Custos, and represented sitting on a Throne, holding his Thunder in his right
hand, with this Inscription, JUPITER CUSTOS, or JOVIS CUSTOS.

JUPITER,
was surnamed Anxurus in Italy, and is represented like a young Boy, without a
Beard, Crowned with Branches of Olive, and holding a Goblet or Patera in his
right hand, and his Scepter in the other.

JURAMENTUM,
An Oath taken to confirm a thing.

The solemnal Oath of the Gods, was by the Waters of the River Styx. The Fable
says, that Victory, the Daughter of Styx, having assisted Jupiter against the
Giants, he ordered for a Reward of her Service, that the Gods should Swear by
the Waters of that River; and in case they forswore themselves, they should be
deprived of Life and Feeling, during Nine thousand Years, as Servius reports;
and gives this reason for this Fable, that the Gods being Immortal and happy,
swear by the Styx, which is a River of sorrow and grief, which is very contrary
to their temper; and that Oath was a kind of Execration, in lib. 6. Aeneid.

Hesiod in his Theogonia relates, that when any of these Gods had told a lie,
Jupiter sent Iris to fetch some Water out of Styx in a Golden Vessel, whereupon
the Liar takes the Oath; and if he forswears himself, he is a whole year
without life and motion, but a very long one, including many Millions of Years.

Diodorus Siculus, l. 11. Page 67. tell us, that the Temple of the Gods, called
Palici, famous in Sicily, was there much respctred and very ancient; and that
two very deep Basins were kept therein, full of boiling Water mixed with
Brimstone, always full, and never flowing over. In this Temple solemn Oaths
were taken, and Perjuries were immediately punished very severely; some of them
being condemned to have their Eyes put out. Silius Italicus has expressed in
Verse what Diodorus has here reported.

Et qui praesenti domitant perjura Palici,
Pectora Supplicio.
To this purpose Virgil speaks thus, Lib. 9. Aeneid v. 584........... Symethia
circum
Flumina, pinguis ubi and placabilis ara Palici.


The two Basins where the Oaths were taken, and the Divine vengeance broke out
upon the Purjured, were called Delli. Macrobius after Callias makes mention of
them, saying, Nec long inde lacus breves sunt, quos incolae Crateres vocant,
and nomine Dellos appellant, featres que eos Palicorum aestimant. Aristotle
assures us, that the Person who took the Oath wrote it upon a Ticket which he
threw into the Water. The Ticket floated over if the Oath was true; if it was
false, the Ticket appeared no more.

Appollonius Tyaneus, l. 1. c. 4. in his Life, written by Philostratus,
mentions a Spring of Water at Tyana in Cappadocia, which was very like this
abovementioned.

This my Story of taking the Oath, and punishing Perjuries, was doubtless an
imitation of what is written in the Book of Numbers, concerning the trial of
Waters, which Women impeached of Adultery were obliged to drink.

The Rom ans swore by their Gods, and Heroes, ranked in the number of Gods, as
by Quirinus, Hercules, Castor and Pollux, etc. Suetonius relates, that under
the Empire of Julius Caesar the Romans began to swear by the health of the
Emperors, and by their Genius. However, Tiberius did not allow it, but
Caligula ordered, that all those who should refuse to do it should be put to
Death; and came to such an excess of folly and madness, that he commanded that
the People should swear by the Health and Fortune of a fine Horse, which he
intended to take for his Colleague in his Consulat, as Dion tells us, lib. 59.
They also Swore by one another Genius, as appears by a place of Seneca: Jurat
per Genium meum.

JUS.
The Law. There are three kinds of Laws; the Law of Nature, the Law of Nations,
and the Civil Law.

The Law of Nature is what Nature teaches all living Creatures, and is in a
manner common to Men and Beasts, as Marriage, Procreation, and Education of
Children.

The Law of Nations is what natural Reason has inspired and dedicated to all
Men, and is practiced by all Nations, as Religion toward God, Piety toward
Parents, and Love of our Country. From thence comes the difference and division
of Nations, settlement of Kingdoms, share of Demesne, Trade, and most sort of
Obligations: From hence also arises the right of War, to take Prisoners, to
accept of their ransom, to set them at liberty, or to detain them in slavery.

The Civil Law is what each City or State has established or enacted for a Law:
For natural reason having taught Men to live together, and for that purpose to
build Towns, and create Magistrates, has also taught them to make Laws, and
assume to themselves a private and particular right, to be the tie and rule of
their Societies; and this is called the Civil Law, i. e. the Law of the City or
Country.

The Civil Law which is now taught in Schools, is a body composed of Roman
Laws, viz. a Collection of the Law received, introduced and observed in the
City of Rome, and all the extent of the Roman Empire, during the space of more
then twelve hundred years; during which time, the Roman people, who seemed born
to command, not only made a considerable Progress by their Valor toward the
general Empire of the Universe; but also carefully and diligently inquired
after the best methods and rules to govern themselves and their Subjects with
Justice and Equity, and render to every particular Man what was due to him,
keeping withal all Men in their Duty.

And to succeed in their design, not being satisfied with their own, they lent
to Greece, then flourishing in all kinds of Learning, to inquire after their
Laws: Wherefore the Body of the Roman Law is not the work of a man only, nor of
some few Years, but the work of many Nations and Ages together, brought to
perfection by a long and laborious Observation of humane affairs, that the
greatest wits of that flourishing State, fully instructed by the exercise of
inferior Magistrates, and from thence raised to the highest Offices of the
Empire, have collected and reduced under certain Principles and general Maxims,
of which it was formed and perfected.

And because so many Men having put their hand to this work, the number of
Volumes were grown almost infinite. Justinian the Emperor gave order to
Trebonianus his Chancellor, and some other great Lawyers of his Age, to reduce
it to a perfect Body, which they divided into three Volumes, which are
remaining still, viz. Pandectae or Digests, the Code, and Institutes, as we may
see in the Preface of the Institutions of Justinian, and by the title of the
Code, de veteri jure enucleando.

The Digests contain the Opinions and Resolutions of ancient Lawyers.

The Code is composed of the Constitutions and Rescripts of the Emperors,
since Adrian to Justinian.

The Institutes is an excellent Abridgment of all that is contained in the two
former Volumes, i. e. an Abridgment of the Roman Law.

To these three Volumes they have since added the Constitutions of Justinian,
called Novellae or Authenticae; which, although they are not contained in the
body of the Law, collected and published by the order of Justinian, yet they
have obtained such an Authority, that though they were published last by
Justinian's order, yet they have exceeded the former in many things.

And this Work was so excellent, that even after the ruin of the Roman Empire,
the best polited Nations in the World make still use thereof to decide all
their differences.

The Civil Law is twofold, the written and the unwritten.

The written Law is that which being collected into Writing, is published in a
manner usual to each state. In the Roman Dominions there were six kinds of this
written Law, called by several names, viz. Lex, Senatur Consulta, Plebiscita,
Principum Placita, Magistratuum. Edicta, Responsa Prudentium. These several
Definitions are related by Justinian in the 2. Cap. of his first Book.

The unwritten Law is that which has introduced it self by Practice and Tacit
consent of them who use it, and this is called Custom. These two several kinds
of Laws are much in request in France, for they have there the Edicts and
Ordinances of their Kings for a Written Law; and as for Custom, there is almost
no Province, but has Laws called customs particular to themselves.

The Canon Law is nothing else but a collection of Ecclesiastical rules,
definitions and constitutions, taken out of the ancient General and Provincial
Councils, the writings and resolutions of the Fathers of the Church, and
constitutions and rescripts of the Popes, whereby are decided all controversies
of the Ecclesiastical State, not only concerning the administration of
Sacraments, management of the Estates, and regulating of Clergymen, but also in
what concerns the Laity, and Secular men in Spiritual matters, and this Law,
which was lately collected and composed on the Model of the Civil Law, is
contained and reduced into three Volumes, the first whereof is called the
Decree of Gratian, composed of the ancient Canons, or rules taken from the
ancient Councils and Writings of the Fathers.

The Second is called the Decretals, containing the Decretal Epistles i. e. the
constitutions or rescripts of the Popes, chiefly since Alexander III. till
Gregory IX. by whose authority it was compiled and some Chapters taken out of
the Epistles of Pope Gregory, and some other Ancients.

The last volume is called Sextum, containing the rescripts of the Popes since
Gregory IX. till Bonifacius VIII. by whose authority it was collected; but this
volume is hardly received in France, because of the difference between
Bonifacius and Philip, called le Bell King of France, and for many things
inserted therein, contrary to the liberties of the Gallican Church.

At the end of this volume are added the Clementina, which are the constitution
of Clement V. decreed in the Council of Vienna, and some rescripts of John
XXII. and other Popes commonly, called extravagantes, because they are out of
the Body of the Canon Law, composed in three volumes.

JUSTITIA.
Justice, A Goddess called by the Ancients Astraea, Daughter of Jupiter and
Themis. She is reprenseted by the figure of a naked and blindfolded Virgin,
holding an even balance with one hand, and a naked Sword with the other, to
show that Justice has no regard to persons, and punishes and rewards equally.

Hesiod says, that Justice the Daughter of Jupiter is tied to his Throne in
Heaven, and demands revenge of him, every time that her Laws are violated,
whereupon a long Succession of calamities is poured upon Nations who are
punished for the Crimes of Kings and great men.

Aratus in his Phenomenon gives us still a finer description of the Goddess
Justice, who during the Golden Age was conversant night and day on the earth,
amongst People of all sorts of Age, Sex, and Condition, teaching her Law.
During the Silver Age, she appeared only in the night, and in secret
reproaching men with their unlawful ways; but in the Iron Age, she was forced
to quit the Earth, and retire into Heaven, because of the multitude and
enormity of Crimes.

JUTURNA.
A Fountain in Latium, disimboguing itself into the River Numicius. The Fable
tells us, that she was Daughter of Danaus, and Sister to Tutnus King of the
Rutnll, whom Jupiter loved and enjoyed, she assisted her Brother against
Aenaeas; but having perceived that the Fates were averse to him, out of despair
she cast herself headlong into the River Numicius.

Ovid, in the 6th Book of his Fasti, speaks of the Temple of Juturna the Sister
of Turnus, so often mentioned by Virgil in his Aeneids, who was beloved by
Jupiter, from whence she took her name, as if one said Joviturna.

The truth of the History is, that it was a Fountain in Italy, the waters
whereof were very fine and wholesome, from whence it took also its name, as
Servius informs us, in lib. 12. Aeneid. Jaturna fons est in Italia
saluberrimus, cui nomen a juvando est inditum. Varro on the contrary seems to
say, that the waters of that Fountain were sought after, because of its name,
out of a superstitious and common simplicity, Nympha Juturna quae juvaret;
itaque multi propter id nomen hinc aquam petere solent.

JUVENTAS,
called by the Greeks Hebe, the Goddess of Youth, Juno's Daughter. See Hebe.

IXION,
The Son of Phlegias or Aetion. Lucian in his Dialogue of the Gods introduces
Juno and Jupiter talking thus of Ixion.

Jun. Who do you think was Ixion?


Jup. A very gallant man, and good Company, or else I would not have admitted
him to my Table.


Jun. He is an insolent fellow, who does not deserve that honor.


Jup. What has he done? I would fain know?


Jun. I am ashamed to tell it, such is his impudence.


Jup. Has he made an attempt upon some Goddesses honor, for you seem to
intimate as much.


Jun. He has made his addresses to myself. At first I took no notice of his
love; but afterward he had always his eyes fastened upon me, and that from
time to time he sighed, and let some tears drop, that he affected to drink
after me, and looked on me while he was drinking; and then kissed the Glass, I
perceived his folly, and I was ashamed to acquaint thee with it, and thought it
would soon be over. But at last he grew so insolent as to tell me of it; then
presently stopping my ear, lest I should hear him, I came running as fast as I
could, to give thee notice of it, that thou might make an example of him.


Jup. That is a bold Rogue to attempt to plant Horns on Jupiter's Head. He was
certainly drunk with Nectar; but it is my fault to love mortals so well, as to
admit them to my Table. For it is no wonder if feeding upon the same meat as I
do, they are transported with the same desires, and fall in love with immortal
Beauties. Thou know thy self what a Tyrant Love is.


Jun. It Is true, that he is thy master, and that, as they say, he leads thee by
the Nose. However I do well perceive why thou pityst Ixion: He does nothing but
what thou have deserved; for thou have formerly lain with his Wife, and begot
Perithous by her.


Jup. Do thou remember it still? Shall I tell thee my opinion in this matter?
It would be too great a punishment to banish him for ever out of our Company;
but seeing that he cries and sighs, my opinion is......


Jun. What! That I lay with him?


Jup. No, some other Phantom like thee, somewhat to satisfy his passion.


Jun. This would be to reward him, instead of a punishment.


Jup. But what harm would that do thee?


Jun. He would think to embrace me, and the disgrace would redound to me.


Jup. But he should be deceived; for if we should form a Cloud like thee, it
should not be Juno herself.


Jun. As men have commonly more vanity than love, he would brag of it, and say,
that he had lain with me, and I should lose my reputation.


Jup. If it thus falls out, I will throw him headlong into Hell, where being
tied to a Wheel, he shall turn for ever, without enjoying any rest.


Jun. This wont be too great a punishment for his crime. In short, Ixion being
persuaded he had embraced Juno, because he hugged a Cloud like her, bragged of
it, whereupon Jupiter precipitated him into Hell, where he turns a Wheel
without Intermission.

Isaac Tzetzes relates, That Ixion having killed his Father in law, and being
wandering and vagrant, as a punishment of his crime, was entertained by a King
named Jupiter, who kindly received him in his Palace, and admitted him to his
Table; but Ixion having forgot this kindness, imbolden'd himself to discover
his love to the Queen; which being reported to the King, to inform himself of
the truth of the matter, ordered that one of the Queens Maids of Honor called
Nephele, or Cloud, should be dressed with the Queens Apparel, and brought to
Ixion, who enjoyed her, thinking it was the Queen her self.


K.
K, A double Consonant, and the tenth Letter of the Alphabet, taken from the
Latin, and comes from the Greek Kappa. It was accounted useless by Priscian.
Claudius Dausquius says, from Salust, that the inventer of the Letter K, was
named Salvius, and that it was unknown to the ancient Romans.

K is also a Numeral Letter, which signifies amongst the Ancients two hundred
and fifty; and with a stroke above it, it stands for an Hundred and fifty
thousand.

KALENDE,
The Calends, or the first day of every Month amonst the Romans. See Calendae,
etc.

L.
L, Or Ell, the name of the eleventh Letter of the Alphabet. L is also a
numeral Letter amongst the Ancients, which stands for Fifty, and signifies the
same in the Roman Arithmetical Figures: And when a stroke is added to it, it
stands for fifty thousand.

LABARUM,
The Standard of the Roman Emperors, carried before them in the Wars, and
adored by the Soldiers. It was a long Spear, with a Staff set cross-way at the
upper end thereof, and from that Staff hung down a rich Standard of Purple
color, edged with a Fringe, and beset with precious Stones. The Roman Emperors
carried in their Colors or Labarum, an Eagle Painted or Embroidered with Gold;
as we may observe in the reverse of a Medal of Maxentius, wherein this Tyrant
is represented armed with his Breast Plate, holding with one hand the Labarum,
wherein an Eagle is drawn. But Constantine the Great, in the War against
Maxentius, where he vanquished him by the sign of the Cross, which he saw in
the Clouds, Crowned the Labarum with a rich Crown, beset with precious Stones,
and ordered that this Cipher P, i^e! Christ, with these two Letters, A and O,
to signify that Jesus Christ is the beginning and the end; should be wrought
in Gold upon the Purple Standard. We have a Medal of Constance, wherein the
Emperor is represented with his Coat of Armor on, with his right hand holding
up Victory, which Crowns his head with Laurels, and with the left hand he
carries the Labarum.

Those who did bear the Labarum, in the Armies, were called, Labariferi.

LABRUM,
A great Tub, standing at the entrance of the Temple of the Jews, and the
Pagans in imitation of them, where the Priests washed their Feet and Hands
before they offered Sacrifices. Labrum. signifies also a Bathing Tub, used in
the Baths of the Ancients.

LABYRINTHUS.
A Labyrinth, a place full of turnings, and windiags, so contrived, that it is
very hard to get out again. Pliny mentions four Labyrinths; that of Egypt,
which was the greatest of all, described by Herodotus, having amongst other
remarkable things sixteen Wards, or great sides of Houses, answerable to the
sixteen Governments of Egypt; which Menis or Maros King of that Country ordered
to be built to serve him for a Mausoleum, as Philostraros reports: And upon the
Model of this Labyrixth, Dadalus built that of Creta or Candia, by Minos's
order, to shut in the Minotaur therein. But Daedalus was there shut up himself
with his Son: However he got out by the means of Wings he made of Wax. Theseus
was there also exposed to be devouted by the Minotaur, and had not escaped but
by the help of the clue of Ariadue. The third Labyrinth was in the Isle of
Lemnos, and had a hundred and fifty Pillars of Marble: And the fourth was built
in Italy by the orders of Porsenna King of Tuscany.

LACERNA,
A kind of a Garment worn by the Romans over their Gowns, like a Cassock to
keep off rain and cold. The Soldiers, the common People, and the Emperors did
wear it even in days of Shows. The Emperors had this Garment made of Purple
colored Cloth. Ovid informs us, that Lucretia hastened her Servants to finish
that kind of Garment, that she might send it to Collatinus her Husband, who
laid Seige to Ardia. Mittenda est Domino, nunc nunc properate, puellae.
Quam primum nostra facta lacerna manu.


And Lampridius speaking of the Emperor Alexander Severus, says, That he
returned from the Baths with the common People, without any other badge of his
Imperial Dignity, but his Lacerna of Purple Colors, Hoc solum Imperatorium
habens quod lacernam coccineam accipiebat.

Some mistaking two places in Juvenal and Horace say, That this Garment was
worn by Women; but have not observed that Juvenal speaks of one Sporus whom
Nero Married as if he had been a Woman. Ipse lacernatae cum se jactarit amicae:


And that there is a fault in the Verse of Horace; for Lainbinus will have us
read, Sub clara nuda lacerna, instead of Sub clara nuda lucerna, it being a
common thing for these prostitute Women, whereof Horace speaks, to wait for
their Sparks by the light of a Lamp.

LACHESIS,
One of the three Destinies, Daughter of Jupiter and Themis, or the Night and
Erebus, who spins the Thread of Man's Life, according to the Fable. The Ancients
represented her clothed with a Garment sprinkled with Stars, and holding many
Spindles in her hands.

LACONICUM,
A S^ove, or Sweating house. The dry Stove were thus called by the Ancients,
because the Lacaedemonians brought them into use. Mercurialis finds fault with
those who confounded Laconicum, which is a place for Sweating, with
Hypocaustum, which was the Stove that warmed the Laconicum.

LACOTOMUS,
A line to mark the lines in the Analemma. Grammarians have not asserted the
signification of this word, which seems to be a Greek word, and is not found in
the Treatise that Ptolomy has written concerning the Analemma. The most common
opinion is, that this word comes from the Greek (...), i. e. paring of Cloth,
and from the Verb (...), i. e. to act; for the line called Lacotomus cuts one
part of the Meridian.

LAMIAE,
were accounted Hags, or rather evil Spirits, who under the shape of fair Women
enticed Youth to devour them.

Philostratus in the Life of Appollonius calls them Lemures. The Origin of
this word comes from a Fable, related by Suidas and Phavorinus; who tells us,
that Jupeer fell in love with a certain Woman of extraordinary beauty called
Lamia; but Juno growing jealous, turned her beauty into terrible deformities,
and put all her Children to death; whereupon she grew so mad, that she devoured
all the Children she met.

Dion Chrysostom reports this Story otherwise; for he tells us, That there are
in the Desert of Lybia some fierce Beasts, who have the Face and Breast of
young Maids, and the rest of the Body, which they take care to hide, is like a
Serpent; and that they entice the Travelers by a thousand Caresses, that they
might devour them. Philostratus relates also in the same place, that he drove
one out of Corinth who attempted to surprise a young Man called Menippus.

In short, these Lamiae are Sea Monsters, and Fish of so prodigious bigness,
that two Horses are hardly able to draw one of them in a Cart. The Inhabitants
of Marseilles have taken some Lamiae, in the Stomach whereof they found whole
Men, and even one armed.

LAMPAS;
A Lamp, a Vessel wherein they burn Oil to give light.

The Ancients had no other Lights but Lamps, and kept some burning before their
Images. Lucian has given us the Description of an Island of Lamps where he
landed. He says, That this Isle is situated between the Hyades and Pleiades,
and a little below the Zodiac; that these Lamps go forwards and backwards like
the Inhabitants of a Town, and that every one has its own name and lodging like
the Citizens of a Commonwealth. The Palace of the King is in the middle of the
City, wherein he administers Justice all night, and every one of his Subjects
is obliged to meet there, to give an account of his actions: Those who have
committed faults suffer no other punishment, but that they are put out, which
is a kind of civil death amongst them.

LANCEA,
A Lanco; an offensive Weapon, made of a long Staff like a half Pike, with a
point at the end, armed with Iron. It Is said that the Aeolians invented this
Weapon^ Rallas is represented with a Lance.

LAPITHAE.
A Nation in Thessalia the posterity of Lapithus, the Son of Apollo and the
Nymph Stilbe. At the Wedding of Perithous their King, with Hippodamia, they
fought the Centaurs, and got the best of them. Ovid has described this fight in
the 12th Book of his Metamorphoses.

LARARIUM.
A private Chapel in a house for the household Gods called Lares. Spartian in
the Life of Alexander the Son of Mammeus says, that he kept in his Lararium the
figure of our Savior, with the Images of his other Gods.

LARES.
The Household Gods Lares. Apuleius in his Book of the God of Socrates explains
also what is meant by Manes. The Soul of Man, says he, being free from the
bonds of the Body, and not obliged to perform its functions, becomes a kind of
Demon or Genius, formerly called Lamures. Of these Lemures those who were kind
to their families, and kept them in peace, were called Lares Familiares,
Domestic Lares, but those who for a punishment of their crimes committed
during their lives, were condemned to wander continually, without finding a
place of rest, frighting good men, and plaguing the wicked, were vulgarly
called Larvae.

The Lares called also Penates or household Gods, were adored in private Houses,
under the figures of small Images of Silver, Brass or Earthen Ware. The
Etymology of the word Penates comes either from penes nos nati sunt, or from
the word Penus, which signifies the innermost part of the house. Some of these
Lares were Gods of the Highways, called Lares Viales: Wherefore Plantus i
ntroduces Charinus making himself ready for a journey; calling upon the Gods of
the Highways to preserve him during his Travels. Invoco Vos.
Lares Viales, ut me been tutetis.
I implore your assistance, Gods of the Highways, vouchsafe to protect me in
my journey.

It Is likely, that the word Lar comes from the Tuscan Language, for Lars
amongst the Tuscans was the Prince of the People. Lactantius says, that the
Goddess called Muta, Lara, Larunda, was the mother of the Gods Lares. Ovid
tells us, that Lara was formerly called La-lara from the Greek verb (...)
Loquor, because she talked too much, for she discovered to Juno the amors of
Jupiter and Juturna: Whereupon Jupiter deprived her of her Speech, and gave
order to Mercury to lead her to Hell, but Mercury deflowered her, and begat two
Children of her called Lars. Thus this Goddess became dumb, and her Children
the Lares, were instructed with the care and government of the Highways and
Houses.

Forte fuit Nais, Lara nomine; prima sed illi
Dicta bis, antiquum Syllaba nomen erat.
Ex vituo positum.......
Eripuit linguam: Mercuriumque monet
Duc hanc ad Manes locus illeSilentibus aptus...
Fitque gravis geminosque parit, qui compita Servant
Et vigilant nostra semper in urbe Lares.
Ovid. Fast. l. 2. v. 600. These Gods were honored either privately in Houses,
and then something of what was brought upon the Table was burnt to their
honor, as first fruits, or publicly by sacrificing a Sow to them, as being
keepers and overseers of Streets and Highways.

They were represented clothed with the Skin of a Dog, and having a Mastiff
Dog by them, to show their watchfulness and fidelity in keeping the house, and
defending their master, as we learn from Plutarch in his Roman questions: Why,
says he, is a Dog represented by the Lares called Praestites, and why are they
covered with Dogs Skin?

The Ancients called Lares or Penates Gods, chosen to protect States, Highways,
Forests, and other things like. And Nigidus Figulus, says Arnobius, calls the
Gods Lares, sometimes Curetes, and sometimes Indigetes. But Asconius Pedianus
explaining these words of Virgil, (...) magnis, tells us, that these great Gods
were the Gods Lares of the City of Rome; and Propertius says, that they drove
away Hannibal from his Camp before Rome, because he was frighted by some night
apparitions. Annibalem Lares Romana sede fugantes.


This Inscription, which confirms what Arconius Pedianus has said.

D. M. etc. etc. There was also a distinction of public Lares, viz. Lares of
the Oaks, Lares of the Seas, Lares of the high ways, Lares of the Fields, and
Lares that were enemies.

It Is certain that the Ancients ranked all the little figures they had of their
Ancestors, and others amongst their Gods Lares, especially when they excelled
in some virtue, and in series of time, they all become indifferently Lares
protectors, because they were placed amongst Statues of other Gods; as we learn
of Pliny, l. 2. where he speaks of the ancient Custom of placing those persons
amongst the number of Gods, who had bestowed some considerable favor upon men,
to show thereby an acknowledgment for their kindnesses. And we must not fancy
that this Custom was first practiced, in public Temples, on the contrary, it
began first to be used in private families, who had no authority to propose the
subjects of their personal gratitude to public veneration.

However, the great Gods were placed amongst the number of the Gods Lares.
Macrobius assures us, that Janus was one of the Gods Lares, and presided over
the Highways, because he was represented holding a Key and a Rod in his hands,
like the Keeper of all the Gates, and ruler over the Highways, Nam and cum
clavi and virga figuratur, quasi omnium and portarum custos and rector viarum.
Apollo himself, says he in the same place, was also called by the Greeks (...),
as presiding, over the corner of the Streets of the City. Likewise Diana and
Mercury were also reckoned among the Gods Lares, because Atheneus calls Diana
(...) present at the Highways, and one of the Gods Lares presiding there. And
if the Gods Lares had been uncertain and unknown Gods, the Romans never had
consecrated to them the famous games called Compitalitii, i. e. the Feast of
the Crossways, solemnized according to the Law of the Praetor the xith. day
before the Calends of January; for these games were not only celebrared to
their honor, because they were Keepers both of the Highways and Crossways,
but also because they presided over the guard of Empires, and watched for the
preservation of private men, wherefore at solemnizing of these games they
offered Sacrifices for the Weal of the Republic, and families of the Empire.

It Is therefore certain, that all Gods, chosen Patrons and Protectors of places
and private men, were called Lares; some little images and figures whereof were
kept in the private Chapel of each Family, and the Palace of the Emperors, who
had officers appointed to guard these Gods Lares. This plainly appears by the
ancient Monuments, HYMNUS. CAESARIS. L. AUG. VOLUSIANUS,

DECURIO LARIUM VOLVSIANORUM.

Hymnus Volusianus, Freedman of the Emperor, Decurio of the Volusiani Lares,
and this following. M. FABIO. ASIATICO. SEVIRO MAG. LARUM AUG.

To M. Fabius the Assiatick Sextum-vir, and master of the Lares of the Emperor.



Wherefore all kinds of Gods whatsoever, appointed by Towns, Emperors, or
private Men for their Tutelar Gods, and of whom they kept small Images, were
called Lares: And for this same reason the Feast of the Gods Lares solemnized
the xith. day before the Calends of January, is called by Macrobius the
Solemnity of the little Statues: Sigillariorum celebritas. They set up burning
Lamps before these Figures, they crowned their heads, and perfumed them almost
every day with Effusions.

LARVAE,
Ghosts of wicked Men wandering up and down after their death; Phantoms who
fight good Men, and torment the wicked. The word Larva, in the singular number
is taken for a Vizard, that frights Children, like Larvae or bad Genius's.

LARA and LARUNDA,
The Mother of the two Lares, according to the Fable, whom Jupiter deprived of
Speech, because she had discovered his amors to Juno, wherefore she is called
Muta.

LATICLAVIUM,
etc. See after Latrinae.

LATIUM,
A Country in Italy, thus called a latendo, because Saturn retired there to
secure himself from his Son Jupiter....... Latium que vocari
Maluit, his quoniam latuisset tutus in oris.
Virg. Aen. 8.

This part of Italy is extended along the Shore of the Tyrrhenean Sea, between
Hetruria and Campania, wherein the City of Rome is contained.

LATINAE FERIAE,
The Feast thus called, was kept four days together, and had no time appointed
in the year for their Celebration; only the Consuls were bound to solemnize the
same before they went to War: and it was observed, that those who neglected
that duty were unfortunate in their undertakings. This Feast was instituted by
Tarquinius Superbus, after he had vanquished the Tuscans, to maintain the
Confederacy concluded by his means between them and the Latins. They agreed
about the time of their meetings on Mount Albanus, where they repaired from all
parts, this Hill being situated in the middle of these Nations. There every one
brought along with him his own part for the Offering, either Milk, or Cheese,
or Lambs; wherewith they made a Feast all together, in token of union. There
was all so a Fair kept; but the most remarkable thing in this Feast was the
Sacrifice of a Bull, offered to Jupiter, surnamed for that reason Latialis: For
it is observed that every one of those who were there present, carried home a
piece how little soever of the Bulls entrails: And though this Solemnity was
common to forty seven Nations, yet the Romans had the direction thereof; and if
any Man failed to bring some Offering, or carry home a piece of the Victims, or
neglected some other duty, they were obliged to begin again, and that mistake
was accounted for a great misfortune.

LATONA,
The Daughter of Caea the Titan, and Phaebe, as Hesiod and Ovid, or of Saturn,
according to Homer's opinion, Jupiter was enamoured with her; whereupon Juno
being jealous, raised a dreadful Serpent against her, called Pytho, to pursue
her. Lucian in the Dialogue of the Sea Gods, introduces Iris and Neptune
discoursing thus about Latona's affairs.

Iris. Jupiter bids thee to stop the Island that floats over the Egean Sea,
having got loose from Sicily by stormy weather.


Nept. Why so?


Iris. For Latona to be brought to bed in, who is in labor.


Nept. What, are not Heaven and Earth sufficient for this service?


Iris. Juno is angry, and will not suffer her in Heaven, and the Earth has sworn
that she will not receive her; wherefore there is only this Island, which being
now no part of the world, is not bound by oath.


Nept. Stop at my command, floating Island, to receive two twins who will be
the honor of heaven, and the finest children of Jupiter. Let the winds be
still, whilst the Tritons bring her to lie in: as for the Serpent, he will
serve for a trophy to these young Gods, at the first instant of their birth. Go
and tell Jupiter that all is ready, and that she may come when she pleases.

And in another Dialogue Lucian introduces Juno and Latona quarrelling one with
another.


Jun. In truth, Latona, thou have born Jupiter fine Children.


Latona. We cannot all be the Mother of Vulcan.


Jun. It Is true he is lame, and yet in that condition Venus has accepted of him
for her Husband.... But thy Daughter, out of a masculine courage unbecoming her
sex, goes as far as Scythia to murder her guests; and thy Son, who is of all
trades, an Archer, a Fiddler, a Poet, and Physician, has settled places for
Prophesies at Delphi, Claros and Didymas, where he pretends to tell things that
are to come, and surprises the people by deceitful Oracles, which have always
some back doors to secure themselves, etc.


Latona. Your Jealousy will not permit them to Triumph in Heaven, and be famous
there, one for her beauty, and the other for his harmony.


Jun. Thou make me laugh, when thou take thy Son for an excellent Musician,
who had been flayed in the room of Marsias, had the Muses done him justice. As
for thy Daughter, she is so fair, with her full Moon face, that Acteon was tore
in pieces by his own Dogs, because seen he had her stark naked, lest he should
discover her ugliness to the world.


LATOR-LEGIS,
A Lawgiver, one who ordered a Law to be posted up, and then published his
name under it.

LATRINAE,
A house of office. We don't find neither in the Writings nor Buildings that
remain of Antiquity that they had any Privies in their Houses. For what they
called Latrinae were public places where the Slaves emptied and washed the
Closestool-pans, called also Latrinae a Lavando, according to the etymology
that Varro gives of that word. Plautus speaks of a Slave who washes the pan of
the Close-stool, qui latrinam lavat: for in that place of Plautus it is not
meant the Privy which was washed by Canals under ground, with the waters of the
River Tibor.

It Is then most certain, that there were public Houses of Office in many
places of the Town for public use. These Houses of Office were covered, and
there was a Sponge hung up for cleanliness. Rich Men had Closestools, and other
Vessels for that use, which the Slaves washed, after they had emptied them into
the Common-shore.

LATUS CLAVUS, or LATICLAVIUM, or TUNICA CLAVATA: and LATI-CLAVII.
A Tunick, a Wastcoat trimmed with broad Buttons like the head of a nail. It
was a garment of distinction, and a badge of honor amongst the Romans. The
Senators had the privilege to wear this sort of garment, and therefore were
called by a single name Laticlavii, as Suetonius says, binos Laticlavios misit,
he sent two Senators.

The Consuls, Praetors, Aediles, and those that triumphed were allowed to wear
this Robe; and during the time of the Emperors, it was bestowed upon
Governors of Provinces, and those who had performed some great service for
their Country, as a badge of honor.

LAVATIO MATRIS DEUM.
The washing of the great Mother of the Gods, kept the 26th day of March. This
Feast was instituted in remembrance of the day that she was brought from Asia,
and washed in the River Almon, at the place where it goes into the Tyber. Her
Priests, called Galli Cybeles, carried her Statue in a Chariot, attended by a
great crowd of people, to the place where she was washed as her first coming to
Rome. Here they washed and rubbed carefully, as Ovid says,

Est locus in Tiberim qua lubricus influit Almo,
Et magno nomen perdit in amne minor:
Illic purpurea canus cum vest sacerdos
Almonis Dominam sacraque lavit aqua.
St. Austin, l. 11. de Civ. Dei. cap. 4. gives us an account of this Feast. The
day that Cybele the Virgin and Mother of all Gods was solemnly washed, some
wretched Buffoons sung fifty Songs before her Chariot, that decency would not
only allow the Mother of the Gods to hear, nor even any other Mother of Persons
of the meanest rank: For Nature has printed in us a kind of modesty to our
Parents, that Vice it self is not able to deprive us of. And these Buffoons
would be ashamed to repeat at home before their own Mothers, all the words and
the lascivious postures they played in public before the Mother of the Gods,
in sight of a great multitude of people of both Sexes, who coming out of
curiosity to see this Show, returned home with shame to have seen
Representations that offended modesty.

LAVERNA,
The Goddess of Thieves mentioned in Horace, l. 1. Epist. 16. v. 60. Festus
tells us, that the Ancients called Thieves Laverniones, because they were under
the protection of the Goddess Laverna, who had a Wood consecrated to her, where
they shared their booty. Laverniones fures Antiqui dicebant, quod subtutela
Deae Lavernae essent, in cujus luco obscuro abditoque soliti furta praedam que
inter se luere.

LAVINIA,
The Daughter of King Latinus and Amata, who married Aeneas, when after the
sacking of Troy, he came into Italy: But being a Widow, lest Ascanius should
attempt her life, to secure himself the Crown of the Latins, she retired into
the Forest, where she lived privately in the house of Tyrrhenus, Overseer of
the Herds of her Father Latinus. The Latins grumbled against Ascanius for the
absence of Lavinia; whereupon he was obliged to send some Persons to seek for
her, and entreat her to come again to Lavinium.

LAURENTALIA,
Feasts instituted by the Roman people, in honor of Acca Laurentia, kept
during the Feasts called Saturnalia, which afterward were solemnized as a part
thereof. Authors write, that there were two Laurentia's, one who was Nurse to
Romulus, and the other a famous Curtezan, who by her last Will, made the Roman
People her Heir, and vanished away at her coming to the Sepulcher of the first
Laurentia: Upon this account it is said, that the honors that the Priest of
Mars performed to them both in the Valabrum, with effusion of Wine and Milk,
were confounded together.

LAURENTIA ACCA
was a debauched Woman, who nursed up Romulus and Remus: Which occasioned the
Fable to say, that a She Wolf suckled them. She married afterward a very rich
Man, who brought her a great Wealth; which at her Death she left to the Roman
people, in consideration whereof they performed her great honors. This is the
most certain account we have of her, related by Macrobius, and by him taken
from the most ancient Writers.

LAURUS.
The Laurel or Bay Tree, a Tree which is always green, used to Crown Victorious
Men, and was planted at the Palace-gate of the Emperors the first day of the
year, or any other time when they had obtained some Victory. Dion speaking of
the honors the Senate performed to Augustus, says, that they ordered that
Bay-trees should be planted before his Palace, to show that he was always
Victorious over his Enemies. Tertullian speaks of these Laurels, when he said,
Who should be bold enough to besiege the Emperors between two Laurels? Qui
sunt qui Imperatores inter duas lauros obsident? Wherefore Pliny calls Laurel
the keeper of the Emperor's Gate, the only ornament and the true guard of
their Palace: Gratissima domibus Janetrix Caesarum, que sela and domos exornat
and ante limina excubat. The Fable tells us, that Daphne flying to avoid the
pressing instances of Apollo's love, was turned into a Lanrel.

LECTICA.
A Litter, a Horse Litter, The use and invention of this kind of Chariot came
first from Bythinia and Cappadocia, and was made use of to carry both living
and dead Bodies: As Tully reports, Nam, ut mos fuit Bythiniae, lectica
farebatur. There were two kinds of Litters, some covered, used in dirty
Weather, and others uncovered on purpose to take the air in fair Weather. Pliny
speaking of Nero, calls the first kind of Litters, a Traveller's Chamber,
Cubiculum viatorum. Suetonius reports, that when Augustus was going into the
Country, he often ordered his Servants to stop his Litter that he might sleep
therein; for there were on both sides Pannels or Curtains that might be drawn
at any time. These Litters were carried by six or eight Men, called
Lecticarios, and the Litter, lectica hexaphora, or octophora.

LECTISTERNIUM,
A great Ceremony among the Romans, but seldom practiced but upon occasion of
some great and public Calamity. When this Ceremony was performed, the Statues
of the Gods were brought down from their Basis, or Pedestals, and then laid
upon Beds, made for that purpose in their Temples, with Pillows under their
Heads; and in this posture they were magnificently entertained. Three most
stately Beds were made, whereupon they laid the Statues of Jupiter, Apollo,
with that of Latona, Diana, Hercules, Neptune and Mercury, to pacify them.
Then all the Gates were opened, and the Tables were every where served with
Meat: Foreigners, known or unknown, were entertained and lodged for nothing;
all matters of hatred and quarrel was forgot, they conversed with their Enemies
like Friends, and liberty was granted to all Prisoners.

This Feast was solemnized in time of Plague, or some other great and public
Calamity. The Feast Lactisternium was celebrated by order of the Duumviri, in
the year 335, after the Foundation of Rome.

LEDA.
The Wife of Tyndarus, King of OEbalia; beloved by Jupiter, who turned himself
into a Swan to enjoy her. She brought forth two Eggs, out of one, which she had
conceived by Jupiter, came Pollux and Helena; of the other, which she had
conceived by Tyndarus her Husband, came Castor and Clytemnestra.

LEGIO.
A Legion, a kind of a Regiment, or body in the Roman Army. Legions consisted
of different numbers of Soldiers and Officers, according to different times,
but yet they were commonly made up of six thousand Men. The Forces of Rome
consisted of many Legions. In the time of the Emperor Tiberius, says Tacitus,
two naval Armies, one at Ravenna, the other at Mizenum guarded both Seas of
Italy. The Coast of the Gauls was secured by the Galleys that Augustus had
taken in the Fight of Actium: But the main Forces of the Empire, in the number
of eight Legions guarded the Rhine. Three other Legions were employed to
prevent the Enemies attempts upon Spain, which had been lately conquered by
Augustus. Africa and Egypt were both severally secured by two Legions: And all
the Countries from the Sea of Syria to Euphrates and Pontus, Euxinus were kept
in peace by four Legions. The passage of the River Danube was guarded by four
other Legions, two in Pannonia, and two in Maesia, sustained by two other in
Dalmatia; two kept the Darbarians in awe, and assist Italy in case of need.
Rome was Garrisoned with three Cohorts of the City, and nine of the Emperor's
own Forces, all chosen Soldiers out of Umbria, Tascany, the Country of the
Latins, and other old Roman Colonies. Besides the Armies and Galleys of the
Confederates lying in the most convenient Harbors of the Provinces, which were
also equal to our Forces.

Each Legion was divided in ten Cohorts; each Cohort in three Companies, and
each Company into two Centuries. The chief Commander of the Legion was called
Legatus, i. e. Lieutenant.

LEMNOS,
An Island in the Egean Sea or Archipelago. Poets tell us, That Valcan was
therein cast headlong, from the top of Heaven by Jupiter: However, he was
received in the Arms of the Inhabitants of the Country, who preserved him from
the fate of Astyanax: Notwithstanding he broke one of his Legs, and ever since
was lame. They relate also that he settled himself in that Country, and became
a Blacksmith, because of the Fire that breaks out from time to time from the
middle of the Mountains, and the norse that is heard thereabout.

LEMURES,
Apuleius in his Book of the God of Socrates reports, That the Soul of Man
released from the bands of the Body, and freed from performing of his bodily
Functions, becomes a kind of Demon or Genius called Lemures: And of these
Lomures, those that were kind to their Family, were called Lares Familiares;
but those who for their crimes were condemned to wander continually, without
meeting with any place of rest, and terrified good Men, and hurt the bad, were
vulgarly called Larvae, Hobgoblins.

LEMURIA,
A Feast of Ghosts, and Phantoms solemnized the ninth day of May, to pacify
the Manes of the Dead, who were the Lemures that comes in the night to torment
the living. The Institution of this Feast is ascribed to Romulus, who to rid
himself of the Phantoms of his Brother Remus whom he had ordered to be
Murdered, appearing always before him, ordained a Feast called after his name
Remuria and Lemuria. They offered Sacrifices for three nights together, during
which time all the Temples of the Gods were shut up, and there was no Wedding.
This is the chief Ceremony of this Sacrifice. About midnight, the Person who
offered, being barefoot, made a Signal, having the Fingers of his hand joined
to his Thumb, whereby he fancied he kept off the bad Spirit or Phantom from
him: Then he washed his hands in Spring Water, and putting black Beans into his
mouth, threw them behind him, uttering these words, I deliver my self and mine
by these Beans, making withal a deadly noise, with Pans and other Brass
Vessels, which they did strike one against the other; desiring these Ghosts to
withdraw, repeating nine times together that they should retire in peace
without troubling any more the rest of the living.

LERNA,
A Lake, famous for the seven headed Hydra, defeated by Hercules. Out of this
Lake came infectious Exhalations: And it is reported that the Denaides cast
therein the heads of their Husbands, whom they Murdered on their Wedding Night.

LETHE,
A River of Africa, which after a long course hides its self under ground, and
then appears again; wherefore Poets fancied, that all the dead drank a draught
of its waters, to make them forget what was past.

LEUCOTHEA.
Ino the Wife of Athamas King of Thebes, who casting herself into the Sea,
together with her Son Melicerte, to avoid the fury of her Husband, who was
attempting to murder her, was ranked by Neptune amongst the number of the
Sea-Gods, and called Leucothea, or the break of day.

LEUCOTHOE,
The Daughter of Orchamus King of Babylon, beloved by Apollo, who enjoyed her,
having introduced himself into her Chamber, under the shape of Eurynome her
Mother. But Clythia, jealous of Apollo, having acquainted her Father with the
same, he ordered that his Daughter should be buried alive, but Apollo took pity
of her, and turned her into a Tree, out of which drops Frankincense.

LEX,
A Law. This word expresses the several Governments of States and Nations, and
the Maxims they have agreed upon, or received from their Princes and
Magistrates, to live in peace and mutual society; and in this sense we say the
Laws of Solon and Lycurgus. The Laws of Draco were very rigorous and bloody.
The Laws of the twelve Tables were the ancient Laws of the Romans, which the
Decemviri fetched out of Greece, and made use of them to ground all their other
Laws on. The Codex and Authenticae are the Laws and Ordinances of the Emperors.
The Digest is a Compilation, made by Justinian's order of the several judgments
and opinions of the most learned in the Roman Law, and were received for Laws,
as is ordered by the Epistle at the beginning of that work; and it is that which
composes the Roman Laws.

Moses, says Josephus, in the second Book of his Antiquities, was the first
Lawgiver, and Moses's Law was the first Law given to Men, many Ages before all
other Legislators, and all other Laws; in fine, God gave it in a time when God
only was able to give it, all Men (after the first Colonies of so many remote
Provinces) being fallen into incredible ignorance and confusion, and being then
so far from giving Laws to themselves, that they were hardly able to receive
them. Wherefore in Homer's time, and many Ages after him, there was yet no
mention made, neither of Laws nor Legislators, States and Kingdoms being then
governed not by Laws, but by their King's Ordinances and Customs received among
themselves.

Lex Talionis is the most ancient and most just; and was observed by the
Hebrews, and prescribed by the Law of Moses, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for
a tooth, as it is said in the Gospel: Lex Talionis is natural Justice.

Many famous Laws have been proposed by several Roman Magistrates, as the
Falcidian Law made during the Triumvirat, to regulate last Wills. The Lex
Julia, the Lex Cornelia, the Agrarian Law, the Sumptuarian Law, etc.

Tacitus, in the third Book of his Annals, speaks thus of the Laws.

Men formerly living without ambition and envy, had no occasion neither for
Laws nor Magistrates to keep them in awe; and being voluntarily inclined to do
good, had no need of a proposed reward to incite them to it; and as they
desired nothing but what was lawful, nothing was forbad to them. But at last
this equality being banished, Pride and Violence came in the room of Modesty
and Shame. Some Nations were at first governed by Laws, or had recourse to them
after a long prevailing Authority. At the beginning Laws were simple as Men's
minds, and Fame has principally celebrated those of Creta, Sparta and Athens,
restored by Minos, Lycurgus and Solon; but these were more subtle, and in a
greater number. Rome, during Romulus's Government, had no other Laws but the
Will of the Prince. Numa established Laws concerning Religion; Tullius, and
Ancus made some politic regulations; but our great Lawgiver is Servius
Tullius, who bound even the Prince by Laws. Since the banishment of the
Tarquins, the People found out some Laws to secure themselves from the
oppression of great Men, and maintain Concord and Liberty. The Decemviri were
afterward chosen, and the most excellent Laws of Greece gather together, out
of them they composed the twelve Tables, which were the end of good Laws; for
although there were some regulations made against wicked Men at the first
appearing of Vice, nevertheless, the greatest part were settled by the
dissentions of the People and the Senate, or established by the violence of
some persons in dignity, to banish some illustrious Men, and repress some other
disorders. From thence came the seditious Laws of Gracchus and Saturninus, and
the Latgesses of Drusus in the name of the Senate. The Wars of Italy, and then
the Civil Wars gave occasion to several Ordinances contrary to one another; but
at last the Dictator Sylla, changed or abolished the former, to establish his
own. However, they were not lasting, though in great number; for soon after the
People were in motion, by the turbulent Laws of Lepidus. Since that time there
was nothing established but new regulations concerning every Crime, and the
Commonwealth being corrupted, the number of Laws became infinite. In fine,
Pompey being chosen the reformer of Manners, after he had found out Remedies
worse than the Evils, saw his Laws perish with himself. And afterward, during
25 years of Civil Wars, there was neither Laws nor Customs observed. But
Augustus being elected Consul the sixth time, abolished the Laws which he had
made during his unlawful Authority, and established others to live in peace.
And amongst other Laws, he made a Law concerning Marriage.

The Romans had some Laws under their Kings, and some other in the time of
their Commonwealth. Romulus was the first Lawgiver of the Romans, according to
the testimony of Livy, Plutarch and Tully. There remain but some fragments of
Romulus's Laws, related by Varro and Festus, the first whereof is here inserted.

SEI PATRONOS CLIENTEI FRAUDEM FAXSIT, SACER ESTOD: If a Patron defraud his
Client, let him be cursed. Servius quotes the fragment of this Law, as being
taken out of the Laws of the twelve Tables; nevertheless, Romulus is doubtless
the Author thereof, for it is thus expressed in Servius's Manuscript: Ex lege
Romuli and XII. Tabularum. Si Patroxus Clienti Frandem Faxit, Sacer Esto. It Is
yet true, according to the testimony of Dionysius Halicarnasseus and Livy, that
Romulus had settled the rights of Clients and Patrons; and Scaliger and
Cujacius report, that the Decemviri, who had compiled the Laws of the twelve
Tables, and inserted therein the Laws made by the Kings: Ex his non dubium est
leges Regias in XII. Tabulas a Decemviris conjectas fuisse; and prima, secunda,
tertia tabula leges Regias contineri; quia etiam leges Regias de patria
potestate in quartam tabulam relatas author est Dionysius. Whereby it does
appear, that the Laws made by the Kings, were inserted by the Decemvirs in the
Law of the twelve Tables; and that the first, second and third Table, contained
the Laws of the Kings; as also the Law concerning the power of Fathers over
their Children, is copied out of the fourth Table, as Dionysius Halicarnasseus
tells us.

Sei instead of Si. The Ancients in their Writings express thus the long i by
the Dipthong ei, as it appears by Ancient Inscriptions, and by this which is
yet seen at Rome: Quod ejus Agrei, locei publicum populei Romanei erit.

Patronos instead of Patronus. The Ancients often made use of the o instead of
the u.

Clientei instead of Clienti, by the same reason of Sei instead of Si.

Faxsit instead of Faxit, because of the harshness of the x. The Ancients added
a Letter before or after the x, to make the pronunciation softer, as we see in
the ancient Marbles, vicxit, juncxit, etc.

Sacer Estod instead of Esto. The Ancients joined very often the letter d,
after o at the end of a word, as it appears by the Column of Duellius,
pugnandod.

I have explained the meaning of this Law under the word Clientela; where the
right of Patrons and Clients is expounded; for Romulus allowed the people to
choose for themselves Patrons out of the body of the Nobles, and put themselves
under their protection; and settled the reciprocal Rights of the Patron toward
his Clients, and Clients toward their Patrons; and if they failed in the
observation thereof, they devoted them to the Devil, and any Man might kill
them, without being punished by the Law. This is the meaning of these words
Sacer Estod.

The second Law of Romulus was expressed in these terms.

SEI NOROS PARENTEM VERBERIT, AST OLE PLORASIT, SACRA DIVEIS PARENTUM ESTOD.

If a Daughter-in-law strikes her Father, and he complains of it, let her be
cursed, and puxished by the Gods of the Fathers and Mothers.

Besides these two Laws, the express terms whereof were kept till our time,
there are still many others, the words whereof were lost by the misfortune of
time, but the meaning thereof is recorded by Latin Writers: There are sixteen
mentioned by Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Livy and Plutarch, some concerning the
Law of the Gods, and some others concerning the Civil Law.

Here follows the first Law of the six, which concerns the Gods, related by
Dionysius, Halicarnasseus.

I. NE QUID DEORUM FABULIS IN QUIBUS PROBRA EORUM ET CRIMINA COMMEMORARENTUR,
ADHIBERETUR FIDEI: SED OMNES SANCTE, RELIGIOSE, CASTEQUE DE DIIS IMMORTALIBUS
SENTIRENT ET LOQUERENTUR: NIHIL QUOD BEATIS NATURIS INDECORUM AFFINGENTES.

Not to believe what the Fable says of the Gods concerning their Crimes and
Infamies, but to have Pious and Religious thoughts of them, and not to: speak
of them but in a chaste way, ascribing nothing to them that is unbecoming
blessed natures.

The second Law is concerning the Holiness of the Walls of a City.

II. UT MURI SACRO-SANCTI ESSENT; NEVE QUIS NISI PER PORTAS URBEM INGREDERETUR,
NEVE EGREDERETUR.

That the Walls of a City should be Sacred, and that no person should pass over
them to come in or go out of the City, but only through the Gates.

Upon this Law Plutarch in his Roman Questions, Quest. 27. asks Why the
Ancients consecrated the walls of their Cities, and not the Gates thereof? It
was, answered he, to encourage the Citizens to defend them, out of respect to
their holiness and consecration; and therefore Romulus ordered his Brother
Remus to be murdered, because he had leapt over the Walls.

But the Gates of Cities were neither holy nor consecrated, because all
Provisions were brought in thereat, and the Corpse of the dead were carried
through the Gates out of the City to be burnt. Wherefore when they intended to
build the Walls of a City, they consulted the Augurs, and then drew a Line with
a Plough drawn by an Ox and a Cow yoked together, over that space of ground
where the Walls were to be built, but did not drive the Plough over the place
designed for the Gates of the City. This Ceremony is thus related by Plutarch;
to which may be added, what Pomponius the Lawyer says, Siquis violaverit muros,
capite puniter.

III. NE QUIS EX ASYLOUT SACRO TUTOQUE LOCO VI ABSTRAHATUR.

Let no man be drawn by vlolence out of a place of Refuge, where he has
sheltered himself, as in a Sanctuary.

These Sanctuaries were always Venerable amongst the Greeks and Romans. Cadmus
was the first, who opened a refuge at Thebes, and those who retired thither,
either Freemen or Slaves, were pardoned of the Crime they had committed. The
Posterity of Hercules established a Sanctuary at Athens. Tacitus complains of
the abuse made of places of refuge at Rome. The Reader may see what is said of
them after the word Asylum.

IV. NE QUID IN ADMINISTRATIONE REIPUBLICAE NISI AUGURATE FIERET.

That nothing should be done in the Government of the Republic, before the
Augur was consulted to know the Will of the Gods.

This is confirmed by Tully, in his first Book de divinatione; and? by
Dionysius Halicarnasseus, in the 2d Book of the Roman Antiquities, where he
tells us, that Romulus being established King by the Will of the Gods, which he
had consulted by taking the Auspices, he ordered that this custom should be
religiously observed for the time to come, either in the Creation of Kings, or
election of Magistrates, or in Affairs of great consequence, wherein the
Commonwealth was concerned.

V. UT PENES REGES SACRORUM OM NIUM ET GRAVIORUM JUDICIORUM ESSET ARBITRIUM ET
POTESTAS: PATRICII EADEM SACRA CUSTODIRENT ET CURARFNT, MAGISTRATUS SOLI
REGERENT, JUSQUE DE LEVIORIBUS CAUSIS REDDERENT: PLEBEII DENIQUE COLERENT
AGROS, PECORA ALERENT, QUAESTUOSA EXERCERENT OFFICIA ET ARTS, NON TAMEN
SELLULARIAS ET SORDIDAS, SERVIS, LIBERTINIS ET ADVENIS RELINQUENDAS.

That Kings should have Sovereign Authority over Religious Matters, as also in
the administration of Affairs of the greatest consequence belonging to the Law:
that the Patricians should attend and take care of the Sacrifices; that they
only should perform the office of the Magistrates, and administer Justice in
cases of lesser moment: that the Plebeians should cultivate the Fields, feed
the Cattle, exercise Arts and Trades, except the vilest which were preserved
for Slaves, Freedmen's Sons and Foreigners.

Kings were the Overseers of Sacrifices, and joined the power of Priesthood to
the Royal Authority; wherefore the Romans having expelled the Kings,
established a King whom they called Rex Sacrificulus, as we learn of Livy:
Regibus exactis, and parta liberate, rerum deinde divinarum habita cura, and
quia quaedam publica Sacra per ipsos factitata erant nec ubi Reguns desiderium
esset, Regem sacrificulum creant: and the Wife of the King of the Sacrifices
was called Regina, as Macrobius reports, l. 4. c. 15.

The King administered Justice in causes concerning Witchcraft, public
Offenses, Crimes of High Treason, underhand Dealings, sheltering of wicked
Men, and unlawful Meetings.

The Patricians performed the office of Inferior Judges, in cases of Murders,
Fires, Robberies, public Extortions, removals of Landmarks, and other
Offenses between private men. At first they were the only men who performed the
office of Priesthood, but afterward in the time of the Commonwealth, the
offices of Religion were bestowed upon Plebeians; for in the year ccccli. after
the foundation of Rome, during the Consulat of Q. Apuleius Pansa and Marcus
Valerius Co vinus, five Augures were created out of the body of the people. And
in series of time they raised themselves to the High Priesthood.

The Patricians only had a right to the Magistracy; but sixteen years after the
Kings were banished Rome, it was conferred on the people, for in the year
cccxli. after the foundation of Rome, Quaestors were chosen out of the people;
as also Tribunes out of the Soldiers in the year cccliii. Some years after
Consuls in the year ccclxxxviii. and other Magistrates called Aediles, Curules
in the year ccclxxxix: Dictators in the year ccciic. Censors in the year ccciv.
and in fine Praetors in the ccccxvii. but the interregnum only was left to the
Patricians.

VI. UT POPULUS ACCEDENTE SENATUS AUCTORITATE, MAGISTRATUS CREARET, LEGES
JUBERET, BELLA DECERNERET.

That the People, with the Authority of the Senate, should choose Magistrates,
make Laws, and make the War.

And this was done in the Assemblies of the people, either by Parishes, Tribes
or Hundreds.

VII. UT REGI MAGISTRATUIQUE AUGUSTIOR SEMPER IN PUBLICO ESSET HABITUS SUAQUE
INSIGNIA.

That the King and Magistrates should wear Habits of Distinction, and Badges of
Honor.

The Kings, Emperors and Consuls were clothed with a Robe of State called
Trabea, the painted Gown, and the Robe called Praetexta, mentioned in this Book
in their order.

VIII. UT SENATUS PUBLICUM ESSET ET COMMUNE CIVITATIS CONSILIUM, ET IN EUM
PATRICIIS TANTUM PATERET ADITUS.

That the Senate should be the common Council of the City of Rome and the
Empire and that the Patricians only should be admitted into it.

Romulus at first instituted one hundred Senators; to whom he added the like
number eight years after, because of the Peace concluded with the Sabins.
Tarquinius Priscus increased that number to an hundred more: Since, during the
Triumvirat, their number was augmented to nine hundred, and afterward to a
thousand; but Caesar Augustus reduced that number.

IX. UT COLONI ROMANI MITTERENTUR IN OPPIDA BELLO CAPTA, VEL SALTEM HOSTS
VICTI FRANGENDIS ILLORUM VIRIBUS AGRI MULTARENTUR PART.

That the Romans should send Roman Colonies into the Conquered Cities, or at
least that the Enemies should forfeit one part of their Lands.

Tacitus speaks thus of this custom in the 11th Book of his Annals, c. 12. Do
we repent to have been seeking for the Family of the Balbi in Spain, or others
no less illustrious in Gallia Narbonensis? Their Posterity flourishes still
amongst us, and bear an equal love with us for their Country What is the cause
of the ruin of Sparta and Athens, tho very flourishing Cities, but using the
vanquished like Slaves, and refusing them entrance into their Commonwealths.
Romulus was much wiser in making Citizens of his Enemies in one day.

X. ANNUS ROMANUS DECEMBER ESSET MENSIUM.

That the Roman year should contain ten months.

This year began with March, Numa added two Months to it, viz. January and
February, and ordered that the year should begin with January. See what is said
under the word Annus.

XI. UT MULIER QUE VIRO JUXTA SACRATAS LEGES NUPSIT, ILLI SACRORUM FORTUNARUM
QUE ESSET SOCIA, NEVE EAM DESERERET; ET QUEMADMODOM ILLE FAMILIAE DOMINUS, ITA
HAEC FORET DOMINA; NEQUE DEFUNCTO VIRO, NON SECUS AC FILLIA PATRI HERE IS ESSET,
IN PORTIONEM QUIDEM AEQUAM, SI LIBERI EXTARENT; EX ASS VERO SI MINUS.

That a Woman who had married a Man according to the Sacred Laws, should
participate of the Sacrifices and Wealth with her Husband, that she should be
Mistress of the Family, as he was himself the Master thereof, that she should
inherit his Estate in an equal portion like one of his Children, if there was
any born during their Marriage, otherwise she should inherit all.

By the Sacred Laws in Marriages, it must be understood either the Marriages
solemnized with a Ceremony called Confarreatio, which was performed with a Cake
of Wheat, in presence of ten Witnesses, and with Sacrifices and Forms of
Prayers: And the Children born of this Marriage were called confarreatis
Parentibus geniti; or the Marriages made ex coemptione, by a mutual bargain,
from whence the Wives were called Matres Familias, Mothers of Families. These
two kinds of Marriages are called by ancient Lawyers Justae nuptiae, to
distinguish them from a third kind of Marriage called Matrimonium ex usu
Injustae nuptiae, Concubinage.

The Society of Sacrifices and Wealth, wherein the Wife had her share, must be
understood of private Sacrifices, offered in some Families, practiced amongst
the Romans as upon Birth-days, and day of Expiations and Funerals, which the
Posterity and Heirs were bound to observe. Wherefore Plautus says, That a great
Estate was fallen to one, without being obliged to offer any Families
Sacrifice, se haereditatem adeptum esse sine sacris effertiss^^an.

The Wife was to be the Mistress of the Family, as the Husband Master. It was a
custom used amongst the Romans; that when the Wife set her Foot upon the
threshold of the door of the House of her Husband, they asked her who she was,
and she answered Caia sum, I am Caia; because Caia Caecilia Wife to Tarquinius
Priscus, was much given to Huswifery and Spinning, and from thence is come the
custom, that Brides coming into the House of their Husband, answered that they
were called Caia: Caeterum Caia usu super omnes est celaebrata; fertur enim
Caiam Caeciliam, Tarquinii Prisci uxorem, optimam lanificam fuisse, and ides
institutum esse, ut novae nuptae ante januam mariti interrogatae, quaenam
vocarentur, Catam se esse dicerent.

And Plutarch in the thirtieth Roman Question tells us, That the Husband said
to his Wife at her first coming to his house, Ego Caius, and she answered Ego
Caia.

XII. UT MATRONIS DE VIA DECEDERETUR, NIHIL OBSCOENI PRESENTIBUS IIS VEL
DICERETUR. VEL FIERET, NEVE QUIS NUDUM SE AB IIS CONSPICI PATERETUR, ALIOQUIN
CRIMINIS CAPITALIS REUS HABERETUR.

That they should give way to Ladies of Quality, that no obscenity should be
either spoken nor done in their presence, and that no Man should be seen naked
in their presence, if otherwise he should he guilty of a capital Crime.

XIII. UT MONSTROSOS PARTUS NECARE PARENTIBUS LICERET.

That it should be lawful to Parents to put their Children to Death, if they
were born Monstrous. But they were obliged to call for Witnesses to justify
that they were Monsters, says Dionysius Halicarnassaus

XIV. UT PARENTIBUS LIBEROS RELIGANDI, VENDENDI, OCCIDENDI JUS, ALIISQUE MODIS
DE EIS STATUENDI PLENA POTESTAS ESSET.

That Fathers should have a Sovereign Authority over their Children, confine
them, sell them, and put them to death, and dispose of them which way they
should think fit.

XV. UT SI QUA IN RE PECCASSET MULIER POENAM LUERET EX MARITI ARBITRIO: SI
VENEFICIJ CIRCA PROLEM VEL ADULTERII ESSET ACCUSATA, COGNITIONEM, EJUS REI VIR
ET COGNATI MULIERIS HABERENT; SIN CONVICTA ESSET, EX ILLORUM SENTENTIA
MULTARETUR: SI VINUM BIBISSET DOMI UT ADULTERA PUNIRETUR. SI VIR EXTRA
VENEPICIUM NATORUM VEL ADULTERIUM MULIEREM REPUDIASSET, RERUM EJUS PARS UXORI
DARETUR, PARS AUTEM CERERI CEDERET.

If a Wife was found faulty, her Husband punished her according to his
pleasure: If she had Poisoned her Children, or committed Adultery, the Husband
and her Kindred inquired into the fact, and if she was found guilty, they
inflicted what Punishments they pleased upon her: If she drunk Wine, she was
punished like an Adulteress: If the Husband put away his Wife for any other
cause besides Poisoning or Adultery, part of his Wealth was given to the Wife,
and part to Ceres.

The Roman Matrons were forbidden to drink Wine, and their Husbands had power
to kill them when they had drunk any, as Pliny assures, l. 14. c. 13. Non
licebat vinum Romany feminis bibere Invenemus inter exempla Egnatii Mecennii
uxorem, quod vinum bibisset edolio, interfectam fuisse a marito, eumque caedis
a Romulo absolutum. Cato ideo propinquos feminis osculum dare instituit ut
scirent antemetum olerent, (hoc tum nomen vina erat.) Wherefore Cato ordered,
that married Women should kiss their Relations, to know if they smelt of Wine.

XVI. UT OMNES PARRICIDAE CAPITE PLECTERENTUR.

That all Parricides should be punished with Death.

The following Laws were made by Numa the second King of the Romans.

PISCES quei squamosei non sunt, nei polluceto: squamosos omnes praeter Scarum
polluceto: Do not offer in sacrifice to the Gods Fishes without scales, but
only those which are scaly except the Scarum.

SARPTA vinea nei siet, ex ea vinum Diis libarier nefas estod: It Is not lawful
to offer to the Gods Wine, of the growth of a Vine that was never pruned.

Festus explaining the word Sarpta, says Sarpta vinea putata, i. e. pura facta.
Sarpere enim Antiqui pro purgare ponebant. For the Gods accepted of no
Sacrifices, but those that were pure. The Ancients offered pure Wine to the
Gods, uttering these words: Mactus hoc vino inferio esto. We will speak of it
under the words Sacrificium and Libatio.

QUOJUS auspicio clase procincta operma spolia capiuntur, Joves Feretrio bovem
caedito, quei cepit aeris trecentum darier oporteto, secunda spolia endo Martis
asam endo campo suove tauriliad, utra volet, caedito; quei cepit aeris ducentum
darier oporteto: quotos auspicio capta Diis piacolom dato.

Plutarch assures us, that he had read in the Annals of the Pontiffs, that Numa
had spoken of the spoils called Opima, that one General had taken from another,
and ordered that the first should be consecrated to Jupiter Feretrius, the
second to Mars, and the third to Quirlnus.

Quojus instead of Cujus, an ancient word. Clase procincta, this word signifies
an Army drawn into a line of battle, according to Festus; wherefore the
Ancients called an Army Classis clupcata: opeima spolia instead of opima
spolia, Spoils that the General of an Army took from another, as Festus says;
and they are called opima, as he tells us, because such Spoils are but seldom
got, and this happened but three times to the Roman Empire; once Romulus took
spoils from Acron; a second time Gornelius Cossus took them from Tolumnius; and
a third time, Marcus Marcellus got them from Viridomar and consecrated them to
Jupiter Feretrius, as it is observed by Livy. Quei instead of qui cepit, aeris
instead of aeris, ccc darier instead of dari, oporteto instead of oportet.

Endo Martis asam instead of in Martis aram, endo campo instead of in campo,
suove tauralia instead of sue, ove, tauro, a Sacrifice, where a Hog, a Sheep
and a Bull were offered.

SEI QUIS hemonem leiberom sciens dolo malo mortei duit, parricidad estod. Sei
im imprudens, se dolo malod occisit, pro kapito occisei and nateiis ejus endo
conscione arietem subjicito. If any body kill willingly and out of malice a
Freeman, let him be declared a Parricide: if he does it unwillingly, let him
sacrifice in a full assembly, a Ram for the life he had taken away.

Sei instead of si, leiberom instead of liberum, mortei instead of morti, duit
instead of dedit, parricidad instead of parricida, estod instead of esto,
occisit instead of occidit, kapito instead of capite, occisei instead of
occisi, nateiis instead of natis, endo instead of in, sobjicito instead of
subjicito.

Amongst the Athenians, he who had committed a Crime, was bound to offer a Ram
for expiation.

MULIER quae praegnans mortua ne humator, antequam partus ei excidatur; quei
secus faxit, spei animantis cum gravida occisa reus estod. Negat lex Regia,
says Marcellus the Lawyer, mulierem quae praegnans mortua sit humari, antequam
partus ei excidatur: qui contra fecerit, spem animantis cum gravida peremisse
videtur.

This Law of Numa forbids in express terms, to bury a Woman who died in labor,
before her Child was taken out of her Body; and whosoever neglected to observe
this Law, was accounted the murderer of both the Child and the Mother.

Valerius Maximus reports, that one Gorgias came out of his Mothers belly, when
she was carrying to her Grave, and by his crying stopped those, who carried her
Corpse to be buried.

SEI hemonem folminis occisit, im sopera gen^a nei tollito; sei folmine occisus
escit, eei justa nulla Fieri oporteto.

This Law is not clearly expressed, and cannot be understood, but by considering
the Customs observed by the Romans, in the Funerals of their Dead.

Muma did not allow, that those who were killed by Thunder, should be carried
upon shoulders like other dead, nor that any Ceremony should be performed at
their Funerals, because they were dead by the wrath of the Gods.

Folminis is written instead of fulmen, for the Ancients had no Nominative
terminated in en. Sopera instead of supra, nei instead of us.

VEINO rogum ne resparcito: That the pile of wood should not be moistened with
Wine, but with Milk.

PELEX asam Junonis ne tagito, sei tagit, Junonei crenebis dimiseis acuam
feminam cadito. Let no Harlot touch the Altar of Juno; and if she do, let her
be sentenced to sacrifice a young Sheep to her, having her Hair dishevelled.

Asam instead of aram, tagito instead of tangito, crenebis instead of crinibus,
dimiseis instead of dimissis, acuam instead of agnam.

By this Law, a married Man was not allowed to marry another Woman. It was a
custom in Marriages, for the Woman to take hold on the corner of the Altar of
Juno.

SI QUIS, aliuta faxit, ipsos Jovei sacet estod.

Aliuta instead of aliter. We have but this fragment of this Law, the rest was
lost by the misfortune of time.

Here are still some other Laws of Numa, the words whereof were lost, but the
meaning is yet found in Writers,

The first is concerning the Nature of God, the sense whereof is contained in
these words.

NE QUIS Deum, vel homines speciem, vel animalis alicujus formam habere
existimaret: Let no man ascribe to God, either the figure of a Man, nor any
Animal whatsoever.

It seems by this Law, that Numa was well acquainted with the command of God in
the 20 Chap. of Exodus. Thou shall not make unto thy self any graven Image, or
the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or
in the waters under the ground.

AD DEUS cast adiretur, pietas adhiberetur, opes amoverentur. Separatim nemo
Deos habera neve novos, neve advenas, nisi public adscitos privatim colerent.
Sacra Diis instituta sancte servorentur; fruge molaque salsa litaretur. Templ^
Diis constructa profanis usibus ne polluerentur Templum Jani belli pacisque
indicium esset: That they should draw near but with Purity and Piety, and
remove Riches from them: That no body should have new or particular Gods: That
the Sacrifices instituted in honor of the Gods, should be religiously
observed: That they should power salted dough upon the Victims: That Temples
built in honor of the Gods, should not be defiled by any profane use: That the
Temple of Janus should be the Signal both of Peace and War.

Wherefore in time of War the Temple of Janus was always open, and was only
shut in time of Peace.

UT DIVIS, aliis alii sacerdotes essent. Curiones triginta sacra Curiarum
quibus praefecti curarent; proque Curialibus public rem divinam facerent. Tres
Flamines, Dialis, Jovi, Martialis Marti, Quirino Quirinalis, assidui sacerdotes
essent. Tribunus Celerum sacris sibi assgnatis operam daret. Augures signa de
Coelo servarent, publica que a privatis discernerent, quaeve vitiosa dirave
dixerunt, irrita scaevaque haberentur. Vestales Virgins ignem foci publici in
urbe sempiternum custodirent, quae stupri convictae, ad portam Collinam vivae
defoderentur; qui vitiasset, virgis in foro ad mortem caederetur. Salii
duodecim Deorum belli praesidum universim laudatores, Marti Gradivo sacra in
Palatio celebrarent. Feciales foederum, pacis, induciarum oratores judicesque
essent; viderent sedulo ne ulli foederatae civitati injustum bellum inferretur,
de Lagatorum judicarent injuriis: Si quid Imperatores contra jusjurandum
pecassent, cognoscerent and expiarent. Pontifices denique de omnibus causis,
que ad sacra, tam inter sacerdotes quam Profanos, judicarent; novas leges de
sacris ex sua sententia and arbitratu conderent; sacerdotes omnes examinarent,
sacrorum Ministros in Officio continerent; de Deorum Geniorumque cultu, totoque
Religionum ac Caerimoniarum negotio consulentes docerent: Prescripta a se
contemnentes pro delicti qualitate and magnitudine multarent; nullius potestati
essent abnoxii. That each God should have his particular Priests: That thirty
Curions or Priests should be appointed to the thirty Roman Curiae or Parishes
to offer Sacrifices. Three Priests called Flamines, the first whereof appointed
for Jupiter, should be called Dialis; the second for Mars, Martialis, and the
third for Quirinus, Quirinalis: That he who was called Tribunus Celerum, should
perform the Sacrifices that belonged to him: That the Augures should observe
the Signs of Heaven, and distinguish those that have a regard to public
Affairs, from those that belong to private Concerns; taking particular notice
of all that were evil and direful: That the Vestal Virgins should take care
without Intermission of the sacred Fire: That if any of them suffer herself to
be defiled, she should be buried alive out of the Gate called Collina, and the
Man who had debauched her, should be whipped to death in the public place:
That there should be twelve Priests called Salit, to Sacrifice to Mars, appoint
Gradivas in the Palace: That the Officers called Feciales should be Judges in
Affairs concerning Confederacies, Peace and Truce: That they should take care
that no injust War should be carried on against the Confederates of the Roman
People: That they should judge of wrongs done to Ambassadors; and if the
Generals of the Armies had broke their word, they should make atonement for
their faults: That the Pontiffs should be Judges in Affairs concerning
Religion, between both Priests and Laymen: That they should make new Laws
according to their own mind concerning Sacrifies: That they should examine the
Priests, and keep them to their Duty: That they should give reasons for the
Worship of Gods and Genius's, and of all the Religious Ceremonies practiced
therein, to those that should inquire of them about the same: That those who
should despise their Ordinances, should be punished by them, according to their
faults; and that they should be subject to none.

All these Laws are mentioned by Livy, Plutarch and Florus: And the reason that
St. Austin gives for the Multiplicity of these Priests, is, that having so
great a number of Gods, they were afraid they should be confounded one with
another.

ANNUS duodecim esset mentium: That the year should be of twelve of Months.

Two Months were added to the year of Romulus, viz. January and February.

DIES omnes in fastos, nefastosque distribuerentur: That the days should be
divided in holy days and working days.

UT SI Pater filio concesserit uxorem ducere, quae futura illi juxta leges
sacrorum bonorumque omnium particeps, eidem patri postea nullum jus vendendi
filium esset: That if a Father has given leave to his Son to marry, his Wife
comes into a common propriety to the Goods with him, and the Father after that
cannot sell his Son.

UT CONTRACTUS dubii and sine testibus fide ac jurejurando terminaretur, utique
Magistratus ac Judices in dubiis causis ex alterius fide and Sacramento suam
interponerent sentmetiam: That doubtful Contracts made without Witnesses should
be certified by Oath, and that the Judges should give Judment in doubtful
Causes upon the Oath of one of the Parties.

These were the Laws made by the Kings.

Tullus Hostilius the third King of the Romans established a Law, That when a
Woman should bring forth three Children at one Birth, they should be brought up
at the public charges, till they came to Age.

UT trigeminis, quoties nascerentur, alimenta ex publico, iisque ad pubertatem
darentur.

He renewed again the Law of Romulus, concerning the Officers called Feciales:
Ut Feciales foederum, belli pacis, induciariumque Oratores Judicesque essent
and bella disceptarent.

Tarquinius Priscus made these following Laws.

UT Regia Romanorum Majestas corena aurea, sceptro, sella eburnea, toga^picta,
Lictoribus duodecim, aliisque ornamentis insignis esset. That Kings should wear
a Crown of Gold, with a Scepter in their hand; that they should have an Ivory
Chair, with an Embroidered Robe; and that twelve Lictors should walk before
them.

Ut quisque civis veram bonorum suorum, quae, qualiacumque essent, astimationem
Jurejurando probaret, probatamque ad Regem deferret, genus item, aetatem,
nomina uxorum, liberorum, familiae que omnis: quae, cujus generis praedia, quis
servorum pecudumque numerus, quae qualiacunque fundorum Instrumenta singulatim
sine dolo malo profiteretur, quaque urbis in part, ^uove extra urbem loco
habitaret suas que res possideret sancte indicaret; qui secus fecisset, bonis
publicatis civitatem amitteret, caesusque virgis sub hasta veniret: That each
Citizen should be bound to bring to the King an account of all his Goods
whatsoever, and certify by Oath the truth thereof; as also to declare his
Family, and his own Age, the name of his Wife, Children, and all his Family;
and tell the number of his Fields, and what they were proper for, and the whole
without any fraud: That if any failed therein, he lost the Citizen's freedom,
and forfeited his Goods; he should be whipped, and then sold by public Sale.

UT QUISQUE Pater familias pro nascentibus quidem ad aedem Junonis Lucina, pro
sumentibus vero togam virilem ad Juventutis; pro desunctis denique ad Libitinae
certas stipes penderent, easque quotannis Aeditui in tabulas referrent, ex
quibus puerorum, puberum ac mortuorum certus numerus singulis annis
cognosceretur: That each Master of a Family should give a certain sum of Money
to the Temple of June Lucina, for new born Children; another to the Temple of
Youth, when their Children put on the toga virilis, and a third to the Temple
of the Goddess Libytina when they died. The Sextons of the Temple were bound to
keep Registers of the names of those for whom these presence were made to the
Goddesses, that it might be known what number of Children were born, how many
had put on the toga virilis, and how many were dead.

UTI in Tribus urbanus atque jus civitatis servi ab civibus Romany manumissi,
qui vellent ad sciscerentur; and libertini ad omnia plebeiorum admitterentur
munia: That Slaves freed by the Romans might be admitted into the Tribes of the
City, if they desired it, and enjoy the freedom of Citizens; and that Freemen's
Children should be received in all Offices like the Roman People.

NE QUIS ob debitum foenus in vincula traheretur, neve faeneratoribus jus in
libera corpora sed debitorum contenti facultatibus essent: That no body should
be put in Prison for Debt; and that Creditors should have no right over free
Persons, but should be contented with the substance of their Debtors.

We have but this Law of Tarquinius Superbus.

Uti facrorum causa quotannis semel in moutem Albanum Romani Latinique nomine
populi Romani a supreme Magistratu Romano cogerentur: Jovi Latiali consensu
communi sacra facturi, ferias and mercatus celebraturi and una epulaturi: That
every year the Sovereign Magistrate of Rome should Summons the Romans and
Latins upon Mount Albanus, to offer unanimously a Sacrifice to Jupiter
Latialis, and keep there a Holy Day, a Market and a Feast together.

These are all the Laws made by the Kings, which Sextus Papirius a Lawyer has
collected into a body, to preserve them to Posterity, which are called after
his name Jus Papiri^. We must now speak of the Laws made during the
Commonwealth, whereof some were established by the Decemviri, others by the
Consuls, Dictators, and Tribunes of the people.

The Laws of the Decemviri, comprehended under the names of the Laws of twelve
Tables, were most considerable; for they were collected from the Republics of
Greece, and the most just customs of the Romans and other Nations to which the
Royal Laws were added.

This Collection was made with great care and deliberation by the most able Men
amongst the Romans: Then the Decemviri called an Assembly of the Senate, to
whom they proposed these Laws to be examined. The Senate, after a serious
consideration, unanimously approved of them by a Decree; and the people
afterward confirmed them by a Plebicitum, in an Assemby of Hundreds. Then they
were Ingraved upon Brass Plates, exposed in the public place. This was done
cociii after the Foundation of Rome: And the following year, something being
yet wanting for the perfection of the Roman Law, the Decemviri added still two
other Brass Tables, to the ten before mentioned, which made up the number of
twelve. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Livy and Plutarch speak at large of these
Laws, and may be consulted thereupon, by those who would have a full knowledge
of them. Finally, Tully prefers these Laws to all the libraries in the World,
l. 1. de Orat. Est in duodecim Tabulis Antiquitatis Effigies, quod and verborum
prisca vetustas cognoscitur, and actionum genera quaedam Majorum consuetudinem
vitamque declarant: Sive quis civilem scientiam contempletur, totam hanc,
descriptis omnibus civitatis utilitatibus ac partibus, duodecim Tabulis
contineri videbitis: Sive quem ista praepotens and Gloriasa Philosophia
delectat, dicant audacius hosce habet fontes omnium disputationum suarum, qui
jure civili and legibu^^continentur. Bibliothecas mehercle omnium
Philosophorum, unus mihi videtur xii. Tabularum libellas, si quis legum fontes
and capita videret, and auctoritatis pondere and utilitatis ubertate superare.

These Laws were lost by the misfortune of time, there remains only some
fragments thereof, dispersed in the Books of several Authors, which we will
insert here for the Reader's sake.

PRAECO fonus endeicito: quom fonus ecfertor, nei encorumitiato: That the
public Crier invite to the Funerals; and during the time of the Burial, let no
Assembly meet.

Fonus instead of funus, endeicito instead of indicito, quom instead of quum,
ecfertor instead of est efferendum, nei instead of ne, encomitiato instead of
ito in comitium.

These were the words used by the public Crier, when he invited the People to
the Funerals of the Great Men of Rome: OLLUS QUIRIS LETO DATUS EST, or L.
TITIUS VIXIT, L. TITIO EXEQUIAS IRE CUEI COMMODUM EST, JAM TEMPUS EST, OLLUS
EFFERTUR: Lucius Titius is dead; those who have time to come to his Burial,
it is time, they are carrying the Corpse out of the House.

MOLIERES fa cium nei carpunto, neive cenat radunto; lesum foneris nec habento.
These three fragments are found in several Writers. This law ordered the
mourning, and prescribed bounds to grief. Molieres is here written instead of
mulieres, nei instead of ne, conas instead of genas.

This law forbids Women to tear their faces, and make lamentions.

Tully assures us, l. 2. Tuscul. that this law was made by Solon, and collected
by the Decemviri: Postea quam, ut scribit Phalereus, sumptuosa fieri funera and
lamentabilia coepissent, Solonis lege sublata sunt, quam legem iisdem prope
verbis nostri Decemviri in decimam tabulam conjecerunt.

ENDO fonere tribos ricinieis, rica porporea, decemque tibicinebos vetier
liceto: hoc plous nei facito.

Endi instead of in, fonere instead of funere, tribos ricineis instead of
tribus ricinieis, porporea, instead of purpurea, tibicinebos instead of
tibicinibus, vetier instead of utier. It was ordained by this Law, that Women
should be dressed with three Gowns of purple color, and that only ten Pipers
should be employed in Funeral Pomps.

SERVALIS unctura, circumpot atioque, quom fonus exsequiantor, neive respersio
fuat; acerras sepolchris aut longas koronas nei endep^nito. This Law forbad to
anoint the Corpse of Slaves, and make a Funeral Feast at their Burials, and
effusions of Wine, or Crown their Graves with Garlands, or burn Frankincense.

Servalis instead of Servilis, quom instead of cum, fonus instead of funus,
exsequiantor instend of exsequius ire, nei instead of ne, fuat instead of fiat,
sepolcris instead of sepulcris, koronas instead of coronus, endeponito instead
of imponito.

MURINAM mertuo nei endito: That they should not make use of that excellent
drink at Funerals.

Writers don't agree about the composition of that artificial Drink; but all
unanimously say, that it was very chargeable: Wherefore the Decemviri, who
intended to lessen the great Charges of Persons of Quality's Funerals, forbad
the use thereof.

PLUSA fonera unei nei facito, neive pluses lectos endoserto.

It was not allowed to have many Beds carried in Funeral Pomps.
Notwithstanding, Augustus honored Marcellus's Funeral with six hundred Beds;
and there were six thousand reckoned at the Funeral of Sylla.

This was accounted a great honor: As for the common People, their Corpse were
only carried in Coffins.

Plusa instead of plura, fonera instead of funera, unei instead of uni, pluses
instead of plures, endoserto instead of inserto.

AUSUM in fonere nei addito: ast quoi auso denteis vinctei sieut, im cum ole
sepelire urereve se fraud liceto.

Ausum instead of aurum, ast instead of at, quoi instead of cui, auso instead
of auro, denteis instead of dentes, vinctei instead of vincti, ole instead of
illo.

It was forbidden to burn Gold with the Corpse of the dead, unless his teeth
were tied with golden Thread: For in this case it was not lawful to burn it
with the Corpse.

ROGUM ascia nei poleito: That the pile of Wood should not be of polished Wood,
but of Wood as it grows.

HONORATORUM virorum lauds endo conscione memorantor, easque naeniae ad
tibicinem prosequantor: That the Funeral Speech of Illustrious Persons should
be made in public, and that lamentations should be sung, at the sound of
Musical Instruments.

P. Valerius Publicola was the first who made publicly the Funeral Speech of
Junius Brutus his Colleague in the Consulat. This custom was afterward
followed by others during the Commonwealth, and in the time of the Emperors.

DOMINUS foneris endo ludeis Accenso, Lictorebosque actitor.

Endo instead of in, ludeis instead of ludis, Lictorebosque instead of
Lictoribusque, octitor instead of utitor: That the President of the Funerals,
should make use of the Officers Accensi and Lictores in the Games.

Dominus ludorum, the Master of the Games, whom Augustus first named, according
to Quintilian Munerarius. This custom of representing Games to honor the
Funerals of great Men, is very ancient, since Homer and Virgil make mention
thereof. These Games were solemnized with Fights of Gladiators or Horse-races.

HOMINI mortuo osa nei lecito, quo post fonus faciat, extra quam sei quis foris
militiaeque mortuos siet.

This Law is mentioned by Tully, l. 11. de Legib. HOMINI, inquit, mortuo ossa
ne legito, quo post funus faciat: excipit bellicam peregrinamque mortem. And
afterward he explains this Law: Ut posteaquam corpus crematam esset, ossa a
cineribus legantur, statimque loco proximo in terram condantur, ne, si alium in
locum sepeliendi causa deportarentur, luctus duplicaretur and sumtus; left they
would renew the Mourning and Charges. Those who died in the Wars or foreign
Countries, whose Bones were brought to Rome, to be laid in the Sepulcher of
their Ancestors, were exempted from this Law. It Is true that the Bones of those
Men, who died in the War or foreign Countries were burned; except one of their
Fingers, which was cut off and brought again to Rome, to receive the Funeral
honors performed to the dead, as we learn of Festus. Membrum abscindi mortuo
dicebatur quum digitus ei decidebatur; ad quod servatum justa ficrent, reliquo
corpore combusto.

HOMINEM mortuum endo urbe nei sepeleito, neve urito: That the Corpse should not
be neither buried nor burnt in the City.

This Law is related by Tully: HOMINEM mortuum, inquit lex duodecim, in urbe ne
sepelito, ^eve urito. Nevertheless, Great-Men, Emperors and Vestal Virgins have
been excepted from this Law; for Valerius Publicola and Posthumous Tubertus
were buried below the Capitol, as also the Claudias Family; but the other
Citizens were buried in their own Lands, or in the Highways of Rome.

PATRI endo fidiom qui ex se matreque familias natus est, vitai necisque
potestas estod; terque im venundarier jous estod: sell pater fidiom ter
venomduit, fideos d patre leber estod: That the Father should have power of
life and death over his Son, begotten of him and his Wfe in a lawful Marriage:
that he might sell him three times like a Slave; but having been sold three
times, he became free again, and was no more under his Father's Authority.

Endo instead of in, fidiom instead of filium, vitai instead of vitae, estod
instead of esto, im instead of eum, venundarier instead of venundari, jous
instead of jus, sei instead of si, venomdui: instead of venundederit, fidios
instead of filius, leber instead of liber.

The Father's Authority was great among the Romans; and the Emperor Justinian
tells us, that this Right was particular to the Romans: Jus potestatis quod
habemus in liberos proprium est civium Romanorum. Nulli enim sunt homines, qui
talem in liberos habeant potestatem, qualem nos habemus.

Dionysius Halicarnassaeus says, that this sovereign Authority was granted to
the Fathers by Romulus: Hanc autem potestatem nei recentem fuisse, sed jam inde
ab Romulo permissam.

In the time of the Emperors, it was not lawful for Fathers to kill their
Children, nor to make them Slaves; nor to disinherit them, but in some cases of
great consequence, which they were obliged to declare before the Praetor.

PATREI libereis suis quosque habet in potestate cujuscumque sexus, tutoris
testamento dandi jous estod: That a Father might appoint Tutors to his Children
by his Last Will.

SI QUIS tutor pupillum fraudarit remque ejus intervorterit, infamia notator
peuaque moltator duplionis: If a Guardian defrauds his Pupil and waste his
Estate, let him be branded with infamy, and fined the double of the Trespass.

For a Guardian is not only bound to give an account of what he has received
out of the Estate of his Pupil, but also of all that he might or could honestly
have received, and that with as much and more diligence, than if it was his own
affairs; and if he was convicted of having fraudulently dealt in that matter,
he was not only bound to a single restitution of what he had taken or converted
to his own use, but also to pay the double of the Trespass by Action, called by
the Lawyers, de rationibus distrahendis, and was branded with infamy.

SEI Fousiosos esit, adnatorum, genteiliumque endo eo pequniaque ejus potestas
estod.

Si furiosus est, agnatorum gentiliu^^que in eo pecuniaque ejus potestas esto.

It Is enacted by this Law of the twelve Tables, that if a Pupil who is come to
age, becomes a fool, or mad, and incapable of managing his own Estate, he must
be left to the Guardianship of his nearest Relations, who are to take care of
his Estate and Person.

PATER familias, utei soper familia pecuniaque soua lagasit, ita jous estod.
That the Master of the Family should have power to dispose of his Estate by his
last Will.

Utei instead of uti, soper instead of super, soua instead of sua, legasit
instead of legaverit, jous instead of jus, estod instead of esto.

By the Law of the twelve Tables, which is the most ancient Law of the Romans,
it was allowed to a Testator to dispose of his Estate which way he thought fit;
but most often, when Testators had thus disposed of their wealth in private
Legacies, the Executors of the Will seeing that there remained nothing for
them, quitted it, and by this means the whole Will was made void, and the
Legatees got nothing. Wherefore to prevent this praemunire, the Law called
Falcidia was made, by which it was enacted, that Testators should have power to
dispose by their Last Will, but of three fourth parts of their Wealth, and
should be bound to leave the other fourth part to the Heir appointed by their
Will. And therefore this Law is called Quarta Falcidia, or only Falcidia, which
was made a little time before the Empire of Augustus, during the Trium-virat.

FILII filiaeque familias bonorum paternorum sui suaeque heredes sunto.

The Law of the twelve Tables instituted but two kinds of Heirs or Inheritors
abiutestat, i. e. without making a Will, viz. suorum and agnatorum, of Children
and Kindred.

The Male line was so much regarded in the ancient Roman Law, and the Female so
neglected, that Children did not inherit the Goods of their Mother, and the
Mother was no Heir to her Childrens Estate: But afterward a decree of the
Senate was made, setting a mutual Succession, viz. Orficianum jus, impowering
Children to inherit after their Mother, and Tertyllianum jus, settling the
right of Mothers to the Inheritance of their Children.

SEI QUA molier post virei mortem in december proximeis mensebos pariat, quei,
quave ex ea nascatur, souus, suave, in virei familia here is estod. If a Woman is
delivered of a Child ten Months after the death of her Husband, let the Child
born, either Boy or Girl, be Heir to his Father.

Ulpian's opinion is, that a Child born eleven Months after the death of his
Father, is not able to inherit, post december menses mortis natus non admittitur
ad legitimain hereditatem: However, the Emperor Adrian has declared, that an
honest woman lying in the eleventh month after the death of her Husband, the
Child then born, might lawfully inherit his Fathers Estate, grounded therein
upon the authority of Physicians and Philosophers. Wherefore Varro says, in a
Satyr entitled Testamentum.

Si quis undecimo mense (...) natus, esto here is.

Whereupon Cujacius tells us, that this must be understood of the eleventh
month began, and not over.

PATREBOS cum plebed counubia nec sunto: That Marriages should be forbidden,
between the Patricians and Plebeians, i. e. between the Nobles and the People.

By making this Law, which was afterward repealed, the Deoerviri attempted to
breed divisions between the Nobility and the Populace, and by that means render
their Magistracy perpetual.

SEI VIR aut molier alter alterei nontiom miseit, devortium ested; molier res
souas sibei habetod, vir molierei claves adimitod exicitoque.

Sei for si, molier for mulier, alterei for alteri nontiem miseit for nuntium
misit, devortiem for divortium, estod for esto, sonas for suas, sibei for sibi,
habetod for habeto, molierei for mulieri, adimitod for adimito, exicitoque for
exigitoque.

Divorces were not known to the ancient Romans before the Law of the twelve
Tables, neither do we find it to have been put in practice, till one and twenty
years after the Law made by Spurius Carvilius Ruga, who put away his Wife
because of her barrenness in the Year of Rome DXXIII, when M. Pomponius Matho
and C. Papyrius Maso were Consuls, for which Valerius blames him, in that he
preferred the desire of having Children, before his Conjugal Affection. This
was afterward observed in the Roman Empire, not only during the time of
Paganism and the ancient Economy, but also under the first Christian Emperors,
and continued to, and even after the Reign of Justinian; and this was so
certain, and looked upon to be so reasonable, that the parties concerned were
not allowed to divest themselves of that liberty by a penal agreement, but must
be content to undergo the penalties which the Law prescribed, in respect to the
person that was the cause of an unjust Divorce. The Divorce was made by a
mutual consent of the parties, which they called Bona Gratia, and in this case
the same depended wholly upon the Parties agreeting, to discharge each other of
their Nuptial Rights, and to advance themselves as they thought good, or else
by the sole motion and obstinacy of the one, against the inclination of the
other; and if there were no lawful cause for it, he who sued was liable to the
penalty of injusti dissidii; but if there were just cause for it, then the
Husband restored her Fortune to his Wife, took the Keys of his House from her,
and sent her away, as Cicero tells us, frugi factus est, mimam illam suam suas
res sibi habere jussit ex duodecim Tabulis, claves ademit, exegit.

SEI QUIS injuriam alt^rei fault xxv aris panae sunto: If any man wrongs
another, he shall pay him XXV As's in brass Money. The word Injuria, injury, in
the Roman Law, comprehended every thing a Man did in prejudice to his
Neighbor: An injury was done three ways, by action, when one Man had received
more blows and wounds in his body than the other; by words, when one spoke
words of another that touch his Reputation and Honor, and by writing
defamatory Libels and Verses. The first sort of injury was variously punished
by the Roman Law, for if it proceeded so far as to break a Member, the Laws of
the twelve Tables allowed the maimed person to take satisfaction himself, by
laying the same punishment upon the other, that is, to maim him or break the
same bone; and this they called Talio, for the punishment was and ought to be
equal to the wrong; and when there was nothing broke, but only a blow of buffet
given with the Fist, he was only to pay five and twenty Ai's. As to Wrongs
done, and Satyrs made upon the Great Men of Rome, they were punished by a
pecuniary mulct or banishment, and sometimes by death it self, as St Augustine
relates from Cicero, l. 4. De Repub. Our Laws of the twelve Tables, are very
contrary to that, for though they are very tender in the point of punishing
Offenders with death, yet they enjoin it in respect to those, who blast the
Reputation of another by Verses, or injurious Representations, for which there
is great reason; for our lives ought to be liable to the lawful censures of the
Magistrates, and not to the unbridled liberty of Poets, and we ought not to be
allowed to speak ill of any one, but upon condition that we are able to answer
it, and vindicate our selves by Law.

QUEI cum telo hominis occidendi con^a deprehensos fouerit, kapital estod: He
who is found ready to kill another with an Arrow, ought to be punished with
death. Wilful murder was always punished most severely by the Ancients; and
this punishment, according to the vigor of the Law, was not only inflicted
when death ensued, but also when a person was bent upon the execution of an ill
design, which he could not accomplish; and so that person was punished, who
armed waited for, or set upon any one with a design to kill him, though he in
reality should escape. So also, he that gave another poison, who bought, sold
and prepared it, though it wrought not the effect, was punished in the same
manner as a murderer.

QUEI nox fortum faxsit, sei im aliquips occisit, joure caeses ested: Sei
loucoi fortom faxsit, t^l^ve se tefenderit, sei im aliquips cum clamore
occisit, joure caefos estod: Sei loucei fortom faxsit utque telo se defenderit,
sei leber siet, Praetor im vorberarier joubetod, eique quoi fortom factum esit
addeicito: Sei servos siet, virgis caesos ex saxo deicitor; sei impobes siet,
Praetoris arbitratu verberatos noxsiam sarceito: It was lawful to kill him that
stole any thing by night; and if it was day, and that the Thief stood armed
upon his defense, it was also lawful to kill him; but if he did not so defend
himself, and got away, the Praetor sentenced him only to be whipped; but if he
was a Slave, they were, after he had been first whipped, to throw him down
headlong over the Tarp^ian Rocks: If the Thief was not yet at age, he was to
be whipped and be sentenced to such Damages as the Praetor pleased.

QUEI falsum testimonium dixserit ex saxo dicitor: That he who bore false
Witness against any one should be thrown down headlong over the Tarpeian Rock.
This Law agrees with the Eighth Commandment, which God gave his people, Falsum
Testimonium non dices. Plato and other Greek Philosophers had undoubtedly read
the Books of Moses, wherein the Decalogue is set down, and took the greatest
part of their Laws from thence, which the Decemviri compiled. I shall not in
this place set down several Fragments of the Laws of the twelve Tables,
concerning the way of judging and ordering an Accusation, which will be found
under the word Accusatio, jus and judicium: No more than those which refer to
the Assemblies of the people of Rome by Tribes, Centuries and Curiae, which
will be found under the word Comitia. But now we come to speak of the
particular Laws of the Romans and their Emperors.

LEX SULPITIA,
The Sulpitian law, made by the Consuls P. Sulpitius Samurius, and P.
Sempronius Sophius, in the year of Republic ccccl.

NESCILICET quis templum vel aram lajussu Senatus aut Tribunorum plebis majoris
partis dedicaret: It was not lawful to dedicate a Temple or an Altar without
the consent of the Senate or Tribunes of the people.

LEX PAPIRIA.
The Papirian Law, Ne quis injussu plebis aedes, terram, aram, aliam^^ rem
ullam consecraret: It was not allowed any to consecrate Temples, any piece of
Ground, and Altars, without the consent of the people.

LEX HORTENSIA.
The Hortensian Law required, that the Fairs which were at first kept on
Holy Days, should for the future be held on Working-days; where in the Praetor
administered Justice by pronouncing these three words, do, dico, addico. This
Law was made by Q. Hortensius Dictator in the year of Rome cccclxviii.

LEX PUBLICIA.
The Publician Law made by Publicius Tribun of the people. Ne quibus nisi
ditioribus cerei Saturnalibus mittorentur: That Wax Tapers were not to be sent
to any, but those that were rich, at the time of the Saturnalia. It was a
custom to make several Presents at this Feast, and particularly of Wax Tapers,
to intimate that Saturn had brought Men from Darkness to Light; that is, from
an obscure and savage, to a polite and learned Life.

LEX CORNELIA.
The Cornelian Law, made by the Consul P. Cornelius Dolabella, after the death
of Julius Caesar, in the year of Rome dccx. Ut Eidus Julii quibus Caesar
interfectus in Senatu est, Urbis natales haberentur: That they should celebrate
the day of Rome, s Original, on the Ides of July when Caesar was slain.

LEX LICINIA.
The Licinian Law, concerning those Plays called Ludi Apollinares, instituted
in honor of Apollo, determined the day on which they should be represented,
there being no fixed day before appointed for that purpose. P. Licinius Praetor
urbanus legem far ad populum jussus ut hi ludi perpetuum in statam diem
voverentur.

LEX ROSCIA,
The Roscian and Julian Law, of which L. Roscius Otho Tribune of the people was
Author; according to Florus, in the year of Rome dclxxxvi. Ut in Theatro
Equitibus Romany qui H. S. quadringenta possident, quatuordecim spectandi
gradus adsignarentur, exceptis iis qui ludicram artom exercuerant quique sive
suo sive fortunae vitio rem decoxissent: That the Roman Knights who were worth
400000 Sesterces, i. e. about 3333 l. Sterling, should have fourteen Steps of
the Theater allowed them to see the Plays, except those who were turned
Buffoons, and wasted all their Fortune by their Debaucheries. This is what
Tacitus says, Ami. l. 15. c. 5. the Emperor separated the Roman Knights from
the people in the Circus, and gave them Seats that were neares to the Senators.
For before this they assisted at this Show confusedly; for the Roscian Law
regulated no more than what regarded the Seats in the Theater.

LEX CINCIA.
The Cincian Law, made for restraining the Avarice of the Orators, who exacted
large Sums of Money for their pleadings. The Calpurnian Law against the Bribery
of Magistrates, and that which bore the name of Julius Caesar, was made against
the Avarice and Intriges of those who made private Suit for Offices in the
Commonwealth.

LEX PAPIA.
The Papian Poppean Law, made by Augustus in his old Age, to encourage Men to
Marry, by imposing a Penalty upon Batchelours, and thereby to increase the
Rvenues of the Commonwealth.

LEX AGRARIA.
The Agrarian Law, made concerning the distribution of Lands, taken from the
Enemies. This Law proved to be the Seed of great Divisions in the Roman Empire
in the time of the Republic. See Agraria.

LEX JULIA.
A Law made by Augustus against Adultery. It was the first that appointed a
punishment and public Process to be made against those who seduced Wives, and
Debauched Maidens and Widows of Quality: Not that Adultery was not punished
before Augustus his time; but there was no process made against it, and there
was no stated Punishment assigned for it: But the Julian Law, which Augustus
himself had the misfortune to see put in execution in his own Family, in the
person of his own Children, required nothing but banishment for this sin of
Adultery; but the Penalty was afterward increased by the constitutions of the
succeeding Emperors, who punished Adultery with death.

LEX SUMPTUARIA,
A Sumptuary Law, made by Cornelius Sulla the Dictator, in the Year of Rome
DCLXXIII. whereby the expenses of Feasts and Funerals were regulated, and those
condemned to pay a certain pecuniary mulct, who transgressed the injunction of
that Law.

LEX PAPIA,
The Papian Law concerning the Vestal Virgins, who looked after the Sacred Fire
in the Temple of the Goddess Vesta, she who let it go out, was whipped by the
Sovereign Pontiff; and if she suffered her self to be Debauched, she was buried
alive in Campus Sceleratus, without the Gate called Portacollina. See Vestalis.

LEX PEPETUNDARUM, or DE REPETUNDIS,
The Law of Bribery or public Extortion.

LEX AELIA,
The Elian Law made concerning the Augurs, by Q. Aelius Paetus the Consul, in
the year of Rome dlxxxvii.

LEX FUSIA,
The Fusian Law, made concerning the time of holding the Assemblies, which
ought not to be held but upon those days called Dii Comitiales.

LEX VALERIA, SEMPRONIA,
The Valerian and Sempronian Law, made concerning those who had a right to Vote
in the Roman Assemblies. C. Valerius Tappo, Tribute of the people was the
Author of it, in the year of Rome icxvi.

LEX VILLIA,
The Villian Law, of which L. Villius Tribune of the people was Author; and
whereby the Age of Persons that were to enter upon Offices in the Republic was
regulated. 'Twas also called LEX ANNALIS.

LEX CORNELIA.
The Cornelian Law, which prescribed the Qualifications, Persons ought to have
that enter upon Offices in the Commonwealth.

LEX HIRCIA,
The Hircian Law, which allowed of none to hold Offices in the Republic, but
such as had sided with Caesar against Pompey.

LEX VISELLIA,
The Visellian Law, which allowed the Sons of Freedmen the right of becoming
Magistrates.

LEX POMPEIA and CLAUDIA,
The Pompeian and Claudian Law, which required that those who put in for
Offices in the Commonwealth should be always present.

LEX RHODIA,
The Law of Rhodes relating to traffic by Sea; this Law required that if it
happened a Ship laden with Merchandise, that belonged to several Merchants, in
order to avoid Shipwreck, threw the Goods of some of them overboard, and that
those of the other were saved, an estimate should be made of all the
Merchandise, and that the loss and damage should be sustained by every one of
them in proportion to the Effects he had on board, this was made by the
Rhodians, and was found to be so just, that it was received by all the Nations
that came after them.

LIBATIO,
A Libation, being a Ceremony practiced in the Sacrifices of the Pagans,
wherein the Priest poured down some Wine, Milk and other Liquors, in honor of
the Deity, to whom he Sacrificed, after he had first tasted a little of it.

LIBATIONES,
Libations of Wine and other Liquors, frequently made by the Heathens to their
Gods when they went upon any enterprises. The Deputies which were sent to
Achilles to invite him to come to the relief of his Countrymen, began to wash
their hands before their departure, to fill their Crowned Cups with Wine, and
to pour it down upon the ground; in honor of the Gods these Libations were
commonly performed, before they went to sleep. Ulysses after he had got some
little advantage over his Enemies, washed himself in the Sea Water, and went to
make his Libations to Minerva.

LIBER.
This is one of the Epithets of Bacchus; either because he procured unto the
Baeotians their Liberty; or that being esteemed the God of Wine, he does by
Drinking, give Ease unto disturbed Minds. The Consulary Medals of the Family of
Cassia, represent unto us the Pictures of Liber and Libera, as they are called
in Ancient Inscriptions; that is, of Male and Female Bacchus.

St. Augustine, Lib. 7. de Civ. Dei, Cap. 21. speaks thus of Liber: As for the
Mysteries of Liber, whom they have made to preside over the Seminal Powers of
Liquids, I mean, not only over the Juices of Fruits, amongst which Wine has the
Pre-eminence, but also over Seeds of Animals; I am loath to take notice of that
Excess of Infamy they arrived to therein; but yet I must say (in order to
confound the arrogant Stupidity of our Adversaries) among other Things, which I
am obliged to omit upon this Occasion, because they are too tedious; that
according to the Testimony of Varro, the Feasts of Liber were celebrated with
so much Licentiousness in some Places in Italy, that in Honor of him, they
gave Adoration to the Privy Parts of Man, and that not in Secret to cover their
Shame, but publicly to make Wickedness appear triumphant: For they placed him
after an honorable Manner in a Chariot, which was brought into the City after
they had first drawn it through the Fields: But at Lavinium they spent a whole
Month in celebrating the Feasts of Liber only, during which time, there was all
the Impurity of Speech imaginable encouraged, until the said Chariot had
traversed the Marketplace, and was brought whither the People designed to
deposite what they carried; after which, the most virtuous Ladies in the City
must go and crown this infamous Thing, before the Multitude. In this Manner it
was that they made God Liber favorable to Seeds, and expelled Charms and
Witchcraft out of the Earth.

LIBERALIA;
the Feasts of Bacchus. See Bacchanaelia.

LIBER;
a Book. The Way used by the Ancients in Binding of their Books, was not like
unto ours: Books of a Square Form were hardly ever in use, either amongst the
Greeks or Romans, till a long time after Catulus. Indeed, King Attalus seeing
the Art was found out to make Parchment so well, as to be fit to be writ upon,
on both sides, made some of his Books Square-wise; yet the ancient Way, which
was to roll their Books in such a Manner, as to give them the Form of a small
Column, prevailed so long, that even all their Libraries, in the Time of
Cicero, and long after, were composed of these Rolls: The Dearness of
Parchment, and Cheapness of the Paper, whereof they made their rolled Books,
was the Reason there was hardly any other to be seen. As to the Matter of
Binding, there was no other Fashion in use, but to paste or glue several Leaves
of Paper at full length to the Ends of one another, in proportion to the
Bigness of each Book: When one side was filled up, the Work was at end, for
they did not write on both sides; they rolled all together, beginning with the
last, which they called Vmbilicus, whereunto they fixed a Piece of Wood, Ebony,
or some such Thing, to keep the Roll tight, and to the other End they glewed a
Piece of, Parchment, which covered the whole Volume, and was of use not only to
save the Paper, but also to be an Ornament to the Book, because it was painted
of a Purple or Crimson Color. The Title of the Book was written in Gold
Characters on the outside of the Parchment, but the Epistle Dedicatory they
wrote on the inside. When the Roll was made, they cut it at both Ends, and upon
every Leaf, which was well polished with a Pumice-stone, they laid pieces of
Gold, Silver, or Ivory, which they fastened to the Stick placed in the Vmbilicus.

LIBERALITAS:
Liberality; a Goddess worshipped by the Romans, and a Virtue often put in
practice by good Emperors; above all by Augustus Caesar, according to Suetonius
and Tacitus; Congiarium populo, Donativum militibus dedit: He gave a Largess to
the People, which consisted of small Sesterces, and a Donative to the Soldiers,
which was a like Sum of Denarii. Marcus Aurelius caused Medals to be coined,
whereon the Picture of Liberality was engraven, like a Roman Lady clad in a
long Robe, holding a Tessera in her Right Hand, and round it Liberalitas
Augusti: By the Medals of Adrian and Alexander Severus, the Emperor is to be
seen mounted upon a little Ascent, and in a sitting Posture, making Signs to a
Man that is at his Feet, to give him the Money that was set upon the Brink of
the Ascent, with Liberality on the Sides thereof, and a Tessera in her Hand.

LIBERTAS.
Liberty; a Goddess worshipped by the Romans and Greeks, by the Name of
Eleutheria; the Romans had diverse Places and several Temples consecrated to the
public Liberty: Ovid makes mention of these Places, and of a Day that was
dedicated to Jupiter the Victorious, and to Liberty:

Occupat Apriles Idus cognomine Victor
Jupiter, hac illi Sunt data Templa die.
Hac quoque ni fallor, populo dignissima nostro
Atria Libertas caepit habere sua.
The Places were surrounded with Portico's, and it did appear that the People
met there: It was a kind of Temple, open at top like unto that at Jerusalem,
where stood the Altar for Burnt-Offerings; but besides these Places, the Roman
Historians make mention of several Temples at Rome dedicated to the Goddess
Liberty; among others, that built by Claudius, in the Place where Cicero's
House stood, after it had been ruined; and that erected in Honor of Julius
Caesar, after his Death. Dion Cassius mentions both, in Lib. 43. It was to the
public Liberty that the Romans dedicated these Temples. Her Picture
represented her clad like a Roman Lady, holding a Javelin in one Hand, and a
Cap or Bonnet in the other: By the Medals that were coined in Honor of Brutus,
and by those of C. Caesar, surnamed Caligula, you may observe that the Bonnet
or Cap was an Ensign of Liberty; thus when the Romans were about to grant their
Slaves their Freedom, they gave them a Bonnet or Cap: From whence comes the
Latin Phrase, Dare Pileum, to give one his Liberty, and Vocare ad Pileum, to
call a Slave to his Freedom.

LIBETHRA;
a certain Fountain consecrated to the Muses, and for this Reason they have
been called Libethrides. Strabo in his 10th Book, will have them to have been
thus named, from a Mountain in Thrace called Libethrus, at the Foot whereof
there stood a Temple dedicated to the Muses by the Thracians.

LIBITINA;
this was a Goddess, believed by the Ancients to preside over Funerals: Some
consound her with Proserpina; others with Venus; the Moon as well as the Sun
preside over Nativities and Funerals, as the general Cause of the Generation
and Corruption of all Things; and she has received all these Names and Offices
for her self alone, as Plutarch has it in the Life of Numa. In her Temple they
kept all Things that were requisite for Funeral Solemnities; whence it is, that
Phoedra reproaches a Miser, for cutting off by his Will, all the Charges which
should have been expended at his Funeral, for fear lest the Goddess Libitina
should get any Thing by his Death. Qui resecas omnem impensam Funeris
Ne quid de tuo Libitina lucretur.
Those Persons whose Business it was to furnish them with what was necessary
for that Purpose, were called Libitinarii, according to Vlpian; and at this Day
they are known with us by the Name of Undertakers.

LIBRA,
the Balance, is one of the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac; when the Sun comes to
the Eighth Degree of Libra, it marks the Autumnal Equinox, because it forms
Arches equal to those it did before in Taurus; it enters therein in the Month
of September, on our 7th or 12th.

LIBRA,
a Pound. It Is a Measure of Weight in respect to all heavy Things that are
weighed; the Romans allowed but Twelve Ounces to a Pound Weight, and to a Pound
of Length-Measure: The Weights of a Pound were borrowed by the Romans from the
Sicilians, who named it Litra; and the Romans changed the t into b.

The Romans had also a sort of Money which they called Libra or Libella, and
was the Tenth part of a Denarius, because 'twas the Value of an As, which at
first was a Pound Weight of Copper: Scaliger also adds, that they made use of
the Word Libra for Money told out; Libra non erat nummus, sed Collectio
Nummorum.

LICHAS;
Hercules his Servant, by whom Deianira his Wife sent him the Shirt that was
infected with the Blood of the Centaur Nessus; which Poison made Hercules so
outrageous, that he threw Lichas into the Seas, and he was transformed by
Neptune into a Rock.

LICTORES;
Lictors, or Ax-Bearers; they were so called, because they carried the Axes,
which were fastened to a long Handle, and encompassed with a Bundle of Rods,
called Fasces, or Secures: Romulus was the first that made use of them, with a
Design to inspire the People with a greater Reverence for their Magistrates:
The Dictators had Twenty Four Lictors, who walked before them, the Consuls,
Twelve; the Pro-Consuls and Governors of Provinces, Six; the Praetors and City
Magistrates, Two only. They also punished such Offenders as were surprised in
the Fact at the first Command they received from the Magistrates. J. Lictor,
Colliga manus, expedi virgas, plecte securi. They were ready to undo their
Bundle of Rods, whether it were to whip, or to cut off the Head of the
condemned Offender: They were thus called a Ligando, because they bound the
Hands and Feet of the condemned Person before his Execution.

LIMENARCHAE,
or Stationarii; They were Soldiers posted by the Romans in diverse Places, to
prevent Disorders, and especially High-way-men, and Robbers upon the Highways,
as the Grand Provosts are in France at this Day: They were appointed by
Augustus after the End of the Civil War, to hinder the Soldiers that had been
disbanded from ravaging Italy: Tiberius increased their Number, as Suetonius in
the Life of the said Emperor informs us: The Chief of these Soldiers was called
Irenarcha; that is, The Prince of the Peace, because he was instrumental to
secure the Peace and Tranquillity of the Public.

LINGUA,
Tongue, Speech; they are certain Expressions which People have conceived to
make one another to be understood: The Original of Languages came from the
Confusion, wherewith God punished the Pride of those who built the Tower of
Babel; the Hebrew Tongue is the ancientest Language, and is called the Holy
Language, and the Rabbis say, it is so; because it is so pure and chaste, that
there is no Word therein for the Privy Parts, nor for that whereby we ease
Nature; there is a Difference between the Hebrew without Points, and that
wherein the Vowels are noted by Points. Father Morin pretends, in Opposition to
the Modern Rabbis, that Moses wrote without Points, and without the Distinction
of Words: Vossius maintains, that besides the Books of Scripture, in the Time
even of St. Jerome, there was no other Book in Hebrew, but only in the Greek
Tongue, and that it was not before Justinian's Reign, that they began to
appear. The Reason which he gives for it, is, that the said Emperor having by
an Edict forbidden the Jews to Read the (...), or their Traditions in their
Synagogues, they bethought themselves of Translating it into their own
Language; and this Book, says he, was called Misna. The Points in the Hebrew
Tongue were not invented, to signify the Vowels by, till toward the Tenth
Century, by the Massaretes.

The Punic Tongue, according to the Authority of William Postell, was no other
than the Phaenician, which he compares with the Hebrew, from whence it
proceeded together with the Caldaean and Syriack.

The Arabic Tongue is the most Copious of all the Languages; and the Arabs
say, they are as Ancient as the Hebrews, as pretending their Descent to have
been from Ismael: Their Ingenuity and Language have been much commended: Their
ancient Writings have almost all the Letters joined together; but one Elcabil
was necessitated to invent and introduce the Points into their Language, for
the easier reading of Arabic: Some of them they place above, and others below
the Words. Kinslenius in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Emperor Rodolphus,
speaking of this Costom, seems to be of Opinion, that the Arabs did not admit
of these Points into their Writings, till such time as they had Commerce with
the People of Europe: The Ancient Arabic Character was called Cuphick: The
most Ancient is the thickest and largest, the other being less both ways. That
which the Tartars make use of at this Day, appears closer, smaller, and more
bended than the others.

The Egyptian Language had the Forms of Animals in it, being mysterious
Symbols, that served to conceal and involve in Obscurity all the Secrets of
their Theology: They called them Hieroglyphics: And many Obelisks or Tombs are
still to be found inscribed with such Characters, and Hieroglyphical Figures;
the Words of this Language express the Nature and Propriety of all Things.

The Coptick, which was the Language of Egypt before the Greek, is a singular
Tongue, and independent of all others, according to the Opinion of Kircher.
Salmasius says, That the Word Coptick, comes from a Town called Coptos, whose
Inhabitants had retained part of the Ancient Language: The same Person in
another place is of Opinion, That this Name was taken from the Word (...); the
which is confirmed also by Father Vansleb, although he attributes the Origin
thereof to Coptos the Grandson of Noak; there are still, says he, some of the
Descendants of these first Egyptians in being, who speak this Language: In the
mean time, it may be said, that the same has been lost many Ages ago. A
Grammar and Vocabulary were found in the famous Monastery of St. Anthony,
written in this Language, whose Characters are somewhat like the Ancient Greek:
The Modern Copticks have no other Language than the vulgar Egyptian Dialect,
that is intermixed with Turkish and Arabic: Father Kircher will have the
Ancient Coptick to have been altered by the Greek Tongue, from which it has
borrowed diverse Words and Characters.

The Etrurian Tongue has some Characters that are like enough to the Latin, and
the Writing thereof is from the Right to the Left. Eugubinus has given us an
Inscription in this Language, which has been found to have been of Fifty Years
standing before Sylla's Time; the Romans were very Curious to know this
Language, and they used all their Endeavor to learn it.

The Characters of the Greek Tongue have not changed so much as those of other
Languages; the First and the most Ancient of them are more square, and come
near those of their Original, which is the Phaencian or Hebrew; seeing that,
according to the Authority of Herodotus, the first Characters that were
introduced into Ionia, were very near the same. Pliny speaking of the Greek
Characters, after he had said that they were like the Roman Letters used in his
Time, cites no other Example for it, but an old Inscription upon a Brass Plate,
which Vespatian and Titus had given to the Public Library: The Ancient Greek
Characters, says he, are almost like unto the Latin ones of our Days, witness
that old brazen Plate, taken out of the Temple at Delphos, which may be now
seen in the Library of the Palace, dedicated by the Emperors to Minerva. (...).

This certainly was the Form of the Ancient Greek Characters, whereof Pliny and
others speak; for it is certain, that the Ancient Grecians knew no other Letters
but Capitals; and John Lascary, a Greek by Birth, confirms it in a Preface of
his to a Collection of Greek Epigrams, printed at Florence in Capital Letters,
in the Year, 1484. The Pointing and Distinguishing of Words, were not in use in
those Old Times; which continued in a manner to the 174 Olympiad, according to
the Testimony of Lipsius and Leo Allatius: Its observed from the most Ancient
Monuments, that the Greeks did not divide their Discourses at any time, but for
the Perfecting and Completing of the Sense of them: They did not put many
Words into the same Line, but began another with a new Sentence; as may be seen
by the Inscriptions of the Earl of Arundel; insomuch, that they did not write
along at all as we do, but by way of Articles: Suidas speaks of a Way of
Writing, which they call (...), Boustrophidon, being as much as to say, done in
Lines like unto those made by Oxen when they plough. Pausanias confirms the
same Thing in a Description he gives of the Coffer of Cypselus, that was in
Juno's Temple, in the City of Elis: There was upon this Chest, says he, some
Inscriptions engraved in old Characters and straight Lines: There were also
some others done after the Way which the Greeks call Boustrophidon, because the
Second Verse immediately follows the First, and joins it in the same Manner as
the Races in the Stadia or Circus are redoubled. Some Authors are of Opinion,
that the Sentences so distinguished and separated by Lines, have been continued
even long after the Use of Accents and Points had been introduced, as may be
seen in Diogenes Laertius: Aristophanes, a Grammarian of Bizantium, was the
first that brought them up, toward the 150 Olympiad, in the Reigns of
Philopater and Euergetes, Kings of Egypt, Two Hundred Years before Christ's
Nativity.

The Latin Tongue, like the rest, has had its Increase and Revolutions: The
same Thing has befell its Characters, as may be observed from the most ancient
Inscriptions, and those which have succeeded them, even before the Destruction
of the Empire: As the Characters of that Inscription of Duilius, published by
Father Sirmond, do come nearer their Origin, so they have a little more of the
Etrurian and Greek in them: They discover the Shaking-hand of a People who did
yet but begin: Those Seven Latin Volumes that were found in Numa's Tomb, were
not writ in this Character; seeing Quintilian assures us, there were but very
few Letters in those early Times, whose Shape and Power were of a different
kind; and the Emperor Claudius procured no small Benefit to himself, in
introducing the Eolick Letter (...) Tacitus in the 10th Book of his Annals,
speaking of the Form of the Roman Letters, says, they were like unto the most
ancient Greek Characters, which were Capitals.

LINUS,
the Son of Apollo, and Terpsichore, or of Mercury, and the Nymph Urania, was a
famous Musician, and Master to Orpheus: Hercules killed him with his own Harp
for ridiculing him: Of this Name was a Theban Poet, that first brought Letters
from Phaenicia into Greece. Hermodorus the Platonic, C. 2. Of his Discourses,
says, He wrote a Tract in Verse about the Creation of the World, the Course of
the Sun and Moon, and the Generation of Animals: He was killed with an Arrow
shot at him by Apollo.

LITARE,
and Litatio; Terms used at the Ancient Sacrifices, to intimate, That the
Sacrifice was over, and the Gods made propitious. Litare, says Macrobius, L. 3.
Saturnaliorum, C. 5. Est Sacrificio facto placare Numen. It Is to appease God by
Sacrifice. Suetonius also speaking concerning Julius Caesar, that he could not
offer one favorable Sacrifice, on the Day wherein he was slain in the Senate,
makes use of this Latin Expression; Dein pluribus Hostiis Caesis cum litare non
posset, introiit in Cariam, spreta Religione; after he had offered many
Sacrifices, and could not find the God's favorable, he gave over and went into
the Senate, in Contempt of Religion: The said Author does again make use of the
same Expressions in the Life of Augustus; Sacrificio non Litante; that is, not
being able to appease the Gods, nor to make them propitious by his Sacrifices.

LITERA;
a Letter; Figure, Character, or Stroke of the Pen, which Men have agreed upon
to signify something, and the Joining whereof makes their Thoughts known to
one another: From these Letters, are, as I may say, miraculously sprung a
Million of different Words: They may be called the Elements of Speech, the
Sacred Atoms, out of which is formed the vast World of Sciences; and the
faithful Gardians of what is most precious amongst Men. Without them the
Original of the World would have been but confusedly known, and the most
celebrated Actions would be buried in profound Oblivion.

The Alphabet of every Language is composed of a certain Number of these
Letters or Characters, which have a different Sound, Form and Signification:
The English and Greek have each 24 Letters; the Latin commonly 23, and the
Hebrew 22 without Points. The Art of Writing has not been perfected all at
once, several Ages were required to supply what was defective in those Shapes
of Animals, the Ancients used, as may appear by Tacitus. The Egyptians,
according to his Account, believed themselves to be the Inventers of it; but
it is more likely that the Hebrews, or as almost all the Ancients call them, the
Chaldeans or Phaenicians, were their Masters, as we learn from that Verse in
Lucan:

Phaenices primi, famae si creditur, Ausi
Mansuram rudibus vocem signare Figuris.
Whence it was that those Letters were called Phaenician ones by the Greeks.
Yet Diodorus Siculus reports, that that was certain, and that it was only
believed, that they did not invent, but change the Form of Letters; which is
not unlikely, since Quintus Curtius says of them, if the Relation is to be
believed, that they were the first that invented Letters, and showed the Use of
them: St. Augustine also, with many others, is of Opinion, that the People of
God had learned them of the first Fathers, as of Moses: And that before the
Deluge it self, the first Characters, according to Josephus, had been engraven
upon Pillars, which Seth caused to be erected in Syria, for the Preservation of
the Sciences he had discovered: This agrees with what Pliny says concerning the
Assyrian Letters, that they are no other than the Hebrew or Chaldean; As for my
self, says that Author, I believe the Assyrian Letters were always in being.
Hyginus attributes to the Distinies the Invention of the following Greek
Letters, A, B, H, I, T, G. And it is for that Reason Martianus Capella calls
them the Secretaries of Heaven.

Josephus, in the Beginning of his Jewish Antiquities, rejecting the Opinion of
the Greeks and Egyptians, will have us to believe, that the Grecians came very
late to the Knowledge of Letters, that they received them from the Phaenicians,
and not from Cadmus, seeing at that time there were no Inscriptions found in
the Temples of their Gods, nor in the public Places; it being certain, the
Greeks had nothing of greater Antiquity, than the Works of Homer; though Cicero
in his Orator, entitled Brutus, tells us, they had Poets more ancient than
Homer, who contented themselves with rehearsing their Poems by heart, because
they had not yet found out the Use of Writing, or of Letters. Pliny, Lib. 7.
Chap. ^6. will have the most ancient Letters to have been the Assyrian, and
that Cadmus about the Year of the World 2520, above 250 Years before the Trojan
War, brought Sixteen of them from Phaenicia into Greece, viz. A, B, C, D, E, G,
I, L, M, N, O, P, R, S, T, V, to which Palamedes, during the Trojan War, had
added Four, TH, X, ph, T. Herodotus will have it, That the Phaenicians, who
came with Cadmus into Greece, brought Writing Characters thither; which
Diodorus Simulus also affirms; but at the same time he shows these Letters were
not the same which Cadmus brought with him, seeing they had had them there
before the Deluge of Deucalion, and that he did no more than revive the Use of
them. Eupolemius attributes the first Invention of Letters to Moses, who gave
them to the Jews long before Cadmus his Time, and the Jews to the Phaenicians,
who were their Neighbors: Philo the Jew ascribes them to Abraham a long Time
before Moses; and Josephus in the First Book of his Antiquities, carries the
Matter still farther, as high as Adam's Children, even to Seth, who engraved
the Characters thereof upon Two Pillars.

Moses his first Characters were not those Hebrew ones used now, which were
invented by Ezra after the Babilonish Captivity, but those which were called
Samaritan, according to St. Jerome, in his Preface to the Book of Kings: And
this is agreeable to the Sentiments of some Rabbis, who ground the same upon
the Samaritans, having always the Law of Moses written in the Five Books,
called the Pentateuch, in their own Characters, and that the same were
inscribed upon ancient Medals of Gold and Silver, which were found in
Jerusalem, and diverse other Parts of Palesline. But this Opinion is not without
its Difficulty; as may be seen by the Talmud, where Marsuka says, that the Law
was first given to the Children of Israel in Hebrew Characters, but that
afterward Ezra put it into the Aramean Tongue, and Assyrian Characters. There
are some Authors who maintain, that Moses made use of two sorts of Characters,
one, which is the Hebrew, for Sacred Things, and the other, which is the
Samaritan, for profane Matters, and of which last the Chaldeans made use, and
that the Greek and Latin Characters were formed of these; the last of which
being no other than the Greek Capitals, according to the Testimony of Pliny,
who proves it by an ancient Inscription engraven upon Brass, and brought from
Delphos to Rome. (...).

And he says in Chap. 56. These were Assyrian Letters, or according to some
Authors, Syriac: But they are rather Samaritan, which, besides the Aleph and
Jod, are so like the Greek and Latin ones, if they be considered and taken
upside down, that they are almost the same thing. Eusebius confirms the same
Matter by the Greeks own Denomination, or Imitation of Caldaism therein, by
their adding an A, as in Alpha instead of Aleph, Beta for Beth, Gamma for
Gimel, Delta for Deleth, etc.

Simonides, Evander and Demaratus were the first that brought Letters into
Italy, the one from Arcadia, and the other from Corinth, the last into Tuscany,
and the other to that Part of the Country where he settled: In a Word, the
ancient Greek Letters were very like ours, but we had but a very few of them at
first; the rest were since added. The Emperor Claudins, in Imitation of the
Ancients, invented Three Letters, that continued in Use during his Reign, and
were abolished after his Death: The Form of them are still to be seen in the
Temples, and other public Places of Rome, upon the Copper Plates, whereon the
Decrees of the Senate were engraven.

The Hebrews made a Division of their Letters into Guttural, viz. ab, cb, gn,
Dental z, s, r, Labial b, m, n, p, and those of the Tongue, viz. d, t, l, n.
Crinitus says, Moses invented the Hebrew Letters, Abraham the Syriac and
Chaldee; the Phaenicians those of Attica, (^ighteen whereof Cadmus brought into
Greece, and which the Pelasgi carried into Italy) and Nicostrates the Latin
Letters.

The Egyptians instead of Letters used the Figures of Animals, and of Birds,
which they called Hieroglyphics, and were invented by Isis.

The Gothic or Toledo Letters were invented by Guesila, Bishop of the Goths.

The Letters, F, G, H, K, Q, X, Y, Z, were formerly not known to the Romans, as
is proved by Claudius Dausquias in his Orthography, wherein he shows the Origin
of Letters.

The Grammarians distinguish Letters into Vowels and Consonants; into Mutes,
double Letters, Liquids, and Characteristicks. They reckon Six Vowels, A, E, I,
O, V, and Y, they are thus called, because they have a distinct Sound of
themselves, and can alone form a Syllable, There are Eighteen Consonants, who
require the Help of a Vowel in order to the Forming of an Articulate Sound, and
Composing a Syllable. Of the Eighteen Consonants the X and the Z, according to
the Ancients Way of Pronouncing them, are properly no more than Abbreviations;
the X, being nothing else but a C, and an S; and the Z, a D, and an S; and for
this Reason, they are called double Letters.

King Chilperic had a Mind to introduce all the double Greek Letters into the
French Alphabet, that so by one single Character they might express the th, ch,
ph, ps; and this was put in Practice during his Reign, according to the
Testimony of Gregory of Tours.

Of the Sixteen Consonants which remain, there are Four which they called
Liquids or Fluent ones, viz. L, R, M, N; though strictly speaking, there are no
more than the L and the R, which deserve this Name: the other two especially
the M, being but very little liquid: There are Ten of them which may be called
Mutes, and may be divided into Three Classeles, according to the Affinity they
have one to another.

Mutes, B, P, F, V, C, Q, G, I, D, T,



As for the other two, the S makes a Class by it self, unless the two double
ones X and Z be joined thereunto, because it makes up the principal Part of
them: As for the H it is no more than an Aspiration, although for that Reason it
ought not to be struck out of the Number of Letters.

Of Vowels in general.
There is nothing wherein we have more changed the Pronunciation of the
Ancients, than in them, for we do not continue to take Notice of the
Distinction between long and short Vowels, whereon depends all the Quantities
of Syllables, excepting those who are long by Position; thus in pronouncing of
Amabamm and Circumdabam, one may easily see that man is long in the first Word,
and da^ short in the second: But in pronouncing Dabam or Stabem, you cannot
conceive whether the first Syllable of either of them be long or short: but the
Ancients in their Pronounciation made an exact Distinction between all the long
and all the short Vowels, wherever they met with them. They also observed
this Distinction in their Writing, between long and short Vowels, wherein they
often doubled the Vowel to denote a long Syllable: Which is testified by
Quintilian to have continued in Use to the Time of Attius. They also sometimes
placed the Letter H between the said double Vowel, to render the Pronounciation
thereof the stronger, as Abala was put for Ala; and it is for this Reason, that
we likewise find among the Ancients Mehe put for me or me; and mebecum put for
mecum, and the same we do when we say, vehemens for veemens, and mihi for mi
and mii of the Ancients. But afterward in order to abridge the same, they have
thought it enough to draw a Line only above the said Vowel, to show it was
long; which being not understood by the Transcribers, they have taken this Line
for the Abbreviation of a Letter, which is the Cause, that we meet with totiens
for toties, vicensimus for vicesimus, formonsus for formosus, aquonsus for
aquosus, and the like; they being ignorant that among the Ancients the said
Line was of no other Use than to denote the Quantity of the Syllable.

Of Vowels in particular.
The Three first, viz. A, E, I, are called open Vowels, because they are
pronounced with a more open and full Mouth than the others. The Three last
Vowels are O, V, and the Greek T, and are named close Vowels, because they are
pronounced with a closer and smaller Mouth than the foregoing ones.

The Dipthongs, which Lipsius calls Bivocales, double Vowels, are pronounced
with a double Sound, as their Names do import; although both the Vowels are not
heard equally or alike, because the one is sometimes weaker and the other
stronger. They reckon Eight of them in Latin, viz. Ae, Ai, Au, Ei, Eu, Oe, Oi,
Vi.

Of Consonants.
They reckon Eighteen Consonants in all who require a Vowel to be joined to
them in order to the Forming of an Articulate Sound and composing a Syllable;
they are divided into Liquids and Mutes, into hissing and aspirated Consonants.

There are Four Liquid or Fluent Letters, that is, such as pass quickly and
easily, viz. L, R, M, N. L and R have so great an Affinity between them, that
those, who would pronounce the R, cannot do it, because it is very harsh, and
falls naturally into the L: From whence proceeds the mutual Change that has
been between these Two Letters, for 'twas not the Athenians alone that said
(...) for (...); but the Latins used Cantherus for (...), and conslacuit for
confracuit. The M has a dull Sound, and is pronounced with the outermost Parts
of the Lips, from whence it has been called Mugiens Littera; it is drowned
often in Prose, as also sometimes in Verse. In the Law Restitutu' iri is put
for Restitutum iri: The N on the Contrary was called Tinnieus Littera, because
it had a clearer and sharper Sound, and sounded against the ^allate of the
Mouth.

Those Consonants are called Mutes, which have a duller and less distinct sound
than the rest. The B and the P are so like one another, that in the Opinion of
Quintilian, concerning the Word Obtinuit, Reason would have him use a B, but
his Ears could hear no other Sound than a P, Optinuit; for which Cause we see
both by ancient Inscriptions, and old Glosses, that these Two Letters have been
often confounded, as apsens has been put for absens, obtimus for optimus; and
the Germans to this Day say, ponum vinum for bonum vinum; these Two Letters
have always had that in common, that they often slip into Words without any
need of them, as absporto put for asporto. The Letter F was pronounced as the
Greek ph, but not with so strong an Aspiration, according to the Testimony of
Terrentianus. The Vah or V Consonant had a more plain Pronunciation, but with
less Respiration than we now use it. The C and the Q are so very like one
another, that several Grammarians have been minded to reject the Q as a
superfluous Letter, pretending that the C and the V were sufficient to express
what we intend by a Q; but there is no reason why they should reject the Q, as
Varro does, according to the Relation of Censorinus, and Licinius Calvus
according to that of Victorinus; for it is still useful since it serves to join
the two Vowels that follow into one Syllable, whereas the C denotes their being
divided; and this is that which makes a Difference between the Nominative, Qui,
and the Dative, Cui. D is nothing but a Diminution of T, as the G is of C,
according to Quintilian, and these two Letters are so very like, that by reason
thereof, they are often found to be put one for another, as at for ad; which
gives Quintilian occasion to laugh at those who make a Scruple of writing one
indifferently for the other, as set for sed, haut for haud, atque for adque are
to be met with in Inscriptions, and elsewhere.

In the French Tongue they write voit with a t, though it be derived from the
Word Videt, and as often as the D is in the End of a Word, and that the
succeeding Word begins with a Vowel, or an H that is not pronounced by way of
Aspiration, they sound it as a T; for Example, they pronounce it un grant
Homme, though they write it un grand Homme. In every Thing else, they, as well as
the English, have almost entirely retained the Pronunciation of the said two
Letters, saving that they soften the T very much when it is joined with an I
before another Vowel, where they make it to sound very near like unto the S of
the Ancients, as Pronuntio is sounded, as if it were written Pronunsio. The S
they call an hissing Letter, by reason of the Sound it has. The same has been
variously received among the Ancients, some having rejected it very much while
others did as much affect it: Pindar in a manner lays it aside in all his
Verses: Quintilian says, it is harsh, and makes an ill Sound in the Conjunction
of Words, whence it came to pass that many times it was entirely rejected:
Plautus, Terence, and others using to write in this manner, Dignu' omnibu', and
the like: Some of the Latins changed this Letter into a T; in Imitation of the
Athenians, using Mertare for Mersare: Whereas others on the Contrary affected
the Use of it every where, as Casmenae was put for Camenae, Dusmosae for
Dumosae: And Quintilian bears witness, that from Cicero's Time, and so onward,
the same Letter was often doubled in the middle of Words, as may be instanced
in Caussa, Divissiones, etc. But be it as it will, it is certain, that this
Letter is harsh, if it be hissed out too much, or have too great a Train to
follow it, and this has obliged the French to soften it to that degree, that
when the same happens to fall between two Vowels they pronounce it like an Z.

The X sometimes is put with the C, as in the Words vicxit, juncxit, and the
like; and many times with S, as you see in Capadoxs, Conjunxs, etc. St. Isidore
testifies, that this Letter was not in use before the Reign of Augustus, and
Victorinus says, Nigidius would never make use of it; and for the Z it was
pronounced much more softly than the X; though the said Pronunciation was not
altogether the same as it is at this Day, wherein we give it but one half of an
S, as in the Word Mezentius.

There has been a Dispute among Grammarians, whether the H should be reckoned
in the Number of Letters or no; because, say they, it is no more than an
Aspiration.

It must be confessed, the H is no more than an Aspiration, yet that does not
hinder it to be a real Letter, which may be seen by what has been said before
concerning the H.

The Romans made use of the Letters of the Alphabet only to denote their proper
Names, and to abridge diverse Words in their Inscriptions and ancient Monuments.
A alone signified Aulus, from the Verb alo, he having been born Diis alentibus:
In Judicial Proceedings it stood for absolvo; I discharge the Person accused:
In the Assemblies for antiquo, I reject the Law proposed to be passed. A stood
for Augustus: A A for Augusti, etc. C stood for Caius, he being so called from
the Joy conceived by his Parents at his Birth. C was used for Caesar, coming
from the Verb Caedo, because his Mother's Body was cut open to bring him forth:
C stood also for Consul, and C C for Consules, etc. D signified Decimus or
Decius; that is, one born on the Tenth Day. L stood for Lucius, the Light,
because the first Person that bore this Name was born at break of Day. M
expressed Marcus, being as much as to say, one born in the Month of March, and
this Letter with an Acute marked thus M' or with a Comma thus M' signifies
Manius, that is, one born in the Morning, or rather, one that is all Good; the
Contrary whereof is, Immanis, wicked, cruel, etc. N signifies Nepos, a
Grandson. P implies Publius, from the Word Pubes, or Populus People. Q stands
for Quintus. that is, the fifth Son of the Family, or Quaestor, a Treasurer, or
Quirites, Citizens of Rome. T stands for Titus, from the Word Tueri, being as
much as to say, the Defender or Preserver of ones Country, and the same Letters
also of the Alphabet turned topsieturvey denoted the proper Names of the Roman
Ladies, W being put for Marca, and C for Caia.

They sometimes doubled the Letters of their Alphabet with the same Design, as
A. P. signified Appius, which is derived from the Sabine Word Attius; for
Attius Claudius was the first that was banished out of his Country that came to
Rome, and changed his Name from Attius, to that of Appius Claudius. Cn
signified as much as Cneus, that is, Naevus, from some Mark or Mole upon his
Body. M F signified Marci Filius, the Son of Marck. M N denoted Marci Nepos;
the Grandson of Marcus. P C signified Patres Conscripti; the Senators of Rome.
P Q signified Populus Romanus; the Romans. R P was put for Respubiica; the
Commonwealth. S C was used for Senatus Consultum, the Order or Decree of the
Senate. S P stands for Spurius, which denotes somewhat that was base in ones
Birth, or that the Person was not legitimate. Ti, is put for Tiberius, as
having been born near the Tiber. Cos. is put for Consul. Coss. for Consules in
the Plural Number. S. P. Q. R. stands for Senatus, Populusque Romanus; the
Senate and People of Rome. It is also found that the same Letter doubled serves
to increase the Signification of a Word, or to signify a Superlative Degree.
Thus B. B. stands for been been: F. F. for fortissime or felicissime. L. L. for
Iubentissime, etc.

The Ancients, before Parchment was invented, wrote only on one fide, because
the Leaves of the Tree, which they called Papyrus, whereon they wrote, were so
thin, that the Backside could not bear Ink: They did the same Thing, when they
began to use Parchment, and as the Leaves thereof were very long and large,
they were obliged to roll them up, and close them with a Boss made of Bone,
Horn, or Ivory, like a Navel: And from thence came the Word Volume, from the
Verb volvo, and this other Latin Phrase, ad umbilicum opus perductum; that is,
a Business finished; for the same was closed up with this Boss or Stud: To
write otherwise, was so very contrary to Custom; that when they were minded to
ridicule any one, who was tedious, they said he wrote on both sides, and never
made an end. This Invention of Parchment is older than some Authors make it to
be; since Herodotus relates, that the Ionians, who received the Use of Letters
from the Phoenicians, called the Skins of Beasts, Books; because they made use
of them sometimes to write upon, and because a Treaty made between the old
Romans and the Gabii, a People of Latium, was written in Antique Letters, upon
an Ox his Hide, wherewith they covered a Wooden Shield, as Dionysius of
Halicarnassus, informs us; they made use almost of all sorts of Things to write
upon, as the Barks of Trees, Boards covered with Wax, or the like: Brass was
also used on which the Spartans wrote to Simon, High Priest of the Jews;
scripserunt ad cum, says the Scripture, in Tabulis aereis: They wrote also
upon Ivory, as Vlpian informs us, Libris Elephantinis; upon Goat Skins, and the
Entraiis of Animals, according to Herodotus, Cedrenus, and Zonaras; who relate,
that there was in the Library at Constantinople, Homer's Iliads wrote in Gold
Characters upon the Intestine of a Dragon, an 120 Foot in length. The Lombards,
after their Irruption into Italy, wrote upon Wooden Tables, or Boards, that
were very thin, whereon they drew Letters, as easily as upon Wax: Apuleius, in
diverse places, speaks of Linnea Books, Libri lintei, which were so valuable
that they made no use of them but to record the Actions of the Roman Emperors;
which were deposited in the Temple of Juno Moneta: They at first made use of a
Style to draw the Letters with; but afterward Ink came in Fashion and the same
was of diverse Colors, even of Gold and Enamel. Pliny speaks of a Kind of
peculiar Ink for Books, which was mixed with some Wormwood-Juice to preserve
them from Rats.

The Custom of using Gold is very ancient, seeing a certain Author has given
us an Account, that one of Pindar's Odes, which was the Seventh, was writ in
Gold Characters, and kept in the Temple of Minerva: Silver was also in Use; but
Purple was reserved for the Emperors only.

LITHOSTROTON;
a Pavement of Mosaick-Work, which begun to be in Use in Rome in Sylla's Time,
who made one thereof at Preneste in the Temple of Fortune, about 170 Years
before our Savior's Nativity: This Word signifies only in Greek a Stone
Pavement; but by it must be understood, such Pavements as are made of small
Stones joined together and as it were enchased in the Cement, representing
different Figures by the Variety of their Colors and Ordering: At last the
same came in Fashion in Rooms, and they wainscoted the Walls of Palaces and of
Temples therewith: there is at Lions an old Church dedicated to St. Ireneus,
that is all paved with Mosaick-work, where may be still seen Images, of
Rhetoric, Logic and Prudence. The Pieces whereof Mosaick-work was made, M,
Perrault says, in his Commentary upon Vitruvius, should be cubical, or come
near unto a cubical Form, that so they might join exactly one with another, and
be able to imitate all the Figures, and Shadowings of Painting; every small
Stone used therein having but one Color, as well as the Stitches of
Needle Work Tapestry.

LITUUS;
this was a Staff belonging to the Augurs, bending inwardly at Top, somewhat
like a Bishop's Crosier, but shorter: It was the Ensign of their Office.

LIVIA;
was of the illustrious Family of the Claudii, who by several Adoptions had
passed into that of the Livii and Julii; for her Father was adopted into the
Family of the Livii, and her self into that of the Caesar's: She was first
married to the Emperor Tiberius his Father: But Augustus being smitten with her
Beauty would have her for his Wife, and though shewere then with Child, forced
her away from her Husband: By her first Marriage she had Tiberius and Drusus.
Historians accuse her of poisoning Augustus, in order to raise her Son Tiberius
to the Throne: She died at a great Age in the Consulship of Rubellius and
Fusius surnamed Geminus.

LIXA;
a Town in Mauritania, where, according to the Fable, stood the Palace of
Anteus, whom Hercules squeezed to Death between his Arms; as also the Gardens
of the Hesperides, where grew the golden Apples that were guarded by a Dragon.

LUCARIA;
was a Feast which was celebrated at Rome on the Eighteenth of July, in Memory
of the Flight of the Romans into a great Wood near the River Allia, where they
made their Escape: Plutarch says, the Actors were paid that Day, the Money
which arose from the Felling of Wood.

LUCINA;
Ovid derives her Name from Lucus, or rather Lux, because 'twas by her Help
they believed Infants were brought forth. Cratia Lucinae, dedit haec tibi
Nomina Lucus;
Aut quia Principium tu Dea Lucis habes.


The Poets attributed to Diana the Functions of Lucina, and they thought 'twas
she that was invoked under the Name of Lucina: Martial confounds the one with
the other, and so does Horace.

Rite maturos aperire partus
Lenis Ilithyia, tuere Matres;
Sive tu Lucina probas vocari,
Seu Genitalis.
Diva, producas Sobolem. --
The Women cried to her, when they were in Labor, because she presided over
Lyings-in; Juno Lucina, fer Opem. Ter.

LUCRETIA;
the Daughter of Spurius Lucretius, who married Collatinus; her extraordinary
Beauty made Sextus Tarquinius, attempt to ravish her in the Absence of her
Husband: But this virtuous Lady being not able to bear that Indignity, went to
her Father and the People of Rome to have Justice done her, then stabbed her
self with a Dagger, that she might not survive the Disgrace: This Sight did so
affect the Romans, that they cried out for Liberty, and drove King Tarquin out
of Rome, and erected a Sort of Government that had something both of
Aristocracy and Democracy in it; for which End they created Two Consuls to
govern the Commonwealth.

LUCTA;
was one of the bodily Exercises used among the Athenians, being an Encounter
between Two Men only, for a Trial of Strength, and wherein each endeavored to
give the other a Fall: This sort of Combating, and the Prize appointed for the
Conqueror, they had in the Olympic Games. Lucian in his Dialogue concerning
the Exercises of the Body, brings in Anarcarsis, a Scythian, speaking thus to
Solon, concerning the said Exercise, where he determines how it should be done.

Anacarsss. Why do these young Men give one another the Foyl, and tumble in the
Dirt like Swine, endeavoring to Stifle, and hinder each other to take breath?
They anointed and shaved one another at first very friendly; but suddenly
stooping their Heads, they butt at each other like Two Rams: Then one of them
hoisting up his Companion, throws him violently down upon the Ground, squeezing
his Throat with his Elbow, and pressing his Body with his Knees, insomuch, that
I have been afraid he would have choked him, though the other clapped him on the
Shoulder, to desire him to let him go, as acknowledging himself overcome.

LUCULLUS,
an illustrious Roman, who defended the Republic, and overcame Mithridates in
Two pitched Battles: He had the Misfortune to contract the Hatred of his
Followers and the Soldiery, by his contemptible Usage of them: He received the
Honor of Triumph, wherein never was such vast Riches seen: Mithridates his
Statue all of Gold, and Six Foot in Height, was carried before him, with his
Buckler all covered over with precious Stones. He had several Mules laden with
Ingots of Gold and Silver, and a great many rich Movables. After he had
triumphed, he retired from public Affairs, and lived the rest of his Days a
delicious and voluptuous Life: He built Gardens, and stately Houses,
everywhere, but more particularly on the Seaside: His Magnificence and
luxurious Living appeared by his Table, he having Halls on purpose for the
Feasts he made, wherein was expended more or less, according to occasion; but
among others, there was one which they called Apollo's Hall; where the
Entertainment he made cost Five Thousand Crowns: He erected a stately Library,
well furnished with Books, that was free for any Body's perusal: Sometime
before his Death he was disturbed in Mind, and put under the Care of his
Brother; it is thought Calistenes, his Freed-man, gave him Poison, which thus
distempered his Brain.

LUDI,
Games or Plays, in the Plural Number; A Term used for the Shows, and public
Representations made by the Ancients, such as the Olympic and Pythian Games
were among the Greeks; and those of the Circus among the Romans: Ausonius has
observed the following Difference between the Four famous Games of Greece, that
Two of them were dedicated to the Gods, and Two to Heroes: Ancient Authors give
an Account of Three sorts of Diversions, which they named Races, Combats and
Shows; the First were called Iudi Equestres sive Curules, which were the Races
made in the Circus, dedicated to the Sun and Neptune; the Second they called
Agonales or Gymnici, which were Combats and Contests, as well of Men as Beasts,
performed in the Amphitheater, and dedicated to Mars and Diana; the Third were
named Scenici, Poetici and Musici; which consisted of Tragedies, Comedies, and
Balls, that were acted at the Theaters, dedicated to Venus, Bacchus, Apollo and
Minerva. There was an old Decree of the Senate of Rome, that enjoined the
public Plays, should be consecrated and united to the Service of the Gods:
Constantine was the first who put down the Sanguinary Plays of the
Amphitheater, after he was baptized: See an Account of these different sorts of
Plays under their particular Heads in the Alphabet.

LUGUDUNUM,
according to Dio, Lugdunus by Corruption, when the Goths, in the Fourth and
Fifth Centuries, ravaged the Roman Empire, and Lugdunum by way of Abbreviation;
is the City of Lions, in Gallia Narbonensis, concerning which, Dio, who wrote
the Roman History in the Reign of Alexander Severus, speaks in this manner: The
Senators, says he, when they understood that Syllanus sided with Mark Antony,
and were afraid left Lepidus and Lucius Plancus, should take to the same Party,
they sent Deputies to them, to let them know, that the Republic had then no
occasion for their Arms, that so they might contrive no ill Designs, and not
begin any hostile Act. They received the Senate's Orders about building a City
for such as the Allobroges had before drove out of Vienna (a City in the
Province of Narbonne) and who had withdrawn themselves to a Place situate upon
the Confluence of the Rhosue and the Saone; so that fixing themselves there,
they built Lions, formerly called Lugudunum.

It was in the Year, DCCXI, from the Building of Rome, which according to the
exactest Chronology answers the Year XLIII. before the Coming of our Savior,
that the said City was built, according to an old Inscription, by Lucius
Munatius Plancus, Son of Lucius, Grandson of Lucius, Great Grandson of Lucius,
Consul, Censor, and declared General of the Army a second time, one of the
Seven Officers appointed to take Care of the Banquet of the Gods, who triumphed
over the Rhetians, built the Temple of Saturn with the Spoils of his Enemies,
made a Distribution of the Lands about Beneventum to the Soldiers, and settled
Two Collonies in Gaul, one at Lions, and the other at Aost or August, Five
Leagues from Basil.

L. Munatius L. F. L. N. L. P. Plancus. Cos. Cens. Plutarch seems to say, that
Lions is older than Plancus; his Words are these: Adjoining unto the Soane,
says he, there is a Mountain called Lugdunus, which took its Name upon this
Occasion; when Momorus and Atepomarus were expelled the Kingdom of Seserone,
and were about to build a City upon this Hill, and by Order of the Oracle had
laid the Foundation thereof, several Ravens appeared unto them all on a sudden,
with extended Wings, and covered all the neighboring Trees, from which Sign,
Momorus, being skilled in the Art of Augury, named the Town Lugdunum; because
that a Raven in their Dialect was called Lugum, and an high Place Dunum, as
Clitophon witnesses, in L. 13. concerning the Founding of Cities.

Nothing certain can be offered concerning the Etymology of the Word Lugdunum:
Some will have it, that the Place was named Lugdus, in Memory of one of the
Kings of the Celtae; others, in Remembrance of a Legion under Julius Caesar
that was called Lugda, and was wont to winter-quarter in this Country: Becanus
deduces it from a German Word that signifies Fortune, Glukdunum, being as much
as to say, a fortunate Mountain: As for the Word Dunum, it is agreed, that in
the ancient Gaulish Tongue it signified a Hill or Mountain: Some ancient
Authors there are, who say, the Word Lug signified a Raven, in the Language of
the Celtae; and that because the Mount of Fourviere, which some have thought to
have been once called Corviere, was a Place frequented by Ravens, the City
which had been built upon the said Mountain, retained the Name thereof, after
the Roman Eagles had chased them away: Some there are who say, that Lugdunum or
Lucdunum, as it is sometimes found written, signifies as much as Lucii Dunum;
the Praenomen of Plancus. Lastly, Others having read in Eusebius, that at first
when Lions was built, there was a great Steel-mirrour placed upon Mount
Fourviere, which by the reflected Rays of the Sun, taught those who came from
Savoy, the Way to Lions, which was not yet become a beaten Road; they have
thought it Cause enough to affirm, the Place was so called quasi Lucis Dunum:
It is true, some others who are not so credulous, but doubtful of the Truth of
this Report, yet retain the same Etymology; though they deduce it from Mount
Fourviere's being opposite to the Sunbeams, when it rises.

As the Romans were the Fathers of this City, they also were the People who
from Time to Time took Care for the Beautifying of it; Augustus who saw it
begin to flourish in the Time he was projecting to set up his Monarchical
Authority, resided there for Three Years; during which Space, it is Inhabitants
received many Favors from him, as well as the rest of Gaul, who as a Mark of
their Acknowledgement built him a Temple at the Joint-charge of Sixty Gaulish
Nations, with as many Statues appertaining thereto as bore the Titles of each
of the said Nations; and this Temple, according to Strabo, was situated before
the City of Lions, at the Place where the two Rivers meet. Three Hundred
Augurs, and Sixty Haruspices, or South-sayers served there, as may be gathered
from the ancient Inscriptions still remaining: It was in this Temple that the
Emperor Caligula set up those Academick Plays, of which Suetonius makes
mention, whither so many Orators and Poets came from several Parts of the
World, to set forth their Eloquence: It was ordered, that he that did not win
the Prize, should be plunged into the Saone, if he had not rather choose to blot
out his Writings with his Tongue. This gave Juvenal Occasion to make the Fear
of an Orator who went to make an Harangue before the Altar at Lions to be
exceeding great. Palleat, ut nudis pressit qui calcibus anguem,
Aut Lugdunensem Rhetor dicturus ad aram.


In this City was established not only the Exchequer of the Gauls, but almost
of all the Roman Empire, and there was a Mint for the Coining of Money set up
there, that circulated through the whole Empire.

LUNA,
the Moon according to the Fable: Here take what Lucian writes concerning her
in one of his Dialogues entitled Icaromenippus; he brings in Menippus, saying,
that having been one Day transported into the Globe of the Moon, she called to
him with a clear and feminine Voice, and desired him to make a Representation
unto Jupiter of the impertinent Curiosity of the Philosophers, who would know
all she had within her, and give a Reason for her various Changes: For one
said, She was inhabited, as the Earth was; another, That she hung in the Air,
like unto a Mirror; a third, That all her Light was borrowed from the Sun:
Nay, they, were so bold, as to go about to take Measure of her, as if they
would make her a Suit of Clothes. The same Lucian tells us in another Place,
That the Moon is a round and bright Island, hung in the Air, and is inhabited,
of which Endymion is King. Apuleius calls the Moon the Sun of the Night, Lunam
solis aemulam, noctis Decus, and says, She shines in the midst of the Stars, as
their Queen, whence comes that Saying of Horace, Syderum Regina bicornis The
Scripture says, God made Two great Lights or Luminaries; the one to rule the
Day, and the other the Night. Aristotle tells us, the People honored the Moon
as if she were another Sun, because she participates and comes most near unto
her: And Pliny informs us, that Endymion spent Part of his Life in observing
this Luminary, from whence sprung the Fable of his being enamoured on her.
Vossius sets forth at large, that the Moon is the same as Venus Urania, or
Venus Caelestis, that was first famous amongst the Assyrians afterward the
Worshipping of her was introduced into Phaenicia and Cyprus, from whence it was
brought to Greece, Africa, Italy, and the remotest Nations of Europe. Diana was
also the Moon; for the Name Diana, seems to have come from Diva Jana. Thus the
Sun was called Janus, and the Moon Jana, according to Varro: Nunquam audivisti
rure, Octavo Janam Lunam, etc. Et tamen quaedam melius fieri post octavam Janam
Lunam: Diana was made to preside over the Exercise of Hunting, because she
chased away the Night by the Favor of the Moon's Rays. St. Jerome says, Diana
of Ephesus was pictured with many Breasts, which is proper enough for the Moon,
in order to the common Nurture of Animals: Diana presided over Childbearing;
because it is the Moon that forms the Months, and regulates the Times of Women's
Lying-in: Thus Cicero speaks of it, Lib. 2. de Not. Deor. Alhibetur ad partus,
quod ij maturescunt, aut septem nonnuquam, aut plerumque novem Lunae cursibus.
Plutarch says, The Elizian Fields were the upper part of the Moon; that that
Part of the Moon which looked toward the Earth, was called Proscrpina and
Antichthon; that the Genii and Doemons inhabit the Moon, and come down to
deliver Oracles, or to assist at Festival Days; that the Moon does upon no
other Account incessantly turn about in order to rejoyn the Sun, but from a
Motive of the Love she bears this common Father of Light; and that undefiled
Souls fly about the Globe of the Moon, which is the same as Lucina and Diana.

The Moon, at Caran in Mesopotamia was esteemed for a God, and usually called
Lunus, and not Luna. Thus Spartian speaks of it: As we have made mention, says
he, of the God Lunus, you must know, that the Learned have left it to us upon
Record, and that the Inhabitants of Caran think to this very Day, that such as
believe the Moon is a Goddess and not a God, will be their Wives Slaves as long
as they live; but that those on the Contrary who esteem her to be a God, will
ever be Masters of their Wives, and will never be overcome by their Artifices:
Wherefore, continues the same Author, though the Assyrians and Egyptians call her
by a Feminine Name; yet in their Mysteries of Religion, they take Care to
reverence her continually as a God. And there are still remaining several
Medals of the Nysaeans, Magnesians, and other Greek Nations, who represent the
Moon to us in the Dress, and under the Name of a Man, and covered with an
Armenian Bonnet.

The Moon is one of the Seven Planets, and the nighest to the Earth: She goes
round the Zodiac in 27 Days, 7 Hours, and 41 Minutes, and does not overtake
the Sun in less than 29 Days, 12 Hours, and 44 Minutes. The first Motion is her
Periodical Course; the second is, the Synodical or Course of Conjunction; there
is a third they call a Course of Illumination, during which she appears to us,
which is for 26 Days and 12 Hours. The Moon is a spherical and dark Body, which
has no other Light than what is reflected upon her from the Sun: Her Spots
proceed from the Unevenness of her Surface: The Arabians and Egyptians
attributed 28 Houses to her, which are explained in the Oedipus of Father
Kircher: The different Appearances of the Moon's Light, according to the
Situation thereof in respect to the Earth and Sun, are called Phases: She is
called the new Moon, when she proceeds from under the Rays of the Sun, or its
Conjunction with it: The old Moon, when she is upon the Decline or in the Wam:
the full Moon, when she is in its Opposition. The Ancients were superstitiously
guilty of making great Lamentations during the Eclipse of the Moon, and the
Romans made many mournful Noises upon the said Occasion.

LUPERCI
and Lupercalia: The Luperci were the Priests of Pan, God of the Arcadians,
surnamed Lycaeus, the Son of Mercury and Penelope, and God of Shepherds.
Authors do not agree concerning the Manner of instituting these Priests, nor
their Sacrifices and Ceremonies observed at Rome in Honor of God Pan. Some
refer it to Romulus, and others with more Likelihood to Evander King of
Arcadia, who having been miserably driven out of his Country, came into the
Territories of the Latins, where he was not only favorably entertained by
Faunus, who was then King there, but also received Part of his Territories from
him, so as that he was free to settle himself toward Mount Palatine, where he
built a small City and Temple, which he dedicated to Pan the Lycaean, at the
Foot of the said Mountain, with a Statue erected in Honor of him, which was
covered with a Goat's skin, like the Dress of the Shepherds of those Times:
There he appointed Sacrifices to be offered, and constituted a Number of
Priests called Luperci from Lupus, Lycaeus being the same thing as Lupus with
the Latins. And this makes it evidently appear that the instituting of those
Priests and Festivals, is to be attributed to none but Evander; and not to
Romulus: Thus when Numitor's Men seized on Remus, they surprised him, as he was
offering Sacrifice to the God Pan, at the Foot of Mount Palatine, according to
the Report of Dionysius of Halicarnassus, and Aelius Tubero, L. 1. of the Roman
Antiquities; which also does suppose, that the said Sacrifices were before
instituted by Evander, unless any should say, that Romulus increased the
Ceremonies and Magnificence of these Feasts (after he had built Rome) the
Foundations whereof had been laid by Evander. And here note, that in the
Solemnities used at this Feast, which was celebrated at Rome February 15th, the
Priests met together early in the Morning in the Temple of this God; where
after they had made the usual Prayers, they sacrificed white Goats to him, in
whose Blood when they had dipped two Knives, they marked two young Men in their
Faces therewith, then they wiped them with Wool steeped in Milk; after which
they provided themselves with Thongs made of these Goat Skins, and run stark
naked about the City, slapping the Women with them, who willingly received
them, because they had an Opinion these Blows would make them fruitful: Some
have held, that this Ceremony was added by Romulus, because that finding the
Sabin Women which he had ravished, became barren, he consulted the Augurs
thereupon, and they made answer, that in order to remedy the said Evil the
Woman must offer Sacrifice to Juno on a Mountain of Rome called Esquiliae, each
being covered with a Goatskin, which is interpreted to be the Skins of the
Goats the Luperci sacrificed.

The Custom of these People's running naked, came from Pan's running so after
his Flocks: Ipse Deus nudos jubet ire ministros. Ovid. or rather for preserving
still some Remains of the Savage Life which the first Inhabitants of the Earth
led, before some extraordinary Men were raised up to polish and civilize the
Savages and of whom afterward they made Gods.

This Feast lasted a long Time among the Romans, and Augustus himself reformed
several base Abuses that had crept into it, and forbad the Youth of the City
that exceeded the Age of Fourteen, to run naked thereat. Lupercalibus vetuit
currere imberbes, says Suetonius in the Life of Augustus, and this makes Cicero
in his second Philippick to reprove Antony, that when he was Consul he had run
about stark naked at this Feast: Ita eras Lupercus, ut te esse Consulem
meminisse deberes.

LUSTRATIO;
was a Ceremony or Sacrifice made by the Romans, after they had done numbering
the People which was performed every Five Years.

LUSTRUM;
that is to say, the Space of Four or Five Years. The Romans numbered their
People by Lustra's: The Word comes from Luo, according to Varro, which
signifies, to pay; because that at the Beginning of every fifth Year they paid
the Tribute, laid upon them by the Censors: Their Charge, which afterward
became Annual, having been established at first for this Space of Time: Servius
was the first that purified the People in this manner: He put them into
Battle-array; and made a Bull and an He-goat, which he sacrificed, to pass
round them three Times, and that was the first Lustrum of the Romans, and the
first Tax, which was continued from Five Years to Five Years.

LUTETIA;
or Paris; some Authors being not able to discover the Original Institution of
the Arms of Paris, which are a Ship, have gone so far to enquire after the same
as Isis, as well as for the Name of this Illustrious City: For many have
thought the Name of Paris to have been Greek, and to come from (...), that is,
near the famous Temple of the Goddess Isis: It must then be supposed, as it has
always been thought, that there was a Temple there dedicated to the said
Goddess, within the Bounds of the Ground which belong now to the Abbey of St.
Germain des Prez: This Temple stood till the Time that Christianity was
established in France, and when it was demolished, Curiosity led some to
preserve the Idol of Isis that had been worshipped there, and the same was put
into a Corner of the Church of St. Germain des Prez, when it was built by
Childebert, and dedicated to St. Vincent, to serve as a Trophy that Idolatry
was subdued: The said Idol was preserved to the Year 1514. when Cardinal
Briconnet, who was then Abbot of the Place, coming to understand, some silly
Women through Simplicity and Superstition, had burnt Candles before the said
Idol, caused the same to be taken away and cut into Pieces. This City at first
bore the Name of Paris, which it took from its Proximity to the Temple of Isis,
and communicated it to all the Country round it, whereof it was the Capital
City, but received that other Name of Lucotecia or Lutetia, from the Greek Word
(...), which signifies Whiteness, because of the Whiteness of the Plaster the
Masons used in the Building thereof; and none ought to wonder why the Name of
Paris should be taken from the Greek, considering the Affinity there is between
the French and the said Language, of which diverse Authors have treated: The
Word Paris therefore extended it self throughout the Country, as it does still
to this Day, the same being called Parisis, and the City Lucotecia or Lutetia
Parisiorum: They are Names even to be met with in Caesar's Commentaries, Strabo
and Ptolomy.

LYAEUS,
an Epithet given to Bacchus, from the Greek Word (...), which signifies to
chase away; because Wine, of which he was the God dissipates the Vexations of
Men's Minds.

LYCAEUS,
a Mountain in Arcadia consecrated to Jupiter and Pan the God of Shepherds,
from whence it is, that they have given him the additional Epithet of Lycaean;
they solemnized some Festivals there in Honor of Pan, which Evander carried
into Italy, and were called Lupercalia.

LYCAON,
was a Tyrant of Arcadia, who was thunderstruck by Jupiter, and changed into a
Wolf, because he had sacrificed a young Child upon his Altar, according to the
Testimony of Pausanias in his Arcadicks: Ovid gives another. Account thereof,
L. 1. Metamorphosis, he relates, that Jupiter being not able any longer to bear
with the horrible Cruelties exercised by Lycaon toward his Guests, took upon
him Humane Shape, and went into the Palace of this Tyrant, who being desirous
to make Trial whether he were a God, or no, laid Humane Flesh before him at
Table, with which Jupiter being incensed, he transformed him into a Wolf.

LYCEUM;
a famous Place near Athens, where Aristotle read Philosophy to his Disciples,
as Plato did in his Academy: His Disciples were called Peripateticks, because
he taught them walking.

LYCIUS,
a Surname of Apollo, who was worshipped in the City of Patara the Capital of
Lycia, where he had a Temple famous for the Oracles delivered there by him: Et
Lyciae sorts, Virg. 4. Aeneid.

LYCURGUS;
the great Legislator of the Lacedaemonians, formed his Republic, according to
the Model of the Stars, says Lucian, and forbad his Citizens, to go forth to
Battle before the Full Moon, because then their Bodies were in greater Vigor:
That his Laws might obtain the greatest Authority, he pretended to have had
them from Apollo at Delphos; he died when he was Fourscore and Five Years old.

LYNCEUS;
was one of the Argonauts, who went with Jason to the Conquest of the
Golden-fleece; the Poets made him to be so quicksighted, that he could see
through Trees and Walls, and that because he had found out Mines in the Bowels
of the Earth.

LYNCUS;
a very cruel King of Scythia, who would have put Triptolemus (whom Ceres had
sent to teach Men the Use of Corn) to Death, but the Goddess abominating so
much Cruelty, changed him into a Lynx which is an Animal spotted with diverse
Colors.

LYRA;
a Lyre, or Harp; an old musical Instrument, which we find painted in the Hands
of Apollo; it is almost of a circular Form, and has a small Number of Strings,
which are touched with the Fingers, some have thought the Grecian Lyre to have
been the same with our Cuitarre; others say, it was an Instrument made of a
Tortoise-shell, which Hercules excavated and bored Moles in, and then strung
it, as Horace bears witness, and so they came to call it Testudo: You may see
it bears several different Forms on the Monuments and Medals of the Ancients:
Some attribute the Invention of this Instrument to Orpheus; others to Linus,
some to Amphion; others again to Mercury and Apollo, as may appear by those
Dialogues of Lucian concerning the Gods, where he brings in Apollo to speak
thus: He has made an Instrument of a Tortoise-shell, whereon he plays to that
Perfection, as to make me Jealous, even me who am the God of Harmony.

The Harp is also a Celestial Sign, composed of Ten Stars, that rise at the
Sign of Libra; the Situation whereof makes as it were a kind of Harp: The
Fables of the old Astronomers, would have the same to be Orpheus his Harp,
which he received from Apollo, to whom Mercury had made a present thereof; and
that the Muses placed it among the Stars.

LYSIMACHUS,
was one of the Successors of Alexander the Great; by a Medal of his, was to be
seen on one side, the Form of his Head, with his Crown on, and two Horns at
both ends; and this he bare, faith Appian, because he held a mad Bull by the
Horns, that had forced himself loose out of the Hands of the Sacrificers, and
had killed them; and in Testimony of his Conquering of him, he bore the said
Horns. Upon the Reverse of the Medal sits Victory, holding a Victim in her
Right Hand.

M.
M Is a Consonant, and the Twelfth Letter of the Alphabet that has a very dull
Sound, and is pronounced with the outermost Part of the Lips, whence it comes
to pass that it is called Mugiens Littera. It Is sunk often times in Prose, as
it is also in Verse, Restitutu iri, you meet with in the Law, Saltu for Saltum,
in Vet. Gloss. Quintilian says, That the M often ended Latin Words, but never
Greek ones, and that in such Case the Greeks changed it into an N, because the
N had a more pleasing Sound, though it was rare in the Latin Tongue to meet with
any Words ending with this Letter.

M alone stands for Manius; Marcus, Manes, Manibus. M being a Numeral Letter,
stood for a Thousand among the Ancients; and when a Stroke was drawn above it,
it made a Million.

MACHINA,
a Machine, or Engine, being no other than the Setting together of several
Pieces by Mechanical Art, so as to serve for the Increasing of the Force of
moving Powers: The Name of Machine has been given in general to every Thing
that has no other Motion but what comes by the Art of Men; the Ancients had a
Multitude of Warlike Machines, consisting of Rams, Slings, Scorpions,
Cross-bows, Catapultes, etc. for the Beating down Town-walls, Shooting of
Arrows, Flinging of great Pieces of Stone, and the like.

MACHINAE VERSATILES;
They are strange Inventions to Change Scenes, make Flights in the Air; to move
Animals, and for other Artifices, that both surprise and prove an agreeable
Diversion to the Spectators: Clocks, Pumps, Mills, Organs, and the like Things
which operate by the Help of Wind and Water, are Water or Aerie Machines,
otherwise called Hydraulick or Pneumatick ones.

MACTUS HOC VINO INFERIO ESTO:
'Twas a Form of Speech used at the Sacrifices offered by Pagans to their Gods,
being as much as to say, Magis auctus; may your Glory be increased by the
pouring out of this Wine; and the following Expression also has the same
Derivation, Macte nova Virtute Puer; Pretty Boy, increase in Virtue.

MAGIA;
Magic; the Scripture it self gives us an Account of the Antiquity of Magic
in Egypt; when it speaks of the Magicians used by Pharaoh, in Opposition to
Moses, who also by their Enchantment, performed some of the Miracles, which God
wrought by his own Divine Power: But that is not the first Place, perhaps,
wherein the Magic of the Egyptians is spoken of: It Is most certain, that as
Egypt was the Mother of Fables, so was she also the Mistress of Magic: Among
those Magicians who withstood Moses, there were Two who signalized themselves
above the rest, to wit, Jamnes and Mambres, of whom St. Paul makes mention,
according to the Tradition of the Jews: Pliny had Knowledge of these Two
Egyptian Magicians, but he puts Moses, their grandest Adversary, in the same
Rank with them. Est and alia Magices factio a Mose, and Jamne and Jotape
Judaeis pendens, sed multis millibus annorum post Zoroastren. Zoroaster, whom
Pliny makes so much ancienter than Moses, was, according to Justin, King of
Bactra, and the Inventer of Magic. Rex Bactrianorum, Zoroaster, qui primus
dicitur Arts Magicas invenisse. It was against this Zoroaster, Ninus made War:
It follows from hence, that Magic, as well as Magicians, took its Origin at
Babylon, or in the East, before it was spoken of in Egypt: Suidas also places
Zoroaster in Media or Persia, and makes him to be the Chief of the Magi or
Magicians. Zoroaster Perso-Medus Astronomorum peritissimus and Princeps Magorum
nominis apud ipsos recepti. Diverse Authors make Zoroaster to be of a more
Modern standing, and put him no higher than the Times of Darius Histaspes: But
it is like they may have confounded several Zoroasters together; and that this
having been a common Name among the Magi, they attributed to the last of them
somewhat that appertained to the first. Varro the learned Man in the Roman
Empire in his time, and one who had a clearer Sight than any of them, doubted
not but all that Homer has related concerning Circe, and the Transformation of
Ulysses his Companions into Beasts, was no other than the real Effects of
Magic: He makes the same Judgment of what was said concerning the Arcadians,
who in swimming cross a Pond, were changed into Wolves; and if they abstained
from the Use of Humane Flesh, they should become Men again in Nine Years time,
by once more swimming over the said Pond: And it is upon this same Account that
Varro thinks Jupiter and Pan were called Lycaei, in Arcadia, because they
transformed Men into Wolves. St. Augustine speaking of Magical Transformation,
says, He cannot believe the Devils are able to make any real Change, either in
the Minds or Bodies of Men, though they may disturb their Imagination, and by
fantastical Apparitions, make them see either themselves, or others in the
Form of some Animal, in the same Fashion as those Visions are formed in Dreams:
It was therefore in this Manner that the Arcadians were transformed into
Wolves, and Ulysses his Companions into other Animals by Circe. As to what
relates to Diomedes his Companions, who were changed into Birds, without any
remedy; It must be said, that the Devils carried them quite away, and brought
strange Birds to stand in their places, in the same Manner as the Demons
substituted a Hind in the room of Iphigenia, who was not transformed into such
an Animal, because she appeared afterward, and exercised the Office of Diana's
Priestess at Tauris, from whence she also fled, and retired with her Brother
Orestes to Aricia in Italy.

MAGIA,
Magic; Pliny describes the Original and Efficacy of all pretended
Enchantments thus: He says, 'That upon all the Occasions that had been offered
him in this kind, he had discovered, and was convinced of the Vanity of Magic,
calling it the most deceitful of all Sciences: He shows how after having its
Original from Physic, it had borrowed Strength from Religion; wherein, said
he, Mankind saw no Relish for to gain the Superstitious by; that the same was
supported by the Mathematics, that is by Astrology, for attracting the Curious
unto it; and that out of those Three Sciences, one was made, which with this
Triple Cord bound up the Senses of Men, and she became so much a Mistress over
them, that in the East she commanded Kings themselves. The same Author speaking
of the Chelony, which is a Stone resembling the Form of an Eye, that is found
in the Shell of the Indian Tortoise, he says, If we will believe the Lies of
the Magicians, it has exceeding great Virtue, that after you have washed your
Mouth with Honey, you shall no sooner put it on your Tongue, but you will be able
to foretell Things to come. Where he treats elsewhere of the Vervein used by the
ancient Gauls, when they were minded to give Answers to such as came to consult
them; he speaks thus: But the Magicians are still more foolish and mad, in
saying, that such as rub themselves with the said Herb, obtain all they can
desire, expel Fevers, make themselves to be beloved by whom they please, and
cure all manner of Diseases.

Aug. L. 26. C. 4. In setting forth the Vanity of Magicians, speaks of a
wonderful Herb: Cast it, says he, into Ponds or Rivers, it drys them up; make
it but to touch the strongest Places, it opens them. He says of another; That
if it be but thrown into an Army drawn up in Battle-Array, they will be
terrified and fly away: At length he concludes with another Herb, which the
King of Persia gave his Ambassadors, whereby they might be able to find,
wherever they passed, Plenty of all Things necessary for the Furtherance of
their Journey; afterward he grows very pleasant, and asks, Where that Herb
was, which put Armies to the Rout, when Rome was pressed upon by the Cimbri and
Teutones? Why did not the Magicians of Persia make use thereof against
Lucullus, when the said General cut their Armies in pieces without Mercy? It
must be a Matter of Wonder, that other Roman Generals, rather than take upon
them the Care of having so many Commissaries, for providing their Armies with
Victuals, had not stocked themselves with the Herb, which had the Virtue to
cause their Tables to be furnished with all Necessaries for the Support of
Life, where ever they were. Lastly, He quarrels with Scipio for having made use
of so many Warlike Engines and Soldiers to take Carthage, since one Herb was
able to open its Gates for him; and he reproaches the Senate, that they did not
make use of the Herb called Aethiopidis, for drying up the Marshes of Italy. In
C. 2. L. 30. He says, He had learned from one Ostanes, that there were several
sorts of Magicians, some of which were made so by Water, others by the Spheres,
Air, Stars, Lanthorns, or Flambeau's, Basins and Axes. He afterward speaks of
the particular Favor Nero had for Magicians, because they had Power to command
the Gods. Tiridates to make his Court to the Emperor, brought him many
Magicians, and was rewarded by Nero for it, with the Kingdom of Armenia: And so
he ends thus: We must then absolutely believe, that the Magic Art is not
supported by any valuable Testimony whatever.

MAGISTER PEDITUM;
General of the Infantry.

MAGISTER EQUITUM;
General of the Horse, or Lieutenant General of the Cavalry.

MAGISTER MILITUM UTRIUSQUE MILITIAE;
General of the Army: They attribute the Constituting of these Officers to
Constantine the Great, at the Time that he took away the Command of the Armies
from the Prafecti Praetorio.

MAGISTER SCRINII MEMORIAE;
a Secretary and an Officer of the Empire, to whom his Prince gave a golden
Girdle at his Creation: His Business was to reduce into a few Words the Answers
the Emperor made to the Petitions and Requests made unto him, and afterward to
enlarge upon them in the Letters Patent or Briefs that were granted: He had
under him other Officers who were called Scriniarii Memoriae, or Memoriales:
It Is thought this Office was instituted by Augustus, and that the same was
exercised by Roman Knights.

MAGISTER SCRINII EPISTOLARUM;
the Secretary who wrote the Emperor's Letters; Augustus writ them himself, and
then gave them to Mecaenas and Agrippa to correct, says Dio; other Emperors
usually dictated them, or told their Secretary what they would have writ, and
then did no more than subscribe them with the Word Vale; unless it were that
they had a Mind to keep a Business secret: This Secretary had Thirty Four
Officers under him which they called Epistolares.

MAGISTER SCRINII LIBELLORUM;
Master of the Requests, the Person who represented to the Prince the Requests
and Petitions of particular Persons, and received his Answer, which was reduced
into Writing by his Clerks who were Thirty Four in Number, and were called
Libellenses: This may be seen in the Notitia Imperii. Cognitiones and preces
Magister Libellorum tractabat, and Acta Libellenses scribebant. We have still
in being the Form of a Petition that was presented to the Emperor Antoninus
Pius, in these Words.

Cum ante hos dies conjugem and filium amiserim, and pressus necessitate
corpora eorum fictili sarcophago commendaverim, donec quietis locus quem
emeraem aedificaretur, via Flaminia, inter milliare secundum and tertium
euntibus ab Vrbe, part laeva, custodia Monumenti Flam. Thymeles Amelosae M.
Signii Orgilii: Rogo, Domine, permittas mihi in eodem Loco, in marmorco
sarcophago quem mibi modo comparavi, ea corpora colligere, ut quando and ego
esse desiero, pariter cum eis ponar.

This was a Petition presented by Arrim Alphius the Freed-man of Arria Fadilla
the Emperor's Mother, importing his Desire to have Leave given him to gather up
his Wife and his Sons Bones to be laid in a Marble-Coffin, which before he had
put in an Earthen-Vessel, till such Time as the Place which he had bought to
raise a Monument for them, was ready; to whom Answer was given in this Manner.

Decretum fieri placet; Jubentius Celsus promagister subscripsi. III Non.
November.

MAGISTER SCRINII DISPOSITIONUM,
was the Person who gave the Emperor an Account of the Sentences and Judgments
past by the Judges of the respective Places, and who examined them, to see if
they had judged aright or not, and thereupon sent the Answer to his Prince: He
had Courriers appointed on purpose to carry these Answers, who were called
Agentes ad Responsum, and a Fund to pay them called Aurum ad Responsum.

MAIA;
the Daughter of Atlas and the Nymph Pleione, on whom Jupiter was enamoured,
who bore him Mercury.

MAIUS,
May; the fifth Month in the Year, reckoning from the first of January, and the
third in counting the Year to begin with March, as they anciently did: the Sun
enters now into Gemini, and the Plants of the Earth flower: This Month was
called Maius by Romulus in respect to the Senators and Nobles of his City,
which were named Majores; as the following Month was named Junius, in Honor of
the Youth of Rome, in Honorem Juniorum, who served him in the War. Others will
have it to have been called thus, from Maia the Mother of Mercury, to whom they
offered Sacrifice on that Day: This Month was under the Protection of Apollo,
and therein also they kept the Festival of Bona Dea, that of Goblins called
Lemuria, and the Ceremony of Regifugium, or the Expulsion of Kings. On the
first Day was celebrated the Anniversary of the Dedication of an Altar erected
by the Sabines to the Lares or Household Gods, praestitibus Laribus; because
they took a faithful Care of whatever was in the House: These Lares had a Dog
represented at their Feet, because this Animal also took Care of the House. And
this is the Reason which Ovid gives of it, L. 1. Fast.

At canis ante Pedes saxo fabricatus eodem
Stabat, quae standi cum Lare causa fuit?
Servat uterque domum, domino quoque fidus uterque est,
Compita grata Deo, compita grata cani.
The Roman Ladies on this same Day, offered Sacrifice to Bona Dea, in the Chief
Pontiff's House, whereat it was not lawful for Men to assist; they also covered
all Men's Pictures and Statues, as they did those of other Animals of the Male
Kind. On the 9th was celebrated the Feast of Apparitions or Goblins, called
Lemuria or Remuria, instituted by Romulus, for appeasing the Ghost of his
Brother Remus, that appeared to him in the Night. See Lemuria. On the 12th came
on the Feast of Mars, surnamed Vltor, or the Avenger, to whom Augustus
consecrated a Temple on that Day. On the 15th, or Ides of the Month was
performed the Ceremony of the Argians, whereon the Vestal Virgins threw Thirty
Figures made of Rushes into the Tiber, above the Wooden Bridge. The same Day
was kept the Feast of Traders, which they celebrated in Honor of Mercury; they
offered unto him a whole Sow, and went to a Fountain called Aqua Mercurii, at
the Gate named Capena, and there sprinkled themselves with a Lawrel-branch,
praying that God to favor them in their Gains, and to pardon the exorbitant
Prizes they sold their Goods at, in the Way of their Occupations. On the 21st
came on the Feast named Secunda Agonia, or Agonalia, whereof I have spoken
under Agonalia. On the 24th was another Ceremony called Regifugium, which same
was often repeated in the Compass of the Year. See Regifugium.

Plutarch asks why the Romans did not marry in the Month of May; and says, it
was either because that in that Month they made several Expiations, with which
Marriage did not agree, or because the Month of May took its Name from aged
Persons, Majores, for whom Marriage was not suitable; but that the Month of
June deducing its Name from Juniores, Marriages were reassumed therein. A
little farther he asks, why Virgins never married on Festival Days, or such as
the Public Assembly were held on, but that Widows affected to marry at those
times: He answers, that Virgins are married with Grief, and as it were by
Constraint, which is not suitable to Festival Days, an causa est ratio, quam
affert Varro, virgins nubere invitas and tristes, festo autem die nilil agi
debet cum molestid. But as for Widows, they married the rather on Festival
Days, because they could do it then much more retiredly, the Feast having drawn
all the People thither; and they thereby with Reason expressed their Shame for
their Second Marriages.

MAMURIUS,
surnamed Veturius, whose Name is famous in the Hymns of the Salians, for
having made Eleven Shields or Bucklers, so like unto that which Numa pretended
to have fallen down from Heaven, that it could not be distinguished from them.

MANCEPS,
A Farmer of the Public Revenue.

MANCEPS,
is one who sells an Estate with a Promise of keeping the Party harmless; he is
likewise one that buys an Estate by Outcry.

MANCIPARE,
is to sell or divest one self of any Possession, and to invest another with
it, according to the Roman Law.

MANCIPATIO,
is the Selling or Alienating of some Lands by the Balance, and Five
Witnesses, which took no place but among Citizens of Rome, in respect to
certain Estates situate in Italy, or among such as were privileged to be Roman
Citizens.

MANCIPIUM,
and MANCUPIUM; A Sale, or Alienation which took place among no other than
Citizens of Rome only. Mancipium was a peculiar Right of Propriety, which the
Citizens of Rome, and those to whom it was granted, in respect to some Lands in
Italy, enjoyed alone, wherein were observed some Formalities relating to the
Balance and Tale of Money- Multae sunt domus in hac Vrbe, atque haud scio, a^
pene cunctae, jure optimo; sed tamen jure privato, jure haereditario, jure
auctoritatis, jure mancipi, jure nexi. There are diverse Houses in Rome, which
are, perhaps, Freehold, but this Franchise is founded upon a particular Right,
not a public One, upon a Right acquired by Succession of Inheritance, by Way
of Prescription, by Right of Purchase; the Sale of such Houses having passed
with a Clause and Condition that is express and formal, in respect to such
Franchise and Prerogative.

MANDRAGORA,
Mandrake; there is a Male and Female of it, and there is another that is a
kind of Solatrum Soporiferum, whose Root is white and hollow, and a Cubit high:
This Plant has strange Properties, for if the Quantity of a Dram of it be given
any one to drink, he will presently think himself as handsome as that Metius we
read of in Domitian's Court: And if three times as much of it should be
administered, it would render such an one as extravagantly foolish as can well
be thought of.

MANES;
the Manes, or departed Souls. Ser^im in his Commentary upon the Third Book of
the Eneids, informs us of the various Opinions the Ancients held concerning
this Word: The Manes, says he, are Souls separated from Humane Bodies, which
have not yet entered into other Bodies, and delight to do Mischief unto Men,
being so called by an Antiphrasis; for Manum in the old Latin signified Good.
Some will have this Word Manes to come from Manare, to flow or come forth,
because all the Air between the Earth and Circle of the Moon is full of Manes,
who come out of their Mansions to torment Mankind: Some there are who
distinguish the Manes from the Infernal Gods; others who say, that the
Celestial Gods are the Gods of the Living, and the Manes the Gods of the Dead:
And Lastly, Many believe the Manes are Nocturnal Dieties, who reign between
Heaven and Earth, and preside over the Moisture of the Night, which has given
occasion to call the Morning Mane.

Apuleius in his Book concerning the God of Socrates, which we have already
related under the Word Lemures, tells us, that as it is uncertain whether Souls
separated from Bodies are of the Number of the Lares or Larvae, they have been
called by the Name of Manes, and in a Way of Honor they have the Title of Gods
given them. Festus says, the Manes were invoked by the Roman Augurs, because
they believed them to be favorable unto Men, and that they were also called
Superior and Inferior Gods; and the Etymology of the Word seems to arise from
the Verb Manare, quod ii per omnia aethaerea, terrenaque manare credebantur.

Thus as the Manes were made to be propitious Dieties, and had this Name given
them by way of Honor, if Apuleius may be credited, we may say with Vossius,
and other learned Men, that this Word comes simply from the old Word Manis,
which signified Good: Wherefore it is certain, Manes was taken diversely among
the Ancients; but in the first place in general, for departed Souls, as appears
by an Inscription beginning thus, Manibus gentis suae, which was dedicated by
some Roman to the Manes of his Family; and in Virgil: Manesque vocabat
Hectoreum ad tumulum.
And in another place: Id cinerem aut Manes credis curare sepultos.
In the second place, the Word Manes is by a Metonomy taken for Hell, that is
for those Subterranean places, whither the Souls of Men, both Good and Bad,
were to go, from whence the Good were sent to the Elysian Fields, and the
Wicked to Places of Punishment, called Tartata. Haec Manes veniat mihi fama sub
imos.
And elsewhere: Manesque profundi.
Which cannot be interpreted in respect to the Souls themselves, but to the
Places where they were. Lastly, The Manes are taken for Infernal and
Subterranean Gods, and generally for all Deities whatever, that have the Charge
of, and do preside over the Graves of the Dead, in which Sense, the Word Manes,
in the old Glossarie, is interpreted in Gr. (...), i, e. Demons or Genij,
Subterranean Gods: It Is in this Sense that Epitaphs are dedicated to them in
these two Words Diis Manibus, which are sometimes expressed by halves only Dis
Men, and most often by two Letters D. M. and among the Primitive Romans, who
made their Epitaphs in Greek, were used (...) that is, (...).

The Romans had a great Veneration for these sorts of Gods, and they were of
Opinion they could stop the Hands of any one that attempted to commit
Sacrilege, by putting him in mind of these Gods, in an Epitaph exposed to the
View of all the World, whereof take an Example: NE TANGITO That is, have a
Care, O Man, do not touch me, and have a Respect for the Dii Manes.

MANIA;
was taken by the Ancients to be the Mother of the Lares, or Household Gods;
they offered Sacrifice to her at certain Feasts called Compitalia, instituted
by Brutus, wherein the Slaves intermixed with their Masters, as in the
Saturnalia, eat and drank with them, and diverted themselves in the Cross-ways.
It was a Custom at first to Sacrifice little Children to her for the
Preservation of the whole Family, in Obedience to the Oracle, but Brutus having
expelled Tarquin, gave the Oracle of Apollo another Interpretation than it had
before, and ordered that instead of Men's Heads, they should use those of Poppy
and Onions, they also placed as many of the Effigies of Men and Women, stuffed
with Flax or Chaff, before the Doors of their Houses, and in the Cross-ways, as
there were Free Persons in each House, and as many Balls of Wool, as there were
Slaves there, that so neither Mania, nor the Household Gods her Children, might
do any Mischief to the Living, as Festus informs us:

Quibus tot pilae, quot capita servorum; tot effigies, quot essent liberi,
ponebantur, ut vivis parcerent, and essent his pilis and simulachris contenti.

MANIPULUS,
was a small Troop or Company of Soldiers among the Romans; there was a small
Maniple, which was a Band or File of Ten Soldiers, and the great Maniple, which
Elian makes to be 256 Men, and Vegetius 100 only; for the Word Manipulus
properly signified an Handful of Herbs or Hay, which they tied to the End of a
Pole for a Cognizance or Flag, before they assumed the Eagles for their Arms;
hence comes that Saying, still continuing amongst us; An Handful of Men.

MANIPULARES;
the Soldiers in the Company.

MANLIUS,
surnamed Marcus, and by Pliny, Titus, was a great and generous Captain, who
performed many famous Exploits, and amongst other things saved the Capitol,
when it was besieged by the Gauls, whereby he obtained the Surname of
Capitolinus; he was accused of Aspiring after a Tyrannick Power, was convicted
and condemned to be thrown down Headlong over the same Rock which he had
prevented the Gauls from surprising: His House was pulled down; and all of his
Name were for the future enjoined not to use the Praenomen of Marcus.

MANLIUS,
surnamed Torquatus, because he had killed a Gaul of prodigious Stature, and
took from him a Chain in Latin called Torques; from whence he afterward took
the Surname of Torquatus, which made a Distinction between his Descendants and
the other Manlii. He gave an Example of inflexible Severity in the Person of
his own Son, whom he put to Death, because he had fought against his Orders,
and killed a Gaulish Captain that insulted the Romans; from whence has
proceeded this Proverb, to denote a severe Command, Manliana Imperia.

MANLIUS,
named Lucius, was a famous Painter, who made answer to Semilius, that wondered
to see so good a Painter have such hardfavoured Children; In luce pingo, in
tenebris singo.

MANUBIAE,
the Spoils of the Enemy, or the Money made of the Booty taken from the Enemy.

MARATHON,
a City in the Territory of Athens, and distant from it about Ten Miles. Its a
Place very famous not only for the Death of King Icarus, and the Overthrow of
the Marathonian Bull by Theseus, but more particularly upon account of the
famous Victory won by Miltiades, the Athenian General, over 600000 Persians,
commanded by Darius.

MARCELLUS,
M. CLAUDIUS, after several gallant Actions performed by him in the Wars
against Hannibal, was killed valiantly fighting; the Romans called him their
Sword.

MARCUS ANTONIUS,
Mark Anthony, had a long and full Face, and a double Chin, which was a Sign of
his being a Lover of Pleasure and good Cheer: He had an Eagle's Nose, which
denoted Courage; but the Love he bore unto the fair Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt,
sullied his Glory, and was the Cause of his Ruin.

MARCUS AURELIUS.
See Aurelius.

MARIUS CAIUS:
He brought the War against Jugurtha to an happy Period, and triumphed: He
brought into the public Treasury 3007 Pound Weight in Gold, and 5775 of Silver
in Ingots, without reckoning the vast Quantity of Gold and Silver Coin he also
got them. He afterward defeated the Teutones, who in one Battle lost 100000
Men, slain and taken Prisoners. Marius, who could not be satiated with Wars nor
Triumphs, solicited for a Commission to make War upon Mithridates, and
obtained it; but Sylla, who was Consul, and concerned at this Commission, could
not bear the Affront: He came to Rome with an Army, and obliged the Senate to
declare Marius and his Adherents Enemies to the People of Rome: He withdrew
into Africa, and after having escaped a Thousand Dangers, shut himself up in
Preneste, which he defended as well as he could: But seeing no hopes of Relief,
and no way of Escape, he killed himself, for fear he should fall into Sylla's
Hands.

MARS;
the God Mars, which the Poets feign to have been born of Juno, without
Copulation with any Man, but by the Smell of a single Flower, which the Goddess
Flora had showed her, as Ovid informs us. They make him to be the God of War,
and of Armies, and represented him armed with Rage and Fury, and with flaming
Eyes as well on Horseback as in a Chariot, drawn by Two Horses, named Terror
and Fear, and drove by his Sister Bellona: Terrorque Pavorque
Martis Equi.
Val. Max. L. 3. de Ar^. There are some who make him to be accompanied with
Terror, Fear and Fame. He was very familiar with Venus, Vuscan's Wife, who
surprised them in the Act; as Lucian says in his Dialogue of Apollo and Mercury.

Apoll. Mercury, What do you laugh at?


Mer. Why should not I laugh, Apollo, at so pleasant an Adventure?


Apoll. Tell me, that I may laugh in my turn.


Mer. Mars has been caught lying with Venus.


Apoll. How was that? Give me a Relation of the Adventure.


Mer. Vulcan has been long jealous of their Familiarity, and watched his
opportunity to surprise them, for which End he placed Nets round his Bed, but
so as not to be seen, then went to his Forge: The Gallant laying hold of the
Opportunity of the Husband's absence, went to lie with his Mistress; but the
Light discovered them, and informed Vulcan how it went, insomuch that he took
them both in the Fact, and folded them in his Nets.


What gave occasion to this Fable, of Mars and Venus committing Adultery
together, and the Manner how they were discovered, was taken from the Art of
Astrology, where these two Planets are made to be frequently in Conjunction.
The Ancients represented the Picture of Mars upon their Medals, completely
armed, holding a Javelin in his Hand, called Quiris by the Sabines, from whence
he has obtained the Name of Quirinus pater. Augustus Caesar built him a Temple
at Rome, of a round Form, which he consecrated under the Name of Mars the
Avenger, because he had been Assistant to revenge the Death of Julius Caesar;
Templa feres, and me victore vocaberis Vltor.
Voverat, and fuso letus ab host redit.
Ovid. Its probable the Mars of the Assyrians was the most ancient of any, for
Diodorum Siculus testifies, they gave unto him the Name of Mars, who invented
the Use of Arms, and first began a War: Qui fabulas ad historiam referunt, by
Martem aiunt primum fuisse qui universam fabricarit armaturam, ac milites armis
instruxerit, etc. But he who gave a Beginning to Arms and War, (according to
the Scriptures) was Nimrod, the same as Belus of the Heathens, or his Son
Ninus, of whose being so Justine bears a Testimony. As the Empire of the
Assyrians was the first of all the rest, and that Empire has been no otherwise
set up than by Force of Arms; its not to be doubted but the first Kings of
Babylon or Assyria, were deified by the Name of Mars, in those ancient Times,
wherein Kings were so honored after their Deaths. Cedrenus also informs us,
that Mars and Belus were the same God of the Assyrians; and so the Greek Name
(...) is not only derived from the Hebrew Word Arits, which signifies, fortis,
terribilis; but the same is also common in the Persian Tongue.

This is a Summary Account of the Chymerical Divinity of Mars in Assyria and
Persia: The Egyptians placed him in the second Degree among the Demigods that
reigned with them; and this may be observed from the Dynasties related by
Syncellus. Julian the Apostate makes mention of Mars of Edessa, who was called
Azizus.

Now all the Nations of the Earth having a ^ not be without one. History and
the Greek Fables tell us, that Mars having killed Halirrhothius, Neptune's Son,
for having violated the Chastity of his Daughter Alcippe, Neptune accused him
before the Tribunal of Twelve Gods, where he was acquitted: The Place in Atheus
where this Judgment was pronounced, has been since called (...), because 'twas
an Eminence or a Rock; and the Judges from thence took the Name of Areopagites:
This Action of Mars might very well induce the Greeks, to attribute unto him
what the most Ancient and Eastern Nations had already published concerning the
God of War. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, says, that the Sabins and the Romans
gave the Name of Quirinus to the God Enyalius, being in some doubt, whether he
were God Mars himself, or another God who presided over Military Adventures.

MARS,
in Astrology, is the Fifth Planet, being between the Sun and Jupiter; its a
mischievous Planet, which the Astrologers call Little Misfortune; she finishes
her Course in a Revolution of 322 Days, and goes round about the Sun. Fontana
has observed a Spot in the middle thereof, which he believes to be a Satellite,
as in Jupiter.

MARTIUS;
March, the Third Month in Year, according to our Way of Reckoning. It was
formerly the First amongst the Romans, and is still so in use in some
Ecclesiastical Computations. Its no longer than since the Edict of Charles IX,
in the Year 1564, that they have used in France to reckon the Year from the
Beginning of January; for before it began with March: Astrologers make it also
the first, because it is then that the Sun enters into Aries, by which they
begin to reckon the Signs of the Zodiac. The Calends of this Month was
anciently very remarkable, because of its being the first Day of the Year,
whereon diverse Ceremonies were performed: They kindled a new Fire upon the
Altar of Vesta with the Sunbeams, by the Help of a Burning-glass, in the same
Manner almost as they kindle it in the Popish Church on Easter-Eve: Hujus diei
prima ignem novum Vestae aris accendebant, ut incipiente anno, cura denuo
servandi novati ignis inciperet. Macr. L. 1. C. 12. Saturn. They took away the
old Lawrel-branches and Crowns, as well from the Door of the King of the
Sacrifices, as from the Courts and Houses of the Flamines, and the Axes of the
Consuls, and put new in the room of them; and this was called Mutatio
laurearum. And this Macrobius also informs us, Tam in Regia, curiisque atque
Flaminum domibus laureae veteres novis laureis mutabantur. Ovid tells us the
same Thing, in Lib. 3. Fast.

Laurea Flaminibus quae toto perstitit anno
Tollitur, and frondes sunt in honor novae:
Add quod arrana fieri novus ignis in aede
Dicitur, and vires flamma refecta capit.
The Magistrates took Possession of their Places; which continued, says Ovid,
till the Carthaginian War; for then they altered the Custom, and entered
thereon the First of January: The Roman Ladies celebrated a particular Feast
then, which was instituted by Romulus, and called Matronalia, of which by and
by.

On the Calends of this Month of March began the Feast of Shields or Sacred
Bucklers, Ancyliorum dies, which continued Three Days, whereat the Salii
carried small Bucklers: This Festival ended with splendid Feasting and great
Merriments, which is the Reason of giving the Name of Coena Saliaris to
sumptuous Entertainments. See Ancylia.

On the 6th, which is the Day before the Nones, in Latin called Pridie Nonas,
there were some Solemnities performed in Honor of Vesta. On the 7th, or Day of
the Nones, called Nonis, was celebrated the Anniversary of the Dedication of
the Temples consecrated on such a Day to Ve-Jupiter, in both the Woods of the
Asylum; as also a Feast to Juno, called Junonalia. See Junonalia.

On the 13th there was an Horse-race near the Tiber, or upon Mount Caelius,
when that River overflowed. On the 15th, or the Day of the Ides, came on the
Feast of Anna Perenna, of which I have spoken in its proper place: This Day was
called Parricidium, because Julius Caesar was then assassinated by Brutus, and
the rest of the Conspirators. On the 16th was another Feast called Liberalia,
for then it was that Children took upon them the Virile Robe. On the same Day
also they made Processions called Argei, or Argea in some Places, the which had
been consecrated by Numa in Commemoration of some Grecian Princes that had been
buried there. See Argei and Argea. On the 19th, or 14th of the Calends of
April, began the great Festival of Minerva, called Quinquatria, either because
it fell out on the Fifth Day after the Ides of March, or because it lasted Five
Days. See Quinquatria.

The 24th was marked with those Letters in the Calender, Q. R. C. F. Quando Rex
Comitiavit, Fas; it being as much as to say: It Is lawful for the Praetor to
keep his Seat, as soon as the King of the Sacrifices has done his Business in
the Assembly and is withdrawn. On the 25th was held the Feast called Hilaria,
which was instituted in Honor of the Mother of the Gods and of Atys: On the
26th came on the Feast of Washing the Grandmother of the Gods, Lavatio Matris
Deum, being instituted in Commemoration of the Day wherein she was brought from
Asia, and washed in the River Almo. Vid. Lavatio.

There were several Feasts kept on the 30th, viz. to Janus, Concord, Health and
to Peace. and next Day there was one to the Moon celebrated on Mount Aventine,
to which they sacrificed a Bull.

MARSYAS,
the Son of Oeagrus, who was a Shepherd, and one of the Satyrs, and having
taken up a Flute which Minerva had made of a Deer's-Bone, and thrown away in
Anger, he learnt of himself to play upon it, insomuch that he adventured to
challenge Apollo, the God of Hermony to play with him: The Muses were the
Judges of this Trial of Skill between them, and they gave the Victory to
Apollo, who presently caused Marsyas to be tied to a Tree, and stead alive by a
Scythian, and cut into Pieces.

MATRIMONIUM,
Marriage, there was a formal Betrothing and Contract went before it, as may be
seen in Plautus and Terence; for he that was minded to have a Virgin in
Marriage, made his Application to her Relations, and demanded their Consent to
it. Quid nunc etiam mihi despondes filiam, illis legibus
Cum illa dote quam tibi dixi; M. Sponden' ergo, spondeo.
Then the Contract was drawn and signed with the Relations Seal, wherein the
Terms and Articles of Marriage were writ, which gave Juvenal Occasion to say,

Si tibi legitimis pactam junctamque tabellis
Non es amaturus.
Veniet cum signatoribus Auspex.
The Bridegroom sent to her that was to be his Wife a Ring as a Pledge of their
future Marriage; which Tertullian informs us, who calls the said Ring Annulus
pronubus.

Aurum, inquiens, nulla norat praeter uno digito quem sponfus oppignerasset
pronubo annulo. De cultu faeminarum.

And Isidorus Hispalensis, Lib. 11. de div. off. Cap. 15. Quod in primis, ait,
nupti^^ annulus a sponso sponsae datur, fit nimirum vel propter mutua
dilectionis signum, vel propter id magis, ut eodem pignore eorum corda
jungantur: unde and quarto annulus digito inseritur, ideo quia in eo vena
quaedam, ut fertur, sanguinis ad cor usque perveniat.

And this is confirmed by Aulus Gellius, Macrobius and Appian, and particularly
by these Verses of Juvenal.

Conventum tamen and pactum and sponsalia nostra
Tempestate paras, jamque a tonsore magistro.
Pecteris, and digito pignus fortasse dedisis.
This Ring was made of Iron and without any Stone in the Time of Pliny the
Historian, as we read in L. 33. Not. Hist.

There were no Constitutions at first made for regulating the Age of such as
were to be betrothed, and the Articles of Betrothing might have been made by
both Parties at the Age of Seven Years: But afterward Augustus ordered they
should not be done till Two Years before the Consummation of the Marriage, that
is, at Ten Years of Age: Maidens might lawfully contract Marriage at Twelve
Years old: See how Dio speaks, L. 54. Quoniam autem, ait Dio, quidam infantes
puellas despondentes, praemiis quidem conjugum fiuebantur, caeterum effectum
rei and conjugum opus now praestabant, ea sponsalia vires nullas habere
constituit, post quae doubus transactis annis sponsa duci minime posset: hoc
est ut omnimo decennis virgo desponderetur, duodecimo namque anno virgo matura
viro and nubilis existimatur.

The Articles of Agreement being made, there was a Day appointed for
solemnizing the Marriage: All the first Days of the Months, as well as the
Month of May were accounted unhappy for Marrying. Macrobius L. 1. C. 25. makes
an Enumeration of all the Days whereon the Romans would not marry. Nec hoc
praetermiserim, ait, quod nuptiis copulandis Calendas, Nonas, and Idus
religiosas, id est devitandas censuerunt; hi enim dies praeter Nonas feriati
sunt, feriis autem vim cuique fieri piaculare est: Ideo tunc vitantur nuptiae
in quibus sieri vis virginibus videtur.

They were very sollicitous about consulting and receiving good Omens before
Marriage, as appears by that Verse in Plautus.

Vltro ibit nuptum, non manebit Auspices. And Tacitus Lib. 11. speaking of the
Wedding of Messalina, says, That her Marriage to Silius was performed with all
the Ceremonies, Sacrifices, Testimonies, Auspices, Feastings, Kissings and
Embraces imaginable, nay, with all the Freedom of Man and Wife: And in L. 15.
where he speaks of Nero's Marriage with Pythagora, he makes mention of the
Omens: The Marriage was performed with all the usual Ceremonies: Money was
consigned into the Hands of the Augurs: She had the Vail on, which Brides used
to wear. There was a Wedding-bed prepared; and the Flambeau's of Hymen were
lighted.

The Bride had an old Man's Hair on her Head, says Sextus Pompeius, which was
curled with the Spear of a Javelin that had struck in the Body of a Gladiator
that had been slain, to the End that in like manner as the Spear had been
united to the Body of the Gladiator she might also be to her Husband; or else
because Women were under the Protection of Juno Curitis, who was called Curis
in the Language of the Sabines, being as much as to say, a Javelin, or Spear.
Sive quod hasta Curis priseis est dicta Latinis.
Ovid. Lib. 11. Fast. The Bride wore a long Vest which had been wrought by the
Hands of Caia Caecilia, according to Pliny, L. 7. Hist. Not. and at her
Entrance into her Husband's House, she had the Keys presented to her, whereby
she was constituted Mistress of the whole House, and the Management of the
Family was left to her; whereas on the Contrary, when the Husband divorced his
Wife, he took the Keys from her, as may be seen by that Passage in Cicero, in
Anton. Act. 2. Mimam exegit, claves ademit, res suas sibi habere jussit. When
this Ceremony was over, they laid her upon a Sheep-skin with the Wool on, to
put her in mind that Men were formerly clad with the Skins of Beasts, and
farther to intimate it was her Duty to employ herself in Spinning: After this
they fell to Feastings, and other Diversions.

At the Marriages of the Greeks they sung the Hymenaeus, but at those of the
Romans they performed the Talassio, both by Instrumental and Vocal Music: Now
this Custom of Performing the Talassio comes, says Livy, from an Adventure that
happened when the Romans ravished the Sabine Women, for there was one of the
most beautiful of them who was forced by Talassio's Soldiers, and, who as they
were carrying of her toward their Commander, for fear left any should take her
away from them, they cried that they reserved her for Talassio; and this Word
was afterward found to be a good Omen by the Augurs, and has remained till
now. This Eusebius also informs us: Sabinae, ait, rapte anno ab urbe condita
tertio, and una virginum pulchertima cunctorum acclamatione rapientium Talassio
duci Romuli decernitur; unde in nuptiarum solemnitatibus Talassio vulgo
acclamitant, quo scilicet talis nuptasit, quae Talassium habere mereatur.

Varro gives this Word another Interpretation, and will have it to signify a
Pannier to put Wool in. The Husband threw Nuts to the Boys, Sparge marite,
nuces, Virg. Eclog. 8. intimating he gave himself up to all the Diversions of
Children, and to hinder the Hearing the Bride's Cry, when she lost her
Virginity: They sung wanton and smutty Songs, called Versus Fescennini, because
the first of the Sort were made in the City of Fescennia. Fescennium, says
Servius, is a City of Campania, where Songs proper for Weddings were invented:
Fescennium est oppidum Campaniae, ubi nuptialia carmina sunt inventa. Lastly,
The Wedding-Bed was prepared, which by the Ancients was called Lectus or Torus
genialis, and then they invoked the Genius of the Husband, and the Bride was
put to Bed. Next Day the Husband made a Feast at his House called Repotia, and
had Presents made him; and both Husband and Wife offered Sacrifices to the
Gods. Festus speaks of this Custom in the following manner: Regillis, inquit,
tunicis albis textis pridie nuptiarum indutae cubitum ibant ominis causa: There
was a Girdle given to the Bride, which the Bridegroom united at her going to
Bed, and this Girdle was made of Sheeps Wool: Cui mea virginitas avibus libata
sinistris,
Castaque fallaci zona revincta manu.
Juno, who presided over Marriages, took diverse Names according to the diverse
Actions performed thereat: First from the Conjunction of Man and Wife they gave
her the Epithet of Juga; from the Conduct of the Bride in her Husband's House,
she was called Domiduca and Iterduca; from the Woman's Girdle Cinxia; and from
the Perfumes they anointed her with she got the Name of Vnxia. St. Aug. Lib. 6.
de Civ. Dei. Cap. 11. Laughs at the Superstition of the Gentiles, for
introducing so many Gods into the Ceremony of Marriage: The God Jugatinus, says
he, presides over the Habitation of the Man and Woman: Another God called
Domiducus, is required to conduct the Bride to her Husband's House: The God
Domicus his Office is to keep her there, whereunto they also added the Goddess
Munturna, to make her continue to dwell with her Husband. They likewise filled
the Room with a Company of Gods, when the Paranymphs came thither: In short,
the Goddess Virgo, Father Subiguus, Mother Prima, Partunda, Venus and Priapus
assisted hereat: The Goddess Virgo was to be present to undress the Bride, God
Subiguus, in order to put her to Bed; the Goddess Prima, to hinder her from
resisting the Carresses of her Husband. Priapus must be there also, and in
pursuance to a most Civil and Religious Custom of the Roman Ladies, they made
the Bride sit in the Lap of this infamous Diety, under a Pretense of preventing
thereby the Power any Charms and Witchcrafts might have over her.

The Bride had a Flame-coloured Vail, called Flammeum, on, and under it wore a
Crown of Vervein, which she had gathered her self: Flammea texantur sponsae.
And Tacitus, C. 15. Annal. speaking of Nero, says, They veiled him with such a
Vail as Brides wore. The Hymenea Torches were lighted; and these were made of
white Thorn or Pine; by the Light whereof the Bride in the Evening was
conducted to her Husband's House: Mopse, novas incide faces, tibi ducltur uxor.
The Bride amongst the Greeks and the Egyptians was conducted to her Husband's
House in a Chariot; but among the Romans she was lead by the Hand, and the
Doors of the House were adorned with Garlands of Flowers and green Boughs. The
Bride's Toilet was carried by a Lad in a Basket that was covered: And when she
came to the Bridegroom's House, the Bride was asked who she was, to which she
presently answered Caia, as Val. Maximus informs us; Allusion being thereby
made to Caia Caecilia, Tarquinius Priscus his Wife, who was the Mother of a
most exemplary Family, and who spent her Life in Spining. This being over, the
Bride put some Wool at the Door of the Bridegroom's House, and sprinkled it
with Oil or Wolf's Grease; as Pliny observes; Novas nuptas adipe lupino posts
inungere solitas: And Servius upon the 4th Book of the Eneids writes to this
Purpose; Moris erat ut nubentes puellae simul ac venissent ad limen mariti,
posts antequam ingrederentur, ornarent laneis vittis and oleo ungerent: When
this was done, she jumped over the Threshold, and was very careful not to touch
it; which otherwise would have been a very ill Omen, according to Lucan:
Translata vitat contingere limina planta.
Servius upon the 8th Eclogue of Virgil, says, That the Bride in going into her
Husband's House, took care not to touch the Threshold, for fear of becoming
guilty of Sacrilege, by touching the Place that was consecrated to Vesta. Ideo
Sponsas limen non tetigisse, ut ne a sacrilegio inchoarent, si rem Vestae
calcarint.

MATRONALIA;
they were Feasts instituted by Romulus, and celebrated by the Roman Ladies.
Ovid gives diverse Reasons why they were instituted: 1st, Because the Roman
Ladies interposed between their Husbands and Relations in the Battle with the
Sabins, and also terminated the Difference between them for having stole them;
in Commemoration of which Action Romulus would have the Day of the said
Pacification, which was the First of March, celebrated as a Festival. 2dly, In
order to pray unto Mars that he would favor them to bring forth Children as
happily as Ilia, on whom he had begot Romulus. 3dly, Because in this Month the
Earth began to bring forth and grow fertile. 4thly, Because on that Day a
Temple had been dedicated to Juno Lucina (upon the Mount called Esquiliae) who
presided over Women's Lying-in. 5thly, Because Mars was Juno's Son who presided
over Marriages: This Feast was remarkable, upon Account that the Men sent
Presents to the Women, as they did again to the Men at the Saturnalia: Sicut
Saturnalibus, says Suetonius, dabat viris apophoreta, ita and Calendis Martii
faeminis: And inasmuch as the Men treated their Slaves at the
Saturnalian-Feasts, and made them their Companions, so the Women did the same
thing now in respect to their Slaves, and served them at Table; for which
Reason the said Day was called Saturnalia faminarum. Batchellors did not assist
at these Feasts; which gave Horace occasion to tell Maecenas, that he would be
surprised to find that he who was not married, celebrated the Calends of March:

Martiis caelebs quid agam Calendis,
Quid velint flores and accerra turis
Plena, miraris, positusque carbo in Cespite vivo.
MATUTA;
Break-of-day, a Goddess called Leucothoe by the Greeks.

MAUSOLUS,
was a King of Caria, born at Mylasa, who built a stately Palace in
Halicarnassus, adorned with Proconnesian Marble. His Queen Artemisia erected a
stately Funeral Monument for him, and called it according to his Name
Mausoleum, the which in ancient Times passed for one of the 7 Wonders of the
World.

MAXENTIUS,
was Maximian's Son: Hercules Victor says, That Eutropia his Wife had put a
suppositious Child upon him: When he understood that Constantine was chosen
Emperor; he got himself also declared so at Rome by the Pretorian Bands, whom
he corrupted with large Donatives: He was infamous for his Cruelties and Vices,
and was defeated by Constantine, near unto Pons Milvins, or the Milvian Bridge
upon the Tiber, which breaking under him, he was drowned, after he had reigned
Seven Years.

MAXIMINUS
was a Person of a mean Birth, but succeeded Alexander Severus in the Empire:
He was of a Gigantick Stature, being Eight Foot and a Half high, insomuch that
his Wife's Bracelet served him for a Thumb-ring: He was robustick and strong as
if he were another Milo, which made every Body dread him, so that Balbinus
trembled when he heard but his Name mentioned. He had a long and sharp-pointed
Chin, which is a common Sign of a fierce and cruel Nature; and so indeed he was
violent and cruel to the highest Degree, that being his Maxim, that he could
not maintain himself in the Empire but by Severity. Moreover, as he was a
Person of an extraordinary Size, and had a large Mouth, as great Eaters usually
have, it is the less to be wondered at what Historians write, that he sometimes
did eat in one Day Forty Pounds of Victuals, and drunk as many Pints of Wine.
He was killed together with his Son by the Soldiery, having reigned only Three
Years.

MECOENAS,
a Roman Knight descended from the Kings of Etruria, which made Horace,
speaking concerning him, say, Mecaenas atavis edite Regibus.
He was the Patron of learned Men, and had a singular Kindness for Virgil and
Horace: He was a Favorite of the Emperor Augustus, and of a very healthy
Constitution: All the Patrons of learned Men are at this Day called Meccanas's.

MEDEA;
the Daughter of Aetes, King of Colchos, who by her Magical Art assisted Jason
to take away the Golden-Fleece; she married him afterward, and had Two
Children by him; but that did not hinder him from wedding Creusa, the Daughter
of Creon, King of Corinth, whither had retired. Creon banished Medea, scarce
allowing her a Day's Respite, the which she improved to make enchanted Presents
to Creusa, whereby she was destroyed: Creon afterward died embracing of his
Daughter: Medea killed her own Children, and in a Chariot drawn by winged
Serpents made her Escape to Athens, where she married King Egeus, by whom she
had a Son named Medus: But going about to poison Theseus the eldest Son of
Egeus, her Design was discovered, and she was forced to fly to Asia with her
Son Medus, who left his Name to the Country of Media.

MEDICINA,
Physic; it is an Art, according to Galen, to preserve present Health, and to
restore that which is lost; and according to Hippocrates, it is an adding of
that which is wanting, and a retrenching of what is superstuous; in Herophilus
his Sense, it is a Knowledge of such Things as are conducive to Health, or
noxious thereunto. This Art was not introduced to Rome, till about 600 Years
after the Building thereof, as Pliny says; wherein he is mistaken, unless he
means, that it was not practiced in Rome by Foreign Physicians till such a
Time. The Art is divided into Anatomy, Pathology, Therapeutick, Chemistry,
Botanism, and Surgery: Julian the Apostate made a Law concerning Physicians,
which is printed among his Greek Letters, and runs thus in English. It being
known by Experience, that the Art of Physic is beneficial to Manking; it is not
without Cause that the Philosophers have given out, it came down from Heaven,
seeing that by it the Infirmities of Nature, and accidental Sicknesses are
removed, wherefore in Pursuance to the Rules of Equity, and the Decrees and
Authority of the Emperors our Predecessors, we of our good Will and Pleasure
require and command that you who profess Physich be dispensed with, and
discharged of all Offices and Charges laid by the Senate.

MEDICUS,
a Physician, is one who practices the Art of Physich in Curing of Diseases and
Wounds, for of old, Physicians practiced Chyrurgery; some Authors pretend, that
Physic was practiced by no other than Slaves and Freedmen; but Causabon in his
Comments upon Suetonius refutes this, and so does Drelincourt, Professor of
Physic at Leyden; and the same may be farther justified by old Inscriptions.
Dioscorides, a Grecian of Anazarba, coming to Rome, was made a Citizen thereof,
and became the intimate Friend of Licinius Bassus, an illustrious Roman. The
Physician who viewed the Wounds of Julius Caesaer, was called Antistius, and
consequently was a free Citizen of Rome; for Slaves had only a Surname, without
any Name for their Family. Pliny who seems not to treat well of Physic, says,
That the Quirites, as much as to say, the Romans, practiced it; and it is well
known that no Roman Citizens were Slaves: Those who are acquainted with
History, must know what Esteem Physicians were in of old at Rome, and
elsewhere, since Princes themselves disdained not the Study of it. Mithridates,
King of Pontus, did himself prepare a Remedy against Poison. Juba, King of
Mauritania, writ a Book of Plants; and Evax, King of Arabia, according to the
Testimony of Pliny, dedicated a Book to Nero concerning the Medicinal Virtues
of Simples.

Its true, Suetonius in the Life of Caligula speaks of a Slave that was a
Physician: Mitto tibi praeterea cum eo ex servis meis Medicum; I also send you
one of my Slaves, who is a Physician with him. There might have been some
Slaves who were Physicians; but it does not follow that there were no other but
Slaves that were Physicians. Its farther pretended, that they were banished out
of Rome in the Time of Cato the Censor, according to the Sentiments of Agrippa,
in his Book concerning the Vanity of Sciences; but for this there is no other
Foundation than the Misunderstanding of the following Passage in Pliny: This
Art of Physic is subject to a Thousand Changes, and a Thousand Additions, so
liable are our Minds to change upon the first Wind that blows from Greece; and
there is nothing more certain among such as practice it than that he who
abounds most in Words, becomes uncontroulably the Arbiter of Life and Death, as
if there were not a Multitude of People who live without Physicians, though
indeed they should not be without Physic, and this may be observed concerning
the Romans themselves, who lived above 600 Years without them; though otherwise,
they were not a People flow to receive good Arts, but manifested the
Inclination they had for Physic, till having had Experience thereof, they
condemned it, expertam damnarunt.However, they did not condemn the Art of
Physic it self, but the Male Practice thereof, non rem, sed artem.

Cassius Hemina, an old Author, says, That the first Physician who came from
Peloponesus to Rome, was Archagatus, the Son of Iysanias, when L. Aemilius and
M. Livius were Consuls, in the Year DXXXV, after the Building of Rome; that
they made him a Citizen, and that the Government bought him a Shop in the
Cross-street of Acilius: It Is said they gave him the Title of Healer of Wounds,
and that he was at first very much made of; but soon after, his cruel
Operations which went so far, as to the Cutting off and Burning of some Parts
of the Patient's Body, procured him the Nickname of Hangman, and made the
People out of conceit both with Physic and Physicians. And to go a little
farther with this Matter, take the Words of Marcus Cato the Censor to his Son;
says he, I Will tell thee now, my dear Son Mark, what my Thoughts are of these
Greeks, and what I desire you to learn during your Stay at Athens: Take care to
inform your self of their Customs, but learn them not: They are a wicked and
indocible People, which I cannot endure. Believe it, as if it came from a
Prophet, that when this Nation communicates her Sciences to others, she
corrupts the whole, and especially if she should send her Physicians hither to
us: They are bound to one another by Oath to kill all Barbarians with their
Physic..... They call us Barbarians, nay, and give us more opprobrious Names:
I forbid you therefore above all Things to have to do with the Physicians.

We ought not to rely upon what Pliny says, in respect to the Romans having no
Physicians for above 600 Years, seeing he contradicts himself, when he says
that Archagatus came thither in the Year 535. So that he misreckons near 100
Years. But to show you more exactly how he is mistaken; we must observe what
Dionysius of Halicarnassus says upon the Year CCCI, Hist. Romans wherein he shows
that a Plague breaking out at Rome, it swept away almost all the Slaves and
half the Citizens, there being not Physicians enough to attend so many sick
Persons: So that here is at least a Rebate of 300 Years in Pliny's Account,
seeing according to the Testimony of the said Dionysius, who was an Author of
good Credit, there had been Physicians at Rome from the Year 301. In the
succeeding Age, viz. in the Year CCCCLXI, the Plague raged again in the City of
Rome, and the Art and Care of the Physicians being not able to withstand the
Contagion; the Romans sent Deputies into Greece to setch Esculasius the God of
Physic thither, who at Epidaurus had done Wonders in the Curing of Diseases.
In the 6th Century Archagatus was the first that came from Greece to Rome.
Terence adapts a Comedy to the Year DLXXXVIII, wherein he brings Physicians
upon the Stage; which he would have taken care not to have done, if they had
none of them at Rome, or if they had been banished thence. Plautus before him,
in his Mercator, brings in a discontented Man, who said, that he would go for
some Poison to a Physician: Ibo ad Medicum, atque me ibi toxico morti dabo.
Herophilus came in the 7th Century, who, as Pliny says, resisted the
Principles of Erasistratus, and settled the Differences between Diseases,
according to the Rules of Music. Asclepiades toward the End of the said
Century flourished, and after him his Scholar Themiso; and the famous Craterus,
of whom Cicero speaks often in his Epistles to Atticus, and indeed, he was a
Person of very great Reputation, as Horace witnesses: Non est cardiacus,
Craterum dixisse putato, Hic Aeger.
It is of him Porphyric speaks, who having a Person for his Patient that lay
ill of an extraordinary Distemper, wherein his Flesh fell away from his Bones,
he cured him, by feeding him with Vipers dressed like Fish. In the 8th Age,
besides the famous Antonius Musa, Augustus his Physician, and Eudemus; Celsus,
Scribonius Largus, and Charicles flourished also at Rome in the Reigns of
Augustus, Tiberius, and Caligula; Vectius Valens, and Alco lived under
Claudius, and so did Cyrus, Livia's Physician. During the 9th Century there
flourished at Rome Statius Annaeus, Nero's Physician, old Andromachus, the
Inventer of the Theriaca Andromacha; Thessalus, who got himself the Name of
Iatronices, i. e. Conqueror of Physicians, because he boasted he had overthrown
their Principles; Crinas of Marseilles, and Charmis of the said City, who being
desirous to go beyond their Brethren, condemned the Use of Hot Baths, and made
their Patients bath in cold Water, even in Winter time. In the 10th Century,
after the Building of Rome, Galen, a Native of Pergamus, was in Request at
Rome, he being Physician to the Emperors Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus. In
the 11th Century there were diverse famous Physicians in the Empire and at Rome;
but the 12th was fertile in them, among whom were Zeno of Cyprus, Ionicus of
Sardis, Magnus of Antioch, and Oribassius of Pergamus, who were his Disciples.
This was the last Age of the Roman Empire, which according to the Appearance of
the 12 Vultures to Romulus, was to last but so many Centuries.

MEDIMNUS, or MEDIMNUM;
it was a Measure among the Greeks, containing Six Roman Bushels, which is
about Lifty English Quarts.

MEDITRINALIA,
were Feasts instituted in Honor of the Goddess Meditrina, a Medendo, because
the Romans then began to drink new Wines, which they mixed with old, and that
served them instead of Physic: It was celebrated on the 30th of September.

MEDUSA,
the Daughter of Phorcus, who dwelt in one of the Islands of the Ethiopian
Sea, with her two Sisters Euryale and Sthenion, who were called Gorgons. Modusa
was exceeding beautiful beyond her Sisters, and had the finest Head of Hair in
the World. Neptune enjoyed her in the Temple of Minerva, who resenting so base
an Action, turned the Hairs of Medusa's Head into so many Serpents, and made
her Aspect so terrible, as to transform all that looked upon her into Stones.
Perseus rid the Earth of so horrible a Monster, and by the Help of Mercury's
Wings, and Minerva's Shield, cut off her Head, the which Pallas fixed to her
Shield, and with which she petrified all her Enemies.

MEGAERA,
was one of the Furies of Hell, the Name being derived from the Greek (...),
Odiosa, and who by Virgil is placed in Hell, with her Head dressed with Serpents,
and a frightful Aspect, which punishes the Guilty.

MEGALESIA;
they were Feasts instituted in Honor of Cybele the Grandmother of the Gods;
and the same was solemnized on the Nones of April, i. e. the Fifth Day, with
Plays and Rejoycings: The Priests of this Goddess, who were called Galli,
carried her Image along the City with the Sound of Drums and Wind-musick, in
order to imitate the Noise they made, who were entrusted by this Goddess with
the Education of her Son Jupiter, that so they might hinder Saturn from hearing
the Child's Cry, and not devour him, as he had done his other Children.

MELAMPUS,
the Son of Amithaon the Argian, and of Doripe; he was an Augur and a very
experienced Physician; he had the Art perfectly to imitate the Volces of all
Sorts of Animals: There were Temples erected for him, and Divine Honors paid
him; Proetus gave him his Daughter Iphianassa in Marriage, whom by his Art he
had brought to her right Senses.

MELANTHO,
the Daughter of Proteus, who was wont to divert her self in the Sea riding
upon a Dolphin's Back; but Neptune being taken with her Beauty, assumed the
Shape of a Dolphin, and after he had carried her on his Back for some Time in
the Sea, he took her off and enjoyed her.

MELEAGER,
the Son of Oeneus King of Calydonia, and of Althaea: Diana being angry that
this King had forgot her at a Sacrifice, sent a furious Boar into his Country,
which he with the Help of Theseus killed; from whence came the Proverb, Non
fine Theseo: This Victory proved fatal to Meleager, for having made a Present
of this Animal's Head to his Mistress, the Jealousy of some Persons who were
present, occasioned a Quarrel, wherein his Two Uncles were killed, and whose
Death Althea their Sister, and the Mother of this Prince, revenged upon him in
a very strange Manner: For Althea perceiving, at the Time that Meleager was
born, that the Destinies had limited the Life of the said Child so long as a
Firebrand should last, she took care to put the Fire out, and to preserve that
Firebrand very carefully: But being now desirous to revenge the Death of her
Brothers upon her Son, she threw the Firebrand into the Fire, and presently the
unhappy Meleager felt a terrible Burning throughout his whole Body, and died
with miserable Torments: His Sisters lamented him, and were transformed into
Turky-Hens. Lucian also relates this Fable in his Dialogue concerning
Sacrifices: All the Evils which formerly fell out in Etolia, and all the
Calamities of the Calydoneans with the Murdering of them, and the Death of
Meleager, came from the Displeasure of Diana, who was angry she had been
forgotten at a Sacrifice.

MELICERTES,
the Son of Athamas and Ino, who with his Mother threw himself down headlong
over the Rocks called Scironides, and was carried by a Dolphin to Corinth,
where he was turned into a Sea-God by the Name of Palemon. They celebrated
Games in Honor of him, called the Isthmian-games, near Corinth, with great
Expense.

MELPOMENE,
one of the Nine Muses, said to have been the Inventress of Tragedies, Odes and
Songs.

MEMNON,
the Son of Tithonus and Aurora, who came to the Relief of King Priamus at the
Siege of Troy, and was killed by Achilles in a Duel: He was changed into a
Bird by his Mother, when his Body was laid upon the Funeral-Pile: The Egyptians
erected a Statue for him, which made a Noise at Sunrising, when the Sun darted
it is Beams upon it, and the same in the Evening had a mournful and complaining
Tone, as if it were concerned for the Loss of it is Presence: This is the
Account Philostratus and Tacitus give thereof.

MENANDER,
an Athenean famous for his Comedies, of whom Phaedrus speaks in the 5th Book
of his Fables: He was courted by the Kings of Egypt, and more particularly in
Favor with Demetrius, who admired the Excellency of his Wit.

MENIPPUS,
a Cynick Philosopher, whom Lucian in his Dialogue entitled Icaromenippus,
makes to take a Journey into Heaven, by the Help of a Couple of Wings, one
being a Vulture's and the other an Eagle's; and the Reason which he makes
Menippus give why he undertook so great a Journey, is that after he had
observed the Frailty and Inconstancy of Humane Things, he began to despise
Grandeur, Wealth and Pleasures, and to apply himself to a Contemplation and
Search after Truth, for which End he consulted the Philosophers, but that he
found so much Contradiction and Uncertainty in what they said, that he was
resolved to go and enquire after it into Heaven.

MENOECEUS;
the Son of Creon King of Thebes, who was willing to die for the Preservation
of his Country, for when they came to know by the Oracle, that the Thebans
should obtain the Victory, if the last of Cadmus his Race devoted himself to
the Infernal Gods, he slew himself with his own Sword, after he had so devoted
himself.

MENSIS,
a Month, the Space of Time that the Sun takes to run through one Sign of the
Zodiac, which makes the 12th part of a Year: Cicero derives this Word from
Mensura, or Metior, Qui, quia mensa spatia conficiunt, menses nominantur.

Months, properly speaking, are no other than the Time which either the Moon
takes to run through the Zodiac (called by Astrologers a Periodical Month) or to
return from Sun to Sun, (which is distinguished by the Name of a Synodical
Month) but yet this Name has been also given to the Time the Sun is a running
through the Twelfth Part of the Zodiac; two Sorts of Months, viz. the Lunar and
the Solar being hereby distinguished: The Lunar Synodical Month, which is that
alone that People mind, is a little above Twenty Nine Days and an Half: The
Solar is usually accounted to consist of some Thirty Days Ten Hours and an
Half: The Month is again distinguished into an Astronomical and Civil Month;
the first is properly the Solar Month, and the Civil is that which is
accommodated to the Customs of People and particular Nations, every one in
their Way, some using the Lunar, others the Solar Months.

The Jews, Greeks and Romans formerly made use of Lunar Months; but to avoid
all such Fractions in Numbers as would happen, they made them alternatively to
consist of Twenty Nine and Thirty Days, calling the former Cavi, and the other
Pleni: The Egyptians used Solar Months, and ordered all of them to consist of
Thirty Days only, adding to the End of the Year Five Days which were made up of
the Supernumerary Hours, and neglecting the Six Hours, or thereabouts, that
arose from the Half Hours; and this made their Seasons in the Revolution of
every Four Years go backward One Day: We now make use of these Months, though we
render them unequal, and at the same Time reserve the Six Hours to make up a
Day from Four Year to Four Year; and this has been explained under the Word
Annus, which may be seen for this Purpose.

Romulus made his Year at first to consist but of Ten Months, the first of
which was March, then April, May, June, Quintilis, (July) Sextilis (August)
September, October, November, December. But Numa Pompiltus who had a very
particular Converse with Pythagoras, of whom he had learned diverse Things in
the Astronomical Art, of which he made good Use, especially upon this Occasion,
added Two Months more to Romulus's Ten Months, by taking a Day off from April,
June, August, September, and December to which Romulus had allowed Thirty Days,
leaving Thirty One Days to the rest as they had them; then adding those Six
Days to Fifty One that were wanting in Romulus his Year which consisted of 304
Days, in order to perfect his own of 355 that made 57 Days, the which he
divided into Two other Months, viz. into January which had 29 Days, and
February 28. which he placed before March. He was not concerned that the Days
in this last Month consisted of an even Number, because he designed it for the
Time to offer Sacrifices in to the Infernal Gods, to which this Number, as
being unhappy, according to the Egyptians Superstition, seemed to belong. He
constituted the Month of January, which he appointed for the Winter-Solstice,
to be the first Month in the Year, instead of March which was so before, and
which Romulus had put for the Vernal Equinox.

The Romans made use of Three Words to reckon the Days of their Months by, to
wit, the Calends, Nones and Ides: The first Day of every Month was called
Calends; the Four following Days were the Nones (except in March, May, July and
October, who had 6 Days of Nones;) then came the Ides, which contained Eight
Days: And the rest of the Month was reckoned by the Calends of the following
Month: We now make use of the Roman Months, and only reckon the Days therein by
1, 2, 3, 4, etc. See what has been said upon Calendae and Calendarium.

MENSORES;
Harbingers, whose Business it was to go and fix upon Lodgings for the
Emperors, when they were minded to go to any Province; and when they intended
to encamp, they marked out the same, and assigned its Post to every Regiment.

MENSURA;
Measure, being that which serves to make known unto us the Greatness, Extent
and Quantity of some Body. Josephus, the Jewish Historian, attributes to Cain
the Inventing of Measures: Eutropius in the Beginning of his History ascribes
it to Sidonius, in the Time that Procas reigned in Alba, some 300 Years after
the Destruction of Troy: But the Holy Scriptures show us that Measures are much
more ancient, since it is said, Lev. 19. Ye shall do no Unrighteousness in
Judgment, in Mete-yard, in Weight or in Measure. The Ancients had a Custom, and
the same is still in being in some Places, to lay up the Original Measure in
their Temples, that Recourse might be had thereunto, when they were minded to
try whether the others were right or no; and this is that which is to be
understood by the Measures of the Sanctuary so often mentioned in Scripture:
For it is not to be believed, that these Measures or Weights of the Sanctuary
were different from those in common Use, since this would but confound all
manner of Trading: But these Weights were only more exact than others, and
therefore it is that the Scripture always refers us to them, when it would
point out unto us the greatest Exactness, and strictest Justice. We read in
Fannius, that the Amphora, which was a very ancient Measure, was by the Romans
consecrated to Jupiter, upon Mount Tarpeius, where the Capitol stood: Quam ne
violare liceret,
Sacravere Jovi Tarpeio in monte Quirites.
And the Emperor Vespasian, after the Civil Wars with Vitellius were ended,
having repaired the Capitol, put also the Original Measures therein.

There are Three sorts of Geometrical Measures, viz. the Line, the Superficies,
and the Solid Body. Line-Measure refers only to Length; as a Road is measured
by Paces, a Rope by the Fathom, a Beam, or some other Piece of Wood by the
Foot; in the same Manner are measured the Height of a Tower, the Depth of a
Pit, or the like. The other Way of Measuring is superficial, and consists of
Length and Breadth, whose Lines crossing each other, and the Sides being
multiplied by one another, show what the Content of its Compass is, which is
commonly called the Area: As supposing one of the Sides be 7 Foot, and the
other 4, the Area of the Superficies will be 28 Foot, for 4 times 7 makes 28.
By this Way are Acres of Land, Woods, Waters and Meadows measured; so likewise
Hangings, and Panes of Glass, which ought to be taken as superficial Squares.
The Third Way of Measuring is Cubical, or a Solid Body in all the Parts and
Dimensions of Length, Breadth and Depth, such as are Feet in Mason's Work,
which should be like a Dye (...); so as that having but 6 Feet in Length, it
should have 36 in the Area or Superficies, and 216 solid Body.

But for the better Understanding, and exacter Rating of Measures, you must
know that as the As or Pound, which were Synonymous Terms amongst the Romans,
were divided into 12 Ounces; these Terms have also been very often applied to a
Total divided into 12 Equal parts; and the Name of their Aliquot parts, has
been also applied to the Parts of those other Things: Wherefore it will be
proper here to see the Division made under the Word As, and the Names of its
Parts; of which take this Abridgment.

As or Libra 12 Ounces, or a Pound, or a Total divided into 12 Parts. Deunx, 11
Ounces, or 11 Parts. Decunx or Dextans, 10 Ounces, or 10 Parts. Dodrans, 9
Ounces, or 9 Parts. Bes or Bessis, 8 Ounces, or 8 Parts. Septunx, 7 Ounces, or
7 Parts. Semissis, 6 Ounces, or Half a Pound, or Half the Total. Quincunx, 5
Ounces, or 5 Parts. Triens, 4 Ounces, or 4 Parts. Quadrans, 3 Ounces, or 3
Parts. Sextans, 2 Ounces, or 2 Parts. Sescunx, 1 Ounce, or 1 Part and an Half.
Vncia, an Ounce, or one Part of the whole.
Hence it is that the Roman Sestier being divided into Twelve Cyathae, they
were marked likewise by the Parts of the As called Aliquots, as you have it in
Martial, Sextantes, Calliste, duos infunde Falerni:


Fill me; Callistus, Two Sextans of Falernian Wine.

That is Four Cyathae, for the Word Sextans which signified Two Ounces, or the
Sixth Part of an As is taken here for Two Cyathae, which make the Sixth Part of
a Roman Sestier, and in another Place. Poto ego Sextantes; tu potas, Cinna,
Deunces.


I drink Two Cyathae, but you, Cinna, drink Eleven.

And hence also it comes to pass, that the Foot being divided into Twelve
Inches, it obtained the Name of a Pound, as each Inch did the Name of an Ounce:
And this has been the Cause we meet with such sort of Expressions,
Quincuncialis herba in Pliny, a Plant Five Inches high, Vnciales litterae in
St. Jerome, Capital Letters of an Inch high, and in the Holy Scripture it self
Crassitudo trium unciarum, Three Inches thick.

What we are more particularly to distinguish in this Place are those Two Sorts
of Librae we meet with, whereof the one is divided into Twelve Ounces, and the
other is a Measure divided into Twelve Inches, that so we may unravel all the
Difficulties that may arise upon this Occasion. Now this Distinction of a Libra
into Weights and Measure is to be met with in the Works of Galen; who says,
That the same Name was given by the Romans to a Pound Weight, whereby solid
Bodies were weighed, and to a Pound of Measure which was made use of for
Liquids: The same Author in another Place taking upon him to reprove some
Physicians, who did not specify the said Difference, says, They would have
done better to have noted more carefully what Ounces and Pounds, they meant,
should be used for Liquid Remedies, whether they were those of Weights or
Measures. And in another Place he informs us, that the Inches were marked on
those Measures by certain Lines, and that those Inches were called Ounces. The
Romans, said he, had a Measure which they used to sell Oil by, that was
distinguished by certain Lines, whereby the Whole was divided into Twelve
Parts, and they called it a Pound of entire Measure, and the Twelfth Part
thereof an Ounce.

This Use of the Libra and the Parts thereof for Weights and Measure was
formerly so common, that those who made it their Business to give it the
clearest Explication, added thereunto the Word Pondo for Pondere, in order to
the avoiding of all manner of Equivocation, when they would have it understood
they meant Weights: For Example, Plautus says, Laserpitii libram pondo diluunt.
They steeped a Pound of Benjamin; Pisoium nullam unciam pondo cepi, I have not
taken this Day an Ounce of Fish, Columella's Expression is, Sextarius aquae cum
dodrante pondo mellis, a Pint of Water with Nine Ounces of Honey. Livy also
says, Paterae aureae fuerunt 176, libres fere omnes Pondo, there were 176
Gold-Cups, that weighed almost each of them a Pound. Its certain that this
Equivocation concerning the Pound of Weights, and that of Measure has often
introduced Confusion into Authors, as may be justified by Galen, who speaking
of the Contest there was in his Time concerning Measures noted by Authors that
were not fully explained, informs us, that some thought they ought to take the
Term Cotyla according to the Measure of the Atheneans, and others, according to
the Italian, which was more.

There were Two Sorts of Measures, one flat or long, and the other round and
hollow, for dry Things and Liquids: Long-Measure is a Barley-Corn, which in
Geometry makes the 12th part of an Inch, otherwise called a Line. The Inch
contains 12 Lines or Barley-Corns; the Romans called it Vncia. Its the 12th
part of a Foot, and contains 3 Fingers, each of which takes up the Breadth of 4
Barley-Corns or Lines. The Foot is 12 Inches; a Geometrical Pace 5 Foot; a
Geometrical Perch 10 Feet, and in some Places 22; a Spar 8 Inches; a Cubit (a
Jewish Measure) a Foot and an half; a Furlong 125 Paces; the Funiculus, an
Egyptian Measure, 40 Furlongs; a Mile 8 Furlongs; a Parasange (a Persian
Measure) 30 Furlongs and more; the Egyptian Schoenas 30, 40, and 120 Furlongs;
a League 3 Miles, more or less, according to the Places or Countries you are in.

Measure, in respect to Celestial Distances, is half the Diameter of the
Earth, being 15000 Leagues or thereabouts: The Ell is a Measure for Stuffs: The
Reed, called Kenech by the Hebrews, contained 6 Cubits, i. e. 8 Feet, a Digit
and an half. A Rod, Fathom, etc. differ according to different Places. As for
Surfaces, an Acre consists of an 160 Perches Square; a Day's-work is as much as
one can plough in a Day: The Cubical Foot is a Measure for solid Bodies.

Round and hollow Measures are such as serve to measure Corn and Liquids with:
Those used for dry Things are the Litra, Bushel, Minot, Sestier, and Muid. For
Liquids, a Tun, Muid, Pipe, Calens, Amphora, and Barrel: And for Retail,
Hemina, or the Half Sestier, Sestier, Quart, Pottle, Pot, Congius, Cotyla,
Cyathus, and Acetabulum. And for the Measure of Herbs in Physic, that is done
by Bundles, Handfuls and Pugils, most of these Terms shall be explained in
their proper Places.

MERCATORUM FESTUM;
the Feast of Merchantile People, which fell out May 15, or the Ides of the
said Month, and were kept in Honor of Mercury; for on that Day a Temple was
dedicated to him in the great Circus, when Appius Claudius, and P. Servilius
were Consuls: They sacrificed to that Deity a whole Sow, and went to sprinkle
themselves with the Water of a Fountain named Aqua Mercurii, which stood near
unto the Gate Capena, praying unto Mercury, that he would prosper their Trade,
and forgive their Cheating. Thus Ovid describes it, L. 5. Fast.

Sive Deum prudens alium Divamve fefelli;
Abstulerint celeres improba dicta Noti:
Et pateant veniente die perijuria nobis,
Nec curent ent Superi si qua locutus ero.
Da modo lucra mibi, da facto gaudia lucro:
Et face ut emtori verba dedisse juvet.
MERCURY,
according to the Fable, was Son to Jupiter and Maia, the Daughter of Atlas,
who Lay in of him upon Mount Cyllene, near Tegaea, in Arcadia; they also called
him the Tegean, Cyllenian, and Grandson of Atlas, as Horace calls him, Mercuri
facunde nepos Atlantis. Lucian informs us of his Qualities and Offices, in the
Dialogues of the Gods, where he brings in Vulcan and Apollo speaking in this
Manner.

Vulc. Apollo, Have you seen little Mercury? What a fine Fellow he is, and how
he laughs at all the World: He discovers plainly, what he will be one Day,
tho'he be but a Child.


Apoll. Do you call him a Child? He who in Malice is older than Japetus.


Vul. What Harm could he do? He is yet but new born.


Apoll. Ask Neptune, from whom he has taken away his Trident, and Mars whose
Sword he has got; to say nothing of my self, whom he has robbed of my Bow and
Arrows.


Vul. What! An Infant do this, who is yet in Swadling-Clouts?


Apoll. Thou will see what he can do, if he comes near thee.


Vul. He has been at my House already.


Apoll. And has he taken nothing away?


Vul. Not, that I know off.


Apoll. See everywhere.


Vul. I cannot see my Pinchers.


Apoll. I Will warrant you, thou will find it in his Clouts.


Vul. How! Is this little Thief already so expert? I believe he has learnt to
steal in his Mother's Womb.


Apoll. He has a great many other Qualities, and you will see them when there is
occasion: He will in time be a great Orator, and also a good Musician, if I
mistake not, for he has already foiled Cupid: And as the Gods laughed at it,
and that Venus took him to kiss him, he stole away her Girdle, and would have
deprived Jupiter of his Thunderbolt, if he had not been too hot and eager; but
he took his Scepter from him.


Vul. He is a bold little Spark.


Apoll. He is also a Musician.


Vul. How so?


Apoll. He has made an Instrument of a Tortoise-shell, whereon he plays to
great Perfection, insomuch that he makes jealous, of him, who am the God of
Harmony: His Mother says he does not sleep a Nights; and that he goes as far as
Hell to get any Booty; for he has a Rod endued with great Virtue, wherewith he
brings the Dead to Life again, and conducts the Living to their Graves.

His Offices are also described in another Dialogue, where he brings him in
talking with his Mother.


Mer. Is there ever a God in Heaven more unhappy than I?


Maia. Ah! My Son, talk not at this rate.


Mer. Why not? Since I have alone as much Business upon me, as all the rest of
the Gods besides. In the first place, I must get up at break of Day, to clean
the Hall where they Feast, and the Place of their Assembly: Then I must be at
Jupiter's Levy to receive his Orders, and to carry them backward and forward.
At my return, I wait upon the Master of the Household, and sometimes the
Cup Bearer: At leastwise, I did this Office before the Coming of Ganymede: But
what disturbs me most, is that in the very Night, when every Body is at rest, I
must go and convoy the Dead to Hell, and there assist at their Condemnation, as
if all the Day were not long enough for me to act the Offices of a Sergeant,
Champion, Orator, and many more, etc.


He has been taken for the God of Traders, and that he presided over Trade: He
was called Mercurius, a Mercibus, or a Mercium cura; and this makes Plautus in
the Prologue of Amphytrion bring him in speaking,

Vt vos in vostris voltis mercimoniis
Emundis, vendundisque me laetum lucris
Afficere.
He is usually painted with Wings at his Sides and Feet, a Caduceus or Rod
twisted round with Two Serpents in his Hand, wherewith he performs many
Wonders; and a great Cap, called Petasus, on his Head, whence he was named
Mercurius Petasatus. The Cock was under his Protection, which intimates that a
Man that Trades ought to be vigilant, and rise early. He is also the God of
Thieves, and the Messenger of the Gods, and the Arbiter of Peace; and this made
the Roman Ambassadors carry a Caduceus with them to proclaim a Peace. Apollo
gave him that Rod, and taught him the Virtue of it; and Mercury first tried it
upon Two Serpents that were fighting, between which when he threw it they were
pacified; from whence forward he carried those Serpents who twisted themselves
about the said Rod, along with him.

MERCURY,
in the Art of Astrology, is a Planet, that is hardly ever separated from the
Sun, and so is rarely seen, as being as it were always buried under the Beams
thereof, or else appears like a black Spot upon the Body of the Sun it self:
It Is for that Reason, perhaps, that the Ancients sometimes confounded it with
the Sun, and said it was the Soul or Understanding thereof. Thus they made him
the Master of Wisdom and Knowledge; from whence it came to pass that he was to
preside over Men's Discourses, which is nothing else but an Effusion of Thoughts
or Wisdom. You may see how Porphyry speaks upon this Occasion, who seems to
attribute to the Moon, that Mercury or Genius which regulates Discourse, as he
appropriates to the Sun that which directs Argumentation and Reasoning:
Mercurius orationem exhibet, etc. Hence it appears, that the Pagans looked upon
these Stars as living and intelligent Beings, and such as communicated their
Influences with their Knowledge: For Horace calls learned Men, Mercuriales
viri, as being Persons more abundantly furnished with the Gifts and Influences
of Mercury.

Hesychius says, that the Babilonians called the Star Mercury, Sechez: Mercurii
stella Babylonii Sechez: And the People of Edessa gave Mercury the Name of
Monimus, who together with Mars, they would have to be the Two Assistants of
the Sun; hence it appears the Eastern People were much addicted to the Worship
of Mercury: The Eastern Nations were no less of Opinion, that Mercury was the
Star that had the Government of Reason and Speech: The Gauls, of whom Caesar
speaks in his Commentaries, minded more the fabulous History of Mercury, than
the Nature of the Star, that bare his Name: And 'twas for the same Reason that
the ancient Representations of Mercury, had neither Legs nor Arms, that we may
know, if we believe Plutarch, that a Person by the Application of his
Understanding, and a prudent Conduct alone may compass all Things, without the
Assistance of the Members of the Body. As Mercury presided over Highways, they
gave to Men's Heads that were cut upon Square Stones there the Name of Mercury;
and all Passengers in order to make the Place yet the more remarkable, taking
upon them to add also another Stone each, it made a Heap at last, which they
called Acervus Mercurii: This was an ancient Custom, seeing we read of it in
the Proverbs of Solomon; Sicut qui mittit lapidem in acervum Mercurii. Homer
also in his Odysses speaks of these Mercuries, or Heaps of Stone.

MERCURY
(according to History) the most famous of all those that bore the Name of
Mercury was he of Egypt, whose Commentaries, Philo Biblos (according to the
Relation given us by Eusebius) says, were with utmost Care sought after by
Sanchuniathon, that thereby he might be able to compose his Treatise of Pagan
Theology, as knowing well he was the Person that first found out the Use of
Letters, and that he was called by different Names as Thoh, Thoyth, Tautes:
Porphyry bears the same Testimony of Taautus, and Sanchuniathon forgets not the
Genealogy of Taautus, amongst those of the other profane Deities of the
Phoenicians and Egyptians. It Is not to be doubted but the Ancientest of all the
Mercuries, and he that was the Inventer of Letters, was he of Phoenicia, and he
passed from thence to Egypt, and so from Egypt to Greece: Eusebius also proves
out of Diodorus Siculus, that the Egyptians presented to their ancient King
Osiris a Mercury very like unto him of the Phoenicians: Apud eum summo in
bonore Mercurium fuisse; quod in excogitandis iis quae vitam hominum juvarent,
ingenii solertiam ostenderes plane singularem: quippe qui litteras invenerit,
Deorum sacrificia rite instituerit, lyrae cantum invenerit, Graecosque homines
(...), hoc est, elocutionem docuerit: quam ob causam (...), id est, Mercurius
ab iisdem fuerit appellatus; denique olivae plantam invenerit. Clemens
Alexandrinus speaks of this Egyptian Mercury, as of a Man whom they had
deified there after his Death: Cicero would have it, that there were Five
distinct Mercuries, of which Three were Greeks, one the Son of Nilus, and the
last he of Egypt: The great Glory of the Egyptian Mercury was, that he was the
Inventer of Letters, Sciences and Laws, according to Jamblicus his Testimony of
him.

It will be some Difficulty to reconcile what Pliny says with the most received
Opinion, That the Invention of Letters was found out in Assyria; Litter as
arbitror Assyrias fuisse: sed alii apud Egyptios a Mercurio, ut Gellius, alii
apud Syros repertas volunt. But this Contrariety may be accommodated in this
manner: That whereas the Beginning of all Things proceeded from Assyria, other
Nations affected to have the Honor thereof: Indeed it may be said, that
Letters were in Use before the Deluge, and Noah preserved the same in his
Family, and to his Posterity, but after the Flood when People began to be
scattered into all the Parts of the World, and almost fell into mere Barbarism;
there was as it were a Necessity for a new Creation of all Arts and Sciences,
to bring them back from the said Barbarism, and the profound Ignorance they had
plunged themselves into: Wherefore it is true, that Letters were originally the
Assyrian's Invention, or rather found among them, since Noah and his Family
dwelt in Assyria; but in Process of Time and after the Multiplying of diverse
Colonies in the World, the Phoenicians were the first who received the Use of
Letters by the Means of Taautus; next to them the Egyptians got them, and had
their Taautus or Mercury also; which gave Sanchuniathon Occasion to say, That
Mercury was Saturn's Secretary, (...). The Egyptians represented their Mercury,
with a Dog's Head, and sometimes confounded him with Anubis, because of the
Sagacity of a Dog: See how Servius speaks of it: Latrator Anubis, Mercurius
capitus anino pingitur, ideo quia nihil est cane sagacius.

But besides this first Mercury, who lived a little after the Deluge, there was
a second Mercury the Son of Vulcan who reigned in Egypt long after, and wrote
Books (which he deposited in their Temples) concerning the Writings of the
first Mercury, which he found graven upon Pillars, and this Manetho said,
according to the Account Syncellus gives us of it. Ex stelis positis in terra
Syriadica, and exaratis sacra dialecto and hieroglyphicis litteris a Thoth, qui
est Mercurius primus, secundus Mercurius Agathodaemonis filius, Tatipater,
libros traduxit, quos in templorum adytis Aegypti reposuit. Ammianus
Marcellinus gives a Description of those Subterranean Places, where for Fear of
another Deluge those Secrets which they were desirous to transmit to Posterity
were writ on the Walls in Hieroglyphics: It was this second Mercury that was
called Trismegistus, according to Syncellus and Manetho: Clemens Alexandrinus
makes mention of 42 Books of Mercury, that were carried in Pomp by the
Egyptians when they were solemnizing the Mysteries of their Religion, and
wherein were contained all the Divine and Humane Sciences entertained by that
Nation, as their Hieroglyphics, Geometry, Cosmography, Astronomy, Laws of
Sacrificing, and all Divine Worship: Its manifest, that it was from these Two
Egyptian Mercuries the Greeks and Romans borrowed all those Accomplishments,
wherewith they endued their fabulous Mercury: For the Greeks could not deny but
that the Egyptian Mercury was the most famous of all of them, and therefore
they made it their Business to give out he was a Greek by Birth; and whereas it
is certain, that the Greeks received their Letters from the Phoenicians, as we
have already showed, they endeavored all they could to persuade the World,
that they were originally found out in Greece, from whence they had been
carried into Phoenicia: Such a Likeness was found to have been between the
Egyptian and Grecian Mercury, that it may be easily judged the One is but a
Copy of the Other.

Strabo calls a Child which he saw was born without Arms (...), according to
Mercury's Name. Thus Mercury was usually pictured, to let Men understand, says
Festus, that Discourse does every Thing, without the Assistance of the Arms:
Cyllenius dictus, quod omnem rem sermo sine manibus conficiat; quibus partibus
corporis qui carent, (...) vocantur: But Pausanias says, the Athenians were the
first that gave Mercury's Name to such as were lame in their Arms: Primi
mutilos Hermas vocarunt: For before Daedalus his Time all their Statues had but
one Foot, and either no Arms at all, or else they were joined to, or hung by
their Bodies: He was the first that made them with Two Feet, and set the Arms a
little off from the Body: The Statues of Mercury might be left in the same
Posture as anciently.

MERCURY
(according to Macrobius) is the same as the Sun or Apollo, and the Reason why
Wings are given to Mercury, is to denote the swift Motion of the Sun. Apollo
presides over the Quire of Muses, and Mercury is the Father of Eloquence and
good Literature. The Sun is the Mind and Understanding of the World, which
agrees well with Mercury, whose Name is derived (...) ab interpretando: Mercury
is the Messenger of the Gods, being often sent by the Celestial to the
Infernal Deities; because the Sun in its Course passes through the Superior and
Iuferior Signs: Mercury killed Argus, who had 100 Eyes to watch Io, that was
transformed into a Cow: That is, that the Sun ecclipses the Light of the Stars
and the Heavens by its Presence, these Stars having been as so many Eyes in the
Night, to watch and mind the Earth which by the Egyptians was represented by
the Symbol of a Cow: Lastly, Mercury's Caduceus which was beset with Two
Serpents twisted together and kissing one another, signified the Four Deities
that presided over the Nativities of Mankind, viz. the Sun, Moon, Love and
Necessity. The Two Serpents are the Sun and Moon; the Knot is Necessity, and
their Kissing denotes Love: Mercury may also be seen pictured sitting upon a
Cray-fish, holding a Caduceus in his Right hand and one of the Claws of the
Fish in the other: Farther; He is grawn on Medals, like a beardless Youth with
Wings, and holding a Purse in his Left Hand, and a Cock upon his Fist. He has
an He-goat at his Feet, with a Scorpion and a Fly. The Germans adored him as
the Sovereign of the Gods; and as Tacitus reports, offered Humane Sacrifices to
him: Devrum maximum Merturium colunt, cui certis diebus humanis quoque hostiis
litare fas habent. The Greeks and Romans sacrificed a Calf unto him; they made
him an Oblation of Milk and Honey, as unto a God of Sweetness, by Reason of his
Eloquence. Callistratus and Homer say, it was a Custom to present him with
Neat's-Tongues, by throwing them into the Fire, and sprinkling a little Wine
thereon, because he was the God of Speech, whereof the Tongue is the Organ. See
Hermes, which is Mercury.

MERCURIUS
(Dies is understood) is Wednesday, the Third Day of the Week, being so called,
because the Planet Mercury reigns in the first Hour thereof, according to the
Opinion of those who allow of Planetary Hours.

MERETRIX;
a debauched Wife or Maiden. A Bill was wont to be fixed over the Door of
Common Women, according to the Testimony of Aurelius Fuscus, and Seneca,
Controv. 1. Meretrix vocata es, in communi loco stetisti, superpositus est
Cellae tuae titulus, venientes accepisti. Tertullian in his Book de Pudicia,
calls these Inscriptions the Bills of Lewdness, Libidinnm tituli. Portius Latro
says the same Thing; Es in lupanari, accepisti locum, titulus inscriptus est;
you are in an ill Place, you have a Room there, a Bill is set on the Door. The
Custom also was for them to change their Names, as soon as they had told the
Aediles, that they would lead a dissolute Life; as we are informed by Plautus,
in his Comedy, entitled, Poenulus, Act. 5. Sect. 3. Ver. 20. Namque body
earum mutarentur nomina,
Facerenique indignum genere quaestum corpore.


They changed their Names, in order to drive a Trade, which became not their
Birth and Condition. But when they forsook this infamous Profession; they also
laid aside that Name of Reproach they had assumed, and reassumed that of their
own Family.

At the same time says Tacitus in his Ann. I. 2. C. 24. The Lewdness of Women
was restrained by the Senate's Authority, and such of them whose Grandfather,
Father or Husband had been a Roman Knight, were forbid to make a public
Profession of their Lewdness: For Vestilia, who was of a Praetorian Family, had
made her Declaration, before the Magistrates, according to the Custom of our
Ancestors, who thought such debauched Practices were sufficiently punished with
the Disgrace of such a Confession.

MEROPS,
was one of the Giants, who went about to drive the Gods from Heaven; but this
Name ought rather to be given to those who assisted at the Building of the
Tower of Babel, because of the Confusion of Languages that ensued thereupon;
seeing the Word Merops comes from (...) dividere, and (...) vox.

METELLUS;
the Surname of the Family of the Caecilii, from whom were descended many
illustrious Persons, among the rest L. Caecilius, a brave Commander, and
learned Orator; who going one Day to his Home, was stopped by Ravens, who
flapped him with their Wings; whereat he was amazed, and went back again to
Rome, where finding the Temple of Vestae was on fire, he delivered the Image of
Pallas, called Palladium, from the Flames; and in so doing became blind, but
that Goddess afterward restored to him his Sight.

METRA,
the Daughter of Erisichthon, who obtained as a Reward from Neptune, for the
Loss of her Virginity, a Power to transform her self into what Shape she
pleased; wherefore, in order to supply the Necessities of her Father, she
sometimes took upon her one Form, and sometimes another, under which her Father
sold her again and again, as he had occasion.

METRETES;
it was an Athenian Measure, that contained 40 English Quarts, i. e. 72
Sestiers.

MIDAS,
King of Phrygia, the Son of Gordius, and the Goddess Cybele, he received into
his Court Silenus, one of Bacchus his Captains, that had straggled in his Way
to the Indies; in acknowledgment whereof Bacchus gave him his Choice to ask him
what Kindness he would. And his Request was, that whatever he touched might be
turned into Gold; but having experimented the same diverse times, he was
surprised to find, when he went to drink or eat, that all was transmuted into
Gold; wherefore he had recourse to Bacchus again, who bid him go and wash
himself in the River Pactolus in Lydia, to which the Property was communicated
to remedy him in this Case; and so upon washing therein the Gold Scales
presently fell off. Sometime after having adjudged the Victory to God Pan
against Apollo, this Deity grew angry thereat and presently changed his Ears
into those of an Ass. Midas concealed this Misfortune, and discovered it to
none but his Barber, with a Charge he should let no other know it; the Barber
made a Pit in the Earth, and entering therein, said, Midas has Asse's Ears; and
so covered the Pit again, as believing he had by that means hid the Secret very
well; but Reeds coming to grow up in the said place, and being shaken by the
Wind, repeated the Words, King Midas has Asse's Ears. Plutarch in his Treatise
concerning Superstition, says, that Midas toward the latter part of his Life,
was so extremely afflicted with Melancholy, occasioned by frightful Dreams that
broke his rest, that he could not remedy the same, and that drinking some
Bull's Blood, he died upon it.

MILLIARE, and MILLIARIUM;
a Mile; 'twas a certain Space that contained 1000 Paces among the Romans, who
distinguished their Miles by the Marks they set: The small League in France
contains 2000 Paces, the common League 2500, and the greatest 3000.

MILO.
A Crotonian, was a Man of vast Strength; he carried a Bull of Two Years old
upon his Back at the Olympic Games, for the Space of a Furlong, then killed
him with his Fist; and 'twas said, eat him all in one Day. He held a
Pomegranate so firmly in his Hand, that no Body could take it from him: As he
was one Day in a Wood, and went about to break a Tree off with his Hands, which
was a little slit, the same closed again, and both his Hands were catched
between, so that he could never pull them out, and in that Condition he became
a Prey to the Wolves.

MINA or MNA,
Greek Money worth 100 Drachmas, and is somewhat more than Three Pounds
Sterling. Sixty Mina's were required to make up an Attick Talent.

MINERVA;
of whose Nativity Lucian gives an Account in his Dialogue of the Gods, where
he introduces Vulcan and Jupiter speaking of it in this manner:

Vul. Lo, I bring thee a very sharp Hatchet; What would thou have us do with
it?


Jup. Cleave my Head in two presently.


Vul. Thou shall see whether I am such a Fool as to attempt it: Tell me
seriously, what thou would employ me in.


Jup. To cleave my Head in the middle; I am in earnest; and if thou will not
obey, thou shall see how it will be taken; strike only with all thy Might, for
my Head is split with Pain, and I endure the same Misery, as if I were in
Labor like a Woman.


Vul. Have a Care that we do not commit some Folly; for I cannot lay thee so
easily as a Midwife.


Jup. Strike thou only, and fear not; leave the rest to me.


Vul. It must be so in spite of me; But who would do it? I must obey: O ye
Great Gods! I do not wonder at thy having a Pain in thy Head, since thou had
a Woman within it, and even an Amazon, with a Lance and Shield: It Is that which
made thee so impatient.


Cicero, L. 3. de Not. Deor. speaks of Five Minerva's: The 1st, which he says
was the Mother of Apollo: The 2d brought forth by the Nile, which the Egyptian
Saites worshipped. Plutarch in his Treatise of Osiris, says that the Image of
Minerva or Pallas was in the City of Sai, with this Inscription: (...), I am
all that was, is, and is to come; and my Vail no Mortal has hitherto
uncovered. 3d, Is she that came'out armed from Jupiter's Brain. 4th, Was the
Daughter of Jupiter and Corypha, the Daughter of Oceanus, who invented Chariots
with Four Wheels. 5th, Was the Daughter of Pallantis, whom she killed, because
he would have ravished her: This last they made to have Wings to her Feet, in
the same manner as Mercury. Arnobius pursues the same Distinction: We may with
certainty conclude, that the Second of these Minerva's, is the ancientest and
first of any of them. Plato in his Timaeus, speaking of the City of Sai, says,
that Minerva was worshipped there, and called by the Name of Neith. Syncellus
intimates, that the Name of Queen Nitotris, which includes that of Neith,
signified as much as Victorious Minerva. Plutarch speaks also of the Minerva of
Sai, and says that some made no distinction between her and Isis.

The Phoenicians, according to the Relation given us by Sanchuniathon, had
their Minerva also, and they made her to be the Daughter of Saturn, and
attributed the Invention of Arts and Arms unto her: This is what Eusebius says
of her: Saturnus liberos procreavit, Proserpinam and Minervam; ac prior quidem
Virgo diem obiit; Minerva autem Mercurioque auctoribus falcem exferro hastamque
conflavit. It was from the Egyptians or Phoenicians, that the Greeks borrowed
their Minerva, and Cecrops was the first who taught the Athenians to worship
Minerva and Jupiter, as Eusebius says. The Convenience of Neighborhood made
Minerva pass from Egypt into Lybia before Cecrops went over into Greece.
Herodotus assures us, the Lybians made her to be the Daughter of Neptune, and
the Lake Triton, though afterward upon the Account of some Misunderstanding
between her and her Father, she went to Jupiter, who adopted her for his
Daughter. Pausanias assures us, the Athenians were much devoted to the Worship
of the Gods, and that they were the first who gave Minerva the Name of (...),
operaria, machinatrix. He says elsewhere, they built a Temple to Minerva,
(...), Machinatrix, as being the Goddess that had introduced Arts and
Inventions into the World: He speaks moreover of a Statue of Minerva that fell
from Heaven. He says Minerva aided Perseus in his Conflict against Gorgon, near
the Lake Triton, for which Reason that Country was consecrated to her. Lastly,
The said Author declares, the Baeotians affected to give the Name of Triton to
a Brook that run near Minerva's Temple, from which she had been named Tritonia.
As for Minerva, says St. Augustine, L. 18. C. 9. de Civ. Dei, She is much more
ancient than Mars or Hercules, and they said she lived in the Days of Ogyges,
near unto the Lake Triton, from whence she was named Tritonia: She was the
Inventress of many rare and useful Things; and Men were so much the more
inclined to believe she was a Goddess, because her Original was not known; for,
as to their saying that she came out of Jupiter's Brain, it is rather a Poetical
Fiction, or an Allegory, than Truth of History.

Minerva was worshipped by the Athenians for a Goddess, before Cecrops his
Time, in whose Days Athens was founded or rebuilt: It Is a Name taken from
Minerva, whom the Greeks called (...). An Olive Tree happening all of a sudden,
in a certain Place, to spring out of the Ground, and a Spring of Water in
another, these Prodigies amazed the King, who presently deputed Persons to go
to Apollo at Delphos, in order to know what the same meant: The Oracle made
answer, that the Olive Tree signified Minerva, and the Water, Neptune, and that
it lay upon them to choose, according to which of the two Deities Names they
should call their City; hereupon Cecrops calls all the Citizens, both Men and
Women together, for the Women were wont to have Votes in their Deliberations:
When the Suffrages were taken, all the Men were for Neptune, but all the Women
for Minerva; and because they exceeded the Men by one Voice, Minerva carried
it, and Athens was called according to her Name. Phornutus going about to give
the Moral and Allegorical Interpretation of Minerva's proceeding from Jupiter's
Brain, says, That the Heathen Philosophers made her to be a Divine Emanation,
which they called the Intellect of the great God, that differed nothing from
his Wisdom, which in him is generated of his Brain, which is the principal Part
of the Soul. This St. August. L. 7. C. 28. de Civ. Dei, says, was the Opinion
Varro had of the Poets, that according to their Custom in obscuring Philosophy
with Fictions, they meant no other than the Idea or Exemplairs of Things, under
the Name of Minerva.

Painters and Statuaries represented her like a beautiful Virgin, armed with a
Curass, a Sword by her Side, a Helmet on her Head, adorned with Feathers,
holding a Javelin in her Right Hand, and a Shield in her Left, whereon Medusa's
Head beset with Serpents was represented: This Shield was called Aegis, and was
covered with a Goat-skin, or that of the Monster Aegidis, which she killed. The
first who erected Temples and offered Sacrifices to her were the Rhodians, whom
she taught to make Colossus's: But because that at the very first Sacrifice
they offered to her, they forgot to make use of Fire, she left them in Anger,
and went to the City, which she called Athens, to whom the Athenians built a
stately Temple, under the Name of (...), wherein they set up her Statute made
of Gold and Ivory by the Hands of Phydias, which was 39 Foot high: Upon her
Pantoufle was graven the Fight between the Lapithae and the Centaurs; upon the
sides of the Shield, the Battle between the Amazons and the Athenians; and
within it the Gods fighting against the Giants. There were several Temples and
Chapels erected for her at Rome; whereof the most Ancient and Famous of all
was that upon Mount Aventine, of which Ovid speaks: The Olive and the Owl were
under her Protection, as may be seen by the Athenian Money, on one side of
which stood the Head of this Goddess armed, and on the other an Owl with these
Greek Characters AOHNA, and upon the Reverse there was an Owl flying, who held
a Laurel between her Claws, as a Sign of Victory.

MINERVALIA,
or Quinquatria, were Feasts instituted in Honor of Minerva, and celebrated
March 19. the same lasting for Five Days: The first Day was spent in Prayers
made to this Goddess; the rest in offering Sacrifices, seeing the Gladiators
fight, acting Tragedies upon Mount Alban, and reciting Pieces of Wit, wherein
the Conqueror had a Prize given him, according to the Appointment of the
Emperor Domitian: The Scholars had now a Vacation, and carried their
Schooling-money, or rather Presents to their Masters, which was called
Minerval: Hoc mense mercedes exolvebant magistris, quas completus annus deberi
fecit, says Macrobius.

MINOS,
the Son of Jupiter and Europa, was King of Candia after he had outed his
Brother Sarpedon. Aristotle, L. 1. Polit, says, He was the first that gave Laws
to the Candiots; his Wife's Name was Pasiphae, a Daughter of the Sun, by whom
he had Three Sons and Two Daughters: He had great Wars with the Athenians, in
order to revenge the Death of his Son Androgeus, whom they had slain; and he
granted them a Peace upon Condition they should send him every Year Seven young
Men of the best Rank in their City, to be devoured by the Minotaur that his
Wife had brought forth, as we shall show presently: He exercised the Place of a
Judge in Hell with Eacus and Rhadamanthus, because he was a very just Prince.
Plato informs us, That Jupiter left the Office of passing Judgment upon the
Dead to Three of his Sons: Radamanthus was to judge the Asiaticks; Eacus the
Europeans; and for Minos, he was to determine any Difficulties that might
occur; so that he was above the other Two.

MINOTAURUS;
the Minotaur, was a Monster, being half Man and half Bull, brought forth by
Pasiphae, Minos his Wife, after she had engendered with a Bull, by the subtle
Means of Dedalus, who made a Wooden Heifer, wherein he enclosed her that she
might be covered by the Bull: This Monster was put into the Labyrinth, and by
Minos his Order fed with Man's Flesh, but he was at last killed by Theseus, who
had been sent thither to be devoured by him. Lucian unravels to us the Fabulous
part of this Story; saying, That Pasiphae hearing Daedalus discoursing
concerning Taurus, which is one of the Twelve Signs, was mightily taken with
what he said; which gave the Poets occasion to say, that she was in Love with a
Bull, whom by his means she enjoyed. Diodorus Siculus says, that Taurus was one
of Minos his Captains, who had to do with Pasiphae, and whose Amors were
countenanced by Daedalus, that she was brought to Bed of Two Children, one of
which resembled Minos, and the other Taurus, and that they were both called by
the Name of Minotaur; that from the said Taurus his using of the Athenians very
severely, in the War which Minos declared against them, to revenge the Death of
his Son Androgeus, they feigned that he fed upon their Flesh. Philochorus
relates that the Minotaur was a very cruel Officer under Minos, who in
wrestling overcame all those that came against him at those Funeral Games,
instituted by Minos to the Ghost of his Son Androgeus, and that he won the
Prize which consisted of some Tribute-Children, from hence came the Fiction of
the Poets, that he was fed with the Children sent yearly from Athens to Creet,
by way of Tribute, for killing Androgeus.

MITHRA;
this a Name which the Persians, Parthians, and several other Eastern Nations
gave to Apollo, because of the Ornament about his Head, wherewith they
represented him: He was also reverenced among the Romans, as appears by several
Inscriptions: Soli invicto Mithrae.
Numini invicto soli Mithrae.
They celebrated the Ceremonies used at his Worship in Caves and Subterranean
Places, and they usually sacrificed a Bull to him. Socrates and Sozomen say,
That in the Reign of Julian the Apostate and Theodosius, the Cave of Mithra,
that was at Alexandria, was opened, that they found it full of Men's Sculls,
that had been there sacrificed unto him: This Worship of Apollo Mithra is one
of the ancientest used among Men, and the Maltese Greeks learnt it of the
Phoenicians, who before them were Masters of the Island. Eustathius derives the
Word Mitre from the Greek (...), which signifies a Weaver's Woof, being a broad
Welt, wherewith they tied his Head: Vossius derives it from (...), which
signifies to tie; because the Mitre was an Ornament which they tied round the
Head: But Scaliger deduces it from a Syriack Word, that signifies a Band or
Line; and others from the Word Mithri, which is Syriac, and is as much as to
say Lord: And in Conformity to this Sentiment, the Mitre was a Sign of Dominion
or Royal Majesty.

MITHRIDATES;
a most potent King of Pontus, who was incomparable as well in Respect to the
Strength of his Body, as to the Endowments of his Mind; but of a cruel and
bloody Disposition. Pharnaces his Son, having raised a Rebellion against him,
he out of Despair stabbed himself, when he found the Poison, which he was wont
to take, would not do his Business.

MNEMOSYNE;
the Mother of the Nine Muses, which she bore to Jupiter; and the said Word
among the Greeks signifies Memory.

MODIUS,
a Bushel; being a Measure in use among the Romans for all sorts of Grain: It
contained about Nine English Quarts.

MOLA SALSA;
is a kind of roasted Wheat which was afterward peeled and steeped in Water
with Salt and Frankincense; and then sprinkled between the Horns of the
Sacrifice before he was killed.

MOLOC,
was the God of the Ammonites, and it is to him they sacrificed their own
Children in the Valley of Tophet, which signifies a Drum, for they beat then
the Drum, to hinder them from hearing the Cries of the Children, which they
threw into the Fire.

MOMUS,
was the Son of Somnus and Nox, he was the God of Liberty, being a Deity that
spoke his Mind freely, and controlled every thing, even the Actions of the Gods
themselves, as may be seen in a Dialogue of Lucian concerning Jupiter Tragicus.

MOMUS;
I was always afraid of the Misfortune that has befallen us: they do Epicurus
and his Disciples an Injury, for what Opinion can Men have of us, when they see
how disorderly we manage the Affairs of the World, where Vice triumphs over
Virtue, where the Innocent endure the Punishment due to the Guilty, and where
nothing can be heard but cheating Oracles, Complaints, Divisions, the Amors of
the Gods, and such like Things as please the Poets: Jupiter, I desire thee to
tell me, for one may speak here very freely, whether thou have ever bethought
thy self of making an exact Search for the Wicked and the Good, in order to
punish the one, and reward the other: -- We must go to the Springhead of the
Disorder, and not think so much upon Destroying our Enemies, as to reform such
Things as are irregular in our own Conduct: You know, Sirs, I speak without
either Passion or Interest, seeing my Divinity is acknowledged but by a very
few Persons, and that for One Altar I have, others have an Hundred. He found
Fault that the Bull's Horns were above his Eyes, saying they ought to have been
before them, that so he might see better where he struck; he reproved Vulcan,
for that having made a Man, he had not set a Window in his Breast, in order to
see whether his Thoughts agreed with his words; and he blamed Minerva, in that
the House she had built could not be carried whither one would.

MONETA;
Money; a Piece of Money marked for the Coin, and with the Arms of a Prince, or
State, who make it to circulate and pass at a common Rate for Things of
different Value: Paulus the Lawyer defines Money to be a Thing stamped with a
public Coin: Josephus seems to attribute the Invention of Money to Cain,
because he had found out Weights and Measures, Money must have been
comprehended therein, which at first was nothing else. The holy Scripture makes
no mention of any till the Year of the World 2110. when it speaks of a 1000
Pieces of Silver given by Abimelech to Sarah Abraham's Wife, of 400 Shekels of
Silver which Abraham gave by Weight to the Children of Ephron, and of the 100
Lambs, that is, the 100 Pieces of Silver Money, which Jacob gave to the Sons of
Hemor.

The first Mark put upon Money consisted of Points to denote the Value thereof,
and because that in the Time when one Thing was given in Exchange for another,
Men's greatest Wealth consisted in Cattle: The Shapes of them, or of their Heads
only were stamped upon the first Moneys that were made: And Cassiodorus takes
Notice that the Latins called Money Pecunia, which was derived from the Word
Pecus, that signified any kind of Beast; it was a Name they borrowed from the
Gauls: Afterward they stamped on their Money the Heads and Arms of Princes, or
some Mark or other that intimated the Origin of States: Julius Caesar was the
first whose Head was stamped upon Money by the Order of the Senate.

The Jewish Moneys were the great Cicar, or Talent of the Sanctuary which
weighed 100 Mina's, or 250 Roman Librae; the little Cicar or common Talent,
called that of the Assembly, which weighed 50 Minae, or 125 Roman Librae. The
Maneth or Mina, which was Two Libra's and an Half, or 30 Ounces. The Shekel or
Sicle of of the Sanctuary, half an Ounce or 20 Gerahs, or Oboli. The little
Shekel consisting of Two Drams, worth near 32 Pence of our Money, and the
Gerah or Obolus which consisted of between 14 and 15 Grains.

As for the Grecians, Herodotus in his Clio writes, That the Lydians a People
of Asia were the first that made hammered Pieces of Gold and Silver: Others
attribute the first Invention thereof to Erichthonius the fourth King of
Athens: Plutarch assures us, that Theseus coined Pieces of Silver weighing Two
Drams, which on the one Side had the Picture of a Ox, in Memory of the
Marathonian Bull or Captain Taurus, and on the other Jupiter or an Owl. He also
made some that weighed half an Ounce whereon Minerva and Two Owls were stamped,
and these were called Stateres.

The Money in Peloponesus was stamped with a Tortoise, from whence came this
figurative Way of Speaking (...); The Tortoise exceeds both Virtue and Wisdom,
that is, that with Money all Things are compassed. The Cizycenians coined
Money, on one Side whereof was the Goddess Cybele, and a Lion on the other. The
Obolus of the Greeks was about Five Farthings English: The Dram was worth
about Seven Pence English: The Mina about Three Pounds: The Talent was in Value
about 203 l. 13 s. And the Shekel about Half a Crown.

As for the Romans, it is thought that Janus was the first who made Brass Money,
on one Side of Which stood a Head with Two Faces, and on the other a Ship, as
Athenaeus informs us: Janus was the first, as they say, who invented Garlands,
and coined Copper-money; and Pliny says, nota aeris ex altera part fuit Janus
geminus, ex altera rostrum navis. Numa Pompilius made Wooden and Leather Money
and afterward established a Company of Brasiers called Aerarii, who were the
Monyers of those Times, for the Romans at first made use of unwrought Brass for
Money, from whence came those Forms of Speech oes alienum, a Debt, and per oes
and Libram, because they were put into the Scales to be weighed. Servius
Tullius made Brass Money weighing 12 Ounces, and the same had the Figure of a
Sheep upon them; and this lasted till the first Punick War: They began to
hammer Pieces of Silver 485 Years after the Building of Rome, I mean the
Denarius which was worth 10 Asses. They had Half a Denarius called Quinarius,
the Quarter Part of a Denarius named Sestertius, and the Teruncius which was
the Fourth of an As. All these were Silver Moneys, marked on the one Side with
a Woman's-Head, which represented Rome, and an X to show the Value to be 10
Asses, and upon the Reverse were Castor and Pollux: They had Quinarii whereon
Victory was pictured, and these were called Victoriati, and others on which
there was a Chariot drawn by Two or Four Horses, which for the said Reason
were called Bigati, Quadrigati: Moreover some of these Silver Pieces have been
met with, on which instead of Rome, was stamped the Figure of some Genius or
Tutelary God, which upon that Account were called Geniati.

Gold Coin came not in Use till about 62 Years after Silver Money, in the Year
of Rome 546, in the Consulship of Nero and Livius Salinator: They were Pieces
whereof 38 went to a Pound, and came near to 2 Drams and an Half, being
worth commonly about 23 Shillings.

A RECAPITULATION of ROMAN MONEYS.
Copper Moneys.
As, Assis, or Assipondium, weighing 12 Ounces, amounted to above a Half Penny
English.

The Third of an As or Triens, weighing 4 Ounces, was worth a Double: The
Quarter Part or Quadrans, weighed 3 Ounces: The Sixth Part or Sextans,
consisted of 2 Ounces: The Vncial weighed 1 Ounce.

Silver Moneys.
The Denarius weighing 1 Drahm, was marked with an X that signified 10 as being
10 Asses, in Value about 7 d. English: The Quinarius, worth 5 Asses: The
Sestercius, or Quarter Part of a Denarius, worth 2 Asses and an Half: The great
Sestercius or Sestercium, worth 1000 small Sesterces, that is about 8 l. 6 s.
The Teruncium, weighed the 40th Part of a Silver Denarius, and is in Value one
4th of an As.

Gold Moneys.
Their Gold Money weighed 2 Drams and an Half: All these Words I shall explain
again in their proper Alphabetical Order.

TRIUM-VIRI MONETALES;
the Triumvirs of Money were Officers created a little before Cicero's Time,
whose Commission was contained in these Five Letters A. A. A. F. F. Aere, Auro,
Argento, flando, feriundo, for the Coining of Brass, Gold, and Silver Money.

MONETARIUS,
a Coiner, 'twas a Name of Old for such as made Money, all the Money of the
Romans and old French had the Name of the Person upon them in full Length, or
at least the first Letters thereof: The Trium-virs were formerly Mint-Officers
whose Business it was to have Money coined, the Names and Quality of whom may
be seen in the Impressions.

MONETA;
a holy and sacred Goddess pictured with a Pair of Scales in one Hand, and a
Cornucopia in the other, with these Words, Sacra Moneta, Augustorum and
Caesarum nostrorum.

MONETA;
this was an Epithet given to Juno, being derived a Monendo, because she gave
them Notice when Rome was taken by the Gauls, that they should sacrifice a
whole Sow, or because that during the War against Pyrrhus when the Romans found
themselves in great Want of Money, they had Recourse to Juno, who advised them
to be always just in their Actions, and they should never want. Unto which when
they had bound themselves by Oath, they drove Pyrrhus out of Italy, and built a
Temple to Juno Moneta wherein they laid up the Silver Money of the Commonwealth.

MONOCHORDUM,
is an Instrument wherewith to try the Variety and Proportion of of Musical
Sounds; It was composed of a Rule divided and subdivided into diverse Parts,
wherein there was a String pretty well extended at the Ends thereof upon both
the Bridges, in the midst of which there is a moveable Bridge, by whose means
in the Application of it to the Different Divisions of the Line, you might find
the Sounds were in the same Proportion to one another, as the Divisions of the
Line cut by the Bridge were: Its also called the Harmonious or Canonick Rule,
because it serves to measure the Flats and Sharps of the Sounds: Its held that
Pythagoras was the Inventer of the Monochordum.

MONS.
A Mountain, it is a great Rising of the Earth above the usual Level of the
Ground; the most celebrated Mountains in the Poets are Parnassus, called
Biceps, or with a double Top, which was the Residence of the Muses; and Mount
Olympus, which the Poets took often for Heaven: Mount Atlas was famous among
Geographers, whose Name has been borrowed and used for a Collection of the
Description of the several Parts of the World, as if the Whole had been
discovered from the Top thereof. Rome had Seven Hills within it.

MONS PALATINUS;
Mount Palatine, which was so called either from the Pallantes who with Evander
came to dwell thither, or from Palatia Latinus his Wife, or from Pales the
Goddess of Shepherds. Upon this Mountain stood the King's House or Palace,
which from thence was called Palatium: Romulus was brought up and looked after
Cattle there.

MONS CAPITOLINUS;
This Mountain was at first called Saturninus, because Saturn lived there; and
afterward Tarpeius from Tarpeia who was there crushed to Death with the
Shields of the Sabins; and at last Capitolinus, a Capite toli, the Head of a
Man which was found there as they were digging to lay the Foundation of the
Temple of Jupiter, surnamed Capitolinus: This was the famousest Mountain of
them all, because of Jupiter's Temple, which was begun by Tarquinius Priscus,
finished by Tarquinius Superbus, and dedicated by Horatius Pulvillus: Here it
was that they made their Vows and solemn Oaths, where the Citizens ratified the
Acts of the Emperors, and where they took the Oath of Allegiance to them, and
at last where such as triumphed came to give the Gods Thanks for the Victory
they had obtained.

MONS QUIRINALIS,
Mount Quirinal, was at first called, Mons Agonius, but after the Alliance that
was made between Romulus and Tatius, King of the Sabins, who dwelt there, they
named it Quirinalis, from their chief City called Cures; and from thence the
Citizens of Rome came to be called Quirites, and after the Death of Romulus
there was a Temple built here under the Name of Quirinus.

MONS CAELIUS,
was formerly called Quercetulanus, from the Oak that grew there, and
afterward Caelius from one Caelius Vibenna, General of the Tuscans, who posted
himself upon this Mountain so, as opportunely to succor Romulus in the War he
waged against the Sabines.

MONS EXQUILINUS,
Mount Esquiline, was so called ab excubiis, or Guards which Romulus posted
there for fear of the Revolt of the Sabines, of whose Fidelity he was doubtful.
It was also called Cespius, Oppius and Septimius, by Reason of some small
Hillocks, which it enclosed or hemmed in.

MONS VIMINALIS;
took its Name from Oziers that grew uponit; and here was a Temple dedicated to
Jupiter Viminalis: It had the Name of Vimineus or Fagutalis, from a Beech-Tree,
which was consecrated to Jupiter Fagutalis.

MONS AVENTINUS,
Mount Aventine, took its Name from a King of Alba, named Aventinus, who was
buried there as well as Remus and Tatius the Sabine. Diana had a Temple here.

MORBUS;
a Disease, of whom the Poets make mention as an hurtful Deity, and Virgil
places him at the Mouth of Hell;

Pallentes habitant Morbi --
MORBUS COMITIALIS;
the Falling Sickness, when in the Assemblies of the People of Rome, any fell
into this Sickness, the Assembly presently broke up, and therefore it was
called Morbus Comitialis, because it broke up their Comitia or Assemblies.

MORPHEUS;
see after Mortui.

MORS,
Death; the Poets made him not only an existent Being, but also a false Deity,
picturing him like a Skeleton, with Claws, and a Sithe in his Hand. Death was
honored by the Lacedamonians, and Servius in explaining that Verse in Virgil,

Multa bonum circa mactantur corpora Morti
Says, that Death is a Goddess, of whom Lucan and Stacius make mention; for
which he cites these Words of Stacius; In scopulis Mors atra sedet:
And those of Lucan; Ipsamque vocatam
Quam petat a nobis Mortem tibi coge fateri.
They make her to be the Daughter of the Night, and Sister of Sleep; and the
same is dressed in a Robe full of black Stars, as also with black Wings.

MORTUI,
the Dead; the Romans burnt their Dead, as being of Opinion, it would be a
Benefit to the Soul, to have the Body quickly consumed, and this continued to
the Time of Macrobius, or the Antoninus's: The ancient Persians, as Agathias
relates, exposed their Dead to be devoured of Beasts, they believing, that such
as continued long entire, were wicked, and the Relations of the Deceased
regulated their Joy or Sorrow accordingly. See Cadaver, where I have showed the
Way of burying dead Corpse, and their Funeral Obsequies; the same may also be
seen under Funus.

MORPHEUS;
was, according to the Fable, one of the Servants of Sleep: Ovid places a
Multitude of Dreams under the Empire of Sleep, but he makes Three of them to be
endued with a much greater Power than the rest, viz. Morpheus, Icelas or
Phobeter, and Phantasos: The 1st imitates Mankind; the 2d other Animals; and
the 3d Mountains, Rivers, and other inanimate Things: At pater e populo natorum
mill suorum
Excitat artificem, simulatoremque figura Morphea, etc.


MOVERE SENATU;
is a Phrase to denote one's being turned out of the Senate ignominiously, or
to be degraded.

MOVERE TRIBU;
to removeone from a considerable Tribe to a meaner.

MOSES,
or Moses; his Father was Atram, and Mother Jochabed, who put him into an Ark
of Bulrushes, that was daubed over with Pitch and Slime, and so exposed him
upon the Brink of the Nile, in Compliance with Pharaoh's Order, in a Place,
whither the Daughter of Pharaoh, whose Name was Thermutis (according to
Josephus) was observed to resort to wash her self; his Sister Mary had Orders
to stay at a small distance off, to see what would become of him; the Princess
seeing the said little Cradle floating, caused it to be brought to her, and
finding a Child therein of Three Months old, whom she knew to be of a Hebrew
Race, by his being circumcised, she was moved with Compassion, and resolved to
save him: The Sister coming thither as by chance, asked her, if she would
please to send her to get a Nurse to suckle him, of that People; to which the
Princess agreeing, she immediately ran to the House, and brought his Mother for
a Nurse for him. At Three Years end she carried him to Thermutis, who adopted
him for her Son, and gave him the Name of Moses, which in the Egyptian
Language, signifies one saved from the Water. Clemens Alexandrinus says, his
Friends had named him Joachim, when he was circumcised: He was very carefully
educated in Pharaob's Court; and as he was a Person of excellent Parts, he
became quickly an admirable Proficient in all the Sciences which at that time
flourished among the Egyptians. The Scripture informs us, that he left
Pharaob's Court, when he was Forty Years old, in order to go and visit his own
Nation, and that finding an Egyptian abusing an Israelite, he killed him, in
the Heat of his Zeal: Hereupon fearing the King's Displeasure, be fled into the
Deserts of Madian, choosing rather to be afflicted with the People of God, than
to possess all the Treasures of Egypt. There he married one of the Daughters of
Jethro or Raguel, a Priest, whose Name was Sephora. He lived Forty Years in
that Country, and as he was one Day leading his Father-in-Law's Cattle to the
Bottom of the Wilderness, toward Mount Horeb, he saw a Bush burning with a
great Fire, which yet consumed it not; and as he was about to draw near unto
it, the Lord called him by his Name, and let him know that he had seen the
Affliction of his People in Egypt, and that he would by his Means work
Deliverance for them; he endeavored to excuse himself upon the Account of his
Incapacity and Stuttering; but God to confirm him in it, gave him the Signs of
a Rod's being turned into a Serpent, and then re-assuming its former Shape, and
of his Hand turning Leprous, and in a moment being restored to its natural
Color: Then he went to see for Pharaob, whom he charged from God to let his
People go Three Days Journey into the Wilderness, to offer Sacrifices unto him:
But he refused to obey and to let she Hebrews go, notwithstanding, all the
Wonders performed by Moses in his Presence, for he saw the Rod which Aaron,
Moses his Brother had in his Hand, turned into a Serpent; the Waters of the
Nile and all the Springs in Egypt changed into Blood, an innumerable Company of
Frogs which covered the Face of the Land, and entered into his very Palace, and
the Dust turned into Lice which filled the Air, and extremely tormented both
Men and Beasts: There came Swarms of large Flies thither, which destroyed
whatever they touched; a sudden Pestilence killed all the Cattle of Egypt
without hurting those of the Israelites; Men and Beasts were struck with
terrible Boils; a Storm of Hail accompanied with Thunder and Lightning fell
over all Egypt which destroyed all sorts of Beasts and Men that were in the
Fields, no other Land being spared but that of Goshen; this Storm was succeeded
by the largest Locusts that ever were seen in Egypt, which destroyed all the
Grass, Fruits and Harvest: A thick Darkness covered the whole Land, saving that
Part where the Children of Israel dwelt; in short, a destroying Angel having
killed all the Firstborn of the Egyptians, without sparing Pharaoh's own Son,
the Egyptians pressed the Israelites to go out of their Country, and to
sacrifice to their God under the Conduct of Moses and his Brother Aaron.

The Rabies assure us, that the Wonders performed by Moses formerly in Egypt
and elsewhere, were done by means of his Rod, which according to what they say,
was created by God between the Two Vespers of the Sabbath, that is, on the
Evening of the Sixth Day of the World's Creation, and upon which in an
wonderful Manner the holy, great and glorious Name of God was inscribed, which
they call Tetragrammaton, wherefore its said in the Zoar upon Exodus, which is
a Commentary upon the Five Books of Moses, that the Miracles were graven
thereon, and that the most holy Name of God was also inscribed; and Jonathan
the Son of Vziel in his Targum, that is, in his Paraphrase upon Exodus, relates
the same Thing; these are his Words. Rehuel (who was Jethro himself, or his
Father, as Rabbi Jonathan seems to take him to be in his 18th Chapter) having
understood that Moses had made his Escape from Pharaoh, put him into a deep
Ditch, where Sephora his Granddaughter fed him for 20 Years, after which he
took him out thence. Moses going one Day into Rehuel's Garden, went to Prayers,
and gave God Thanks for defending and delivering him by his own Power, and for
having wrought diverse Miracles for his sake: And perceiving in the said Garden
a Rod or Staff which God had created between Sun and Sun, that is, on the Eve
of the Sabbath, or 6th Day of the Creation of the World, whereon the great and
glorious Name of God was graved, and by Virtue of which he was one Day to
perform great Miracles in Egypt, to divide the Redsea, and to strike Water out
of the Rock, he presently put forth his Hand, plucked it from the Earth, into
which it had been driven, and as it were planted, got it and carried it away
with him.

The Sentiments of the Author of this Paraphrase are confirmed from what may be
read concerning Aaron's Rod in the Pirke Eliezer, which is a Book containing
the History of the World to the Time of Gamaliel; and from the Schaiseleth
Hakabala which is another History-book or Chronology from the Beginning of the
World: But this may be more particularly seen in a very ancient and scarce
Commentary, entitled Medrasch Vaioscha, printed at Constantinople, which
clears up what is related in the Chaldee Paraphrase and other Authors whereof I
have spoken; for Moses is there represented giving an Account at large of his
Life after this manner.

When I went out of Egypt, I was about 40 Years old and being one Day near unto
the Water-pits; Sephora who was one of Jeyhro's Daughters came thither, and
finding her to be modest and very handsome, I told her, if she pleased I would
marry her; her Answer consisted of an Account she gave me how her Father used
such as sought any of his Daughters in Marriage, which was to carry them to a
Tree that was planted in the midst of his Graden that had so sad and peculiar a
Quality, that it presently struck such as came near it dead; which when I
understood, I asked from whence the said Tree was brought; she answered, That
God on the very Eve of the first Sabbath after the Creation of the World,
created a Rod, which he gave to Adam, Adam left it to Enoch, Enoch to Noah,
Noah to Sem, Sem to Abraham, Abraham to Isaac, Isaac to Jacob, Jacob carried it
into Egypt, and gave it his Son Joseph, after whose Death the Egyptians risted
his House, and finding the said Rod among the Spoils, they carried it to
Pharaoh's Court; and Jethro, who was one of the principal Magistrates of Egypt,
no sooner saw it, but he was desirous to have it, and having stole it away,
carried it to his own House: The great Name of God Tetragrammaton was graven
thereon, with the Explications of it, and the Ten Plagues wherewith God
afflicted Egypt; and as 'twas all full of Wonders, the same was kept in
Jethro's House, my Father-in-Law, till that going on a Time into his Garden,
and holding the Rod in his Hand, he stuck it in the Ground, and endeavoring
soon after to pull it out, he found it had taken Root, that it blossomed, and
that besides the Flowers, it bore also bitter Almonds: He left it there; and by
the Means of this Rod, which grew to be a Tree, he tried all such as had a
Design to marry his Daughters.

When I was informed of all these Particulars, and found the Shepherds would
not let Jethro's Daughters draw Water, I delivered Sephora and her Sister from
the Hands of those rude Fellows, took some Water and gave it their Cattle to
drink; after which they went toward their Father's House, and I accompanied
them. Being come to the House, they went in, and I staid at the Door, and as
they were come back that Day sooner than ordinary, Jethro asked them the Reason
of it; they answered, That a courteous Egyptian had saved them from the
Outrages of the Shepherds: When the Daughters had thus acquainted their Father
with the Adventure, and told him, that he who had delivered them was an
Egyptian; he asked them, if they had not returned him Thanks for his Kindness,
and bid them call me, saying, make him come in, and let him dine with us. The
Daughters having performed his Command, I went in, eat and drank with him, and
then with all Submission entreated him to give me his Daughter Sephora to Wife;
which he promised to do, provided I could bring to him a Rod which was in his
Garden; to which I agreed, went to see for the Rod, and when I found it, I
plucked it out of the Ground, and carried it to him; Jethro was surprised
hereat, and reflecting upon what I had done, he cried out and said, This is
certainly that Prophet, of whom the Seers of Israel have spoken, who is to lay
Egypt waste, and to destroy its People; and being thus possessed, he all in a
Rage took me and threw me into a deep Pit that was in his Garden.

Sephora was not a little concerned at this Adventure, no more than my self,
and she studied at the same time how she might save a Man's Life who had
obliged her. Hereupon she prayed her Father that he would let her tarry at home
to look after the House, and send her Sisters to the Fields, to keep his
Cattle: Her Father in answer told her, Daughter, It shall be so, that thy
Sisters shall go and look after the Cattle, but thou shall tarry here, and take
Care of Matters at home. Thus Sephora finding her self alone, she fed me every
Day with the daintiest Victuals, and the same whereof her Father Jethro eat,
and that for Seven Years, which was the time I tarried in the said Pit. But at
the End of that time Sephora spoke to her Father in this manner: Father, It Is a
long time since you have thrown into this Ditch, that Egyptian who brought the
Rod to you from the Place in the Garden, wherein you had put it; suffer now the
Pit to be opened, and let us see what will come of it; for, if he be dead, let
his Carcass be taken away, that your House may not be polluted, and if he be
still alive, he must be a holy Man: Jethro made answer, Daughter, You have
spoke well; Can you still remember what his Name was? Yes, Father, said she,
his Name was Moses, the Son of Amram: Jethro at the same time commanded the Pit
to be opened, and called me twice, Moses, Moses; I answered him, and presently
he took me out, kissed and told me; Blessed be God, who has preserved thee for
Seven Years in this Pit: I bear him witness this Day, that he has Power to
kill, and Power to make alive: I will testify aloud, and everywhere, that thou
art a right good Man, that thou shall one Day lay Egypt waste, that thou art
the Person who shall drown the Egyptians in the Sea, and by thy means Pharaoh
and his Army shall run the same Fate: And at the same time he gave me Money and
Sephora, his Daughter, to Wife.

Abarbinel, a Jewish Doctor, whose Works are highly esteemed by that People,
commenting upon the 2d Chapter of Exodus, explains that History in this manner:
After Moses had been entertained by Jethro, and that he came to know him to be
a Man of much Understanding and deep Knowledge, he was desirous to enter into a
nearer and more particular Alliance with him, because of the great Wisdom he
had observed in his Conversation, and gave his Consent he should live with him:
And this is that which Moses says in Exodus: And Moses consented to live with
Jethro, not for the Love he bore to Sephora, whom he married, but because of
Jetbro's Wisdom. It is, says he, the Opinion of our Doctors, since they say in
the Commentary, that the Rod of God was planted in the Garden, and that no Man
could pull it from thence but Moses, and that for the said Reason he took
Sephora to Wife; for by it they meant the Tree of Life, which was in the midst
of the Garden, that is, the Wisdom of Moses, upon the Account of which he was
honored with the Gift of Prophecy. Jetbro gave also to Moses his Daughter
Sephora to Wife, by reason of his wondrous Wisdom. Moses lead the People of God
into the Wilderness, and talked diverse times with God: He died upon Mount Nebo,
from whence God had showed him the Land of Promise, he being then 120 Years
old. The Pagans made him to be their Bacchus, as you may see under that Word.
Numerinus says, Plato and Pythagoras had drawn their Doctrine out of his Books,
and that the first of them was the Moses of Athens: He is ancienter than all
the Greek Writers, and even than their Mercurius Trismegistus. Tatian, who was
one of those Ancients that Apologized for the Christian Religion, against the
Persecutions of the first Centuries, tell us, That Moses was before the Heroes,
and even the Gods themselves of the Greeks, and that the Grecians wrote nothing
good, but what they took from our Scriptures, and that their Defign by partly
corrupting them, was no other than that themselves might be entitled Authors.
Theodoretus says, Moses was ancienter by a Thousand Years than Orpheus, and
that he was like the Ocean or Head-spring of Theology, from whence they took
their Origin, as so many Streams, and whereunto the most ancient Philosophers
had Recourse: The Learned are agreed, that the Two ancientest Writers of the
World, whose Writings are transmitted unto us, are Moses and Homer, and that
Moses lived several Ages before the other; Moses wrote much in Verse, and in
the Book of Numbers he has set down a Canaanitish Poet's Song of Victory.

MULCIBER,
one of the Names given to Vulcan, being derived from Mulceo, because the Fire
softens and qualifies all Things.

MUNDUS PATENS:
The open World; a Solemnity performed in a little Temple or Chapel that was
of a round Form like the World, and dedicated to Dis and the Infernal Gods; it
was opened but thrice a Year, viz. on the Day after the Vulcanalia, the 4th of
October and the 7th of the Ides of November, during which Days the Romans
believed Hell was open; wherefore they never offered Battle on those Days,
lifted no Soldiers, never put out to Sea, nor married, according to Varro, as
Macrobius witnesses, L. Saturn, C. 16. Mundus cum patet, Deorum tristium atque
Inferum quasi janua patet, propterea non modo pralium committ^, verum etiam
delectum rei militaris cansa habere, ac militem proficisci, navem solvere,
uxorem ducere religiosum est.

MURTIA,
a Surname of Venus, taken from the Myrtle-Tree, which was consecrated to her:
She was formerly called Myrtea, and corruptly Murtia. Festus says there was a
Temple built for the Goddess Murtia upon Mount Aventine, as to a Goddess of
Idleness, who made People idle and lazy.

MUS;
a Rat, Mouse; the Phrygians held Rats in great Veneration, according to
Clemens Alexandrinus: Polemo relates, says he, that the Trojans gave Religious
Adoration to Rats, which they called Smintheus; because they once gnawed to
pieces the Bow-strings of their Enemies; and this was the Reason why they gave
to Apollo the Epithet of Smyntheus: And Straho speaking of the Statue of this
God, says he had a Rat at his Feet. The Worshipping of Rats appears yet to be
more ancient by the Authority of some Authors: Herodotus relates, that after
Senacherib, King of Assyria, had conquered Asia, he made War upon the
Egyptians; and that Setho, King of Egypt, and Vulcan's Priest, having not
Troops enough to defend him, yet putting his Confidence in the Gods, he
advanced as far as Pelusium, where he pitched his Camp, and that a dreadful
Multitude of Rats, went into the Enemy's Camp by Night, and gnawed their Bows,
Arrows, and Shield-strings to pieces; insomuch, that next Day finding
themselves without Arms, they hastily retreated with the Loss of many of their
Soldiers. Herodetus adds, That he had seen the Statue of King Setho, put up in
Vulcan's Temple, holding a Rat in his Hand, with this Inscription; Let him that
looks upon me, learn to reverence the Gods. The Egyptians in their
Hieroglyphics were wont to point out the Destruction of somewhat, by a Rat
which eats and destroys all it can, as may be seen in the first Book of Horus
Apollo.

MUSAE,
the Muses; Diodorus Siculus informs us, That the most Famous of the ancient
Authors agreed, that the Muses were the Daughters of Jupiter and Mnemosyne;
that some reckoned them to be no more than Three, viz. Mneme, Aoede, and
Melete; that is, Memory, Singing and Meditation: But that Homer and Hesiod
allowed of Nine, whose Names the last Author has also given us, viz.

Clioque, Euterpeque, Thaliaque, Melpomeneque,
Terpsichoreque, Eratoque, Polyhymniaque, Vraniaque,
Calliopeque; haec una alias supereminet omnes.
To Clio they attributed the Invention of History; Tragedy to Melpomene; to
Thalia, Comedy; to Euterpe the Use of the Flagelet, and other Wind-musick; to
Terpsicore, the Harp; the Lyre and Lute, to Erato; to Calliope, Heroic Verse;
to Urania, Astrology; and Rhetoric to Polyhymnia. Diodorus says afterward,
that the Word Muse comes from (...), which signifies to teach hidden Things,
and such as are above the Capacity of the Vulgar; after which he gives a Reason
for the several Names given to the Nine Muses. Its manifest that all these
Names are Greek, and that they have all of them a Relation to the Nature and
Agreeableness of Music and Poetry; which has very much inclined Men to
believe, that the same is purely a Greek Invention, and that it is no other than
a Moral Genealogy, like unto that which sometimes they make of Virtues and
Vices; and the Name of their Mother, which is Memory, is also a Proof hereof.

However, this very same Historian puts Mnemosyne among the Titanes, and makes
the Nine Muses to accompany Osiris in his Military Expeditions, when he gives
an Account of the Theology of the Egyptians: Risus amator erat osiris, and
musica choreisque gaudebat. Ideo Musicorum agmen circumducebat, in quo novem
erant Virgins, canendi scientia praestantes, etc. eruditae, Graci Musas
vocant, quarum praeses Apollo, unde Musagetes dictus. Thus you see the Origin
of the Muses of Greece laid in Egypt, though Greece gives them proper Names, and
to each a particular Function: Egypt is deprived of them, and they are
naturalized in diverse Parts of Greece, whether the same were Fountains, Woods,
Mountains or Cities. Diodorus also makes the Muses to accompany Bacchus in his
Expeditions. It may be farther conjectured, that the Name of Muse came
originally from Phoenicia, seeing the Word Mousar signifies Instruction and
Learning. There are some Critics who believe there were no more than Three
Muses at first, to whom Mount Helicon was consecrated, and that there having
been Three Statues erected to each of them, it was given out there were Nine of
them, that Pierius, in Baeotia, consecrated his Nine Daughters to them, which
made their Names to be common to them. Plutarch in his Symposiacs, a little
before the End thereof, treats of the Muses: It Is a mere Allegory, wherein he
applies the Nine Muses, either to Nine several Sciences, or to as many
Celestial Globes, in order to unite them all into one Harmony.

Clemens Alexandrinus read in some profane Authors, that which he relates
concerning Macar, King of Libya; who being continually jangling with the Queen
his Wife, their Daughter Megaclo bought Nine Maid servants, put them to learn
Music, and to play upon Instruments, that so by the Melody of their Consort,
she might divert the peevish Humor of her Father. This ingenious Piety in her
had the desired Success, and she erected Nine Columns in Honor of these Nine
Female Musicians, to whom afterward great Honors were given. The Poets
represent the Muses unto us, very beautiful and young, adorned with Garlands of
Flowers, and made their Residence to be on Mount Parnassus, and Helicon with
Apollo: To them they consecrated several Fountains, as that called Hippoerene,
or the Fountain of the Horse Pegasus; and among Trees, the Palm, and Laurel.

MUSCA,
a Fly; the Poets feigned this Insect was formerly a Female Musician, and the
Moon's Rival, in respect to the Amors of Endymion, but because she came too
often to sing and play about him, when he was asleep, the jealous Moon changed
her into a Fly; and hence it is, that she always infests such as are asleep,
and especially young People, not out of Hatred, but Love to them, to get some
Kisses of them, which smart a little, as those do of passionate Lovers. There
was formerly a Lady of this Name that made very good Verses, and a Courtizan of
Athens, who was reproached for having pricked her Lovers till the Blood ran:
Lucian, of whom I have had this, has writ a little Treatise, in the Praise of a
Fly, which I have inserted in this place.

The Fly, says he, in respect to Insects is not so big, but she is as little in
Comparison of a Be; but it may be said, that for the Delicateness of her Wing
she does as much excel that of other Birds, if it be lawful to reckon her of
that Number, as Silk does common Thread or Wool; for her Wing is not covered
with Feathers, but with a fine Crape like the Grasshoppers, and when you look
upon her in the Sun, she shines with many Colors, like a Peacock's Tail, or a
Pigeon's Neck, she does not fly by moving her Wings as Birds do, but by sudden
Motions or Rebounds like Locusts, but yet is so flexible as to turn about in an
instant; and the Noise she makes in her Flight is not so harsh as that of
Wasps, but is like the Music of a Flute compared with Hautboys or Trumpets;
she has a large Eye, and a Flower upon her Head, which is hard and shining, as
if it were made of Horn; and her Head is not fixed to her Body in such manner
as that of Grasshoppers is, but she holds it to by the means of her Neck, and
stirs it any way; her Body is of a heap, her Legs long, and not short like
those of the Wasps; her Belly is covered with shining Lames, like unto an
Antique Cuirass; she does not prick with a Sting as Bees do, but with a little
Trunk that serves her instead of a Mouth, and which has a kind of Tooth at the
end of it, wherewith she bites and sucks both Blood and Milk, without doing
much harm: She has fine Legs, whereof the Two fore ones serve her instead of
Hands, for she cleans her self with them, and conveys her Food to her Mouth as
a Man does: She accompanies Man all her Life time, and tastes of every Thing he
eats, except Oil, which is a deadly Poison to her; her Life is not long, but
pleasant; it is not a little Dexterity will serve-her to avoid the Webs of the
Spider, that every where lays Ambuscades for her, into which her Boldness
sometimes does precipitate her. Homer compares her with the most Valiant of his
Heroes, and he cannot for bear to praise and magnify her by the Similies he
uses in several Parts of his Poem: Sometimes he describes her Flight when she
goes in Company toward some Vessel full of Milk, or to some of the spilt Blood
of the Sacrifices; another while he makes use of her Example, when he speaks of
the Diligence and Vigilance, wherewith Minerva defended Menelaus: In another
place he calls her gentle and good, because she has no Sting, and that her
Wounds are not dangerous, as those of Wasps and Bees are: Shall I speak of her
Power, which is so great, that Men cannot defend themselves from her? her Love
is free and heavenly, for she flies in the Air coupled with her Male; and it is
also said she is of both Sexes, as Hermophrodites are: She has this Advantage,
that having but little to live upon, she always finds the Cloth laid; and it
must be said that for her sake, it is that the Cows give Milk, and the Bees
Honey: She sits down the first at Kings Tables, and tastes their Victuals.

MUSEA, MUSIA and MUSIVA,
Pavements of Mosaic Work, which represented natural Grottos: This Name was
given to those sorts of Pavements, because ingenious Works were attributed to
the Muses, and that the Muses and Sciences were represented therein; perhaps
those public Buildings which were appointed for the Assemblies of learned Men,
called Musea, were adorned with these sorts of Work; and these Musea's were
built in diverse Places: In Athens there was a famous little Hill of this Name,
where the Poet Museus was buried; and at Troezen in Peloponnesus there was a
Temple dedicated to the Muses, called Musea for that Reason, which was designed
for the Use of learned Men, where Pitheus had taught Rhetoric, and wrote a
Book upon that Subject, which Pausanias says, he had seen: But one of the most
famous Musea's was that at Alexandria, of which Philostratus and Dio Chrysostom
make mention, and wherein diverse learned Men were maintained at the Charge of
the Government: In all Probability it was erected by that curious King of Egypt
Ptolomy Philadelphus, to whom belonged that admirable Library of which so many
Authors make mention, and who caused the Bible to be translated into Greek by
the Septuagint. The Emperor Claudius who would have himself thought to be
learned, built also another Musea in the said City, which was called the Musea
of Claudius, as Suetonius does restifie.

MUSICA,
Music, a Science which teaches how to affect the Ear with agreeable Notes,
and regulates Harmony; or else a Science whereby a Disposition is made of grave
and sharp Sounds porportionable to one another, and separated by just
Intervals, where with Sense and Reason are satisfied: Some attribute the
Invention to Apollo, and others to Mercury: The Ancients made six sorts of
Music, viz. Rhythmical, Metrical, Instrumental, Poetical and Mimical, which
contained the Rules of Dancing, Reciting, Playing upon Instruments, Versifying,
Gestures of the Actors; and Harmonical, which contained Rules for Vocal Music:
These six Things being the Subject of the six Kinds of Music according to the
Dirision Porphyrie makes of them upon Ptolomy's Harmonicon.

Aristoxenus the Philosopher, and Aristotle's Disciple has left us Three Books
concerning the Elements of Harmonical Music: These Books made him the Author
of a Sect in Music called from him the Aristoxenians, who opposed that of the
Pythagoreans: They differed in that the last in Order to judge of Tones had
Regard to nothing but the Reasons of Proportion, whereas the Former were of
Opinion, it was requisite to join the Judgment with the Ear, whose Part it is
principally to regulate such Things as belong to Music. Aristoxenus divided
Harmonical Music into Seven Parts, and they are Kinds, Intervals, Sounds,
Systems, Tones or Modes, Transpositions and Melopy. The Kinds were Chromatick,
Diatonick and Enarmonick: The Chromatick abounds in Tones, and was thus called
because the Greeks distinguished it by such Characters as were of a Color that
they called Chroma: The soft b belonged to this Chromatick Kind, Boaetius and
Zarlini after him, said, that this Chromatick Kind was invented by Timotheus
the Milesiant in the Time of Alexander the Great; the Spartans banished him
their City, because this Music was too soft, and they not accustomed to use
any other than the Diatonick sort; The Diatonick contained but Two Tones, the
Greater and the Lesser, and Half the Greater Tone. The Enarmonick is a Way of
softning the Voice, wherewith the Ancients were so charmed that they neglected
the Rest.

MUSIVARII,
Mosaic Works, which the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian made at the
Public Charge.

MUTA or TACITA DEA;
the dumb Goddess, or Goddess of Silence, who was thought to have been the
Daughter of the River Almo, and called Lalaria, because of her much Babbling:
This Name she received for discovering to Juno the Amors of Jupiter and
Juturna, which incensed Jupiter, so that he cut out her Tongue, to put her for
ever in mind of her Fault, and ordered Mercury to carry her into Hell, as being
unworthy to see the Light: In conducting of her thither he was charmed with her
Beauty, and enjoyed her, to whom she bore Two Children which were named Lares:
The Romans offered Sacrifice to this Goddess for the Prevention of Slanders,
and joined her Festival with that of the Dead, either because she imitated them
in Respect to their Silence by reason of her Tongue's being cut out, or because
she was the Mother of the Lares, who were accounted to be the Genii or Guardian
Angels of Men during their Lives.

Ovid describes a pleasant Ceremony that used to be practiced upon this
Occasion for the Preventing of Slanders, and says, That an old Woman surrounded
with a great many young Girls, offered Sacrifice to the Goddess Muta, and put
Three Grains of Frankinscence with Three of her Fingers into a little Hole,
having at the same Time Three black Beans in her Mouth: Then she takes the Head
of an Image, which she besmears with Pitch, and makes Holes therein with a
Brass Needle, then throws it into the Fire and covers it with Mint, pouring
some Wine thereon, of which she gives some to the Girls to drink, but reserves
the best Part for her self, wherewith she makes her self drunk, and so sends
them Home, saying, She has stopped the Mouths of Slanderers. Fast. 2. V. 571.

Ecce anus in mediis residens annosa puellis,
Sacra facit Tacitae: vix tamen ipsa tacet:
Et digitis tria tura tribus sub limine ponit,
Qua brevis occultum mus sibi fecititer.
Tum cantata tenet cum rhombo liciafusco,
Et septem nigras versat in ore fabas:
Quodque pice astringit, quod acu trajecit abena,
Obsutum mentha torret in igne caput:
Vina quoque instillat: vini quodcunque relictum est,
Aut ipsa aut comites, plus temen ipsa bibit.
Hostiles linguas, inimicaque vinximus ora,
Dicit discedens, ebriaque exit anus.
MYAGROS,
otherwise called Achor and Beelzebuth by the Hebrews, the God of Flies, to
whom the Elaans offered Sacrifice that he might drive away the Flies. See Achor.

MYODES,
see Achor.

MYRINUS,
an Epithet given to Apollo and taken from the City of Myrina in Eolia where he
was worshipped.

MYRMIDONES,
the Myrmidons; a People of Thessaly, who followed Achilles to the Trojan War:
The Poets feigned that they were Ants, which at the Request of King Eacus were
changed by Jupiter into Men, because the Greek Word (...), signifies an Ant.

MYRON,
an excellent Statuary, who amongst others of his Pieces made a Cow of Copper
so like unto the Life that the Bulls took her to be so; and this has rendered
him famous among the Poets and all the Ancients.

MYRRHA;
the Daughter of Cinirus King of Cyprus, who falling in Love with her Father,
deceived him by the Artifice of her Nurse to gratify her Lust: Cinirus coming
to know it, endeavored to kill her, but she fled into Arabia, where she was
transformed into that Tree which bears Myrrh: She was the Mother of Adonis.

MYSTRUM;
a kind of Measure among the Greeks that held about a Spoonful.

N.
N Is the Thirteenth Letter of the Alphabet, and a Liquid Consonant which is
called Iinniens, because of its having a clearer and plainer Sound than others,
the same sounding against the Roof of the Mouth: And this appears in that it
has the same Pronunciation in Manlius as in the Word An, a Year, in Menses, as
in en: Though sometimes it loses much of its Strength in particular Words, and
forms a midling Sound between it self and the G, which gave the Greeks Occasion
to change the N into P before these Greek Letters (...), as (...) for (...);
though many are of Opinion, that this was the Transcriber's Faults in lengthning
out the v too much, and making a (...) of it: The Latins had also somewhat of
the like Nature in their Language, for they put Two gg together as the Greeks
did, writing Aggulus for Angulus, etc. The Greeks often changed this Letter
into an L in the Midst of Words, as (...) was put for Manlius, or else they
left it out altother, as (...) for Hortensius; which made Lambinus falsely
believe, that the true Name of that Roman Orator was Hortesius contrary to the
Authority of Ancient Books and Inscriptions; besides which we find by a great
many Examples, that it was usual with the Greeks to leave out the N. when it
came not in the End of Words.

This Letter was also sometimes lost in the Latin, as when from Abscindo they
made the Preterperfect Tense abscidi: The N moreover had an Affinity with the
R, from whence we find Aeneus put for Aereus, Cancer for Carcer, Carmen from
Cano, Germen for Genimen according to Joseph Scaliger upon Varro: And N was put
for S, whence it is that Cessores was found for Censores in Varro, and Sanguis
for Sanguen. N among the Ancients was a Numeral Letter, signifying 900, and
when a Line was drawn above it, it implied 90000. N and L being put together,
with the Lawyers signified as much as non liquet, the Cause did not yet appear
clear enough for Sentence to pass.

NAIADES,
they were false Goddesses which the Heathens believed did preside over
Fountains and Rivers: The Poets often make mention of them. It Is a Word that
comes from (...) to flow.

NAPAEAE,
were false Goddesses which the Pagans believed did preside over Forests and
Hills: In the mean while Servius in explaining this Verse in Virgil,

Faciles venerare Napaeas,
says, That the Napaeae, or the Naiades were the Nymphs of Fountains; Its plain
that the Word is derived from the Hebrew Nouph or Noup. And the said Servius
upon another Line in Virgil, says, That the Napaeae were the Nymphs of
Fountains, and the Nereides of the Seas: In the mean time, if the Greek
Etymology (...) be given this Word, we must say that the Napaeae are the Nymphs
of Forests.

NARCISSUS
the Son of Cephisus a River in Boeotia, and of Lyriope the Daughter of
Oceanus, who was exceeding beautiful: His Parents having one Day consulted the
Prophet Tiresias concerning the Fate of their Son, he answered, That if he
lived, he ought not to see his own Face, which they did not at first
understand: He was courted by all the Nymphs of the Country because of his
handsome and good Mein, but he slighted them all, and even made the Nymph Echo
languish and die for Love of him, insomuch that she had nothing left her but a
weak Voice, her Body being transformed into a Rock: The Gods were not willing
to let such disdainful Arrogance go unpunished, and therefore one Day as he
returned weary and faint from Hunting, he stopped upon the Brink of a Well to
quench his Thirst, and seeing his own Face in the Water he grew so desparately
in Love therewith, that he wasted away upon the Place with Love and
Languishment; but the Gods in Compassion to him changed him into a Flower of
his Name. Pausanias in his Boeotica contradicts this Fable, and says, That
Narcissus was in Love with his Sister that was born after him, and that when
she died, he also pined away and perished.

NAVIS,
a Ship, its a Vessel built with high Sides in order to sail upon the Sea: Many
are of Opinion that Janus was the first Inventer of Shipping, because the
Figure of one was impressed upon the Reverse of the most ancient Coins of the
Greeks of Sicily and Italy, according to Atheneus: And Phaedrus, L. 4. F. 6.
speaks of the first Ship in this manner, I wish to God the Thessalian Ax had
never hewn down the lofty Pines growing on the Sides of the Forest of Peleon,
and that subtle Argus who was desirous to trace out a bold Course and such as
was exposed to the Dangers of apparent Death upon the Waters, had not built a
Ship by the Art and Direction of Pallas: This Ship, I say, first opened the
Passage of the Sea, which till then had continued inaccessible, and has been
fatal to the Greeks and Barbarians: What think you of this short Relation?
Doubtless you will tell me, that the same is impertinent and falsely grounded,
because Minos long before the Argonants, had surmounted the Violence of the
Egaean Sea covering the same with a great Fleet.

The most famous Ships of old are reckoned that of Ptolomy Philopator, that was
280 Cubits long, 38 broad, and 48 high, and 54 from the Top of the Poop down to
the Water: She carried 400 Rowers, 400 Seamen, and 3000 Soldiers: That which he
built to sail upon the Nile, was Half a Furlong long, and 30 Cubits broad: But
this was nothing to Hiero's Ship, that was built by the Direction of
Archimedes: There was as much Timber used in it, as was designed for 60
Galleys; and the same was so well contrived on the Inside that every Rower,
Seaman, Soldier and Passenger had a Cabin for himself: There were in it
moreover several Halls to eat in, Rooms, Walks, Galleries, Gardens, Fish Ponds,
Stables, Kitchins, Mills, a Temple for Venus, Baths and Council-Chambers:
Besides which, it had an Iron Rampart, and Towers, Two at the Head and as many
in the Stern, the other being on the Sides with Walls and Bastions, whereon
might be seen several Warlike Engines, and among the rest one that threw a
Stone of 300 Pound Weight, or an Arrow of 12 Cubits long to the Distance of 600
Paces; with many other strange Things of which Atheneus makes mention.

NAEVIUS
surnamed Accius, was a famous Augur who lived in the Time of Tarquinius
Priscus; its said of him that being minded in the King's Presence to give
Authority to his Predictions, he cut a Stone in two with a Razor. See Accius.

NAULUM,
this was Money put into the Mouth of a Person deceased at Rome, to pay Charon
the Ferryman for his Passage, and this Piece was to be of the current Coin of
the Emperor that then reigned, which gave People afterward an Opportunity to
know when such an one died.

NAUMACHIA;
Sea Fights, which were the finest Shows the Ancients had; for Nature and the
Elements gave way to the Art and Inventions of Men: Julius Caesar having found
out a convenient Place on the Banks of the Tiber, and near enough to the City,
called Codetta, as Suetonius says, caused the same to be cleansed and
excavated, wherein he presented the People with the Diversion of a Sea Fight:
There Tyrian and Egyptian Ships fought; and this kind of Show was so new, that
it drew Spectators thither from all Parts of the World. Among these Sea Fights
may be comprehended the fantastical Actions of Caligula who built a Bridge upon
Two Rows of Ships joined and fastened together, that reached from Baiae as far
as Puteoli, insomuch that those Two Towns in the Territories of Rome, which by
Sea and Nature were separated from each other 3600 Paces, were hereby joined
together; the Emperor mounted upon a charging Horse and richly accoutred, rid
several Times backwards and forwards upon the said Bridge the first Day, having
a Crown on his Head, an Ax upon his Saddle-bow, his Shield on his Arm, and a
Sword by his Side: Next Day he appeared in an Habit that was less Warlike, and
rode to and fro a few Times in a Chariot drawn by Two stately Horses, being
followed by a great many Persons of Quality, who are named in the History.

As for his Successor, he undertook a real Sea Fight upon the Lake Fucinus; he
made a Line of a Dozen Ships to fight against as many of the opposite Side, the
one being Rbodians and the other Tyrians. They were animated to fight by the
Trumpets of a Triton, who by the Help of an Engine arose out of the Water with
his Company: He had the Curiosity to make the Combatants pass before him, who
saluted him with these Words. Sir, cried they, receive the Salutation of those
who come to die for your Diversion, Ave, Imperator, morituri te salutant. To
whom he gave no other Answer than, Avete vos. Nero also diverted the People
with a Navalfight, after he had first divided the Mountain which separates the
Lake Fucinus from the River Lyra: He fitted out Galleys in Three or Four Lines
and put 19000 Men aboard them to fight. But the most remarkable of all the
Sea Fights and which is most extolled by Historians and Poets, is that of Titus
and Domitian: For here were 3000 Fighting Men on both Sides, one of whom they
called Athenians, and the other Party Syracusians.

NEBO,
its a Deity mentioned in Isaiah the Prophet, which presides over Prophecy,
according to St. Jerome, who has no other Proof for it but the Signification of
the Word: The Chal^ems were much given to Divination, and Grotius says with
great Likelihood of Truth, that he was some Wizzard or Astrologer, of whom they
had made a God.

NECESSITAS;
Necessity; was a Heathen Deity, which accompanied Man from his very Birth:
Plato makes her to be the Mother of the Destinies.

NECROMANTIA;
Negromancy; an Art by which Communication is held with the Devil and the Dead:
The Pythonissa, or Witch of Eudor, in the Scripture, made Samuel appear unto
Saul by the Art of Negromancy.

NECTAR,
the Drink of the Gods, according to the Fable.

NEMBROD;
Nimrod; Vossius thinks him to be the Mars of the Pagans; and Diodorus Siculus
represents Mars in such a manner as is not very disagreeable to what the
Scripture says concerning Nimrod: For he was the first Inventer of War, and of
an Empire established by Force of Arms: Thus Nimrod's Hunting ended in War, and
the Effect thereof proved the Foundation of the first Empire in the World, that
began at Babylon; which makes the Description given of Nimrod, to be very like
unto that of Mars. It was Belus, according to all our profane Authors, that
laid the first Foundation of the Assyrian Empire; and 'twas Nimrod that did it
according to a plain Text in Genesis; from whence it follows that Nimrod must
be the same with Belus: In short, Mars being no other, according to Diodorus
Siculus, than he who first began Wars and Battles, its very probable that Belus
or Nimrod was the Person whom the Heathens worshipped by the Name of Mars; and
if the Chronicle of Alexandria says, that Nimrod the Founder of Babylon was
transformed into the Constellation, called Orion; its likely the Reason might
be, because Orion was formerly an Hunter as well as Nimrod. Bochartus is of
Opinion, That Nimrod was rather the Bacchus of the Babylonians: Nimrod was the
Son of Chus; Bar-Chus has the same Import as the Son of Chus in Hebrew: The
Letter R being often omitted by the Hebrews in the middle of Words. Bacchus
might have been formed of Barchus: Nimrod comes near to the Word Aimra in
Chaldee, which signifies a Tiger; whence it was that Bacchus was covered with a
Tiger's Skin, and had Tigers to draw his Chariot. Bacchus his Victories in the
Indies may represent those of Belus or Nimrod in the Empire of Babylon and the
East. The same Author says elsewhere, That the Fable of Jupiter may be applied
to the History of Nimrod, who rebelled against his Father Saturn, that is,
Noah; for Nimrod in Hebrew comes from Marad, which signifies to rebel.

NEMEA;
a Forest in Achaia, where the People of Argos were wont to celebrate their
Plays in Honor of Hercules, who had killed a Lion in the said Forest; and this
made him take the Surname of Nemens. There are some Authors who attribute the
instituting of these Plays to have been in Honor of Archemorus the Son of
Lycurgus, who died with the Stinging of a Serpent: The Crown which was bestowed
on the Conquerors at these Games, was made of Ashbranches and the Judges were
in Mourning.

NEMESIS;
this Goddess was she who particularly affected to punish and humble the Proud;
the Persians despising the Greeks, and so having fitted up Marble in order to
the Erecting of Trophies of a Victory, which they had not yet won, when the
Grecians defeated them at Marathon, they made use of the same Marble to set up
a Monument for the Goddess Nemesis, as Pausanias relates. This Author makes
Oceanus to be the Father of this Goddess, and he is of Opinion, that it was not
the main Ocean, that was meant, but a River of that Name in Aethiopia; but it is
more likely that it was the true Ocean, from whence the Poets deduce all the
Gods. He makes her also to be the Mother of Helen, by which no other is
intimated but the Divine Displeasure, which suffered the extraordinary Beauty
of the said Lady, to be as it were the Torch that kindled the Flames of War
between Europe and Asia, with Losses and incredible Mortifications to both
sides. Lastly, He says, that the Statues of Nemesis at Smyrna had Wings to make
her the more like unto Cupid; because she very often made those feel her
Severities, whose Obduracy Love could not subdue, and the which proceeded from
nothing but Pride. Strabo makes mention of the Temples of Nemesis, who was also
called Ramnusia.

The Egyptians painted her having her Throne upon the Moon, that so she might
observe the Actions of Men. When the Romans went for the Army, they sacrificed
to her, and gave the People a Show of the Gladiators; and when they returned
victorious they rendered her Thanks for the Revenge she had taken upon their
Enemies. Plato L. 4. de Leg. says in plain Terms, that Nemesis is the Angel of
Revenge, Omnibus praeposita est Nemesis juditii angelus, actionum Omnium
consider a^^ix. This Philosopher has said what the Poets and Historians would
say; that there is an Eternal Justice who severely punishes the Proud, and who
has Angels to be the Executioners of her Wrath; Artemidorus has the same Idea
of this Goddess as Plato, which is nothing else but the same Justice, from whom
the Good ought to expect all sorts of Kindnesses and Favors; and from whom on
the Contrary the Wicked can promise to themselves nothing but Chastenings and
Punishments: The Romans also worshipped this Goddess, but gave her no Name in
their Language, as Pliny says; Nemesis, quae Dea Latinum nomen ne in Capitolio
quidem invenis: and again elsewhere; Alias Graecam Nemesim invocantes cum ob id
Romae simulachrum in Capitolio est, quamvis Latinum nomen non sit. But no Body
has better expressed the Nature and Power, and formed a truer Idea of this
Goddess than Ammianus Marcellinus, who yet does not give her any Latin Name,
though he does Two in Greek, viz. Adras^ea and Nemesis; of whom he gives a
Description rather like a Philosopher, or a Divine than an Historian. L. 14. He
informs us that it is she who raises up the Just and punishes the Wicked, that
she tumbles down the Proud, and makes a just Mixture of Prosperity and
Adversity, gives Success to our Undertakings or disappoints our Designs
according to the Counsels of an Eternal Wisdom.

But though the Latins had no proper Name in their Language to express this
Goddess by, yet the Poets have not forgot to speak of her, as does C^andian:

Sed Dea quae nimiis obstat Rhamnusia votis,
Ingemuit flexitque rotam.
Again, it appears by some Verses of the Poets that the Name of Rhamnusia came
from the Place where this Goddess was worshipped: The same being Rhamnus in
Attica, where there was a Temple erected to her; and as for the Name of
Adrastea, Strabo says, it came from King Adrastus, who dedicated a Temple to
her: Callisthenes Adrasteam ab Adrasio rege denominatam ait, qui primus Nemesi
templum posuit. And for this Purpose he recites the Verses of Antimachus the
Poet: Hic sacris colitur Dea and Adrastea vocatur, primus illi aram condidit
Adrastus ad amnem Aesopi.

NENIA;
this Word sometimes signifies a Toy or Trifle, and other whiles Lamentations
and mournful Times, sung at the Burying of the Dead: The Word comes from a
trifling Play among Children, called Nenia, which was much used by those of
Rome, and wherein he that succeeded best was made King: Roscia, dic sodes,
melior lex, an puerorum
Nenia, quae regnum recte facientibus offert.
Hor. Ep. 1. L. 1. But the Nenia for the Dead is derived from a Hebrew Word,
that signifies Lamentation or Complaint. The Lamentations of Jeremy are nothing
else but Nenia's upon the Destruction of the Jewish Monarchy, and the City of
Jerusalem, which he bewails like a Man that is dead. Nenia is not Greek; for
the Greeks called mournful Songs Epicedia, or Threni. The Nenia's began
presently as soon as the Party expired, as it appears from the Gospel it self:
Filia mea modo d^functa est, said the Chief of the Synagogue to the Son of
God,, and yet the Singers of the Nenias and of all their mournful Music had
already begun their Lamentations. The Nenia's did not always consist of mean
Verses; for those made by David upon the Death of Saul and Jonathan, and of
Jeremy upon Jerusalem, are complete Pieces, and very elegant.

NEPHALIA,
a Sacrifice and Feast of the Greeks, called the Feast of Sober Men, at which
the Athenians offered to the Sun and Moon, to Aurora and Venus, a Drink made of
Water and Honey: They burnt all sorts of Wood upon this Occasion, except the
Vine and Fig Tree.

NEPTUNUS,
Neptune, one of Saturn's Sons and Jupiter's Brother, who for his Share had the
Dominion of the Sea assigned him; instead of a Scepter they gave him a Trident,
and for a Chariot a great Sea-shell, which they make to be drawn either by
Whales and Sea-Calves or by Horses whose nether Parts were fishy: His Wife was
Amphitrite whom he obtained by the means of a Dolphin, in Acknowledgement of
whose Kindness he placed him among the Stars near into Capricorn. He taught Men
the Art of managing a Horse, which with a Blow of his Trident he made to come
out of the Earth, when he was in Dispute with Minerus who should give Name to
Coecropia, which was afterward called Athens from Minerva: Being engaged in a
Conspiracy against his Brother Jupiter, he was forced to fly with Apollo to
Laomedon, where he helped to build the Walls of Troy, though he was so unhappy as
not to be paid for his Labor, They make Neptune to be the Creator of the
Horse, for thus Virgil speaks of it.

Tuque, o cui prima frementem
Fudit equum Tellus, magno percussa tridenti,
Neptune.
Georg. L. 1. Servius says, that Neptune was also called Equester, because he
made a Horie come out of the Earth, that he might have the Honor to give Name
to the City of Athens, though Minerva prevailed, by making an Olive Tree suddenly
to grow up out of the Ground: It Is probable this Horse was nothing but a Ship,
the Swiftness whereof a Horse does imitate, and which is under the Protection
of Neptune: The Fable also signifies perhaps nothing else but the two Things
wherein the City of Athens excelled; viz. Ships and Olive Trees: Pausanias
gives other Reasons why the Invention of the Use of Horses is attributed to
Neptune.

The Medals represented him naked, holding sometimes a Dolphin in his
Left Hand, or under his Feet, and his Trident in his Right, as may be seen by
the Reverse of the Medalls of Marcus Agrippa: He was represented at other Times
with his Trident in one Hand, and in the other an Arostolia or Ornament, which
was fastened to the Prow of Ships; and this is made out to us by the Reverse of
the Silver Medalls of Augustus and Vespatian, on which there are these
abbreviated Words Nept. Red. Neptuno reduci; these two Emperors intimating
hereby their rendering Thanks to Neptune for their Expeditions by Sea and safe
Return: He was represented also lying upon the Sea, holding his Trident in one
Hand, and leaning with the other Arm upon such a Vessel as the Gods of the
Rivers were wont to do: He is to be seen likewise mounted in a Chariot drawn by
two Horses, as he is also sitting upon a Dolphin, holding Victory in his
Right Hand, which puts two Crowns upon his Head, and his Trident in the Left:
When the Romans and Greeks gave Neptune Thanks for the Victories they obtained
by Sea; they represented him on the one Side with his Trident, and on the other
stood Victory upon the Stern of a Ship. The Romans built a Temple to Neptunue
Equester, as Dionysius of Hallicarnassus says, and appointed a Festival for
him, called Consualia, wherein they crowned some Horses with Garlands of
Flowers, which in this manner were led through the City. The Arcadians gave
this Festival the Name of Hippocratia.

The History of Japhet agrees very much with what the Fable relates concerning
Neptune: Japhet's Share, according to Scripture, was Europe, with all the Isles
of the Sea, and the Peninsula's whereof it consists, Euhemerus the Historian,
as interpreted by Ennius, and related by Lanctantius, bears the same Testimony
concerning Neptune, that the Seas and the Islands fell to his Lot: Neptuno
maritima omnia cum insulis obvenerunt: Plutarch says, the Egyptians called the
Promontories and the utmost Parts of the Earth Nephthyn, which Term has
doubtless a great deal of Resemblance to that of Neptune. As for Neptune's
other Name called by the Greeks (...). Bochartus thinks it is derived from the
Punick Word Pesat: Herodotus says also, there were none but the Libyans that
gave Neptune the Name of Posidon; so Posidon will be the same Name as Neptune.
Lactantius does not doubt but that Neptune was Superintendant General of the
Seas.

All Nations had also a Neptune of their own, and all these Neptunes had in
like manner something that was very manifestly like and unlike to one another:
Diodorus Siculus speaks of an Altar in Arabia dedicated to Neptune, standing
upon the Seaside. Sanchuniathon says, that Vsous was the first who hollowed
the Body of a Tree, and in Phoenicia durst adventure to trust himself with the
Waves of the Sea. The Neptune of the Phoenicians is ancienter than him of the
Greeks and Latins, as they were Navigators before the others; and him they made
to be the Son of Pontus: The Egyptians had also their Neptune, and Plutarch
assures us, that even the Name of Neptune was taken from the Egyptian Tongue,
and signified Promontories, and Seacoasts: But Plutarch perhaps, confounds the
Egyptians with the Libyans, for Herodotus witnesses that the Word Neptune was
proper only to the Language of the Libyans who were the oldest Worshippers of
this Deity. None, says he, assumed the Name of Neptune at the Beginning but the
Libyans, who always worshipped this God. The same Author says elsewhere, that
the Scythians had also a Respect for Neptune, and that they called him
Thamimasades. Appian relates, that Mithridates threw the Chariots drawn by Four
Horses in Honor of Neptune, into the Sea.

NEREUS,
is one of the Gods of the Seas, his Name being derived from (...) Fluid,
according to Hescychius: But yet it is more probably deduced from Nahar, an
Hebrew Term, signifying fluere, fluvius: Some make him to be the Son of
Neptune, others of Pontus: Pontus and Neptune being the same; but Neptune is
more often looked upon as the Genius of the Seas, and Oceanus and Pontus as the
Body thereof. They make Nereus to have 50 Daughters, called from him Nereides,
which are so many particular Seas, being Parts of the main Sea it self. Nereus
married Doris by whom he had Thetis.

NEREIDES,
are Sea-Nymphs and the Daughters of Nereus.

NERO,
the 6th Emperor of Rome, was the Son of Domitius Aeneobarbus and Agrippina and
adopted by the Emperor Claudius his Predecessor, to the Empire: The Medals
which we have of him show his natural Inclinations by the Features of his Face:
For his Eyes were small and beetlebrowed, his Throat and Chin met together, his
Neck was thick, his Belly big and Legs small: Take him altogether, he perfectly
resembled a Hog, which he did not illy imitate in his sordid Pleasures; his
Chin was a little turned up, which was a Sign of Cruelty; his Hair light and
Legs small, as Suetonius observes, and his Face rather Fair than Majestic,
which made him easily to be adjudged an effeminate Person: So that if in the
Beginning of his Reign he showed much Moderation and Clemency, even so far as
to say he wished he could not write, that he might not sign the Sentence of a
Criminal which was brought to him, it was no more than an affected Modesty,
which Policy and the Respect that he bore unto his Preceptors, inspired him
with. Seneca in his Satyr against Claudius, with a sort of Flattery unbecoming
a Philosopher, brings in Apollo speaking of Nero, as being like unto himself
both in Beauty and Majesty: Ille mihi fimilis vultu, fimilisque decore,
Nec cantu, nec voce minor, etc.
And this doubtless is the Reason why Nero is often seen represented like unto
Apollo: To speak the Truth, he had no bad Face, but he could not pass for a
very handsome Person, since his Eyes were too small, his Neck very thick, and
his Legs so slender and disproportionate to his Height. Indeed, at the time
when Seneca writ, he was handsomer than afterward, seeing he was yet but
young, and not so gross and fat as afterward, and this may be observed by the
Medals which were cast, while he was yet but Caesar.

* We have a Dialogue in Lucian, which speaks of Nero's undertaking to cut
through the Isthmus of Corinth, which I shall recite entire in this place,
because it contains some Particulars of the said Prince his Life.

Menecrates. Did not this Design seem to have somewhat in it of the Air of
Greece, which this Prince affects so much?


Musonius. It would doubtless have spared Merchants and Sailors much Trouble,
and particularly Pilots, which are a long time sailing round Peloponesus, and
would have very much conduced to the Defense and Profit of Greece, which would
have had a better Intercourse with it self in the several Parts of it hereby.


Menecr. Thou will oblige us to give a Relation of what passed upon this
Occasion, seeing thou were present.


Muson. This I will very willingly do: The Love of Music, and an Opinion which
Nero had that the Muses could not sing better than himself, carried him into
Greece, that he might be crowned at the Olympic Games; for as to the Pythian
Games, he thought he had a greater Share therein than Apollo himself; and I do
not know but that he might believe the said God would neither dare to sing nor
play upon the Harp after him. This Design therefore had not been premeditated
long, but when he found himself upon the Place, and saw the little Distance
there was from one Sea to the other, the same being about Three Quarters of a
League, he was taken with a Desire to render himself famous by this
Undertaking, according to the Example of other great Princes, who had
undertaken the like Designs. For Agamemnon (as it is said) separated the Island
of Negropont from Baeotia. Darius made a Bridge over the Bosphorus, and Xerxes
would have cut through Mount Athos. Besides, he was mightily pleased to hear
himself praised, for Tyrants are never so cruel nor blind, but they desire to
do something for the Benefit of the Public, or their own Glory; wherefore,
after he had sung the Praises of Neptune and Amphitrite upon the Theater of
Corinth, with another little Poem in Honor of Leucothea and Melicertus, he
went on with a Golden How, which was presented him, and with Songs and public
Acclamations advanced toward the Place, where the Canal was to be made, and
there began to dig a little; after which recommending the Business to those who
had the Charge thereof, he returned into the City, believing that he had by
this Action outdone the Labors of Hercules. The Work was divided so, that his
Army should be employed in that part which was eanest, and that was to dig a
Canal in the Plain, while the Malefactors, which were taken out of the Prison,
should do the rest. After they had worked for Twelve Days, there was a Rumor
spread up and down Corinth, that the Mathematicians should say, that one of the
Seas was much higher than the other, and that if they continued to go on, the
Isle of Egina would be drowned: But besides that these Rumors were false in
themselves, they never had been able to divert the Resolution of a Prince, who
affected to do great Things, if all the Mathematicians in the World had assured
him of the Truth thereof; for he would never have abandoned the Undertaking,
had he not received the News of Vindex his Revolting, and that all Things were
in Confusion at Rome.


Menecr. Tell us now what it was that inclined him to have such a passionate
Love unto Music, and whether he had so good a Voice as some have reported; for
others have affirmed the Contrary.


Muson. His Voice was in reality neither to be admired nor laughed at, because
it was neither very good nor very bad. It was a kind of a rising Voice that he
does not manage ill, and such as agrees very well with his Harp, as well as his
Gesture and Countenance; besides which, he understood the Way of the Theater
exactly well, and better than became a Prince. But when he pretended to rival
the Masters of the Art, he made a Fool of himself; whatever Danger might ensue:
For he was too full of Action, and stood a Tip-toes; besides, he colored in
the Face through an over Eagerness, and a Desire to perform well, though he
naturally had a very ruddy Countenance; and as he had no extraordinary Voice,
nor good Breath, they failed him often at a Pinch.


Menecr. But how do they do to enter the Lists with him?


Muson. He put a Player to death at the Isthmian Games, who had the Boldness to
dispute the Prize with him; for it is no less Danger to excel him, than it is to
laugh at his Voice.


Menecr. How was that, we know nothing of it?


Muson. This was done at the Games of all Greece, and was thus: Though it were
not an usual thing to represent the Diversions of the Theater at these Games,
no more than to sing at the Olympic Games, yet he was minded to carry away the
Honor of his Tragedy; amongst those who came to contend with him for the
Prize, there was a very famous Actor from Epirus, who insisted upon having 10
Talents for yielding the Honor unto him; this made him swell with Anger,
besides, the Actor had already told in private, what it was that hindered Nero
to grant him what he asked. But as he saw him acting his Part with great
Applause, he caused one of his Servants to tell him, that he ought to yield
that Honor to his Prince; and because he would not, but persisted inflexible,
and doubled his Efforts, which were attended with the loud Acclamations of the
People; he ordered his Actors to go upon the Stage (as if that were part of the
same Act) who when they had pushed him against a Pillar, but his Throat with
thin pieces of Ivory, which they had in their Hands, that were as sharp as
Razors.


Menecr. And did he after this Action get the Applause of Greece, and win the
Victory?


Muson. This passed for a Jest, in a Man that had killed his own Mother.


Menecr. Indeed, it is not strange he should go about to make an Actor hold his
Tongue, when he had endeavored to stop Apollo's Mouth, by hindering his
Priestess to deliver any more Oracles, because she had placed him in the Number
of Par^icides, though she had still spared him; for Oresles and Alcmaenon, with
whom she compared him, had killed their Mother in Revenge for their Father,
which had some Shadow of Glory in it; but Nero's Crime was without Pretense.


When the Provinces had revolted against him, and that he found he was hated by
every Body for his Cruelty and enormous Debaucheries, he killed himself, that
he might avoid the Punishments his Crimes deserved.

NERVA,
named Cocceius, succeeded Domitian, and was chosen Emperor by the Senate with
unspeakable Joy; he happily began his Reign by putting forth a Proclamation for
a general Pardon to all such as were banished or in Prison: He was a very just
and good Prince; he was represented upon his Coin with a dry and wrinkled Face,
his Eyes sunk in his Head, and his Chin sharp: He was very old when he came to
the Empire, and was afflicted with a very weak Stomach, which made him lean for
want of Digestion; and this altered his Aspect, and hid his Inclinations: Though
he had a large and Eagle Nose, yet he was not Valiant; 'twas rather a Sign of
great Goodness in him; he had a pretty long Visage: In the mean time they found
in him several Signs of an Inclination to Passion from the Lines of his Face
and Habit of his Body; and among the rest, a lean and thin Face, a
sharp-pointed Head, a more than ordinary Tallness of Body, hooked Nose,
Beetle-brows, and a dry and sharp Chin; in short, he died by being put into too
violent a Passion against Regulus, after he had reigned One Year and Four
Months.

NESSUS;
the Centaur; a Son of Ixion and a Cloud, with whom Hercules having entrusted
his Wife Dianira, for him to carry her over the River Evenus, he went to ravish
her, which being perceived by Hercules, he shot him with an Arrow: At his Death
he bequeathed his Shirt stained with his Blood to Dianira; giving her
understand, that if she could get Hercules to wear it, he should for ever love
her: This therefore she sent unto him by Lycas, and as soon as he had put it
on, he found his Body seized with so violent a Fire, that he threw himself
Headlong into the Flames of Mount Oeta.

NESTOR,
whom Homer proposed for an Example of Wisdom and Prudence, lived about 300
Years, and was sound both in Body and Mind; whence it is, that when we would
wish a Man a long Life, we wish him the Age of Nestor.

NEUROBATES;
by this Name were a kind of Rope-dancers called, who walked not upon an
extended Cord, but made several Tours and Leaps, as a Dancer does upon the
Ground at the Sound of Music.

NICANDER;
was a famous Physician in Nero's Time, who wrote Two Poems concerning venomous
Beasts, and Remedies against Poisons, called Theriaca, and Alexipharmaca.

NICETERIUM;
the Prize at the Olympic and Circensian Games.

NILUS;
the Nile, a River which crosses a great part of Africa, the Springhead
thereof being unknown till the last Age; the same is in a Territory which the
Inhabitants call Abain, or Sacahela, that is, the Father of the Waters: This
River runs out of Two Fountains or Eyes, to use the Words of the People of that
Country, that are at about Thirty Paces distance, each of them being about the
same Circumference as one of our Pits or a Coach-wheel, whose Bottoms are 16 or
17 Foot deep: The Inhabitants, who are Heathens, worship the largest of the
Two, and to it offer several Cows in Sacrifice, whose Hesh they eat as if it
were holy, and leave the Bones in a Place appointed for that Purpose, which at
present makes a Mountain: Its above 2000 Years since Herodotus has made mention
of these Cows that were sacrificed at the Sources of the Nile. The Inhabitants
call it Agaiis, the same being in the Kingdom of Goyam, 12 Degrees North
Latitude and 55 Longitude. Its in a Plain about Three Quarters of a League
long, surrounded with Mountains: At its going out from thence the River enters
into a small Lake, then is loft under Ground for about a Musket Shot; and Three
Days Journey from the Source thereof, it is so large and deep as to bear Vessels
on it; but in about 100 Paces farther it runs cross some Rocks, so that one may
easily pass over without wetting his Feet: They sail upon it with Boats made of
Mat, and well set together: It receives Three great Rivers into it, viz. the
Gema, Linquetil and Brantil, and when it comes out of the Lake of Dambea, which
is Fifty Leagues over, it receives into it other large Rivers, viz. the Gamara,
Abea, Baixo, and Aquors, and lastly the Tacasus near Egypt: It has Two
principal Cataracts or Falls. At the Second it falls into a great Abyss, and
the Noise thereof may be heard at the Distance of Three Leagues; the Water is
forced with so much Violence, that it forms a kind of an Arch, and leaves so
great a Space between, that a Man may pass it without being wet; and there also
are Seats cut in the Rocks, where Travelers may rest themselves: The first
Cataract or Waterfall of the Nile is about Fifty Foot, but the second is three
times as high: Its false that the Noise made by these Cataracts, render the
Neighboring People Deaf, though the same may be heard Three Days Journey off,
and that the Waters which spurt therefrom, appear like a Smoke. Alexander
consulted the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon, in order to know where the Spring of
this River was. Sesostris and Ptolomy sought for it in vain: Cambyses, as
Strabo says, spent a whole Year to find it: Lucan witnesses, that Caesar said,
He would have given over the Pursuit of the Civil War, if he were sure to find
it. Isaac Vossius has wrote concerning the Original of the Nile, and other
Rivers, and attributes the Rise and Overflowing thereof to the Rains, which
fall between the Two Tropicks on the 1st of June, and which are the Causes of
the fine Weather we enjoy in Europe. When the Nile rises up to 16 Degrees, they
fear a Famine, but when it comes to 23 it is a good Year: When it is too high,
the Inundation is dangerous: The Measure for the Increase of the Nile was kept
in the Temple of Serapis, and the Emperor Constantine caused the same to be
carried to the Church of Alexandria.

Plutarch says the Egyptians adored the Waters of the Nile, and St. Athanasius
intimates as much: The Nile was the chief Instrument of God's Blessing bestowed
upon Egypt, as the same Author observes; and thus from it have they made their
God Osiris, if we believe Plutarch. And it ought not to be thought strange that
Osiris, which is the Sun, should be also the Nile: For by the same Reason that
the Sun is Osiris, or the Active or Male Principle in respect to all the Earth,
which is Isis, the Passive and Feminine Principle, the Nile is also the Active
Principle and Author of the Fertility of the Land of Egypt, from which it
receives all its Faecundity; so the Nile is Osiris likewise.

There are some also of Opinion, that the Name of Osiris comes from the Hebrew
Name of the Nile; for in Scripture the Nile is usually called Nahal Misraim,
Fluvius Aegypti, and simply Nahal or Nehel, from whence they made (...): Again,
Mela says, that the Nile at the Springs thereof was called Nuchul, quasi
Nachal. But the same Scriptures give likewise unto the Nile the Name of Scachar
Niger, because the Waters of the said River are very often troubled, muddy, and
blackish; whence also it is, that Plutarch and other Greek Authors sometimes
call it (...). Servius and other Latin Writers name it Melo. From Schachar or
Schabar they make Siris, which is the Name given to the Nile by Dionysius, in
his Description of the World: Siris ab Aethiopibus vocatur. Its also believed,
that the Reason why the Dog Star is called Sirius, is, because it has borrowed
its Name from the Nile, with which it has so much Sympathy, the Overflowings
of the said River being confined to the Dog Days. This being premised; it is not
difficult to believe that the Nile or Siris have been worshipped under the Name
of Osiris. The Overflowings of the Nile are so beneficial to Egypt, that there
is no need of Rain in that Country. Thus the Nile unto them stood instead of
Jupiter, who was held to be the Author of Rains. And this Tibullus expresses in
these Verses:

Te propter nullos Tellus tua postulat imbres,
Arida nec pluvio supplicat herba Jovi.
And in Athenaeus we read this Prayer put up to the Nile, as to the Jupiter of
Egypt.

(...).

NIMROD.
See Nembrod.

NINUS,
was the Son of Belus and Founder of the Assyrian Empire; he continued the
Building of the City of Babylon, which at first he made the Seat of his Empire,
than founded Nineve, so called from his own Name: He made an Idol of his Father
Belus, whom he would have to be worshipped by his People, made it a Place of
Refuge for all Malefactors, and was the Author of Idolatry.

NIOBE,
Tantalus his Daughter, who died miserably through her own Vanity; for she
having bore a great many Children, was so rash as to prefer her self before
Latona. At this Apollo and Diana growing angry, they killed all her Children
with Arrows; which made her pine away for Grief. The Poets say, that the Gods
being touched with Compassion for this unfortunate Mother, which pined away
with Tears and Sorrows, changed her into a Marblestone, which by a Blast of
Wind was carried as far Lycia, near unto the City of Sypilus, where her marbled
Body continually sweated as a Sign of her Mourning.

NISUS,
King of Megara, who had an Hair in his Head of a Purple Color, unto which was
limited the Duration of his Reign; which Story is taken from Sampson's Hair,
wherein consisted all his Strength:

Cui splendidus ostro
Inter honoratos medio sub vertice canos,
Criuis inhaerebat, magnifiducia regni.
Ovid. Metam. l. 8. v. 8. Scylla, a Daughter of this King's, happening to fall
in Love with King Minos during the Time of his Besieging Megara, betrayed her
Father, and cut off this fatal Hair: The City hereupon was taken, Nisus
transformed into a Sea-Eagle, and Scylla being deserted by Minos, was changed
into a Bird named Ciris:

Jam pendebat in auras,
Et modo factus erat fulvis Halyaeetos alis, etc.
Plumis in avem mutata, vocatur
Ciris: and a tonso est hoc nomen adepta capillo.
Ibid. v. 145. Here is a double Etymology the one Greek, and the other Hebrew,
and as Ovid hints, the Name of Ciris comes from (...) tondere; but that of
Nisus from the Hebrew Nets which signifies a Sparhawk.

NOBILITAS,
Antonius Geta, Son to the Emperor Severus, has given us the Figure of it in a
Medal of his, where she is represented in a Roman Lady's Dress, holding a
Scepter in her Hand, and upon her Left Arm a small Statue of Minerva.

NODINUS or NODOSUS,
a God that presided over the Knots that are in the Stalks of Corn.

NODUS GORDIUS;
the Gordian Knot, it is a Greek Proverb, which is said concerning a Knot that
cannot be untied, and figuratively put for a Difficulty that cannot be
resolved: It proceeds from an indissoluble Knot of Leatherthongs, which Gordius
King of Phrygia laid up in the Temple of Apollo, in Commemoration of his being
saluted King, because he was the first that entered into the said Temple.
Alexander cut it with his Sword, because he could not untie it, for the Oracle
had foretold, that the Person who untied it, should conquer Asia.

NOAH,
the Son of Lamech, a just and upright Man, who found Favor with God, and who
with his Family only escaped the Deluge, being shut up in an Ark by the Lord's
Commandment. Noah's History has been applied to Saturn; for Noah was the Father
of all Mankind after the Flood: He was also the King and Author of another
Golden Age, while the Earth was peopled with no other than with his Children
and Grandchildren, whom he had brought up in Innocence and under whose Empire
he left them to enjoy an entire Liberty: There were no Slaves in the first Age
after the Deluge; all Mankind making as it were yet but one Family. And whereas
Noah, according to the Scripture, was the first that planted a Vineyard and
brought up the Use of Wine, the Heathens gave Saturn also the Glory of having
taught Men the Art of Agriculture, and especially planting of Vines and the Use
of the Sickle.

Athenaeus, after Berosus, says the Saturnalia were celebrated at Babylon, as
well as in Greece and Italy: And these Saturnalia were Days appointed for
Debaucheries; as if the Heathens had had a mind to keep up the Remembrance of
Noah's Drunkenness, into which he unadvisedly fell, before he had yet had a
Trial of the Strength of Wine. St. Cyrill relates unto us the Testimonies of
Alexander Polyhistor and Abydenus, who say, that Xisutrus King of Assyria,
escaped the Deluge, which Saturn had foretold should come, by putting himself,
according to his Advice in an Ark together with all Kinds of Beasts; that he
sailed to Armenia, and that he sent some Birds to know if the Waters were gone
off the Face of the Earth. It Is manifest, that this is the Story of Noah
counterfeited, and that these Fables had their Origin in Assyria; insomuch that
the fabulous Saturn is the true Noah, and his Ark rested on the Mountains of
Armenia. Tzetzes makes Noah one while to go into India, and at another time to
Egypt: He lived 350 Years after the Deluge, and repeopled the Earth according
to the Command which God gave him: St. Epiphanius says, that Noah made a
Division of the World between his Three Sons at Rkinocorura a Place upon the
Frontiers of Egypt.

NOEMA,
the Daughter of Lamech, whom Moses has joined with Jubal and Tubalcain;
Genebrard in his Chronicle says, she invented the Art of Spinning and Woollen
Manufacturies, and so she was the Minerva of the Heathens, but as the Name of
Noema signifies Beautiful, others have been of Opinion 'twas Venus; here unto
they add farther, that as Noema is in the Book of Genesis joined with
Tubalcain, so the Pagans said, that Venus was Vulcan's Wife.

NOMEN,
a Name; the Greeks had but one Name, but the Romans had sometimes Three or
Four, which they called Praenomen, Nomen, Cognomen, and sometimes Agnomen. The
Praenomen is that which belongs to every Person in particular; the Name is that
which denotes the House from whence one is descended, and the Surname is that
which belongs to a particular Family or to a Branch of that House.

It was a Custom among the Romans to give to their Children the Name of the
Family, to Boys on the 9th Day after their Birth, and to Girls on the 8th. But
according to Festus and Plutarch, the Praenomen was not given them before they
put on the Virile Robe, that is, at the Age of 17. Thus Cicero's Children were
always called Ciceronis pueri till those Years, after which, they called them
Marcus filius, and Quintus filius: As for the Slaves they had no other Name
than that of their Master, as Lucipor, Lucius his Slave, Lucii puer; Marcipor,
Marcus his Slave, Marcipuer. But yet afterward they gave them a Name which
generally was that of their Country, as Syrus, Geta, Davus, and when they were
made free they took the Praenomen and Name of their Master, but not the
Surname, in the room of which they retained their own Name. Thus that learned
Freedman of Cicero was called M. Tullius Tyro; and this was also observed with
Respect to Allies and Strangers, who took upon them the Name of the Person by
whose Favor they had obtained the Privilege of being Citizens of Rome.

Varro says, that the Women formerly had their own proper and particular Names,
as Cala, Caecilia, Lucia, Volumnia, and those, Names, as Quintilian observes,
were distinguished by Letters inverted thus C. L. M. However, afterward they
gave them no Names, but if there was only one Girl, they did no more than give
her the Name of her Family, and sometimes softened the same by the Way of a
Diminution, as Tullia or Tulliola: But if they were two, they called one Major,
the other Minor; and if more, they were named according to their Age, Prima,
Secunda, Tertia, Quarta, Quinta, etc. or they made a Diminutive of the same, as
Secandilla, Quartilla, Quintilla, etc.

NOMENCLATOR;
He was a Person among the Romans who accompanied those who labored underhand
to be made Magistrates, and who told them the Names of all the Citizens they
met with, that they might salute them, and call them by their Names, which was
a very civil Custom, and much in use at Rome.

NONAE;
the Nones, quasi Novae; being as much as to say, new Observations, though its
more likely the Name came, because that from the said Day to the Ides, there
were always Nine Days. They computed Six Days in the Nones of May, October,
July and March, and in the other Months only Four. Some believe that Romulus
began the Month on the First Day of the Moon's appearing in the Evening, on
which the Country People were obliged to come to Town, in order to know of the
Pontiffs, the Time when the Feasts and other Ceremonies were to be celebrated;
and in short, whatever they were to do, or let alone during the whole Month.
And as the Sacrificer was on the same Day wont to cry the Word (...) with a
loud Voice Five times successively, if the Nones contained but Five Days, or
Seven times, if they comprehended Seven; so the Nones perhaps got their Name,
in that at first they were called Nono Idus, the 9th of the Ides, as they are
put indeed in the place of the IX of the Ides. Besides, seeing there were Three
different Variations, and such as are very considerable in the Course of the
Moon; the 1st, When she is entirely hid by the Sunbeams; 2d, On the first Day
of her appearing, when she rises at Night, and appears with Horns at her coming
forth from under the said Beams; 3d, When she is at the Full; it is thought that
Romulus from thence took occasion to divide the Days of his Months, which he
began always with the Calends, at the time when the Moon, sub radiis Solis
celaretur, was hid by the Sunbeams, and afterward gave the Name of Nonae or
Novae Lunae to the Day whereon the New Moon appeared, and that of the Idus when
she was at the Full, or appeared with a beautiful Face, the same Word coming
from the Greel (...) Idus, which signifies as much; from whence they give a
Reason for the Inequality of the Days of the Nones: For, as it happens by a
Composition of the Sun and Moon's Motions, that the Moon comes forth sometimes
sooner from under the Beams of the other, and sometimes latter, and that this
Difference is usually confined within the Space of Two Days: Its very likely,
say they, that at the Time when Romulus instituted this Calender, the Moon
continued longer hid by the Sunbeams, in the Months of March, May, July, and
October, and that upon this Occasion he allowed Seven Days to the Nones of
these Four Months, and only Five to the rest, during which the Moon got sooner
from under the said Beams, and was visible.

NOVEMBER;
'twas formerly the 9th Month of the Year, instituted by Romulus, which
consisted of Ten in all; and now it is the 11th. The Emperor Commodus called it
Exuperatorius; but after his Death it reassumed its former Name: In this Month
the Sun enters into Sagitarius; and it was under the Protection of Diana: On
the first Day thereof they made a Feast to Jupiter, and performed the
Circensian Games: On the Day of the Nones or Fifth were the Neptunalia
celebrated, which lasted Eight Days. On the 7th was held the Show of Ornaments:
On the 3d of the Ides the Enclosure of the Sea: On the Ides the Feast called
Lectisternia: On the 18th of the Calends, the Trial of Horses: On the 17th of
the Calends, the popular Plays in the Circus for Three Days: On the 14th, the
Traders Feast lasting Three Days: On the 13th, the Pontiff's Supper in Honor
of Cybele: On the 11th, the Liberalia: On the 10th, they offered Sacrifice to
Pluto and Proserpina: On the 8th, were the Brumalia celebrated, which lasted
for Thirty Days: On the 5th, were performed the Mortuary Sacrifices to the
frighted Gauls and Greeks.

NOVENSILES;
were Heroes newly received into the Number of the Gods, or the Gods of the
Provinces and Kingdoms which the Romans had conquered, and to which they
sacrificed under the Name of Dii Novensiles.

NOX;
the Night, the Daughter of Terra and Chaos, which the Poets represented in the
Form of a Woman in Mourning, crowned with Poppies, and having black Wings, and
riding in a Chariot drawn by Two Horses, surrounded with Stars, which served as
her Guides: They sacrificed a Cock unto her. Cic. L. 3. de Not. Deor. Says her
Children were Love, Deceit, Fear, Old Age, Miseries, Distinies, etc. The Night
is part of the Natural Day, during which the Sun is not above the Horizon; the
Ancient Gauls and Germans divided Time not by the Day, but by Nights, as you
may see in Caesar and Tacitus.

NUMA,
called Pompilius; the Son of Pomponius Pompilius: He was born at Cures, the
Capital City of the Sabines; the Fame of his Virtue made the Romans choose him
for their King, after Romulus his Death: He revived all the Ancient Ceremonies
of Religion, and instituted new Ones; and writ down a whole Form of Religious
Worship in Eight Books, which he caused to be laid with him in his Tomb after
his Death. But one Terentius, says Varro, having an Estate haid by the
Janiculum, as his Servant was ploughing near unto Numa's Tomb, he turned up the
Books wherein the said Prince had set down the Reasons of his instituting such
Mysteries. Terentius carried them presently to the Praetor, who, when he had
read the Beginning of them, thought it was a Matter of that Importance as
deserved to be communicated to the Senate: The Principal Senators having read
some things therein, would not meddle with the Regulations of Numa, but thought
it conducive to the Interest of Religion to have the said Books burnt. Numa had
had Recourse to the Art of Hydromancy, in order to see the Images of the Gods
in the Water and to learn of them the Religious Mysteries he ought to
establish: Varro says, that this kind of Divination was found out by the
Persians, and that King Numa, and after him Pythagoras the Philosopher made use
thereof: To which he adds, that they also invoked Men's Souls upon this Occasion
by sprinkling of Blood, and this is that which the Greeks called Necromancy;
and because Numa made use of Water to perform his Hydromancy, they said, he
married the Nymph Egeria, as the said Varro explains it: It was therefore by
this way of Hydromancy that this inquisite King learnt those Mysteries which he
set down in the Pontiff's Books, and the Causes of the same Mysteries, the
Knowledge whereof he reserved to himself alone: He boasted he had very often
Conversation with the Moses, to whom he added a Tenth, which he named Tacita,
and made the Romans worship her.

He somewhat rectified the Calender, and added Two Months to the Year, which at
first consisted but of 10 Months, and so made them 12, adding every Two Year
one Month consisting of 22 Days, which he called Mercedinum, and which he
immediately placed after the Month of February; he lived about 80 Years and of
them reigned 40. This Numa Pompilius, second King of Rome was indeed both a
King and a Philosopher, who gave himself up so much to the Doctrine which
Pythagoras afterward published to the World, that many through a gross.
Ignorance of the Time took him to be a Disciple of Pythagoras: Dionysius of
Hallicarnassus has refuted this Error, by showing that Numa was more ancient
than Pythagoras by Four Generations, as having reigned in the 6th Olympiad,
whereas Pythagoras was not famous in Italy before the 50th. The same Historian
says, that Numa pretended his Laws and Maxims were communicated to him by the
Nymph Egeria, which others believed to be a Muse; at last the said Historian
says, Numa pretended to have that Conversation with a Celestial Mistress, that
so they might believe his Laws were the Emations of the Eternal Wisdom it self.

NUMERUS;
a Number, is a Discrete Quantity, being a Collection of several separate
Bodies. Euclid defines it to be a Multitude composed of many Unites. The
perfect Number established by the Ancients is Ten, because of the Number of the
Ten Fingers of a Man's Hand. Plato believed this Number to be perfect, inasmuch
as the Unites, which the Greeks called Monades, completed the Number of Ten.
The Mathematicians who would contradict Plato herein, said, that Six was the
most perfect Number, because that all its Aliquot Parts are equal to the Number
Six: And farther, to make the Perfection of the Number Six to appear, they have
observed that the Length of a Man's Foot is the 6th Part of his Height. There
is an even and an odd Number; the Even is that which may be divided into Two
equal Parts, whereas the odd Number cannot be divided equally without a
Fraction, which is more of an Unity than the even Number. The Golden Number is
a Period of 19 Years, invented by Metho the Athenian; at the End of which
happen the Lunations and the same Epact; though this Period be not altogether
true: Its thought to have been thus called either because of the Benefit there
is in the Use of it, or because it was formerly written in Gold Characters. See
Arithmetica.

NUPTIAE,
Marriages, from the Verb nubere, which signifies to vail, because the Bride
had a Vail on of the Color of Fire, wherewith she covered her self: They
carried a lighted Torch, and sung Hymen or Hymenaeus, which was a fabulous
Deity of the Pagans, whom they believed to preside over Marriages: The Poets
called him fair Hymenaeus. See Matrimonium.

NYMPHA;
a Nymph; a false Deity, believed by the Heathens to preside over Waters,
Rivers and Fountains; some have extended the Signification hereof, and have
taken them for the Goddesses of Mountains, Forests and Trees. The Ancients took
the Nymphs to be Bacchus his Nurses, whether it were because the Wine wanted
Water to bring its Grapes to Maturity, or because it is requisite Water should
be mixed with Wine, that it may not disorder the Head. They have been sometimes
represented each of them with a Vessel, into which they poured Water, and
holding the Leaf of an Herb in their Hands, which grows in Water and Wells; or
else another while with that of a Water-Plant called Nymphaea, that took its
Name from the Nymphs; and again, with Shells instead of Vessels, and naked down
to the Navel; the Nymph were sometimes honored with the Title of August, as
other Deities were, which appears by this Inscription: NYMPHIS That is, Votum
solvit libens merito: Maternus has freely and fully discharged her Vow to the
August Nymphs. This Epithet has been given them by way of Honor, because 'twas
believed they watched for the Preservation of the Imperial Family.

NYMPHAEA;
the Baths which were consecrated to the Nymphs; and therefore so called from
them. Silence was more particularly required there; whence we read in an
Inscription of Gruter, NYMPHIS LOCI, BIBE, LAVA, TACE; to the Nymphs of the
Place, drink, bathe your selves, and be silent.

O.
O Is the Fourteenth Letter in the Alphabet, and the Fourth Vowel: The O by its
long and short Pronounciations represents fully the Omega and Omicron of the
Greeks; the Pronunciation whereof was very different, says Caninius after
Terentianus; for the Omega was pronounced in the Hollow of the Mouth with a
great and full Sound, including two oo; and the Omicron upon the Edge of the
Lips with a clearer and smaller Sound. These two Pronounciations they have in
the French Tongue; the Long O they distinguish by the Addition of an S, as
cost, host, motte; or by the Dipthong au, as haute, fault, etc. and the
Affinity there is between this Vowel O and the Dipthong au, is not without an
Example in the Greek Tongue, wherein you have (...), vulnus, according to the
Dorick Dialect, from whence the Latins have also used caudex and codex; Caurus
or Corus, etc. And hence, perhaps, it is, that as this Dipthong au retains much
of the A, so the O has some Affinity with the A; for the Eolians used (...) for
(...), exercitus (...) for (...), supra; which was also imitated by the Romans,
who took Domo from (...), and used Fabius for Fovius, according to Festus,
Farreus for Forreus, etc. And in the French Tongue the A and the O are often
joined together in the same Word, as in Laon, faon, paon, which are pronounced
with A Long, as Lan, fan, pan; tho Ramus says, that in his Time some
distinguished the Long O by these two Letters AO, which they did perhaps in
Imitation of the Greeks who changed (...) or (...) as well as (...) in their
Contractions into (...).

Again, the O has some Affinity with the E, whence it is that the Greeks from
(...) dico, have made (...) dixi, and the like; that the Etolians used (...)
for (...), tremo; and the Latins from (...), made spondeo; from pendeo, pondus;
from tego, toga; and they used to say adversum or advorsum; vertex or vortex;
accipiter for accipitor, a Bird of Prey; bemo for bomo; ambe and ambes for ambo
and ambos, in Ennius. But the O had still a greater Affinity with the V, whence
the Ancients, as Longus says, easily confounded these two Letters, and though
they writ Consol, they pronounced it Consul: Cassiodorus also informs us, they
wrote praestu for praesto; poblicum for publicum; colpam for culpam. Pliny in
Priscian says the same thing; and thence it comes to pass that huc, illuc, are
used for hoc, illoc, and this Virgil himself does: Hoc tunc ignipotens caelo
descendit ab alto.
Aen. 8. Quintilian also observes, that they used Hecoba, and Notrix with an O
for an V; and that of Odysseus, the Eolians had made Vdysses, from whence the
Romans said Ulysses; and that, in short, his Masters wrote servom with an O,
whereas from his Time forward they wrote the same with two (...), servum. The
two Dipthongs oe and oi come near the Greek Dipthong oi: The O among the Latins
was very like unto the V; wherefore it often happened that the oe was changed
into an u, as when from the Word poena they made punire; and thus we may still
find in some old Inscriptions oisum or oesum put for usum, coiravit or coeravit
for curavit; moenera for munera; and so also they used Puni for Poeni, and
bellum Punicum for Poenicum. O in Arithmetic stands for a Cipher; it was also
made use of for a Numeral Letter that signified Eleven, and when they put a Bar
above it, it stood for 11000.

OBELISCUS,
an Obelisk, a very high Stone set up perpendicularly for an Ornament to some
Place, which had often Inscriptions and Hieroglyphics upon it. The Difference
between Pyramids and Obelisks consisted in that the Pyramids have a large
Basis, but the Obelisks are very narrow: Pliny says, the Egyptians cut their
Obelisks in the Form of a Sunbeam, and that the Word Obelisk in the Egyptian
Tongue signified a Ray or Beam.

OBOLUS,
a Copper Coin worth a Maille or Two Mites, which is not above one 3d of a
Farthing in our English Money: Some will have it only to be the Quarter Part of
a Denier, the Half of a Maille: The Greels had Silver Oboles which were worth
11 Deniers, and as some would have it a French Penny (less by near a Fourth
than the English Penny) and 4 Deniers. They had also Gold Oboles. M. Du Cange
says, there has been in France Oboles of Gold and Silver, that the white Obolus
was worth 3 Deniers, and was called Obole tierce, because it was the third Part
of a French Penny. There were also Silver Oboles that weighed a Denier and 15
Grains.

Obolus in Physic is a Weight of 10 Grains, or Half a Scruple, and there are 3
Scruples go to a Dram or Gross. The Obolus amongst the Jews was a kind of a
Weight named Gerab, weighing 16 Barley-Corns. The Obolus with the Sicilians was
a Pound Weight: It was also a sort of Money: They pretend the Romans borrowed
this Name from them: Borellus derives the Word from (...); because the same was
long and small like a Needle, from whence also he derives the Name of Obelisk.

OBSEQUIAE,
Obsequies, Funeral Solemnities; they are Ceremomes performed at the Burials of
Great Persons, the Word being derived from Obsequium, because these Obsequies
are the last Devoirs we can render to the Deceased. See Funus.

OBSTETRIX,
a Midwife, being such an one as delivers a Woman in Labor; Hyginus informs
us, the Ancients having no Midwives, several Women died in Labor, because of
their being ashamed to have Recourse to the Physicians for Help, and since
there was a Law among the Athenians which forbad Women to have any thing to do
with Physic: Hereupon a young Woman called Agnodicia, having a great
Inclination to the Science, disguised her self in Man's Clothes and studied it,
and then went to Women in Labor, and for the removing of all Scruples from
them, she made her Sex known unto them and then delivered them. The Physicians
observing that this would make them lose their Practice among the Women, sued
the said young Woman, and accused her of ill Practices in Respect to the Female
Sex: In short, they got her condemned by the Areopagites, but she gave them
Proofs of her Innocence in a full Assembly: Then the Physicians had Recourse to
the Law which prohibitted Women to profess Physic; upon which the Athenian
Ladies interposed in the Matter, and got the Law repealed; so that Women were
left at full Liberty to study that Profession.

OCCASIO,
Opportunity, an Heathen God, whom Phaedrus, L. 5. Fab. 9. represents unto us
thus: A Man with Wings, and ran so swiftly that he could go upon the Edge of a
Razor without hurting himself. One that has Hair before, and is bald behind,
with his Body stark naked; one that cannot be possessed but by Prevention, and
whom Jupiter himself cannot recover, if he has once been left to escape, which
denotes to us, that he that loses his Opportunity meets with it no more.

OCCIDENS;
the West, It Is one of the Four Cardinal Points of the Heavens and the Earth,
the Place where the Sun and other Stars set in respect to us. The West of the
Summer is that Point of the Horizon where the Sun sets, when it is in the
Tropic of Cancer; the West of the Winter is that where the Son sets, when it is
in the Tropic of Capricorn; and this happens when the Sun comes to the Points
of the Solstices; each of them is 23 Degrees and an half distant from the true
Point of the West.

OCEANUS;
the Ocean, is that main Sea which surrounds all the Earth; this Name, if we
believe Hesychius, comes from (...), which was the old Name thereof, and it is
very likely proceeded from that Hebrew Word Choug or Houg, that signifies a
Circle; because it goes round the Earth: This Word Houg is in Scripture often
to be met with in this Sense; or if you will, (...) comes from (...), because
of the Swiftness of its Motion. Homer in his Iliads makes Oceanus to be the
Father of the Gods, and Tethys their Mother. (...).
This Opinion may have had its Origin from that Text in Genesis, where the
Chaos seems to be represented like unto the Confusion of the Waters before God
reduced them into order, and made a Distinction between them: In this Sense the
Ocean and Tethys, that is, that Abyss which comprehended the Heavens and the
Earth as an immense Quantity of Waters, before the same were separated by the
Distribution made of the Chaos; this Abyss, I say, might be called the Father
and Mother of all the great Bodies, of which Nature was composed, and which
bore the Name of Gods among the Heathens. And where Plato says, that Oceanus
was begotten of Caelum and Tethys, he means nothing else but the Ocean that was
separated from the Heavens and the Earth, as it was upon the Reduction of the
Chaos into order.

The innumerable Multitude of Petty Deities that preside over the Waters,
whether they be Fountains, Lakes, Rivers, or Seas, might very well be the
Occasion of giving unto the Ocean the Quality of the Father of the Gods: But in
the main, this vast Number of Water-Gods, and their Genealogy, signifies no
more than the Distribution of the Waters of the Ocean, which is done throughout
all the Earth, and which by its Vapors or Subterranean Conduits supplies all
Fountains, Lakes and Rivers, insomuch that it is nothing but the Element of
Water, and the Ocean that is continually animated by the Soul of the Universe,
which makes its Divinity, according to the Language of the Heathens. Virgil in
his Georgicks sacrificed to the Ocean. Oceano libemus, ait:
And he brings in Aeneas sacrificing a Bull to the Gods of the Sea. Justine
relates, that when Alexander had subdued and passed through Asia, as far as the
Ocean, he offered Sacrifice, and prayed him to grant him an happy Return into
Greece; Oceano libamina dedit, prosperum in patriam reditum precatus.

Diodorus Siculus says, that the Ancients gave the Name of Ocean to Moisture or
the Liquid Element, which is as it were the Nutriment, and consequently the
Mother of all Things, and that this is the Meaning of the Verse before cited
out of Homer; and to clear the Thing fully, we may add what he says elsewhere
concerning Jupiter, and the other Gods or Stars, that they went to Oceanus
Habitation, to be entertained at a great Feast by him. Diodorus has said
Oceanus and Tethys were the Nutriment of all Things; and Macrobius explains
this Feasting of the Gods at Oceanus his House, by the Vapors of the Sea,
wherewith the Stars were nourished, and whereof they stood in need, for the
Qualifying of their Heat, significans bauriri de bumore allmenta sideribus.
This was an Opinion commonly entertained by a great many of the Ancient Fathers
of the Church, who gave a Literal Explication of the Waters (which in Scripture
are placed above the Firmament) and believed there was a great Quantity of
Water above the Region of the fixed Stars, to allay the Heat of those
Celestial Fires, and hinder them from burning the World. Though this Idea may
seem odd, yet it is certain, the same is very agreeable to Truth, if it be
considered, that the Stars being fiery Globes of an incredible Bigness, as well
as the Sun, it was requisite to separate them from each other by very great
Spaces filled with Air, and some Liquid Matter, wherewith to allay their Heat,
and make them more tolerable, which in their own Natures were combustible; but
it is no great Matter if the Name of Air or Water has been given to this Liquid
Substance, wherein, as I may say, all these Globes or Luminaries, such as the
Stars are, or dark Bodies, as the Planets and Earth, do swim. Eusebius gives us
the Words of Porphyrie, who applies the Fable of the Poets in this Case
entirely to the Celestial or Elementary Bodies, and who says, that the Ocean
was of a Liquid Nature in general; that Tethys was the Symbol thereof; that
Achelous was drinkable Water; Neptune, the Seawater; that by Amphitrite was
meant, such Waters as are the Principle of Generation; Lastly, That the Nymphs
and Nereides were such particular Waters, as are either sweet or salt.

OCTAVIUS CAESAR,
surnamed AUGUSTUS. See Augustus.

OCTOBER;
the Month of October, being the 8th Month of the Year in Romulus his Calender,
and 10th in that of Numa, has always retained its first Name in spite of all
the different Names, the Senate and Roman Emperors would have given it: For the
Senate ordered that this Month should be called Faustinus, in Honor of
Faustina, the Wife of Antoninus, the Emperor: Commodus would have had it bear
the Name of Invictus; and Domitian made it be called Domitianus, according to
his own Name. This Month was under the Protection of Mars. On the 4th Day of it
was celebrated the Solemnity of Mundus Patens. See Mundus Patens. On the 12th
an Altar was dedicated to Fortune, entitled, Fortunae Reduci, to flatter
Augustus at his Return to Rome, after he had pacified Sicily, Greece, Syria,
Asia, and Parthia. On the 13th was kept the Feast of Fountains, called
Fontinalia. 15th they sacrificed a Horse to Mars, called October equus. 19th
was celebrated the Feast called Armilustrium in the Armies. 28th, and following
Days, the Plays of Victory were performed, which Sylla instituted. Toward the
End of the Month the Vortumnalia, and Sarmatian Games were celebrated.

OCTOBER EQUUS;
an Horse which was sacrificed to Mars in the Month of October; there was then
a Race run with Chariots, drawn each by 2 Horses, and he that run quickest was
sacrificed to Mars. Plutarch gives Two Reasons for this Ceremony; the first was
to punish the Horse for the Taking of Troy; the second, because the Horse was a
Martial Creature, and ought to be offered in Sacrifice to the God of War.

OCULARIA;
Spectacles; its not believed that Spectacles were known to the Ancient Greek
and Latin Poets; for it would be very strange if they had had any knowledge of
them, that they never took an occasion to name them, and to make any Diversion
with them upon the Stage: It would have been a Wonder that Pliny should make no
manner of mention of them in his Chapter concerning the Inventors of Things:
Indeed, there are some modern Authors who cite certain Fragments out of
Plautus; such as Faber ocularius, and Oculariarius of Tomb-stones, and the
Figure graven upon a Marble at Sulmo: But Dati, in a ^issertation of his, has
showed us the Weakness of all these Arguments. M. Spon, in the 16 Dissertation,
Of his Searches after Antiquity, says, That Spectacles were invented in the
Time of Alexander Spina, a Dominican of the Convent of Pisa, in the Year 1313.

ODEUM;
M. Perrault upon Vitruvtus, says, I have been forced to retain the Greek Word,
for it could not have been rendered into French (no more can it into English)
but by a Periphrasis, which also would have been very difficult, forasmuch as
neither Interpreters nor Grammarians do agree about the Use of this Edifice.
Suidas, who holds that this Place was appointed to rehearse the Music that was
to be performed on the great Theater, grounds his Opinion upon the Etymology of
the Word, which is taken from Ode, that in Greek signifies Song.

The Scholiast on Aristophanes is of another Opinion, and thinks that the Odeum
was a Place erected wherein to repeat. Plutarch in the Life of Pericles, says,
It was built for those Persons, who heard the Musicians when they disputed for
the Prize; but the Description he gives thereof, lets us understand, that the
Odeum was built Theater-wise; for, he says, it had Seats and Pillars all round
it, and was made with a sharp Top, with Masts and Sail-yards taken from the
Persians. Cratinus the Comic Poet, upon this Occasion says by way of Raillery,
that Pericles had ordered the Form of the Odeum of Athens, according to the
Shape of his own Head, which was sharp, insomuch that the Poets of his Time
when they were minded to ridicule him in their Plays, intended him under the
Name of Jupiter, Scinos Cephalos; that is, one who has a sharp Head, like a
Tooth-picker, which the Ancients made of a Shrub called Scinos, which is the
Mastick.

OEDIPUS;
the Son of Laius and Jocasta; Laius, King of Thehes, having married Jocasta,
the Daughter of Creon, understood by the Oracle, that they should have a Son
born of that Marriage, who should kill him; which made him command Jocasta to
strangle all the Children she should bear: Oedipus being born, his Mother gave
him to a Soldier to kill him, in pursuance to the King's Command, but he
contented himself to make Holes in his Feet, and to run an Ozier Twig through
them, wherewith he hung him to a Tree upon Mount Cithaeron. Phorbas, one of
Polybius his Shepherds, who was King of Corinth, finding the Infant hanging in
that manner, and taking pity of him, he made a Present of him to the Queen,
who brought him up as her own Child; they gave him the Name of Oedipus, because
of the Swelling that remained in his Feet, which had been pierced through. When
he grew up, he went to consult the Oracle, in order to know who was his Father,
answer was made, That he should find him in Phocis; upon which he went thither,
and meeting with him in a popular Tumult, he killed his Father Laius, and did
not know him, as he endeavored to appease them. Juno being an Enemy to the
Thebans, sent the Monster Sphinx near unto Thebes, that had the Face and Speech
of a Virgin, the Body of a Dog, the Tail of a Dragon, and the Claws of a Lion,
with the Wings of a Pird. she proposed some Enigmatical Questions or Riddies to
all Passengers, and if they could not resolve the same, she presently devoured
them, insomuch that no Body durst come near the City: Hereupon they had
Recourse to the Oracle, who answered, they could not be freed from this
Monster, unless this Riddle were explained, viz. What Animal it was that in the
Morning went upon Four Feet, at Noon upon Two, and at Night upon Three. Creon,
who had possessed himself of the Kingdom after the Death of Laius, caused it to
be published throughout all Greece, that he would quit his Kingdom, and give
Joeasta, Laius his Widow, for a Wife to any one that should explain the Riddle:
Oedipus did it, and explained it thus; saying, That it was a Man, who in his
Infancy crawled upon all Fours like a Beast, leaning upon his Hands and Feet;
that at Years of Maturity he went only upon his Two Feet; and at last being
broken with Age, leaned upon a Stick as he walked. The Monster seeing her self
overcome, and transported with Rage, went and knocked her own Brains out
against a Rock. Oedipus as his Reward had the Kingdom given him, and ignorantly
married his own Mother Jocasta. In the mean time the Gods sent a terrible
Plague upon Athens, to revenge the Death of Laius, which, according to the
Oracle, whom they consulted for that Purpose, was not to cease, but with the
banishment of him who had killed him: Upon this they had Recourse to the Art of
Negro-mancy, for the Discovering of him, and it was found to be Oedipus; who
then coming to know his Crimes, put out both his Eyes, and condemned himself to
perpetual Banishment: He withdrew when he was very old to Athens, to die there,
according to the Order of the Oracle, near the Temple of the terrible
Goddesses, in a Place named Equestris Colonus, where Neptune, surnamed
Equestris, was worshipped.

OENOMAUS,
King of Elis, who had a very beautiful Daughter, called Hippodamia; when he
understood by the Oracle, that his Sonin-Law should be the Cause of his Death,
he would not give his Daughter in Marriage to any one but he who should outdo
him in a Race, or else lose his Life: Pelops, who was in Love with Hippodamia,
accepted of the Offer, and having bribed Myrtilus, Oenomaus his Charioteer, he
caused the Chariot to break in the middle of the Race, and threw down Oenomaus,
who was killed with his Fall; so that by this means he got the Kingdom, and
married Hippodamia.

OENONE;
a Nymph of Mount Ida, who fell in Love with handsome Paris, and foretold him
the Misfortunes he should one Day bring upon his Country by stealing away
Helen. Dictys Cretensis says, when she saw the Body of Paris, which was brought
to her to be buried, she died of Grief.

OENOTRIA;
that Part of Italy which lies toward Sicily, and called so from the Plenty of
Wines it produces. Some Authors say it took its Name from Oenotrius the
Arcadian, as Pausanias; but Varro will have it from Oenotrius, King of the
Sabines: This Name was afterward given to all Italy.

OETA;
a Mountain which divides Thessaly from Macedonia, and is famous for the Death
of Hercules, who from it was called Oetaeus; this Mountain abounded in
Hellebore.

OGYGES,
King of the Thebans, and the Founder of the City of Ihebes about 1500 Years
before the City of Rome, according to Varro, L. 3. de Re rustica, though others
attribute the Founding thereof to Cadmus. St. Augustine relates that a greater
Deluge happened in this King's Time, than that of Deucolion.

OGYGIA;
an Island between the Seas of Phoenicia and Syria, famous for the Residence of
Calypso, who there entertained Ulysses after his Shipwreck, and with whom he
staid Seven Years. There is Reason to believe, that the Island of Ogygia is an
imaginary Thing only. Plutarch places it in the Ocean Five Days sail from
Britannia toward the West. Pliny puts it in the Mediterranean, near unto
Locris, and calls it Calypsus; and this he seems to say in favor of Homer, and
to let us see that that Poet had some Reason to make Ulysses go into the Isle
of Ogygia, where that Hero received some secret Favors from Queen Calypso.
Lucian ridicules Homer and Ulysses upon this Occasion very pleasantly, where he
says in his Celestial Navigation, that he found Ulysses in the Isle of the
Blessed, and that that Hero charged him to carry a Letter to Calypso into the
Island of Ogygia; but herein he would not have himself forget that from the
very Beginning of his Story he had protested he would not say a Word of Truth.
Ptolomy speaks of a Town in B^otia in Greece, which he calls Ogyges or Thisbe,
and was built by a Prince of that Country called Ogyges: The Name of the said
Prince gives some Cause to think, that Fabius Pictor speaks of Gomer under the
Name of Ogyges, and that Ogyges, Saturn and Gomer in that Age were the same
Person: The Reason whereof is, that that Ogyges of Ptolomy reigned a little
after the Deluge, as Pausanias and Berosus assure us.

OLYMPUS;
a Phrygian, who was an excellent Musician, and Player upon string'd
Instruments, and according to Plutarch, in his Treatise of Music, brought the
Invention thereof into Greece: He was also the first who at the Obsequies of
Python played a mournful Tune after the Lydian Mode.

OLYMPUS;
Mount Olympus, situated in that Part of Thessaly which is toward Macedonia:
Its very high, and the Air there always sorene, which made the Poets take it
for Heaven; they feigned that Jupiter governed Olympus, that is Heaven.

OLYMPIADES;
the Olympiads; a Chronological Term, being the Space of Four Years: The Greeks
reckoned by Olympiads, every one of which contained the Space of Four whole
Years; and these Olympiads took their Name from the Olympic Games, that were
celebrated near the City of Pisa, otherwise called Olympia, in Peloponesus,
from whence the said Games were so named. These Games are also called Iphiti,
because Iphitus instituted them, or at least wise renewed the Solemnities of
them. The first Olympiad began in the Year of the World 3938, and of the Julian
Period, An. 3208, and 777 Years before Christ's Nativity: The Peloponesian War
began the first Year of the 87 Olympiads.

OLYMPICI,
Ludi is understood; the Olympic Games: They were famous Games amongst the
Greeks that consisted of Five sorts of Exercises, viz. Running, Whorlbat or
Quoiting, Jumping and Wrestling: Pelops was accounted to be the Instituter of
them after the successful Battle he fought against Oenomaus, whereby he
obtained Hippodamia. however Hercules deprived him of Part of the Glory of this
Institution, either because he revived the Ceremonies thereof that had been
neglected, or because he added to the Magnificence of the same; they were
celebrated every Fourth Year near unto Olympia a City of Elis: They became so
solemn that the Greeks made them their Epact to reckon their Years by, which
were called Olympiads, and this lasted after the Reform of the Calender even to
the Reign of Constantine; those who won the Prize were so much honored, that
when they returned to their own Country, a Piece of the Wall was beat down that
they might enter triumphantly in a Chariot into the City; Cato brought these
Games to Rome, and Augustus instituted others like them which he dedicated to
Apollo after his Victory at Actium.

OPS;
the Romans gave the Name of Ops to the Earth, because of its Power to give us
Relief: Opis differs from Ops, and is one of the Names of Diana among the
Greeks, because she assisted Women in Labor: Its also the Name of one of
Diana's Nymphs in the Eneids, L. 4. And thus Servius speaks concerning this
Distinction of Names; Cum Terramdicimus, haec Ops facit, si Nympham dicamus,
baec Opis: si divitias, hae opes numero tantum plurali: We have said before,
that Caelum and Terra, Saturn and Ops were the first Gods of the Latins.

ORACULUM,
an Oracle; an ambiguous and obscure Answer which the Heathen Priests made to
the People concerning Things to come, by making them to believe that the Gods
spoke by their Mouths: The Madness and Blindness of the Heathens in respect to
their Oracles cannot be sufficiently admired, the same being captious and
obscure, and nothing else but the pure Artifice of the Priests without any,
Diabolical Operation: The Custom of Consulting the Oracles was not known in the
Golden Age, wherein they lived in Tranquillity of Mind, and perfect Innocence,
whereas afterward the inconstant and restless Humor of Mankind lead them to
make Enquiry after Futurity: Ovid indeed says, that Themis in the Time of the
Deluge pronounced Oracles, Fatidicamque Themin quae tunc Oracla tenebat.
But this is to make the Usage of Oracles to exist in the first Ages against
the Judgment of Stacius, and what we read in the Scripture. For though God spoke
to Adam and to Noah, yet it is certain that Divine Apparitions and Predictions,
Divinations and the Responses of Oracles did not begin to be frequent till the
Time of Abraham, to whom God began to make Promises of the Land of Canaan; that
is, that it was not till the second Millenium was expired, when Men began to be
engaged to the Service of God by Promises and frequent Predictions of future
Blessings: And this the Devil delayed not to imitate amongst the Gentiles.

I do not know of any thing more ancient than what Homer says concerning the
Oracle of Jupiter at Dodona, which Ulysses went to consult, that he might learn
of the Oak-Trees the way to get back to Ithaca: However, Herodotus says, that
the Phoenicians having stole away Two Prophetesses from Thebes in Egypt; one of
them they carried to Lybia, and the other to Greece; and that these set up Two
Oracles, the one Jupiter Ammon in Africa, and the other Jupiter Dodoneus in
the Oak-Tree Grove of Dodona; thus Oracles had their Beginning in Egypt, and
from thence passed into Lybia and Greece: Others have said, that they were Two
Doves that were brought up at Thebes, which delivered Oracles at Dodona and
Ammon: Silius Italicus has followed this Opinion. In gremio Thebes geminas
sedisse columbas.


Strabo says, that the Oracles of Dodona and of Jupiter Olympius were silent in
his Time; he speaks elsewhere at large of the Oracle at Delphos. Tacitus
informs us, that Germanicus consulted the Oracle of Apollo at Colophon in Asia:
The Priest went down to it into a Cave, after having only taken the Names, and
Number of such as came to consult it, and answered all of them in Verse though he
had not studied at all for it. Lucian in his Treatise de Dea Syriae, or the
Goddess of Syria, speaks of an Oracle of Apollo, wherein that God gave Answers
himself, whereas otherwise his Priests did it. When he was about to predict any
thing, he shook himself; then his Priests took him upon their Shoulders, and if
they did not, he moved himself and sweated; when they took him up, he led them
where he pleased, guiding them as a Coachman does his Horses, turning this or
that Way, and passing from one to the other, until the Chief Priest asked what
he had a mind to know. If the Thing displeased him he went back, but if
otherwise he advanced forwards, and I have seen him once raise himself up and
pass through the Air: This is the Way they come to know his Will: and they do
nothing either in Public or Private without having first consulted him: He
foretells the Change of Times and Seasons, and even Death it self.

Cicero observes that all Nations have taken their Divinations from such things
as were most familiar to them; the Egyptians and Babilonians from the Stars:
The Tuscans, from the Entrails of the Beasts they sacrificed: The Arabs,
Phrygians and Cilicians, who were always in the Fields, from the Flight and
Singing of Birds: Ammianus Marcellinus speaks of a singular Way of Divination
used among the Scythians, with long Staves, (which the Women made Choice of)
being that which was called Rhabdomancy, whereof the Scripture gives us an
Example in the Assyrians who made use of it. The Words of Ammianus are these;
Futura miro praesagiuns modo. Nam rectiores virgas faeminae colligentes, easque
cum incantamentis quibusdam secretis praestituto tempore discernentes, aperte
quid portendatur norunt. Nebuchodonozer laying Siege to Jerusalem, made use of
Three different Ways in order to know the Event of his Enterprise, Commiscens
sagittas, interrogavit Idola, exta consuluit; he used Rhabdomancy by mixing and
unmixing his Arrows; consulted the Idols, that is the Oracles; and inspected
the Entrails of Beasts. And thus the Assyrians and Babilonians might very well
communicate their Superstitions to the Egyptians, who might afterward send
them from thence into Greece; for in Homer we have neither any Inspection made
into the Entrails of Beasts, no Oracles of the Idols consulted, nor any
Rhabdomancy; they were the Oak-Trees at Dodona, and not the Idols that
delivered Oracles. Herodotus treats at large of the Rhabdomancy of the
Scythians, and Strabo speaks concerning that of the Persians.

There is no Certainty that Demons delivered Oracles, they were the Priests of
those false Gods that did it, and who for Money made whatever. Answer the
Enquirer pleased; and upon this Account a little Treatise in Latin writ by
Van-Dalen, Doctor of Physic, may be consulted: Its true, that Maebius pretends
to refute Van-Dalen, and one of the greatest Arguments he produces is this;
That God forbad the Children of Israel to consult Vizzards and Spirits of
Divination; from whence he concludes, that Ptyhon, by which Torm Demons were
meant, were concerned with Oracles; but for the Refuting hereof, it may be
said, That God speaks of no other than Magic and Negromancy; wherewith the
Demons without doubt concerned themselves: I need do no more than relate a
Passage out of Lucian's Dialogue concerning Alexander the Quack, to convince
People, that the Imposture and Malice of Men had a greater Share in those
Oracles than the Demons, unless it may be said that those who took upon them
to deliver Oracles were themselves inspired by the Spirit of the Demon.
Lucian's Words are these: That Impostor finding a favorable Opportunity,
delivered Oracles for Money, according to the Example of Amphilocus; who after
the Death of his Father Amphiaraus, being driven out of Thebes, withdrew into
Asia, where he predicted Things to come for a Halfpenny apiece to the
Barbarians: Then he gave them Notice that the God himself in such a Time would
give them Answers, and that every one should write his Desire in a Letter
sealed: After which, shutting himself up in the Sanctuary of the Temple, he
called them all who had given him their Letters, according to their turn by an
Herald, and returned them sealed to them with the God's Answer. It would not be
difficult for a Man of Sense to find out the Cheat, but these foolish People
did not perceive that he opened every Letter, and after he had inserted what
Answer he thought fit, returned them sealed up as before; for there are several
ways to open Letters without breaking the Seal; and I will give some Instances
hereof, that so a piece of Subtilty may not pass for a Miracle: In the first
place you may with an hot Needle loosen the Wax that fixes the Thread to the
Letter, without breaking the Seal at all, and when you have read what you have
a mind it may be closed up in the same manner: There is another Invention for
this Purpose, and that consists of Lime and Glue; or is prepared with Mastick
compounded with Pitch, Wax and Brimstone, mixed with the Powder of a very
transparent Stone, whereof they make a Ball, with which while the same is yet
soft they take off the Impression of the Seal, after they have rubbed it with
Hog's Grease, for it hardens presently, and serves to make an Impression as if
it were the Seal it self.

Many have thought that Oracles ceased upon the Coming of Christ, as Eusebius
for one, who grounds his Opinion upon a Passage taken out of Porphyrie: I Will
tell thee the Truth concerning the Oracles of Delphos and Cluros, says Apollo
to his Priest: Formerly there came out of the Bowels of the Earth an infinite
Number of Oracles, and from Fountains and Exhalations, which inspired them with
Divine Raptures; but the Earth by the continual Changes which Time has
introduced; has reassumed, and cadsed them to re-enter into her self, Fountains
and Exhalations: There are no more left but the Waters of Mycale in the Plains
of Didymus, and those of Claros, and the Oracle of Parnassus. Now this Passage
does not say, that Oracles were ceased; and moreover, it excepts Three of them;
which is enough to show us, that Oracles did not cease at the Coming of Christ,
seeing also we have several Proofs to the contrary in Ancient Writers, who make
it appear, that Oracles lasted above 400 Years after Christ's Coming, and that
they were not wholly silenced but with the total Destruction of Paganism.
Suetonius in Nero's Life, says, That the Oracle of Delphos forewarned him to
beware of 73 Years; and that Nero believed he should not die before that time,
not dreaming that Old Galba, who was of that Age, should dispossess him of the
Empire. Philostratus in the Life of Apollonius Tyanans, who saw Domitian, tells
us, that Apollonius visited all the Oracles of Greece, and particularly those
of Dodona, Delphos, and Amphiaraus. Plutarch, who lived in the Reign of Trajan,
informs us, that the Oracle at Delphos was still in being, though she was
reduced to one single Priestess, whereas she formerly had Two or Three. Dion
Chrysostom under Adrian, relates, That he had consulted the Oracle of Delphos,
and had received an Answer, which to him seemed very intricate. In the Days of
the Antoninus's, Lucian says, that a Priest of Tyana went to enquire of the
false Prophet Alexander, if the Oracles which were delivered at Didimus,
Claros, and Delphos were the true Answers of Apollo, or Impostures. After the
Antonines, Three others contended for the Empire, viz. Severus; SSptimius,
Pescenninus, Niger, and Clodius Albinus. They consulted the Oracle of Delphos,
says Spartianus, to know which of the Three was best for the Commonwealth, and
the Oracle made Answer in a Verse: The Black is the Best, the Affrican is Good,
the White is the Worst. Dion who did not finish his History before the 8th Year
of the Emperor Alexander Severus, that is An.. Dom. 230. says, that still in
his Time Amphilocus delivered Oracles in a Dream: He also informs us, that
there was an Oracle in the City of Apollonia, where what should come to pass
was delivered as the Fire took hold of the Incense, which was thrown upon the
Altar: In the Reign of Aurelian, about the Year 272, the Revolted, Palmirenians
consulted the Oracle of Apollo Sarpedonius in Cilicia; and they also consulted
that of Venus Aphacita. A Deity much unknown, named Besa, delivered also
Oracles upon Letters at Abida, in the farthest Part of Thebais, in the Reign of
the Emperor Constantins. Lastly, Macrobius, who lived in the Time of Arcadius
and Honorius, Theodosius his Sons, speaks of a Deity at Heliopolis, in Syria,
and of his Oracle: But Theodosius the Younger having shut up all the Temples of
the false Gods, and rased that of Serapis in Egypt; all the Oracles became
silent, and Paganism was upon Pain of Life forbidden to be publicly practiced;
by the Edicts of Valentinian III. and Martianus in the Year 451.

ORCHESTRA;
the lower Part of the Theater, made in the Form of a Semicircle, and shut up
at the midst of the Steps: It was so called, because that in the Grecian
Theaters, it was a Place where they kept their Balls from (...), which
signifies to dance. The Orchestra among the Greeks made a Part of the Scene;
but at the Roman Theaters none of the Actors went down to the Orchesira, which
was taken up with Seats for the Senators: The Orchestra now adays is the Place
where a Consort of Music is placed; formerly it was the middle of all the
Theater, which consisted of Three Parts, to wit, the Steps or Seats, which we
call the Theater; and the Orchestra, which is named the Pit: Among the Romans
it was the Place where they placed the Senators; but among the Greeks it was
where they danced or kept their Balls that made part of their Plays.

ORCUS;
this comes from the Caldee Word Arequa, which signifies the Earth, in a Text
of Jeremy, and is but a Dialect of the Hebrew Aretsa, and this Word is taken
for Hell.

OREADES,
Nymphs of the Mountains, which were so called from the Greek Word (...), that
signifies a Mountain.

ORESTES;
the Son of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra, who put her Husband Agamemnon to Death
to revenge the Death of her Daughter Polyxena whom he had sacrificed. Orestes
and Electra his Sister killed Clytemnestra, that the Death of their Father
might not go unpunished: Orestes after this Parricide ran mad, and with his
Friend Pylades fled into Scythia; he landed at Tauros whither Ephigenia had
been transported by Diana, and where she was her Priestess, to offer all
Strangers who landed in that Country in Sacrifice to that Goddess: Orestes was
taken and he had very like to have been sacrificed by his Sister, who did not
know him; but at last coming to be acquainted one with another, they fled away
both together privately, and carried with them Diana's Statue, after they had
killed Thoas who was King of that Country: Orestes returned to Athens, where
after the Purifications appointed him by the Oracle, he came to himself again,
and went to reside at Orestes a City in Arcadia, where he died with the
stinging of a Serpent: The Scythians adored Pylades and Orestes as Gods, and
built them Temples and Altars, as Lucian in his Dialogue of Toxaris or of
Friendship, informs us, wherein he brings in Ioxaris who was a Scythian,
speaking to Menesippus in this Manner.

Toxar, Observe how the Barbarians (for so they call us) have better Sentiments
of the Greeks, than the Greeks themselves: We have built Temples for those Men,
whom you have not as much as erected Funeral Monuments for. Where will you find
a noble Tomb either for Orestes or Pylades in Argos and Messena; whereas they
are adored by the Scythians? And though they were no Strangers, you have not
thought them worthy of this Honor: But Virtue is adorable even in Enemies,
wherefore what they have done for one another is graven in the Temple of
Orestes upon a Brass-Pillar, and it is the first Thing we teach our Children:
Their Actions are also set on the Walls of the Temple, where may be seen on one
Side a Ship dashing her self to Pieces against a Rock, and those Two Heroes led
Prisoners along, and crowned like Victims that were to be sacrificed; and on
the other they are represented with their Arms in their Hands, breaking their
Chains, and defending their Liberty at the Expense of many a Man's Life, and
even of King Thoas's, then they carry away Diana and her Priestess, they are
pursued as they begin to sail and their Ship attacked, but they make a gaslant
Resistance, and at last save themselves by Swimming, being either wounded
themselves or amazed with the Wounds of others.

ORGIA;
a Term made use of by the Heathens, whereby to express the Feasts and
Sacrifices of Bacchus, which were more particularly celebrated upon Mountains
by raving Women called Baccbantes. Servius says, that at first all sorts of
Sacrifices were called Orgia in Greece, and the same at Rome were named
Ceremonies.

ORIENS;
the East. The first of the Four Cardinal Points of the World, where we see the
Sun and Stars rise: The Point or Tropic of Cancer which intersects the
Horizon, is called the Summer-East; and the Winter-East is the Point of the
Horizon that is intersected by Capricorn: In Trajan and Adrian's Golden-Coin
the East is found represented by the Sun with this Word Oriens.

ORION,
proceeded from Jupiter, Neptune and Mercury's Urine, who passing through the
World arrived one Day very late at a poor Countryman's Hutt, whose Name was
Hyreus, and who received them very kindly, and in order to entertain them
killed the only Ox he had: The Gods to reward his Liberality bid him ask what
he would for his Reward and he should have it; upon which he prayed them, that
he might be able to have a Child without being married; the said Gods presently
causing the Ox his Hide which he had killed to be brought to them, they pissed
upon it, and bid him bury it in the Ground and not trouble himself about it
till Ten Months end: when the Time was expired he found a Child there, which he
called Orion: Hesiod makes Neptune to be his Father and Euryale the Daughter of
Minos his Mother: He tells us, he had obtained a Power of Neptune to walk as
lightly upon the Water, as Iphic^^s did over the Heads of Ears of Corn: Being
gone one Day from Thebes to Chio, he ravished Mer^^s, Enopian's Daughter, who
struck him blind, and drove him from the Island; from whence he went to Lemnos
to Vulcan, who brought him to the Sun, that cured him of this Blindness: As he
went afterward to ravish Diana, she caused him to be stung by a Scorpion,
whereof, as Palephatus says, he died. Homer in his Odysses, L. 5. relates, that
'twas Diana her self that shot him to Death with her Arrows, out of a Jealousy
she had that Aurora was in Love with him: And this is confirmed by Plutarch in
his Fortune of the Romans, where he says, that Orion was beloved of a Goddess:
Diana in Compassion made him a Constellation (placing him before the Feet of
Taurus) which consists of 17 Stars, in Form like unto a Man armed with a
Cutelas: It rises on the 9th of March, bringing Storms and great Rains with it,
whence Virgil gave it the Epithet of Orion aquosus; it sets June 21. Lucian in
Praise of an House, speaking of the Sculptures which adorned the Appartments,
says thus of Orion: This next is an old Story of Blind Orion, which imports,
that some Body showed him the Way, he ought to follow in order to recover his
Eyesight, and the Sun that appeared cured him of his Blindness; and this
Vulcan contrived in the Isle of Lesbos.

ORPHEUS
the Son of Oeagrus, or according to others, of Apollo and the Muse Calliope;
he was born in Thrace, and was both a Poet, Philosopher, and an excellent
Musician, Mercury having made him a Present of his Harp on which he played so
exquisitely that he stoped the Course of Rivers, laid Storms, drew the the most
savage Animals after him, and made Trees and Rocks to move: Having lost his
Wise Eurydice, who shunning the Embraces of Aristeus King of Arcadia, trod upon
a Serpent, who stung her to Death, he went down to Hell after her, where by the
Melody of his Music he obtained Leave of Pluto and Proscrpina for her to
return, upon Condition he should not look behind him till he got upon Earth,
but being overcome by an amorous impatience,, he turned about and lost his
Eurydice for ever; upon which he conceived so great an Hatred to Women, that he
endeavored to inspire others with the same, and this provoked the Women of
Thrace to that Degree, that being one Day with Transports of Fury celebrating
their Orgia they fell upon Orpheus, tore him to Pieces, and threw his Head unto
the River: Lucian writes concerning it in this manner. When the Thracian Women
killed Orpheus, it is said, his Head which they threw into the River swum a long
time upon his Harp, uttering mournful Tones in Honor of the said Hero, and
that the Harp being touched by the Winds answered the mournful Song; and in
this Condition they arrived at the Isle of Lesbos, where the People erected a
Funeral Monument for him, in the Place where Bacchus his Temple now stands, but
they hung up his Harp in Apollo's Temple, where the same was kept a long time
till the Son of Pittacus having heard say, that it played of it self, and
charmed Woods and Rocks, had a mind to have it for himself; and so bought it
for a good Sum of Money of the Sacristan; but not thinking he could play safely
in the City, he went by Night to the Suburbs where as he went about to touch
it; the same made such a dreadful Noise instead of the Harmony he expected,
that the Dogs run thither and tore him in Pieces, and so was attended with the
same Fate herein as Orpheus himself. There are some Authors who say, that the
Menades tore Orpheus in Pieces, because he having sung the Genealogy of all the
Gods, had said nothing of Bacchus, and the said God to be revenged on him
caused his Priestesses to kill him. Others say, this Misfortune befell him by
the Resentment of Venus, to whom Calliope Orpheus his Mother had refused to
give Adonis any longer than for 6 Months in the Year, and that to revenge the
same, she made all the Women in Love with Orpheus, and that every one of them
being minded to enjoy him, they had in that manner tore him in Pieces.

Cicero says, that Aristotle thought there never was such an one as Orpheus,
and that the Poems which were attributed to him, were the Works of a
Pythagorean Philosopher. In the mean time, it is hard to doubt there was such an
one, after so many Testimonies of the Ancients to the Contrary, since Pausanias
makes mention of Orpheus his Tomb, and of the Hymns he had composed, which he
says, came but little short or the Elegancy and Beauty of those of Homer, but
that his Wit was attended with more Religion and Piety than the others. St.
Justin reports, that Orpheus, Homer, Solon, Pythagoras, and Plato had traveled
into Egypt, that they got there some Knowledge of the Scriptures, and that
afterward they retracted what they had before written concerning the
superstitious Worship of their false Deities in Favor of the Religion of the
true God: Orpheus, according to this Father, in his Verses spoke very clearly
concerning the Unity of God, as of him who had been, as it were the Father of
that extravagant Multiplicity of the Heathen Gods.

The Fable made him after his Death to be changed into a Swan, Lucian informs
us also in his Judicial Astrology, that he gave the Greeks the first Insight
into Astrology, though but obscurely and under the V^il of diverse Mysteries and
Ceremonies: For the Harp on which he celebrated the Orgia, and sung his Hymns
and Songs, had Seven Strings which represented the Seven Planets, for which
reason the Greeks after his Death placed the same in the Firmament and called a
Constellation by its Name.

ORUS or HORUS,
King of Egypt; the Son of Osiris; the Greeks call him Apollo, because perhaps,
he divided the Year into Four Seasons, and the Day into Hours. See Horus.

OSIRIS,
was a God and King among the Egyptians, to whom they gave also diverse other
Names: Diodorus Siculus says, that some took him for Serapis, others for
Bacchus, Pluto, Ammon, Jupiter and Pan. After that Osiris King of Egypt, who
was the fifth of the Gods that reigned in that Country, after, I say, Osiris
was killed by his Brother Typhon, it was believed his Soul went into the Body
of the Ox Apis, and into all the rest which were successively substituted in
his Stead, and this Ox was looked upon as the Image and Soul of Osiris,
according to the Testimony of Diodorus Siculus; and as there were Two sacred
Oxen in Egypt, the one named Apis in the City of Memphis, and the other called
Mnevis in Heliopolis, the same Diodorus says, they were both consecrated to
Osiris; Tanros sacros tam Apim quam Mnevim Osiridi sacros and dicatos esse, and
pro Diis coli, apud universos promiscue Aegyptios sancitum est. Diodorus
afterward sets forth at large how the Worship and Mysteries of Osiris were
carried from Egypt to Creece under the Name of Bacchus the Son of Semele the
Daughter of Cadmus, originally descended from Thebes in Egypt; for the Daughter
of Gadmus having had a Bastard Child that was very like unto Osiris, Cadmus to
save the Honor of his Daughter deified her Son after his Death, making him to
pass for another Osiris the Son of Jupiter: Orpheus a little after went to
Egypt, and in Acknowledgment of the Kindness he had received from Cadmus his
Family, he published these same Mysteries in Greece but so as to attribute to
Semele's Son, all that had been said of the truc Osiris several Ages before;
and so the Osiris of Egypt, and Bacchus of Creece, the Mysteries of the
Egyptian Osiris, and those of the Greclan Bacchus, were one and the same.
Herodotus attributes the bringing of this Name, History, and Mysteries of
Osiris or the Egyptian Bachus into Greece, to Melampus, who was antienter than
Orpheus.

The Egyptian Tradition, according to Diodorus Siculus, was, that Osiris, Isis
and Typhon were the Sons of Saturn and Rhea, or rather of Jupiter and Juno;
that Osiris is the same with Bacchus, and Isis the same as Ceres, that Osiris
and Isis reigned with extraordinary Mildness, and conferred great Benefits on
their Subjects, that they hindered Men to eat one another any more; that Isis
inveated the Sowing and Use of Corn, and made several excellent Laws; that
Osiris was brought up at Nysa in Arabia Felix, and going for one of Jupiter's
Sons, they called him (...), that he applied himself to Agriculture, and first
taught how to plant Vines: That Hermes or Mercury was his Secretary in sacred
Things; that he was minded to travel all over the World to teach Mankind the
use of Corn and Wine; and in his Absence recommended Mercury to the Service of
Isis, to Hercules the Government of Egypt, to Busiris that of Phoenicia; and
Lybia to Anteus; that he was accompanied by Apollo his Brother; Anubis, Macedo,
Pan and Triptolemus; that having passed over Africa Asia and Europe, he built
the City of Nysa in the Indies, defeated Lycurgus in Thrace, and at last
returned home; he was killed by his Brother Typhon; that Isis and Orus his Sons
revenged his Death, and having slain Typhon, they paid Divine Honors to
Osiris, whose Members Isis very carefully gathered together, which Typhon had
divided between the Murderers. Plutarch observes that the Egyptians took Osiris
for a good Genius, and Typhon for an evil Genius, and the Principle of all
Evil. Plutarch wrote a particular Treatise concerning Isis and Osiris; where in
an Account is given of the Birth, and great Exploits of Osiris, of his
Conquests, Benefits to Mankind, the secret Contrivances of Typhon against him,
his Death, and the Care taken by Ises for his Deification. At last he pretends
that Osiris and Isis, from good Genii as they were, became Gods, as a just
Reward of their Virtue, and that Osiris is Pluo, and Isis, Proferpina.

Synesius, Bishop of Cyrene, who wrote a Treatise concerning Providence,
confines himself almost wholly therein to the Explaining of the Fable or
History of Osiris: He begins with this Reflection, That if the same be a Fable,
its full of Wit, since the Egyptians were the Authors thereof; and if it be
more than a Fable, it deserves our Pains to make a further Inspection into it;
he afterward gives the same Account as other Writers have done, of Osiris and
Typhon; and says, that their Father was a King, Priest and a God, because the
Egyptians pretended they had been governed by the Gods before the Kingdom fell
into the Hands of Men: Afterward he gives a Description of the Reign of
Osiris, which was a Reign of Justice, Piety, Clemency and Liberality it self.
Typhon dethroned and banished him, and assuming the Government, reigned in all
manner of Vices, and with all imaginable Cruelty. But the Patience of the
People being worn out, they recalled Osiris. Typhon was punished by the Gods,
and Osiris recovered the Crown. M. Spon in his Searches after Antiquity, gives
an Account of an Idol of Osiris: I remember, says he, that being formerly at
Leyden, I saw among the Curiosities of their Anatomy-School, two small Idols:
The first is an Osiris, that was a famous Deity among the Egyptians, having a
Miter on his Head, at the lower part whereof there was an Ox's Horn on each
side; for he was thus worshipped in the Form of an Ox, because he had taught
Mankind the Art of Tillage; in his Left Hand he held a Staff bent at the End,
and in his Right a Triangular Instrument: This last was very like unto a Whip
with three Cords. Plutarch says, that Osiris commanded over the Dead, and might
not this Whip be the Ensign of his Authority, as the Furies are represented
with a Whip and Torches?

OSSA;
a Mountain upon the Frontiers of Thessaly, that is covered all over with Wood
and Snow. Seneca says, that this Mountain was joined to Olympus, but that it
was separated by the Labor of Hercules: It was a Place of Retreat for Giants
and Centaurs.

OSTRACISMUS;
Ostracism; it was a kind of Banishment, in Use among the Greeks, of such
Persons whose over great Power the People suspected, as fearing least the same
should degenerate into Tyranny; This Banishment was not accounted disgrateful,
because 'twas not a Punishment in^^icted for any Crime: It lasted Ten Years,
and in the mean time the exiled Person enjoyed his Estate: It was thus called
because the People gave their Suffrages by writing the Name of him whom they
were minded to banish upon Shells: Aristides was exiled in this manner, because
he was too Just, as Plutarch says in his Life.

OTHO,
named M. Silvi^s, was the 8th Emperor, and succeeded Galba, whom he put to
Death: The Medals which we have of his, make him somewhat like unto Nero, which
caused the People to cry, Othoni Netoni: But yet he was not so fat, tho
otherwise he had the Mien and Delicacy of a Woman: He was shaved every Day, and
wore a Peruke, because he had but very little Hair: His Peruke may be
distinctly observed on his Silver and Gold Medals; and 'twas he that brought
the Use of Wigs into Italy. The Brass Medals of this Prince, which are all of
them Egyptian or Syrian; do not represent him with a Peruke, perhaps, because
they did not know the Use thereof in those Countries; and so they do not give
so exact a Resemblance of him as the Latin ones stamped in Italy. His
Inclimations were conformable to those of Nero's, and this Conformity made them
contract so entire a Friendship, that every Thing was in common between them,
even to their Wives, without entertaining the least Jealousy thereupon:
However, when Otho became Emperor, he appeared of a better Disposition, and
perhaps put a Constraint upon himself, that he might procure the Favor of the
People: He showed both Courage and Bravery against Vitellius, his Competitor
for the Empire, and beat him three times, but at last being gulled with
Proposals of Peace, he was defeated; which Misfortune made him resolve to kill
himself rather, if Suetonius is to be believed, out of a Sense of Pity for the
Death of so many Men that lost their Lives in endeavoring to support him, than
out of an Effect of Despair: And as his Resolution to kill himself was looked
upon as a great Action among the Romans; Suetonius cannot forbear admiring him,
saying, That though he had the Complexion of a Woman, he being fair, clear
skinned, and without Hair, of a middle Stature, with small Feet, yet his Body
was not answerable to so much Resolution as he showed at his Death.

OVATIO;
an Ovation; a lesser Triumph amongst the Romans, which was allowed some
Commanders that had won a Victory without the Effusion of much Blood, or for
the Defeating of Rebels, Slaves, Pirates, or other unworthy Enemies of the
Republic of Rome. Their Entry was on Foot, and sometimes on Horseback, but
never in a Chariot; and they wore Crowns of Myrtle, which they called Ovales,
having all the Senate following of them. This Word Ovatio, according to
Servius, is derived from Ovis, because the Conqueror sacrificed a sheep only
upon this Occasion to Jupiter, whereas in the great Triumphs they sacrificed a
Bull; others derive it from those Acclamations and Shouts of Joy made by the
People, in Honor of the Solemnity: This sort of lesser Triumph was established
in the Year of Rome 250 or 251, and 'twas the Consul Posthumous Tubertus, that
after the Defeating of the Sabines, brought up the Custom of it.

OVIDIUS NASO;
a Latin Poet, born at Sulmo, a considerable Town of the Peligni, in Italy, in
the Consulship of Hirtius and Pansa, that is in the Year of Rome 711. He was
banished into the Province of Pontus in Asia, for making Love to Julia,
Augustus his Daughter, or as others will have it, for writing lascivious
Verses, touching the Art of Love: He died at Tomos, January 1st, of the CXCIX
Olympiad, that is in the 40th Year of the Reign of Tiberius, and 17th of our
Redemption: The Sweetness that is to be met with in several Parts of this Poets
Works, makes us concerned for those that are lost, as the Six last Books de
Fastis, etc. He gives an Account himself of the Cause of his Banishment and
Ruin in the following Distick.

Ille ego qui fueram tenerorum lusor amorum,
Ingenio perii Naso Poe^aemeo.
P.
P Is a Consonant, and the 15th Letter in the Alphabet, being a Numeral Letter
that signifies 100, according to Vgution; but Baronius believes it signifies a
Septenary Number: When a little dash is put over it, it stands for 400000. The
P and B are so like one another, that Quint^ran declares, that in the Word
obtinuit, his Reason required him to put a b, but that his Ears could hear
nothing but a p, optinuit: For which Reason we see in ancient Inscriptions and
old Glosses that these two Letters have been often confounded, as apsens for
absens, obtimus for optimus, pleps for plebs, poplicus for publicus, etc. Hence
also we have suppono for subpono, and oppono for obpono, still in use. Several
Nations also often pronounce one of these Letters for the other, as the Germans
particularly, who say ponum vinum for bonum vinum. The Greeks often put them
for one another; and Plutarch says, that 'twas usual with those of Delphos, to
say (...) for (...) for (...): And so among the Latins, as often as an s
followed, the b was changed into a p, as scribo, scripsi: These two Letters
have also this in common, that they often slip into Words, where there is no
need of them, as Absporto for Asporto.

PACTOLUS;
a River in Lydia, that rises in Mount Tmolus; it brings Golden Sands down with
it: The Poets feigned this Gold-Sand proceeded from Midas his having washed
himself therein, and that he left there the Gift which he had received from
Bacchus to change all Things into Gold.

PAEAN;
a Song of Rejoicing, sung in Honor of Apollo. Io Paean, the Original of this
Word was this: Apollo being grown up, bethought himself of the Injury which his
Mother had received from the Serpent Python, and so engaging with her in a
Fight, he slew her with his Arrows: During the Combat, these Words were heard
repeated, Io Paean; from hence it became a Custom to sing the same at the
Public Games, at Triumphs and Victories both in Rome and Greece: This Song was
also made use of after a Victory, in Honor of Mars; as it was likewise for the
Curing of some Sickness, wherewith any were afflicted; and then they addressed
themselves to Apollo the God of Physic.

PAEON,
Endymion's Son, and the Brother of Epeus, who in a Race being outdone by him,
resigned the Kingdom to him, according to Agreement: Then he retired toward
the River Axus, and gave Name to that Part of the Country of Macedon, which was
called Paeonia. There was another Person of this Name, who had great Skill in
Physic, and who cured Pluto of the grievous Wounds he had received from
Hercules.

PALAEMON,
the Son of Athamas and Ino, called before Melicertus, but took upon him this
Greek Name of Palaemon, when that being thrown into the Sea with his Mother
Ino, they were both deified by Neptune, and reckoned amongst the Gods of the
Sea: The Latins gave him the Name of Portumnus, because that they committed the
Care of Ports and Havens unto him. Theseus instituted Plays in Honor of him,
called the Isthian Games, where the Victors were crowned with Branches of Pine.

PALAESTRA;
was a public Building among the Greeks, for the Performing of all sorts of
Exercises, as well of Body as Mind, as consisting of a College and an Academy,
in the Sense wherein the Words are modernly taken: Though the greatest part of
Authors take Palaestra to be but as an Academy for bodily Exercises, according
to the Etymology of the Word, which comes from (...), that in Greek signifies
Wrestling, which was one of the most famous Exercises among the Ancients: This
was one of the Diversions at the Olympic Games, and there was a Prize assigned
for it. Foyls are Slights in Wrestling. Philostratus made a Picture of the
Palaestra, which is represented like a young Nymph full of Vigor and Strength,
and he would have her to be Mercury's Daughter, who invented this sort of
Exercise in Arcadia.

PALAMEDES;
the Son of Nauplius, King of the Isle of Eubaea, and an irreconcilable Enemy
to Ulysses; be added Four Letters to the Greek Alphabet, (...). He also
invented Weights and Measures: He appointed the Watchword to be given in
Armies, and the Way to form a Battallion according to the Flying of Cranes,
which for that Reason were called Palamedes his Birds. They make him to be a
great Astrologer, he having regulated the Years according to the Course of the
Sun, and the Months according to that of the Moon: He was stoned to Death by
the Grecians, being falsely accused of holding intelligence with Priamus by
Ulysses.

PALATINUS;
Mount Palatine; one of the Seven Hills of Rome, and so called either from the
Palantes, who came and dwelt there with Evander, or from Palantia, Latinus his
Wife, or from Pales the Goddess of Shepherds. The King's Palace stood upon this
Mountain, and from hence King's Courts came to be called Palatia. Romulus was
brought up on this Mount.

PALES;
the Goddess of Shepherds, who was beloved of Apollo: There was a Feast
celebrated in Honor of Apollo, April 20 or 21, by offering Sacrifices, and
making great Fires of Straw of H^y, which were kindled with great Rejoycings,
and by Sound of Drums and Trumpets; the Country People leaped over these Fires,
and purified their Cattle therewith, in order to keep them from the Mange, and
other Distempers. See Palilia.

PALILIA;
they were Feasts, and Public Rejoycings made as well in the City as Country,
April 20th, in Honor of Pales the Goddess of Flocks, to entreat her to make
them fruitful, and preserve them from the usual Diseases. Fires were kindled
both in City and Country, such as are at this Day used in Popish Territories on
St. John's Eve: And the same were made with Bean-straw, Horse-blood and
Calves-Ashes, which Calf they took out of the Cow's Belly, that they sacrificed
on the Day of the Fordicidia, at what time the Chief of the Vestal Virgins
burnt those Calves, and gathering the Ashes very carefully up, they reserved
the same for a Perfume on the Day of the Palilia, that so the People and their
Cattle might be purified therewith: 'Twas to her that they went to fetch those
Ashes, which afterward they threw into the Fire, as Ovid tells us, Fast. L. 4.
V. 731.

I, pete virginea populus suffimen ab ara:
Vesta dabit, Vestae numine purus eris.
Sanguis equi suffimen erit, vitulique favilla.
Tertia res, durae culmen in ane fabae.
The People danced about the Fire, and purified themselves thus: In the Country
they lighted a great Fire in the Morning, made of the Branches of Olive, Pine
and Laurel, and threw some Brimstone upon it, then went to fetch their Cattle,
which they drove round it, and drew in the Smell that came therefrom: This
Ceremony Ovid describes at large:

Pastor oves saturas ad prima crepuscula lustret.
Vda prius spargat, virgaque verrat humum.
Frondibus and fixis decorentur ovilia ramis,
Et tegat ornatas longa corona fores.
Caerulei fiant puro de sulfure fumi,
Tactaque sumanti sulfure balet ovis.
Ure mares oleas, tedamque, herbasque Sabinas,
Et crepet in mediis laurus adusta focis.
They afterward offered Sacrifice to the Goddess which consisted of Milk,
boiled Wine and Millet, the same being accompanied with Vows and Prayers for
the Fruitfulness and Preservation of their Flocks, then they fell to eat and
divert themselves, leaping over the Fire which they had kindled with Straw or
Bean-straw. These Feasts were also performed in Honor of Rome's Original,
which was on that Day founded by Romulus.

PALICI;
they were Gods famous in Sicily: Diodorus Siculus says, the Temple of these
Deities was much reverenced and very ancient: In it there were two very deep
Basins of boiling and sulphurous Water, which were always full without ever
running over: In this Temple it was that they took the most solemn Oaths, and
Perjuries were there presently punished with some terrible Punishment. Some
lost their Eyesight, insomuch that those Oaths determined the most intricate
Causes: This Temple was also used as an Asylum, for such Slaves as were oppressed
by their Masters; the Masters not daring to break the Oath they took there,
that they would use them more kindly. Silius Italicus in a Line and an half has
expressed all that Diodorus says, Et qui praesenti domitant perjura Palici
Pectora supplicio.
Macrobius observes very well that the River Symetus being in Sicily, the
Temple of the Palici was there also, according to Virgil; Symetia circum
Flumina, pinguis ubi and placabilis ara Palici.
He adds, that the first Poet that mentioned it was Esquilus, a Sicilian; he
relates a Fable out of him, concerning a Nymph whom Jupiter had ravished, and
who for fear of Juno hid her self in the Earth: At the Time of her Delivery,
she brought forth Two Brothers, which were called Palici, (...), as being such
as had entered into the Earth, and came out again. The Word Palici comes from
the Hebrew Palichin, that signifies venerabiles, colendi; and from Pelach,
colere, venerari. And Esquilus himself seems to intimate as much by this
Sentence; Summus Palicos Jupiter venerabiles voluit vocari. Hesychius says,
that the Father of these two Brothers was Adranus, which Name comes from the
Hebrew Adir, which is one of God's Eulogies, signifying, Glorious and
Illustrious. The Two Basins where the Oaths were taken, were called Delli, and
from whence Divine Vengeance broke out upon the Perjured, as Macrobius says,
and Callias after him; but this is an Arabic Word, and in all likelihood was
Phoenician; for Dalla in Arabic signifies as much as indicare; perhaps, it
might come from the Hebrew Daal, i. e. haurire; for Aristotle assures us, that
he who swore writ his Oath upon a Note, which he threw into the Water, the Note
swam upon the Surface. If he swore what was true, otherwise it disappeared.
Ovid gives a natural Description enough of these two Lakes, in his Met. Lib. 5.
V. 405. Perque lacus altos and olentia sulphur fertur
Stagna Palicorum, rupta ferventia terra.


PALILIA.
see next after Pales.

PALINURUS;
a Companion of Aeneas, who being overcome with Sleep, fell with his Helm
overboard into the Sea, and being carried as far as Port Velino, the
Inhabitants rifled him and cast him to the Sea again: But a little after they
were afflicted with a severe Plague, which made them go and consult the Oracle
of Apollo; who answered that they must appease the Ghost of Palinurus, in
Pursuance of which Advice, they consecrated a Grove to him, and erected a Tomb
for him upon the next Promontory, which obtained the Name of Palinurus.

PALLA,
a sort of Garment long in Use both by Men and Women, which the Kings and
ancient Romans wore; and even those who appeared upon the Stage were wont to
wear this long Robe, as Plautus says.

PALLADIUM;
the Palladium was a Statue of Pallas, which fell down from Heaven, in the
keeping of which consisted the Fate of Troy, Ulysses and Diomedes creeping
through the Gutters into the Temple that was in Troy, took away the Palladium:
Diomedes after the Destruction of Troy, going into Italy, gave the Palladium to
Aeneas, in Pursuance to the Commands of the Gods: Aeneas deposited the same at
Lavinium, where it continued. It was afterward carried to Rome into the Temple
of Vesta; nevertheless, Appian in his History of the Mithridatick War, says,
that when Fimbria ruined Ilium he boasted he had there found the Palladium
whole among the Ruins: Dionysius of Halicarnassus is of Opinion, there were
Two of these Statues of Pallas one of which was taken away by Ulysses and
Diomedes during the Seige of Troy, and another that was left there. Others
assure us, that the Trojans made another Palladium exactly like the true one,
and that it was the false one which the Grecians took away: Dionysius of
Halicarnassus his Words are these: The Oracle having assured them the Town
would be impregnable, and the Kingdom remain unshaken, as long as those sacred
Pledges were there: The Romans in all Likelihood feigned that there were Two
Palladiums, or that there was one made like unto the other, that they might not
be obliged to confess that they had lost the Pledge of the Eternity of their
Empire.

PALLAS,
a Goddess who came out of Jupiter's Brain completely armed, by the Help of
Vulcan, who cleft his Head with a very sharp Ax; she was brought up near the
Lake Triton, from whence she was called by the Poets Tritonia, they made her to
be the Goddess of Arts and Sciences. See Minerva.

PALLIUM;
there were Three sorts of Garments called by this Name, one which the Romans
used to tie about their Heads, when they were not well; another was a
fourcornered Robe or Mantle after the manner of the Greeks, and the Roman
Women, also were a long Robe called by this Name.

PALLOR,
Paleness; the Ancients made a Deity of it, to which they offered Sacrifice,
according to Clemens Alexandrinus: Romani Herculi rauscarum depulsori, and
Febri ac Pavori sacrificant. La^^^^tius says, that Tullius Hostilius introduced
the Worship of Fear and Paleness among them.

PALMUS,
a span, a Measure taken from the Length of the Hand, when it was extended as
much as it could be; for what we vulgarly now call the Palm of the Hand, was
formerly called Palmus. There were in former Times Two sorts of them, to wit,
the great and little Palm or Span, that divided a Foot unto Two unequal Parts;
the Greater consisting of 12 Fingers, and the Lesser of Four.

PALUDAMENTUM;
a Garment were by the Romans in Time of War; being the Coat of Arms of their
principal Men, who for that Reason were called Paludati; whereas the Soldiers
had nothing but short Coats, and were therefore named Sagati: this Garment was
open on the Sides with short Sleeves, like unto Angels Wings and came down no
lower than the Navel. It was white or red, and Valerius Maximus says, it was an
ill Omen to Crassus when he was going to make War against the Parthians, that
they gave him a black Paludamentum: Pullum ei traditum est paludamentum, cum in
praelium euntibus album aut purpureum dari soleret.

PAN;
an Egyptian God who was worshipped under the Shape of a Goat, they called him
also Mendes, because that Word signified an He-goat in the Egyptian Language.
Eusebius gives us the Opinion and Words of Porphyrie concerning him, who says,
that Pan was one of the good Genii, engaged in the Service of Bacchus, who
showed himself sometimes to laboring Men, and put them into such terrible
Frights, that many of them died thereof, from whence these Frights came to be
called Panick Fears. Eusebius very discreetly takes Notice of the
Contradictions of the said Philosophers, that would have Pan to be a good
Genius, and yet made it cost them their Lives to whom he appeared: Its true
that Pan was honored in Egypt under the Form of an He-goat, and that the
Damons very often took upon them the Shape of the said Animal: The Demons in
Scripture are often termed Pilosi, He goats: The Hebrew Word Sebirim signifies
an He goat, Pilosi, Hirci: This sort of Idolatry was common even in Moses his
Time, seeing the same had crept in among the Israelites: Non sacrificabunt
amplius sacrificia sua Pilosis, post quos fornicari sunt.

Herodotus says, that the People of the Province of Mendes placed Pan among the
Gods who were before the 12. that he was represented with a She-goat's Head and
the Legs of an He-goat; though he were believed to be really like unto other
Gods, Lastly, that at Mendes it is a common Name to Pan, to an He-goat, and to
a Town, there was kept a sacred He-goat, upon whose Death, all the Country went
in Mourning, as others did upon the Death of Ayl or Mnevis. Plutarch reckons
that the Pans and Satyrs happening first to know of the Death of Osiris, who was
killed by his Brother Typhon, and having spread the News of it, put the People
into so great a Consternation, that that was afterward called Panich Fears:
The Word Pan in Hebrew signifies Terror: Diodorus Siculus says, the Egyptian
Priests first consecrated themselves to Pan, and that in their Temples they
dedicated the Images of their Pans in the Form of an He-goat; pretending the
same was no more than to give Thanks unto the Gods for the Fertility of Nature
and of their Nation.

The Greeks, if we believe Herodotus, came late to know the History of Pan;
that Historian says, it was not above 800 Years before his Time, and that the
Greeks made him to be Mercury and Penelope's Son: In general he declares, that
the Greeks came but by Degrees to the Knowledge of the Egyptian Deities, and
that they formed their Genealogy according to the Time they came to be
acquainted with them: And so they did not know Pan till after the Trojan War,
because they make Penelope to be his Mother; and Lncian in his Dialogues of the
Gods explains the Matter, where he brings in Pan and Mercury speaking thus.

Pan, Good Morrow, Father.


Merc. Good Morrow, Son, but who are you that call me so? for to look upon you,
you are more like unto an He-goat than a God.


Pan, You reflect upon your self more than I, in saying so; Do you no longer
remember that pretty Woman whom you ravished in Arcadia? What makes you bite
your Fingers? It was Penelope the Daughter of Icarus.


Merc. And how comes it to pass that you are become horned, with a Beard, Tail,
and Goat's Feet.


Pan, It is because you were then transformed into the Shape of an He-goat that
you might surprise her.


Merc. I remember it, but I am ashamed to own it. Pan: I will not disgrace you
at all, for besides that I am worshipped in Arcadia, where I possess 1000
Flocks, I am famous for my Skill in Music, and have showed my Valor in the
Battle of Marathon, insomuch that the Athenians for my Reward have given me a
Grot under their Citadel, whether if you will ever come, you shall see how I
am honored there.


Pausanias says, that it was in the Reign of Pandion the Second at Athens, that
those Plays and Combats called Lupercalia Lycoea, were instituted in Arcadia by
Lycaon, who was King of the Country, near unto the Temple of Pan, though they
were consecrated to Jupiter Lycaeus. When Evander went from Arcadia into Italy,
he carried the Celebration of the Lupercalia in Honor of Pan thither; and
Dionysius of Hallicarnassus gives a Description thereof, as of a Custom which
was still in Force in his Time. Pausanias tells us, that Lycaon consecrated
these Plays to Jupiter Lycaeus, but Dionysius of Hallicarnassus says, they were
consecrated to Pan; which gives occasion to believe that the Arcadians
confounded Jupiter with Pan, of which the said Historian gives also a
convincing Proof, when he says elsewhere, that the greatest and most ancient of
the Arcadian Gods was Pan: As Arcadia was a mountainous and woody Country, Its
not strange they should make the God of the Mountains and Woods to be the
greatest of all the Gods: montes and nemora Pani dicari. Ovid himself in his
Fasti testifies, that Pan's Chief Priest was named Flamen Dialis, as well as
Jupiters. And this is clear, that they have either put the Name of Pan upon
Jupiter himself, or invested Pan with the Majesty of Jupiter. Those who would
make the ancient Fables to be a kind of Philosophy, which under those Disguises
conceal the greatest Secrets of Nature, take Pan which in Greek signifies All,
for the Universe, as Plutarch says in his Treatise of Osiris: That Part of Pan
which has Humane Shape from the Wast upwards represents Heaven and that
Intelligent Being, whereby all the World is governed. His red and fiery Face
denotes the Region of Elementary Fire: His Wrinkles and stern Looks the various
Changes of the Air and Seasons: His Hairs are the Beams of the Sun; and his
Horns denote the Moon which receives all the Influences of the Celestial
Bodies, and disperses the same again over the Earth: His lower Part is rough
and hairy, which denotes the Earth with the Forests, Herbs and Plants growing
thereon, his Two Legs are the Two Hemisphears that compose the World; his Belly
is the Sea; and his Horn feet denote the Stability of the Earth. The Panther's
Skin which he carries upon his Shoulders, the which is full of round Spots,
represents the Firmament full of Stars, says Probus the Grammarian upon
Virgil's Georgicks: The Seven Reed-pipes joined together denote the Seven
Planets and their Spears; the Harmony of the Seven Tones, that of their Courses
and Revolutions, says Cicero in his Somnium Sci^^^^is; the Breath wherewith he
makes them sound is the Spirit of Life which is in these Stars. He holds a
crooked Staff in his Hand that signifies the Year; his amourous Complexion, and
the Laciviousness wherewith he pursues the Nymphs is the Desire of Generation
which spreads it self through all the Beings of this World, who attract Matter
proper for that End from the Moisture which is represented by the Nymphs.

PANATHENAEA;
Feasts celebrated at Athens in Honor of Minerva, which were instituted by
Theseus, when he brought all the People of Attica to coalesce into one Body:
The Latins called these Feasts Quinquatri^^ Wrestling was one of the Exercises
practiced here, they also danced the Pyrrhick Dance upon the Theater, which was
done with Arms, and was instituted by Pyrrhus. These Games were of two sorts,
the great ones which were performed every Five Years, and the lesser ones
annually. See Quinquatria.

PANES,
the Satyrs, of whom Pan was the Chief, and who for that Reason were often
confounded with Pan, which is justified by this Verse of Ausonius. Capripedes
agitat cum laeta protervia Panes.
They were the Gods of Woods, Fields and of Hunting, and often were taken for a
Symbol of Impudence and Unchastity.

PANDORA,
whom Hesiod says, was the first Woman in the World, was made by Vulcan of a
little moistened Earth, afterward animated by all the Gods, and endued with
their Perfections: For Venus gave her her Beauty; Pallas her Wisdom; Mercury
his Eloquence; Apollo his Music, and Juno her Riches; and this made her to be
named Pandora from (...) and (...) which signifies All Cift. Jupiter being
angry with Prometheus because he had made a Man and stolen Fire from Heaven,
gave Pandora a Box wherein he enclosed all sorts of Evils, with Order she
should carry it to Epimetheus, the Brother of Prometheus, who upon the
receiving thereof, rashly opened it, when all the said Evils flew abroad into
the Earth, and there was only Hope left in the Bottom which he kept.

PANTHEA, or SIGNA PANTHEA;
Panthean Statues, they were ancient Statues that by the different Figures that
were upon them represented all the Gods, or at least a great Part of the most
considerable of them. (...) in Greek signifies All, and (...) God. And so they
called the Temples wherein all the Gods were worshipped together, Panthea, and
wherein all their Representations might be seen. Of this sort was the famous
Pantheum at Rome, built by Agrippa, and dedicated to Jupiter Vindex, according
to Pliny: It was afterward consecrated by Boniface 3. to the Virgin Mary and
all the Saints. It was of a round Form, and is at this Day called Santa Maria
della Rotonda: There was one at Athens which Pausanias calls the common Temple
of the Gods, and these sorts of Temples might be seen in many other Cities:
Lucian says, that he had observed the Statue of a Goddess in Syria, which
indeed was made for Juno, but that it had something in it of Pallas, Venus,
Luna, Rhea, Diana, Nemesis, and the Destinies. Ruffinus in his Ecclesiastical
History writes, that there was still at Alexandria, in Theodosius his Reign, an
Idol of Serapis made of all sorts of Mettles, and all kinds of Deities: The
Ancients therefore made Statues, which by their different Figures denoted all
the Gods. There were Panthean Inscriptions, Panthean Gravings and Panthean
Feasts.

PANTHEON,
the Pantheon, or a Temple built by M. Agrippa, Augustus Caesar's Son in Law,
of a round Form in Honor of all the Gods; it was made of Brick on the Outside
and within was adorned with Marble of various Colors: There were Niches in the
Walls wherein were placed the Statues of the Gods, especially that of Minerva
which was made of Ivory by Phidias the Statuary, and that of Venus at whose
Ears hung a very rich Pearl of Queen Cleopatra's, which Augustus ordered to be
cut in two, because it could not be matched, which the said Queen at a Feast
with Mark Antony caused to be dissolved and drunk it up: It weighed Half an
Ounce, and was valued at 10000000 Sesterces, which in English Money amounts to
about 76390 l. 11 s. The Gates of that Temple were made of Brass, the Beams
covered with guilt Brass, and the Roof made of Silver Plates, which Constantine
carried to Constantinpole. It was dedicated to Jupiter Vindex. The Emperor
Adrian built one like it at Athens in Honor of all the Gods, which he enriched
with 26 Columns of Thrygian Marble, and there he erected a Library and an
Academy called by his Name, which he adorned with 100 Pillars of Lybian Marble.

PANTOMIMUS;
a Mimick, who among the Ancrents appeared upon the Stage, and by his Signs and
Gestures represented all sorts of Actions. A Mimick, says Lucian, ought to have
the Art to express the Passions and Motions of the Soul, which Rhetoric
teaches us, and should borrow the various Postures and Faces of Men from
Paintings and Sculpture, etc. And a little farther; as the Oracle of Apollo
said, he should make the Spectators to understand without speaking, in the same
manner as if one had spoke. This is that which Demetrius the Cynic Philosopher
confesses, who condemned it; but then a celebrated Mimick in Nero's Time
desired him not to condemn him, before he saw him; and having ordered the Vocal
and Instrumental Music to cease, he represented before him the Adultery of
Mars and Venus, wherein he represented the Sun that discovered them, Vulcan who
spread his Nets for them, the Gods who ran to see the Sight, Venus all in
Confusion, Mars astonished and supplicant, and the rest of the Fable with so
much Artifice, that the Philosopher cried out, he thought he saw the Thing it
self and not a Representation of it, and that this Man's Body and Hands spoke:
But as it are fallen upon this Subject, I Will give you under one, the Testimony
of a Barbarian of th^se Times concerning it; for a Prince of Po^tus being come
to Nero's Court upon some (...) seeing this famous Farce-Dancer dance with so
much Address, though he understood not a Worf of what he sung, yet understood
all, and desired the Emperor in raking his Leave of him, to make him a Present
of this Man; and as Nero was amazed at his Request, he said, This it is to have
Barbarians to my Neighbors, among whom not one understands the Language, and
this Person will serve them as an Interpreter, and by his Gestures make them to
understand what he means.The Perfection therefore of this Art is to counterfeit
so exactly the Part one acts, so as to make neither a Gesture nor Posture that
has not some Reference to the Thing that is represented.

PAPILIO;
a Butterfly; the Symbol of the Soul, a Bas-relievo of Marble might be seen in
a Manuscript of the late M. de Bag^ris, wherein was represented a young Man
extended upon a Bed, and a Butterfly which flew away that seemed to come out of
the Mouth of the Deceased, because the Ancients did believe, as some of the
common People do now, that the Soul came out at the Mouth; which made Homer in
his 9th Illiaed say, That when the Soul has once passed the Barrier of the
Teeth, it cannot return.

PARANYMPHUS;
he anciently was the Manager of Nuptial Solemnities.

PARASANGA,
was an old Persian Measure, esteemed to be 30 Furlongs, according to the
common Consent of the best Authors, both Ancient and Modern; they had, indeed,
some Parasangae that were much greater, and others again far less. Strabo, L.
2. says, That the Parasanga of the Persians, was accounted by some to be 60
Furlongs, by others 40, and again by some 30. Agathias in his Gothic Wars
makes it to be but 21, which makes me say, that there were Parasangae from 20
to 60 Furlongs. But each Furlong contained 125 Paces.

PARCAE;
the Destinies, the Daughters of Erebus and the Night, they were called Parcae
by way of Antiphrasis, quod nemini parcant, because they spare no Body. The
Ancients made them Three in Number, viz. Clotho, Lachesis and Atropos, because
all Things under the Sun, have their Beginning, Progress and End. At Megara,
says Plutarch, in the Temple of Jupiter Olympius, might be seen his Statue,
made of Gold and Ivory by Theoseomus, who upon his Head carried the Destinies
and the Hours, says Eschylus, that had as well a Command over the Gods as Men,
and whose Orders are inviolable. The Birth, Growth, and Death of Mankind is
attributed to them, which doubtless gave occasion to the Poets Fiction; who
tell us, That they spun Men's Lives; that Clotho held the Distaff and spun the
Thread, Lachesis turned the Wheel, and that Atropos cut it. Hyginus attributes
unto them the Invention of these Greek Letters, A, B, H, T, Y, which made
Martianus Capella call them the Secretaries and Guardians of the Library of
Heaven, and that they keep the Archives thereof. Plato informs us, that the
Three Destinies represented unto us All sorts of Times; Clotho, that which is
past, Lachesis the Time present, and Atropos that which is to come; and he
places them in Heaven, each of them sitting upon a Throne, clad in White, with
Crowns upon their Heads, and singing the Sirens Song, that is, the Muses's, or
that of the Eight Spheres, which they represent: That Lathesis is the
Firmament, the Stars whereof preside over the Actions of Men, and the
Productions of the Earth; Clotho represents the Planets, which denote the
Destinies; and Atropos is Saturn, who by his slow Motion, strengthens them.

The Ancients have represented the Destinies diverse ways. Lucian sets them out
in the Shape of Three poor old Women, having large Locks of Wool mixed with
Daffodils on their Heads, one of which held a Distaff, the other a Wheel, and
the third a Pair of Scissars, wherewith she cut off the Thread of Man's Life.
Others have given us another sort of an Idea of them, Clotho appearing in a
long Robe of diverse Colors, wearing a Crown upon her Head, adorned with Seven
Stars, and holding a Distaff in her Hand; Lachesis in a Robe full of Stars,
with several Spindles in her Hands; and Atropos clad in Black, cutting the
Thread with large Scissars. Pausanias in his Elegiacs, says, there was at
Olympus an Altar called Megaretes, that is, the Conductor of the Destinies; and
in Apollo's. Temple there were Two Statues of the Destinies, Jupiter making the
Third. What Plutarch adds concerning the Destinies, is not, perhaps, ill
grounded; for, there was a Destiny which the Ancients placed in the Stars, and
which might have a good Meaning, since it is not to be doubted, but all natural
Causes form one Concatenation, from whence it comes that all Consequences and
Effects prove necessary and inevitable: This Author says, that there is one of
the Three Destinies influenced by the Sun, and gives Birth to all Things, that
the Second follows the Moon, and that it is she which unites and sustains the
Productions of the other: Lastly, that the Third is more like unto the Earth,
and it is she also that is most concerned with Fortune: Clemens Alexandrinus
say, there were some who confined Destiny so much to the Moon, that they said,
if there were Three of them, it was because of the Three most remarkable Days
of the Moon: Parcas allegorice dici parts Lunae, trigesimam, quintam decimam
and novam lunam, ideo and candidatas dici ab Orpheo, qua fuit parts lucis.

Varro says, and we ought to believe him, that formerly they used Parta,
instead of Parca: This Word answers the Greek (...), and comes a Partiendo,
(...), to divide; because it is Fate that makes a Division and Lot for every
Body: But in respect to that Universal Chain of all natural Causes, which
produce all sensible Effects, and form, as I may say, the Fate of our Bodies;
the Moon without doubt is one of the most considerable and efficatiousof any,
as she is also nearest to the Earth. The Moon was one of the Destinies in the
Opinion of those who gave this Quality to Ilithyia, which is known to be the
Moon, and to preside over Nativities. Pausanias tells us, that Venus Urania was
also accounted one of the Destinies, and that she was even the Eldest of the
Three Sisters: Epigramma vero indicat Venerem Caelestem, earum quae Parcae
vocantur, natu maximam.

PARENTALIA;
they were Solemnities and Banquets made by the Ancients, at the Obsequies of
their Relations and Friends.

PARIS;
the Son of Priamus, King of Troy, and of Hecuba: His Mother being with Child
of him, saw in her Dream that she was brought to Bed of a Burning-torch, which
would set all Asia on fire: And having consulted the Augurs thereupon; they
made answer, That that Child one Day should be the Cause of the Ruin of his
Country. Priamus being informed of it, exposed him to be destroyed, but his
Wife Hecuba being touched with Compassion, delivered him privately to the
King's Shepherds, to bring him up on Mount Ida, in Phrygia, where he grew up,
and became Valiant and expert at all bodily Exercises, wherein he exceeded
Hector, whom he threw in Wrestling. Dares the Phrygian, who had seen Paris,
gives us an Account of his Person, in his Book, concerning the Destruction of
Troy; where he says, He was tall, and well proportioned, of a fair Complexion,
had very good Eyes, and a sweet Voice; that he was Bold, Courageous, Forward
and Ambitious: And this is confirmed by Dion Chrysostom and Cornelius Nepos, in
their Translation of Dares into Verse. Hector upbraids him for his very Beauty,
as if he were fitter for Love than War. Homer gives him the Title of being
Valiant, and among others names Diomedes and Machaon's being wounded by him; to
which Dares adds Menelaus and Palamedes, Antilochus and Achilles, whom he slew.
Hyginus relates the Fight he had with his Brethren, whom he overcame, while he
was a Shepherd. As to the Contest between the Three Goddesses, viz. Juno, Venus
and Pallas, to know which was the fairest of them; Dares in his Poem concerning
the Destruction of Troy, recites the Words which they spoke to Paris, in order
to engage him to give Sentence in their Favor, as well as Lucian does in his
Dialogue concerning the Judgment of Paris: Venus wanted not Reasons to gain the
Opinion of amorous Paris, and to oblige him to declare in her Favor; for, as
his Reward, she promised him one of the finest Women in the World, which was
Helen, Menelaus his Wife; and she was so constant to her Word, that she
favored him to carry her off; which occasioned the fatal War made by the
Grecians against the Trojans.

Some Commentators upon Homer, and Spondanus among others, believe this
pretended Sentence of Paris was not known to Homer. Plutarch himself favors
this Conjecture, when he maintains that the 3 Verses of the 24th Iliad, where
he speaks of it, are Supposititious, and inserted by some other; and that it is
an unbecoming thing to believe the Gods were judged by Men, and that Homer
making no mention thereof any other where, there was Reason to believe these
Lines were foisted in: But a Medal of Antoninus Pius gives us to understand,
that this Action was believed to be true by the Ancients; and we may farther
oppose against Plutarch, the ancient Statue of Paris done by Eupbranor,
whereby, as Pliny says, it might be known, that he was a Judge between the
Goddesses, the Lover of Helen, and the Person that killed Aahilles. Other
Authors have thought that Paris himself feigned his having been a Judge between
the Goddesses, and that he did this in Opposition to Hercules, who renounced
Vice in favor of Virtue, how difficult soever it appeared, since Paris
despised the Riches and Honors promised him by Juno, and the Knowledge
profferred him by Pallas, and abandoned himself to his Pleasures. Eusebius
treats of the History, and not the Fabulous: part; for he writes, that the City
of Troy was destroyed for the Rape of Helen, one of the Three Grecian Ladies
that contended for Beauty.

PARNASSUS;
a Mountain in Phocis, consecrated to Apollo and the Muses; whence arise the
Fountains of Custalins, Hippocrene, and Aganippe, so famous in the Poets. At
the Foot of this Mountain stood the City of Cyrrha, and the Temple of Apollo of
Delphos: The Muses took their Epithers from these Places; for in the Poets they
are called Parnassides, and Castalides.

PARRICIDA;
a Parricide, the Murderer of his Father or Mother. The Romans made no Law
against Parricides, because they did not think there could be a Man so wicked
as to kill his Parents. L. Ostius was the first that killed his Father, 500
Years after Numa's Death, even after the Time of Hannibal: And then the
Pompeian Law was made, which ordained, that the Person who was convicted of
this Crime, after he had been first whipped till the Blood came, should be tied
up in a Leathern Sack, together with a Dog, an Ape, a Cock and a Viper, and so
thrown into the Sea, or next River.

PARTUNDA;
a Goddess that assisted at Childbearing.

PASIPHAE;
the Daughter of the Sun, and Wife to Minos, King of Creet: The Fable tells us,
she fell in Love with a Bull, whom she enjoyed by Daedalus his Contrivance, who
by his Skill made a Cow, wherein Pasiphae being enclosed, she conceived by this
Bull a Creature that was half Man half Bull, which was shut up in the
Labyrinth, and with the Assistance of Ariadne killed by Theseus. Servius
informs us, that this Taurus was one of Minos his Captains, who by the
Procurement of Daedalus enjoyed Pasiphae, and because the Child she bore was
like unto Taurus and Minos, he was called Minotaurus. Lucian says, that
Pasiphae hearing Daedalus discoursing of the Celestial Sign Taurus, she became
in Love with his Doctrine, which she learnt from him, and this gave the Poets
occasion to feign that she fell in Love with a Bull.

PASSUS;
a Pace; a Measure taken from the Space that is between the two Feet of an
Animal; the common Pace is that Space we gain in walking; the Geometrical is
double to the common Pace: The Common consists of two Feet and an half, the
Geometrical of five Feet; and this Geometrical Pace is the most common Measure,
the exactest and most certain of all, both among the Ancients and Moderns.

PASTOPHORIUM
and PASTOPHORI; the Pastophori were those whose Business it was at Solemn
Festivals to carry the Shrine of the Deity, when they were to pray to him for
Rain, fair Weather, or some such like Miracle. Its observable that the Greeks
had a College of this Order of Priests, in Sylla's Time, and it is certain they
carried about the Shrines of the Gods when some Solemn Processions were made,
and there were certain Persons appointed for this Office: And hence it may be
concluded, that the Pastophorium signifies an House, wherein dwelt the Priests
who were appointed for this Charge, and which were usually near the Temple, M.
le Moine agrees, that the Pasiophorium was a Cell, and little House adjacent to
the Temple; but he gives the Word another Origin, pretending it was borrowed
from the Flags, which were usually put before these little Tabernacles.

PATAICI DII;
these Gods, according to Herodotus, were much like unto the Dii Cabiri, or
Samothracian Gods, at leastwise, as to their Figures; for they were little
Pigmy Images, with which the Phaenicians adorned the Prows of their Ships.
Herodotus, perhaps, was mistaken when he put these Gods upon the Prow; others
place them on the Poop, and Perseus says it was the Custom. Ingentes e puppe
Dii.
The Origin of this Word is clearly Hebrew, according to Scaliger; for Patach
in that Language is the same as insculpere. Bochartus thinks it may be derived
from the Hebrew Word Batac, i. e. considere; for those Idolaters trusted in
these Gods. Seldom has treated of these Pataick Gods, and believes all the
Phoenician Gods bore the same Name.

PATER-PATRATUS;
was the first and principal Person of the Heralds College, that made as it
were a Council of War to examine the Differences which arose between
Neighboring People, and who endeavored amicably to accommodate the same; they
themselves going to the People to induce them to restore what they had taken,
and to redress the Injury complained of.

PATERA;
an ancient Vessel wherein they received the Blood of the Victim. Patera
filicata, was a Cup adorned with Fern-leaves. Patera hederata, was such as was
adorned with Ivy. Patera pampinata, Cups on which Vine-Leaves or Branches were
carved.

PATRES CONSCRIPTI,
were the Senators of Rome, who at first were only called Patres, but
afterward thus named when their Number was increased. Plutarch says, that
Romulus having chosen and established Ten Orders of Senators, writ down their
Names on Tables of Gold in the Peoples Presence; and this gave them the
Appellation of Patres Conscripti: Those who were chose from among the Knights
to be Senators, were called Patres allecti.

PATRICIUS;
a Patrician; one descended from the Senators, and first Founders of the
Republic of Rome.

PATRONUS;
a Patron; the Person under whose Protection one puts himself; it was also used
in respect to a Master who had made his Slave free: The Law of the Twelve
Tables entitled the Patrons to the Estates of their Freed-men, who died
without lawful Issue, born after their Enfranchisement, and also intestate;
for, though by this Manumission or Enfranchisement, the Slaves not only obtained
their Liberty, but also the Right of Citizens, and so were made Citizens of
Rome, and consequently capable to acquire and possess all sorts of Estates, and
had Power to dispose of them, yet they were very far from the Condition of the
Ingenui, who were born free; for the Law subjected them to show great Respect,
and to perform considerable Services and Devoirs to their Patrons; to the
Observation of which they were so rigorously tied, that when they failed
therein, they might not only be made liable to pecuniary Mulcts, and subjected
to lose part of their Estates, but also be chastised with Corporal Punishments,
and sometimes be even recalled to their former State of Servitude, according to
the Hainousness of their Ingratitude, as it is fully set forth under the Title
of Jus Patronatus. But besides these Rights which the Patron exercised over the
Person of Freed-men while living, he had also another over their Goods after
their decease, being privileged to inherit when the Freed-man died without
having Children born him after his being made free, and intestate: And there
were but Two sorts of Persons that could exclude the Patron, viz. Children
lawfully begotten after his Manumission, and the Heir by Will, whom the Law
preferred before the Patron: But as it was an easy thing for the Freed-men to
deprive their Patrons of the Benefit of Inheriting; and that many times those
who had no Children of their own, got some by Adoption, or else by Will
disposed of their Estates in favor of Strangers; the Praetor by his Edict
introduced a Remedy for this, by giving the Patrons Possession of half of the
Estates of their Freed-men, in opposition to adopted Children and
Stranger-Heirs: And forasmuch as by this Edict one lawfully begotten Child of
the Freed-man, coming to succeed his Father, entirely excluded the Patron; the
Papian Law made an Addition to the Praetor's Edict, and enlarged the Right of
the Patron, by enjoining, that if the Freed-man had a considerable Estate even
to 100000 Sesterces, and less than Three Children, the Patron should have a
Share equal to one of the Children's, which he could not be deprived of by a
Will.

PAVENTIA;
a Deity of the Ancients, mentioned by St. Augustine, L. 4. de Civ. Dei, which
diverted Childrens Fears.

PAVIMENTUM;
a Pavement, of which there were diverse sorts: Pliny says, that those Pavements
which were painted and wrought by Art were brought out of Greece, and among
others that of Pergamus, called Asarotcs, which was not swept; and this Name
was given it, because the Crumbs and Offals which fell from the Table were so
well represented in this sort of Pavement, that they seemed to have been real,
and the Servants had no need to take care of sweeping the Rooms: Then came the
Mosaic Pavements in Fashion, which the Greeks called Lithostrota, and were
used at Rome in Sylla's Time, about 170 Years before Christ's Coming: It was a
Pavement made of small Stones joined, and as it were united together by Cement,
and by the Ordering, and variety of their Colors representing different
Figures. See Musea. Vitruvius speaks of Pavements, which he calls Pavimenta
sectilia, or Pavements of pieces made like one another, which he distinguishes
from Mosaic Pavements.

PAVO;
a Peacock; a Bird by the Heathens consecrated to Jupiter; they feigned that
Argus his Eyes were put into the Peacock's Tail. Lucian has left us an Account
of him thus: The Peacock, says he, at the Beginning of the Spring, when the
Flowers first peep out, spreads abroad his Golden and Azure Feathers in a most
magnificent manner, and contends with the Spring which of them shall produce
the most beautiful Things; he spreads himself, turns and admires his own
Beauty, whose Splendour is doubly increased by that of the Light, which does not
only embellish the Colors, but multiplies them: This particularly happens to
those Golden Circles, which crown the Enamel of his Tail, and each of them
resemble a Rainbow that changes its Color according to the diverse Reflections
of Light.

PAVOR;
Fear, whom the Romans made to be a Deity. Pausanias, in his Corinthiaca, says,
That Mermerus and Pheres, Medea's Children being stoned by the Corinthians, the
Ghosts of them did so frighten young Children, that they died therewith: The
Oracle commanded they should offer Sacrifice to them every Year, and set up Two
Statues, one to Fear and the other to Paleness.

PAX;
Peace; a Deity adored by the Heathens. Pausanias says, that the Statue of
Peace was worshipped at Athens, under the Form of a Woman, who held Plutus the
God of Riches by the Hand: The Emperor Claudius began to build her a Temple at
Rome, but 'twas not finished and adorned till Vespasian did it, after the
Conquest of Judea, and the Destruction of Jerusalem, as the Gold, Silver, and
Brass Money which he coined do testify, whereon Peace is graven, holding a
lighted Torch in one Hand, wherewith she sets some broken Arms on fire, and in
the other an Olive Branch, with this Device, Paci Orbis Terrarum: She is also
represented unto us with an Olive Branch, and Mercury's Caduceus. Titus his Son
and Successor in the Empire, has given us the Figure of Peace, represented like
a Goddess, holding a Palm in one Hand, and Scepter in the other, with this
Inscription, Pax Aeterna.

PECULATUS;
it was a Crime in a Person that robbed the Public Treasure, or converted it
to his own use, who was the Disposer, Keeper, or Receiver of it; there are
diverse sorts of it, all mentioned under Lex Julia.

PECULIUM;
this is the Money or Estate of one who is under the Power of another, which a
Son under a Father or a Slave, may get by his own Industry, without any
Furtherance or Assistance from his Father, or Master, but only his Leave.

PECUNIA;
Money; to whom the Romans offered Sacrifice to induce her to make them rich.

PEDANI, or PEDARII SENATORES;
young Senators who followed the Opinion proposed by the Older, and were always
of their side: And hence is that Saying of Cicero, Ire pedibus in sententiam
alicuyus, to espouse the Opinion of a Person.

PEGASUS.
The Horse Pegasus, whom the Poets feigned to have Wings, and who with the
Impression of his Hoof made the Fountain Hippocrene spring out of Mount
Helicon; it was upon this Horse Bellerophon was mounted, when he fought
Chimera; its said he flew up to Heaven, and placed himself amongst the Stars:
Its also a Celestial Constellation in the Northern Hemisphere, consisting of
20 Stars. Keepler makes it to have 23. Pontanus says, when it rises, it makes a
Man a Poet and Ingenious, a Lover of Glory and of Arms; and Firmicius says,
that if it set with Mars, the Man will perish by Fire.

PELION;
Mount Pelion in Thessaly, which was formerly joined to Mount Oeta, and
separated from it by an Earthquake.

PELOPS;
the Son of Tantalus, King of Phrygia, and of Taygete, whom his Father Tantalus
cut in pieces, and boiled to feast the Gods withal; there was none but Ceres
that eat thereof: The other Gods perceiving it, abhorred the Action, and
restored Pelops to Life; for they gathered all his Members together, and sent
Mercury to fetch his Soul out of Hell. As Ceres had eaten some of the Shoulder,
they gave him an Ivory one in lieu of it, which healed many Diseases: He was
much beloved of Neptune, who gave him immortal Horses, with which he ran
against Oenomaus, for the beautiful Hippodamis his Daughter, became Conqueror,
and so Possessor of that admirable Creature. Pelops was for his Beauty,
according to Lucian, admitted to eat with the Gods.

PELORIS and PELORUS;
one of the Three Capes of Sicily, which is in the North Part of that Island:
It was so called from a Pilot whom Hannibal slew, as supposing he betrayed him;
but coming afterward to know his Mistake, he erected a Statue for him in an
high Place, near the Seaside in Sicily, which he called Peloris, according to
his Name.

PENATES;
a Name given to all the Houshold-Gods, which the Ancients worshipped in their
Habitations: There Gods were the Souls or Genti of deceased Persons, to whom
their particular Families paid some sort of Adoration. These Gods were honored
within Doors, by burning in the nature of First Fruits some of that which was
served to the Table, or publicly sacrificing a Sow to them, as to those who
presided over the Streets and Highways: They had also the public Penates of
the City or Empire, which Aeneas brought from Troy, and whom Varro believed to
have been brought before from Samothracis to Troy. Dionysius of Halicarnassus,
after having said that the Greeks in order to express in their Language what
the Romans meant by their Penates at Rome, called them (...): And after having
assured us, that they were first brought by Aeneas from Troy to Lavinium, from
whence they were carried to Alba, and thence to Rome; he at last asks, what was
the Nature and Shape of those Gods, to which he answers that Timeus wrote, that
they were Iron and Brass Caduceus's, and Earthen Ware made at Troy;
Caduceaferrea and aerea, Trojanamque testam sictilens; (...). He replies in the
2d place, that we must restrain our Curiosity, and out of respect abstain from
penetrating too far into the Mysteries of Religion; and in the last place he
adds, that they were the same Gods as those of Samothracia; that Dardanus
brought them to Troy, from whence Aeneas carried them into Italy, viz. the
Shapes of those great Gods, and the Image of Minerva; sacrae magnorum Deorum,
and effigies Minervae: This Image of Minerva was twofold. Ulysses and Diomedes
took one away from Troy, during the Siege, and the other remained there: Others
say, that the Trojans had made another Palladium very like unto the true one,
and that it was the Copy, and not the Original which the Grecians took away.

Virgil brings the Houshold-Gods giving their Assistance at the Battle of
Actium, where Augustus defeated Antony and Cleopatra: Hinc Augustus agens
Italos in praelia Caesar,
Cum Patribus, populoque, Penatibus and magnis Diu.
Hereby Virgil acknowledges, that Empires, Cities, particular Houses, and
King's Palaces, were as so many Temples, where the Houshold-Gods were present;
where a continual Fire was burnt, and where they were honored by frequent
Libations and Incenses upon all occanons. Lucan observes, that in time of
Peace, the Arms were fixed in the Place appertaining to the Houshold-Gods, as
being entrufted to their keeping, Diripiunt sacris affixa Penatibus arma,
Quae pax longa dabat.
And that it was esteemed to be abominable Sacrilege to commit Murder in the
Presence of Vesta, that is in the Entry, and before the perpecual Fire of the
Houshold-Gods.

PENELOPE,
the Daughter of Icarus, the Iacedamonian, and of Periboea: Its said this Name
was given her from certain Birds called Penelopes or Turkeys, and that she was
named Arnea, i. e. disowned and rejected, from the Verb (...), to Reject: For
her Father understanding by the Oracle, that his Wife Periboea should bear a
Daughter, which should one Day be a Shame to her Sex, he caused her to be
exposed upon the Water, shut up in a Chest; but the said Birds hearing the
Cries made by the Infant, they drove the Chest ashore with their Wings; and
having opened it with their Beaks, they fed her for some time: She was Ulysses
his Wife, and a Model of Chastity and Faithfulness to her Husband; for Ulysses
having been absent Twenty Years, she was courted by several Princes who were
taken with her Beauty; but she to disengage her self from their Importunities,
put off her second Marriage till such time as she had finished a piece of
Linen Cloth, which she had begun, and she cunningly undid in the Night what
she wrought in the Day; and so she continued in this State till Ulysses his
Return, who entering into his own House, disguised like a Peasant, killed them
all. Hereupon you may observe the different Opinions that have been entertained
of Penelope: Some, that is to say, Homer and many others, who followed him,
have represented her as a Model of Chastity; while others, the Chief of whom
are Duris the Samian, Tzetzes, Pausanias and Horace, have taken her for a loose
Woman, and a Prostitute. However, the same Pausanias in his Laconica says, that
her Father Icarus erected a Statue of Chastity Thirty Spartan Stadia's high, in
memory of the Conjugal Chastity of his Daughter Penelope, who had rather, being
left to her Choice, to follow her Husband to Ithaca, than to tarry with her
Father at La^aedemon.

PENTHEUS,
the Son of Echion and Agave, who, because he ridiculed the Festivals of
Bacchus, called Orgia, and would have them reputed Follies and ^xtravagancies,
was cut in pieces upon Mount Citheron by his own Mother and Sister, who being
transported with Bacchick Fary took him for a wild Boar.

PERILLUS.
See Phalaris.

PERIPATE
^ICI; Peripateticks, they were Athenian Philosophers, and the Followers of
Aristotle, who disputed walking in the Licaeum; they were so called from the
Greek (...), which signifies to walk; but afterward they took the same of
Academicks, because they studied in the Academy.

PERITIUS,
(Mensis is understood) the Peritian Month was a Month among the Macedonians,
that answered that of February, and such as was adopted by the Syrians, in
Memory of Alexander the Great, or rather the Macedonians introduced it amongst
them after they had been conquered by them, insomuch that they gave the
greatest part of the Cities and Rivers of Syria, the Names of the Cities and
Rivers of Macedon.

PERMESSUS;
a River in Boeocia, that rises in Mount Helicon, which was consecrated to
Apollo and the Muses.

PERSAE;
the Persians, the People of the famous Empire of Persia, who adored the Sun,
and to whom they erected Altars under the Name of Mithra, which was a kind of
Dress for the Head, like a Bishop's Miter, Soli Invicto Mithrae, and Numini
Invicto soli Mithrae, as you may read in ancient Inscriptions: They also
worshipped the Moon, Venus, Fire, Earth, Water and Wind, yet without any
Temples; Statues, or Altars, and offered Sacrifices to them upon some Hillock,
or high Place, as believing themselves hereby to be nearer unto their Gods.
When the Lacedaemonians beat the Persians in the Battle of Platea, they erected
Statues in Persian Dresses, to support the Weight of the Galleries and
Porticoes which they built, as a perpetual Mark of their Servitude.

PERSEUS;
the Son of Jupiter and Danae, the Daughter of Acrisius, King of Argos, who
coming to know by the Oracle, that the Child his Daughter should bring forth,
would one Day kill him, took a Resolution to shut up his Daughter in a Brass
Tower, that hereby she might have nothing to do with Men: But this Precaution
signified nothing, for Jupiter who loved her, went to see her, and for that End
being transformed into a Golden Shower, he begat Perseus upon her. Acrisius
coming to the Knowledge hereof, shut up both Mother and Child in a Coffer, and
commanded them to be thrown into the Sea; but they were saved by some
Fishermen, who found the said Chest floating upon the Water, near the Isle of
Seriphus, where Perseus was brought up by Dictis, the Brother of Polydectes,
King of that Island. Perseus being grown up, was much beloved of the Gods;
Minerva made him a Present of her Miror, to serve him for a Shield, and Mercury
gave him the Wings which he wore at his Head and Feet, and a Cymeter which
Vulcan had forged for him, and with which he did great Exploits: For by the
Help of this Shield, wherein as in a Miror he saw the Picture of Medusa
sleeping, with the Gorgons her Sisters, he catched hold of her by the Hair, and
cutting off her Head, afterward made his Escape; but in his return, upon the
Coast of Ethiopia, seeing Andromede ready to be devoured by a Sea Monster; and
being struck with a compassionate Love for that unfortunately fair Creature,
whom the Nereides, who were incensed at her Mother's having despised their
Beauty, had tied to a Rock; he turned the Monster into a Stone, with one of the
Looks of Medusa, after he had first stumned him with a Blow with his Sword.
Perseus was not only skilful in Arms, but he also made learning to Flourish in
his Time, having founded a public School upon Mount Helicon, where Youth were
instructed in good Literature; and hence the Poets and Astrologers took
occasion to place him among the Stars.

We have in the Person of Perseus the Idea of a great Captain; for the Arms we
have spoken of, are as so many Hieroglyphics of the extraordinary
Qualifications, that are necessary for a Person, to form great Designs, and to
succeed therein; Prudence is figured out unto us by Minerva's Miror, that
served him instead of a Shield; Strength and Greatness of Courage joined with a
Forwardness, that must engage him to the Execution of his Design, was
represented by the Sword forged by Vulcan, and what has been said concerning
Medusae's Head, which turned Men into Stones with her Looks, imports so much,
that the very Looks of a Person who is endued with so many Accomplishments,
strikes a Dread and Terror into others, and stops them so as if they were
Stone-statues.

PERSEPHONE.
See Proserpina.

PERSIUS;
a Latin Satirical Poet, who has left Satyrs behind him that are very obscure:
He flourished under Nero, and died at 29 Years of Age.

PERTINAX,
named Publius Helvius, surnamed the Wheel of Fortune because he experienced
the Inconstancy thereof. He was a Roman Emperor the Son of a Freed-man named
Helvius who kept a Shop of small Wares. His Father brought him up in good
Literature, which afterward he taught at Rome, but as his Inclinations carried
him more unto Arms than unto Letters, he quitted his Profession, and followed
the Military Art, wherein he signalized himself in diverse Wars, which made the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius give him the Government of Asia and Syria; after whose
Death his Successor Commodus banished him from Rome, but he recalled him some
time after and made him Governor of the City. Upon the Death of Commodus,
Aelius Laetus Captain of the Guard went to Pertinax his Lodging, and made him a
Tender of the Empire, and obliged him to go to the Camp where he was proclaimed
Imperator Augustus, and the same was joyfully confirmed by the Senate and
People. At his Accession to the Imperial Throne he went about to reform the
Extorsions and Violences practiced by the Praetorian Bands over the poor
Citizens, but this drew their Hatred so far upon him, that they adventured to
kill him in the Middle of his Palace, after he had reigned Three Months. By the
Medals which we have of his, it may be observed that he had a fortunate
Countenance, a handsome Head, large Forehead, curled Hair, a long and venerable
Beard; that he was tale, burly, and pretty big-belly'd, as may be known by his
Medals and the Paintings of Capitolinus. All this seemed to promise him a
healthful Constitution, a large Capacity with the Respect of the People, which
his venerable Air must gain him. But his Empire was so short, that he had not
an Opportunity to make his Inclinations known. However, he showed much of an
intrepid Spirit in the Sedition, wherein he lost his Life; for when he saw the
Mutineers enter into his Palace, he went to meet them, and unconcernedly spoke
to them, with much Courage and Gravity, insomuch that they were all appeased,
save one who stirred up the Soldiers anew, and brought his Companions to cut
off so good a Prince.

PETRONIUS;
lived in Nero's Time; though that Emperor loved this Poet very well, yet he was
put to Death by his Command, as Cornelius Tacitus says.

PHAEDRA.
the Daughter of Minos King of Creet, who fell in Love with Hippolytus her Son
in Law; she discovered her Passion to her Nurse that was her Confident, who
attempted to engage Hippolytus his Consent several times, but to no purpose:
Phaedra out of Shame and Despair hanged her self, having first tied to her
Clothes some Letters wherein she charged Hippolytus with a Crime, of which she
her self only was guilty.

PHAEDRUS,
a Latin Poet and the Freed-man of Augustus, who turned the Fables of Esop and
several other Things into Jambick Verse.

PHAETON,
the Son of Sol and the Nymph Clymene, or of Cephalus and Aurora; Lucian in a
Dialogue between Jupiter and Sol explains the Fable to us.

Jupit. Wretch, what have you done, to leave your Chariot to be guided by a
young Fool, who has burnt one Half of the World, and froze up the other,
insomuch that had not I struck him down to the Ground with a Thunderbolt,
there had been an End of Mankind.


Sun. I confess, Jupiter, I was mistaken, that I could not manage my Son, nor
endure the Tears of a Mistress; but I did not think so much Mischief would have
come of it.


Jupit. Did not you know the Fury of your Horses, and that if they turned never
so little out of the Way, an universal Ruin followed.


Sun. I know it very well, and therefore I put Phaeton into the Chariot my
self, and gave him all necessary Instructions, but the Horses not finding their
Conductor with them, took head, and he became dazzled with the Splendour of the
Light, and frightened with the Abyss he saw beneath him. But he has been
sufficiently punished, and I also in his Punishment.


Jupit. In the mean time, give Phaeton's Sisters Order to bury him on the Banks
of the Eridanus, where he fell, and as a Recompense, I will change them into
Poplar-trees, from which Amber shall distill, as a Symbol of their Tears.


The same Lucian in his Judicial Astrology seems to refute this Fable, saying,
that Phaeton busied himself in observing the Sun's Course, and the various
Influences thereof, and that he left this Art imperfect by his Death, adding
that whatever is said of him is not likely at all.

PHAETUSA,
Phaeton's Sister and one of the Heliades, who according to the Fable, was
changed into a Poplar.

PHALANX,
a great square Battalion formed by the Ancients, which was so compact that the
Soldiers had their Feet set close to one another, with their Shields joined and
Pikes turned cross-ways, insomuch that it was almost impossible to break them:
It consisted of 5000 Men. Livy says, that this sort of Battalion was invented
by the Macedonians, from whence came the common Epithet given it of Macedonian
Phalanx.

PHALARIS,
says Lucian, was born of a noble Family in the City of Agrigentum in Sicily;
after he had been brought up in all the genteel Exercises of his Time, and such
as were suitable to his Condition, he was admitted into the Government, as
others were, where he behaved himself so well that there was never any
Complaints made of his Administration: But as he understood that his Enemies
and such as envyed his Prosperity, had laid secret Ambushes for him, and sought
all manner of Ways how they might make away with him, he was constrained for
his own Safety to make himself Master of the State, and to exercise. Justice
very rigorously upon those who would have destroyed him: One Perillus devised
with himself, he could not do him more acceptable Service than to invent some
new sort of Punishment, and as he was an excellent Statuary he made a brazen
Bull so very artificially, that Phalaris cried out as soon as he saw it, that
it was a Present fit for Apollo. But Perillus taking him up, said, If you did
but know what I made it for, you would not talk at that rate. Shut up a
Criminal within it; and put Fire underneath, you shall hear the Bull bellow,
which is the only Thing it wants to imitate Nature to Perfection.Upon which
Words Phalaris who detested so abominable an Invention, caused him himself to
be shut up in his Bull, to make a Trial thereof, and having again taken him out
alive, that by his Death he might not pollute a Present which he had a mind to
consecrate to the Gods, he gave it to Apollo, and caused this Story to be
graven upon it. Suidas represents Phalaris to us as a very cruel Prince, and
will have it, that his Subjects shut him up and tormented him to Death in the
same Bull, wherein he had enclosed and put so many others to Death.

PHALERUS,
an ancient Gate of the City of Athens where Altars were erected to the unknown
Gods, of whom St. Paul speaks, Going along, said that Apostle, and
contemplating your Devotions, I found an Altar on which was this Inscription,
To the unknown God; I therefore declare him unto you, whom you worship without
knowing of him. The Inscription was not barely the same as St. Paul relates it;
for it was, to the Gods of Asia, Europe and Africa, strong and unknown Gods:
But because the Apostle had nothing to do with many unknown Deities, and that
no more than one unknown God was for his Purpose, he makes use of the singular
Number. Meursius assures us, That the People of Athens being converted to the
Christian Faith, consecrated the Temple, where this Altar had been erected, to
the unknown God. Its certain, that Pausanias, Philostratus and Suidas make use
of the Plural Number, when they speak of the Inscription upon this Altar, and
Diogenes Laeertius attributes the Building of Altars without a Name to
Epimenides: But it is to Spimenides that they commonly attribute the Erecting of
the Altar of the unknown Gods. But yet it is true, that Lucian, Theophilact,
Isidorus Pelusiota, Occumenius and St. Chrysostom make use of the singular
Number, when they speak of this Altar.

PHAROS;
it was a famous Tower in Alexandria, on the Top of which they lighted Fires in
the Night to guide Ships that came near the Shore: The Colossus of Rhodes
served instead of a Pharos.

PHEGOR;
is as much as Priapus in Hebrew, according to St. Hierom; from whence came the
Word Beelphegor, which signifies the Idol of Priapus.

PHILOCTETES;
the Son of Pae^, to whom Hercules at his Death upon Mount Octa, gave his Bow
and Arrows, which were dipped in Hydra's Gall, after he had engaged him by
Oath, to discover his Grave to no Body: But when they were to go to the Trojan
War, and that the Oracle gave an Answer, the Town was impregnable, without they
had the Ashes and Arrows of Hercules with them; he was forced to show the Place
where he had hid them; and that he might not violate his Oath, he pointed at
them only with his Feet, for which he was severely punished: For being on his
Journey, one of the said Arrows wounded him in the Foot, wherewith he had
discovered Hercules his Ashes: His Wound stunk so, that it was not to be
endured, which made the Grecians leave him in the Isle of Lemnos; however
finding that the Siege of Troy advanced but little, they caused him to be
brought thither, and he was cured by Macaon the Son of Aesculapius.

PHILOMELA;
the Daughter of Pandion, King of Athens, who was ravished by Tereus, King of
Thrace, who had married her Sister Pregno. He cut out her Tongue, and shut her
up in Prison, that he might enjoy her at his Pleasure: But she had the
Ingenuity to let her Sister know her Misfortune, by drawing the same upon
Tapistry: Progne deferred to take Revenge upon her Incestuous Husband, till the
Festival of Bacchus, when with a Company of the Bacchantes, she went to set her
Sister at Liberty, and laying hold of Itys, Tereus his Son, she dressed his Flesh
for him to eat; which he perceiving, endeavored to kill his Wife; but the Gods
changed Tereus into a Lapwing, Progne to a Swallow, Philomela to a Nightingale,
and Itys into a Pheasant. Ovid. Metam. Lib. 6.

PHILOSOPIA.
Philosophy. The Study of Nature and Morality, grounded upon Reasoning and
Experience: Its said of the Ancient Philosophy, that it became impious under
Diagoras, Vicious under Epicurus, Hipocritical under Zeno, Impudent under
Diogenes, Interested under Demochares, Voluptuous under Metrodorus, Fantastical
under Crates, Buffoonry under Menippus, Libertinism under Pyrrho, Litigious
under Cleanthes, and Restless under Arcesilus: The Ancient Philosophers were of
diverse Sects, viz. Epicureans, Storcks, Platonicks, Peripareticks, Pyrrhonians,
etc. Lucian in his Dialogue of Fugitives brings in Philosophy, speaking to
Jupiter in this manner; Father, see if I have not cause to complain, when you
saw the World full of Error and Unjustice, you had Pity upon it, and you lent
me to bring Men to change their beastly Lives for a better, for if you do
remember, you told me, My Daughter, thou see what a Condition Men are brought
to by their Ignorance and Malice, go to them, for thou art alone capable to
undeceive and cure them. I did not go at first to Greece, but I began with the
most difficult Work, which was that of the Barbarians; afterward I went
toward the Indians who are a great People, and whom I brought down from their
Elephants Backs to hear me; the whole Nation of the Brachmanes, who are
Neighbors to the Necreans and Oxydraci, received my Doctrine and live still
according to my Laws: From the Indians I went into Ethiopia, thence to Egypt
where I taught the Egyptian Priests and Prophets the Worship of the Gods,
afterward I passed to Babylon to instruct the Caldeans and Magi, then to
Scythiae; from whence returning by the Way of Thrace I conversed with Eumolpus
and Orpheus, and sent them before me into Greece, with Orders that the first
should instruct the Greeks in my Mysteries, and the other teach them Music: I
delayed not to follow them and they received me there neither well nor ill:
However in time I won over the Seven wise Men.

PHINEUS,
the Son of Agenor King of Ploenicia, who first married Harpalyce, the Sister
of Calais and Zethes the Children of Boreas; but he was divorced from her and
took to Wife Idea the Daughter of Dardanus King of Scythia, who falsely accused
Phineus his Children by the first Venture for attempting to ravish her. Phinens
believed her, and put his Sons Eyes out, but the Gods revenged the Crime upon
the Father himself, whom they also struck blind, and tormented him cruelly with
Hunger, for as often as he went to eat, the Harpies took away part of his
Victuals, and defiled the rest. Others say, that Phineus having lost his Sight,
and his Sons being dead, the Harpies his Daughters wasted his Estate, till
Zethes and Calais his Cousins, the Sons of Boreas drove those Women out of the
City, and reinvested him in the Possession of his Estate, which occasioned the
Fable.

PHLEGETHON,
one of the Rivers of Hell according to fabulous Antiquity, being derived from
the Greek Word (...), I burn.

PHLEGYAS,
the Son of Mars and King of the Lapithae in Thessaly, who to be revenged of
Apollo, that had debauched his Daughter, burnt the Temple of that God at
Delphos: But he was punished for it; for Apollo killed him with his Arrows and
thrust him headlong into Hell, where he is in continual Fear of the falling of
a Rock which hangs over his Head. There was another of this Name who governed a
certain People in Thessaly, that were drowned by Neptune, as a Punishment for
their Contempt of the Gods. Virg. Eneids L. 9.

PHOBETOR;
the Son of the God Sleep, who represented to the Imagination all sorts and
species of Animals.

PHOCI.
Neptune's Sea-Calves, whose Keeper Protheus was.

PHOEBAS;
Apollo's Priestess at Delphos, that delivered Oracles, to such as consulted
her, upon a Tripod.

PHOEBE;
the Moon which borrows its Light from Phoebus her Brother.

PHOEBUS,
the Sun or Apollo, the Son of Jupiter, and Diana's Brother, born at the same
Time with Latona: He is the God of Parnassus and the Muses; being thus called
by the Greeks from (...), that is, the Light of Life: He was also the God of
Divination, some remains whereof are still retained, in that upon
Twelfth-Night, when they are about to choose King and Queen, they cry in some
Countries Phoebe Domine, Who shall be King?

PHOENIX,
a Bird taken by the Moderns to be fabulous, and concerning which the Ancients
have spoken much, they would have it, that there is but one of the Kind, and
that it lives several Ages. They say it is as big as an Eagle, with a golden
Neck, the Wings of a Fire Color, intermixed with Azure, a white Tail
interspersed with Carnation Feathers, and having a twinkling Star upon its
Head. She erects her own Funeral-Pile of Wood and Aromatic Gums, claps it with
her Wings, in order to set it on fire, and so burns her self: From its Ashes
arises a Worm, and from this Worm another Phoenix. In the Consulship of Paulus
Fabius, and Lucius Vitellius, the Phoenix after a long Series of Years,
appeared in Egypt, and gave ample Occasion to the fine Wits of Greece and Asia
to Discourse upon this Wonder: I Will here recount what is received for Truth;
but I shall also add such Things as are proper to be known, though they are not
so well attested. Those who have described this Bird, set her out different
from others, both in Form and Color, and say she was consecrated to the Sun.
As for the Length of her Life, the most common Opinion is, That she lives 500
Years, but some have stretched it out even to 14 Ages. They add, There is never
but one of them at a time in the World, and that the first appeared in the
Reign of Sesostris, the second in that of Amasis, and third under Ptolomy, one
of Alexander's Successors, and the third of the Macedonian Race, who reigned in
Egypt: They say also, that she came to Heliopolis, or the City of the Sun,
accompanied by a vast Multitude of other Birds, who admired the Strangeness of
her Feathers: There was not 250 Years from Ptolomy to Tiberius; and therefore
some believe, that this same was not the Phoenix of Arabia, nor the true one,
since it had not the Marks attributed to the others; for it is said, that the
Phoenix, when she is grown very old, and sees her End draw near, builds a Nest
in her own Country, to which she communicates some secret Principle of Life;
insomuch that another Phoenix arises therefrom, whose first Care is to give
unto its Parent the Honors of Burial: For which End she makes choice of a
great Quantity of Perfumes, which she carries by little and little, because of
their great distance from the Place, and then bears away the Deceased's Body,
and goes to burn it upon the Altar of the Sun: This is uncertain, and
intermixed with Fables, but for the rest, it is not doubted, but this Bird has
been sometime seen in Egypt.

PHORBAS;
the Chief of the Phlegyae; a cruel Man, and a Robber, who having seized on an
Avenue, by which they went over Land to the Temple of Apollo at Delphos, forced
all Passengers to fight him, in order to exercise them, said he, that they
might act their Part, the better at the Pythian Games: And when he had
overcome, he put them to a cruel Death, by tying them by their Heads to Trees;
but Apollo to punish this wicked Fellow, encountering him, knocked him down with
his Fist.

PHORCUS and PHORCYS;
a Son of Neptune and the Earth (according to Hesiod) King of Sardinia; who
having been overcome in a Fight by Sea, the Poets said he was a Sea-God, and
the Father of the Gorgones.

PHOSPHORUS,
the Planet of Venus; its a Greek Word, which the Latins turned into that of
Lucifer, the Shepherds Star.

PHRIXUS,
the Son of Athamas, who to avoid the Anger of Ino his cruel Mother-in-Law,
that would have killed him, fled away with his Sister Hell upon a Ram, who had
a Golden Fleece, and arrived at Colchos, where he offered the Ram in Sacrifice
to Jupiter, or as some will have it, to Mars, who placed him among the Twelve
Signs of the Zodiac: As for the Golden Fleece, he left it to the King of the
Country, who hung it up in a Temple, consecrated to Mars, under the Keeping of
a Dragon.

PICTURA;
Painting: Its not to be doubted, but Painting is as ancient as Sculpture, but
it is very hard to know the real Time and Place where it first appeared; the
Egyptians and the Greeks, who make themselves to be the Inventors of the best
Arts, have not failed to assume the Glory of their being the first Painters
also: In the mean time, as it is very difficult to see clearly into a Matter
that is obscured with the Revolution of so many Years, which conceal its
Original, we ought to be content to know in respect to Painting; that after it
had had like unto other Things, its faint Beginnings, it was brought to
Perfection among the Greeks, and the principal Schools for this illustrious Art
were at Sicyone, Rhodes, and Athens: From Greece it was brought into Italy,
where it was in great Request in the Time of the Republic, and under the first
Emperors, till at last Luxury and Wars having ruined the Roman Empire, it lay
quite buried as well as other Arts and Sciences, and began not to revive in
Italy till Cimabue fell to work, and retrieved out of the Hands of some Greeks
the deplorable Remains of it: Some Florentines having seconded him, were those
who first appeared and brought it into Reputation; however it was a long time
before any one came to excel in it.

Chirlandaio, Michael Angelo's Master, acquired the greatest Reputation, though
his Manner was very dry and Gothic; but Michael Angelo his Scholar coming up
in the Reign of Julius the 2d, obscured all that went before, set up a School
at Florence, and educated several. Pietro Perugino had also Raphaele d'Vrbino
for his Scholar, who excelled his Master very much, and even Michael Angelo
himself: He erected a School at Rome composed of the most excellent Painters.
At the same time that in Lombardy was set up, and grew famous under Giorgione
and Titian, whose first Master was Giov Belini: There were also other
particular Schools in Italy under different Masters, as that of Leonardo da
Vinci at Milan: But the first Three are reckoned the most Famous, from whence
the rest sprung. Besides these there were Painters on this side the Alps, who
had no Correspondence with those in Italy, such as Albert Durer in Germany,
Holbens in Switzerland, Lucas Van Leiden in Holland, and many others, who
painted in France and Flanders, after different Manners: But Italy and Rome
were the principal Places where this Art flourished in its greatest Perfection,
and where excellent Artists were brought up from time to time: Raphael's School
was succeeded by that of the Carachii, which has continued almost to this time
in its Perfection.

Before a Painter in Flanders called John Van-Eyck, but better known by the
Name of John de Bruges, had found out the Secret of painting in Oil, all the
Painters wrought in Fresco and Distemper or Watercolors; and the Invention of
Painting in Oil was not known to the Ancients; the Secret not being found out
till the Beginning of the 14th Century. We may say that Painting did then
receive great Assistance, and an admirable Advantage: For hereby the Colors of
a Picture hold a long time, and receive a Luster and Union, which the Ancients
could not give to their Works, what Varnish soever they used to lay on for that
Purpose: This Secret which lay hid so long, consists of nothing else but the
grinding of the Colors with Nut or Linseed Oil.

PICUS,
King of the Latins, the Son of Saturn, and Father to Faunus, who reigned 57
Years: He married Canens, the Daughter of Janus and Venilia, according to Ovid:
But his Sentiments do not at all agree with Chronology herein; for Canens would
have been above 500 Years old, if she had lived in the Time of Picus: The same
Poet tells us, that Picus was beloved of Circe, and that not conforming himself
to comply with her Love, she transformed him into a Bird of the same Name,
which is a Wood-Pecker.

PIERIDES;
an Epithet given to the Muses, upon the Account of their having been born in
that part of the Country of Macedon which was called Pieria.

PIETAS;
Piety, whom the Romans worshipped for a Goddess. Antoninus Pius caused her to
be represented in the Dress of a Roman Lady, holding a little Incense Box,
named Acerra, in her Hand, and standing before an Altar where there was a Fire
lighted, to offer Incense upon it. She may be also seen graven upon the Money
of the said Emperor, holding Two Children in her Arms, and with Two more, one
on each side: We have also Piety represented diverse ways, upon the Medals of
Marcus Aurelius, Domitian, and Sabina, Adrian's Wife. She appears in the Dress
of a Roman Lady, in a sitting Posture, holding a Javelin without any Spear to
it in one Hand, and having little Children at her Feet, which she seems to
instruct. As also under the Picture of Marcus Herennius, who carried his Father
upon his Shoulders, and of Aeneas, who did the same by his Father, whom he
pulled out of the Flames of Troy. By the Money which Titus the Son of Vespatian
coined, Piety appears bringing the Two Brothers Titus and Domitian together,
and making them give one another the Right Hand: She was also expressed holding
Two Children in her Arms, with a Stork that carries her Parents about in their
old Age, and feeds them, which is a Symbol of Piety. At Rome there was a Temple
dedicated to Piety by Attilius, in the Place where that Daughter lived, who
sustained her Father in Prison with the Milk of her Breasts.

PILADES;
take what Lucian has writ of him in his Praise of an House: After this comes
an illustrious Example of Friendship, which seems to have been taken out of
Sophocles and Euripides; Pilades and Orestes who were thought to be dead, hid
themselves behind Agamennon's Palace, they secretly stole in, and killed
Aegystus, for Clytemnestra was already dead, and laid out upon the Bed half
naked: You may imagine how astonished the whole Court was at this
Assassination, some wept, others cried aloud or seemed to do so, these same
endeavored to make their Escape, the others resisted in vain; but the Painter
has artfully passed over what was most criminal, and would not represent the
Son killing his Mother, but drew him killing the Adulterer and his Father's
Murderer.

PINARII,
the Pinarians; they were Hercules his Priests and Sacrificers, who offered
Sacrifice to that God Morning and Evening; but the Pinarians happening to come
last and at the End of the Sacrifice, Hercules ordered they should serve the
Potitii when they sacrificed, to him; and thence comes their Name, quasi (...),
a fame.

PINDUS,
a Mountain in Thessaly consecrated to Apollo and the Muses.

PIRAEUS,
a very fine Port at Athens, capable to contain 400 Ships, it was joined to the
City by a Wall 2000 Paces long, and by a great many Buildings that made it the
finest Part of Athens; the Piraeus had been fortified diverse Times, and they
built Porticoes and Temples to the Gods there.

PIRENE,
a Fountain rising from the Foot of Mount Acrocorinthus consecrated to the
Muses, whose Waters are very clear and exceeding pleasant to the Taste.

PIRITHOUS;
the Son of Ixion King of the Lapithae a People of Thessaly, who entered into
strict Ties of Friendship with Theseus. He severely punished the Centaurs, who
had injured the Lapithae at a Feast whereunto they had been invited on the Day
of his Friend's Marriage with Hippodamia: He also assisted him to take away
Helen, and the other in his turn helped him to fetch Proserpina back from
Pluto, but this Undertaking met with bad Success, for Pluto seized them: Some
will have it, that Pirithous was devoured by the Dog Cerberus, others, that he
was condemned to endure the same Punishment as Ixion, and that Theseus by the
means of Hercules set him free, when he went into Hell to bring away Cerberus
according to Eurysteus his Command.

PISISTRATUS,
Hippocrates his Son, who in the Absence of Solon seized upon the Government of
Athens, by the Favor of the People whom he won to his Interest by his
Liberality to them. He made very good Laws which he added to those of Solon; he
was a very great Lover of Learning and learned Men, being the first who erected
a Library at Athens, which Xerxes, when he took that City, carried into Peraia;
he employed Aristarchus to put Homer's Books in order, which were before all in
Confusion.

PISONES,
the Piso's, an illustrious Family of Rome, so called from Pease, which the
first of that Family had taken the Pains to sow.

PITHIA;
Apollo's Priestess, who delivered the Responses of that Deity to those that
consulted him.

PITHO;
the Goddess of Eloquence or Persuasion, being derived from the Greek Word
(...), to persuade. The Romans called her Swadela or Swada.

PLATO;
a famous Philosopher and the Chief of the Academicks: He was called
Aristocles, and named Plato from his great Forehead and broad Shoulders: He was
the most famous of all Socrates his Disciples, and ecclipsed the rest with the
Splendour of his great Reputation; he was of a good Family in Athens, and
greatly excelled all his Companions in the Vastness of his Understanding;
however, not thinking that was enough to make him perfect in the Study of
Philosophy, he resolved to travel and went to all Places where he thought he
might improve in any thing, and so he learnt what was most rare and curious
among the Egyptians, and from thence went into Italy where the Pythagoreans
were in great Esteem; he heard the most Learned amongst them, and easily
apprehended what was most valuable in their Doctrine. He divided his Philosophy
into Three Parts, viz. Moral, which consisted principally in Action, Physics,
that related to Speculation, and Logic which served to distinguish Truth from
Falsehood. Of all the Philosophers his Doctrine comes nearest of any to
Christianity: It will surprise you when you read that Plato had Sentiments of
God so conformable to the Truth of our Religion, from whence some have thought
that in his Travels to Egypt, he was a Hearer of the Prophet Jeremy, or that he
had read the Books of the Prophets, And I my self, says St. Augustine, have
followed this Opinion in some of my Works; but afterward I came to understand
by Cronology, that Plato was not born till about 100 Years after the Prophecies
of Jeremy, and that the Greek Version of the Septuagint was not done by Ptolomy
King of Egypt's Order till near 60 Years after Plato's Death; insomuch that he
could neither see Jeremy who was dead so long before, nor read the Scriptures
which were not yet translated into the Greek Tongue, unless you will have it
said that he took care to be instructed therein, as he did in the Egyptian
Books not by getting them translated, but by conversing with the Jews viva
voce. What favors this Conjecture is that the Book of Genesis begins thus. In
the Beginning God created Heaven and Earth, but the Earth was without Form, and
void, and Darkness was upon the Face of the Deep and the Spirit of God moved
upon the Face of the Waters. And Plato in his Timeus where he speaks of the
Creation of the World, says, That God did first join the Fire and Earth
together: It Is clear that by Fire he meant Heaven. But what fully persuades me,
continues the same St. Augustine, That Plato had some Knowledge of our Books,
is that Moses asking the Angel the Name of him who commanded him to go and
deliver the Hebrews, he received this Answer, I am that I am, thou shall tell
the Children of Israel, I am has sent me to you: But this is that which Plato
firmly establishes in his Works, and I do not know it is to be found in any
Book older than Plato, except the holy Scriptures. His Writings are almost all
divided into Dialogues, in which he introduces his Master Socrates. He died of
the Morbus Pedicularis and was burried in the Academy of Athens where he had
taught Philosophy.

PLAUTUS,
a Comic Poet, admired by all the Ancients for the Eloquence of his Style, he
bore the Name of M. Accius, with that of Plautus, because of his splay Feet, as
Sextus Pompeius says. He was born in a little Town of Vmbria called Sarcinas:
He was much in Esteem at Rome for the Stage, at the same time that Publius
Scipio and Marcus Cato were in great Reputation for their Politeness; his
Comedies are full of Jests and witty Railleries, for which Cicero commends him,
and Varro assures us, that if the Muses would have spoke Latin, they had spoke
like Plautus, and Aulus Gellius in his Noctes Atticae calls him the Father and
Prince of the Latin Eloquence: He imitated the Greek Authors in his Comedies,
and amongst others Diphilus, Epicharmus and Menander. Horace says, he made
Money of his Comedies, and when he had got a good deal, he with that turned
Merchant, but proving unsuccessful that Way, he was necessitated to turn a
Mill, and grind Corn to serve a Bakehouse: He died during the Consulship of
Publius Claudius and Lucius Portius, while Cato was Censor, in the 119
Olympaid, and the Year of Rome 565.

PLEIADES,
they were the Seven Daughters of Atlas and the Nymph Pleione, who finding
themselves pursued by Orion that would have ravished them, they prayed to the
Gods to preserve them from his Insults, which they did by changing them into
Stars, and placing them in Heaven: It Is a Constellation formed of Seven Stars,
which are near together toward the 18th Degree of Taurus. They are rainy and
stormy Stars, and very frightful to Mariners; they call them in Latin
Vergiliae, a vere, because they rise about the Vernal Equinox, and set in
Autumn.

PLEIONE,
the Daughter of Oceanus and Tethys and Atlas his Wife, by whom he had Seven
Daughters called Pleiades.

PLINIUS;
Pliny the Elder, born at Verona, was a Minister of State under the Emperor
Vespatian, he had a very great Knowledge of natural Things, of which he wrote
extraordinary Books, but wherein diverse Matters are to be met with that are
false, which he had by hearsay, and took from the Relation of others; he was
suffocated by the Flames of Mount Vesuvius, as he approached too near it to
observe that Wonder.

PLINY
the Younger, his Nephew, wrote a Book of Epistles, a Treatise about
illustrious Men, and a Panegyric dedicated to Trajan.

PLUTARCHUS,
Plutarch of Cheronea flourished under the Emperor Trajan and gained great
Reputation by his Books: The Lives of illustrious Men both among the Greeks and
Romans, which he compares with one another, are the best of his Works and
deserve Commendation above the rest. Though he is every where agreeably
instructive and shows he had a general Knowledge in all Things.

PLUTUS;
the God of Riches; Aristophanes in a Comedy thus cailed, says, that this God
having at first a good Eyesight, stuck to no Body but to the Just. But Jupiter
taking his Sight from him, Riches afterward fell indifferently to the Share of
the Good and Bad: They formed a Design for the recovering of Plutus his Sight,
but Penia, which is Poverty, opposed it, and made it appear that Poverty was
the Mistress of Arts, Sciences and Virtues which would be in Danger of being
lost if all Men were rich: They gave her no Credit, or seemed not to believe
her, so that Plutus recovered his Sight in Aeseulapius his Temple, and from
thence forward the Temples and Altars of other Gods, and those of Jupiter
himself were abandoned, every Body sacrificing to no other than to God Plutus.
Lucian in Timon or Misanthropos brings Jupiter and Plutus talking together thus.

Jup. I am amazed to find you angry, because you are left at Liberty, seeing
you formerly complained of Usurers, who shut you up under Lock and Key, without
letting you as much as see the Light, and made you endure a Thousand Torments.
You said, that 'twas it which made you pale and disfigured and was the Cause
that you did endeavor to make your Escape. You also blamed the Covetous, who
died for Love of you, and in the mean time durst not enjoy you, like the Dog in
the Fable, who being tied to the Rock, could not himself eat Hay, and would not
suffer the Horse to do it: You said, that they were jealous, and debarred
themselves of all Recreations, without considering that what they loved would
one Day be the Prey of a Thief or some unworthy Heir: Are not you ashamed thus
to swerve from your old Maxims.


Plutus. If you will hear me, you shall find I have Reason for what I do. For
some let me go through Negligence, and others spare me through Stupidity, for
want of knowing that if they used me not I should be of no Benefit to them, and
that they will be forced to leave me, before they are advantaged by me.


Jupit. They are sufficiently punished for their Fault, without your troubling
of me to punish them, seeing the one like Tantalus die of Thirst in the midst
of the Waters, and the other like Phineus see Harpies carrying away their
Victuals, before they have tasted of it.


Mercury. Let us go, why do you halt? Are you lame as well as blind?


Plutus. I go always in this manner, when I am sent to any Body and there I
come very late, and many times when there is nothing for me to do; but when the
Business of my Return is in Agitation, I go as fast as the Wind, and they are
much astonished that they cannot see me more.


Mercury. That is not always true, for there are some People who grow rich
while they sleep.


Plutus. I do not go then upon my Feet, but I am carried; and it is not Jupiter
that sends me, but Pluto who is also the God of Riches, as his Name imports;
for he on a sudden makes great Riches to pass from one Person to another,
etc.....


Mercury. That happens frequently, but when you go alone, how can you find the
Way seeing you are blind?


Plutus. I mistake also sometimes and often take one for another.


Mercury. I believe it, but what do you do then?


Plutus. I turn up and down, to the Right and Left, till I find some Body that
seizes me by the Collar, and who goes to render you Thanks for his good
Fortune, or some other God that shall never think of it.


Mercury. Was not Jupiter therefore mistaken, when he thought you did enrich
Men of Merit.


Plutus. How could he think that one blind as I am, could find out a
meritorious Person which is so rare a Thing? But as the Wicked are very
numerous, I meet with them sooner than others.


Mercury. Why is it that you run so fast in your Return, since you do not know
the Way?


Plutus. They said I never saw well but then, and that Fate gave me Legs for no
other End than to flee away.


Mercury. Tell me farther, why it is, since you are blind, pale, meager and
lame, that you have so many Admirers who die for Love of you, and who place
their Happiness in the Enjoyment of you.


Plutus. It Is because Love hinders them to see my Deformity, and that they are
blinded with the Luster which does surround me.


PLUTO,
Sanchoniathon makes him to be Saturn and Rhea's Son: He adds that he was at
first called Mouth, which in the Phoenician and Hebrew Tongue signified Death,
that they made a Deity of him after his Death, and that the Phoenicians named
him sometimes Death and sometimes Pluto, as Eusebius says, Nec multo post
Saturnus alterum ex Rhea filium, nomine Mouth, vita functum consecrat; quem
Phoenices modo Mortem, modo Plutonem nominant. Diodorus Siculus seems to give a
Reason why they gave the Name of Death to Pluto, and that was because he was
the first that had instituted Funeral Solemnities for the Dead, Plutonem vero
funerum and sepulturae ac parentationis ritus ostendisse ferunt. The Greeks
made a Pluto of a King of the Molossi, whose Name was Aidoneus or Orcus, who
was the Person that stole Proserpina, and whose Dog named Cerberus devoured
Pirithous, and had done the same by Theseus, if Hercules had not come to his
Relief. The Greeks called this God Pluto, because all manner of Riches are at
length swallowed up by the Earth from whence they came. Lactantius says, that
Pluto was not only called Orcus, but also Diespiter, being as much as to say
Dis pater. And that they surnamed him Agesilaus, because all Laughter is
banished out of Hell.

PODIUM,
Balisters which were set round about the Temples of the Ancients.

POESIS,
Poetry. Cicero confesses that Poetry is an heavenly Gift and the Influence of
a Divine Spirit, that Mankind is satisfied of this Truth, and that it is agreed
that the same is no other than a Divine Rapture which transports Man's Spirit
and raises him above himself, but yet so as that we are not indeed obliged to
give the Name of Poetry to such Pieces as are writ in Verse, but yet in reality
are nothing but Prose, for want of this Divine Spirit: It Is the Opinion of
Horace in his Satyrs.

...... Neque enim concludere versum
Dixerim esse satis......
Ingenium eui sit, cui men's divinior, atque os
Magna sonaturum, des nominis hujus honorem.
Plato will have Poetry to be a Divine Gift and Inspiration, and that the Poets
were not only Historians and Philosophers, but Divines in Ancient Times: St.
Hierom informs us, that several of the Books of Scripture had been writ in
Verse and though it were no other in it self than Prose, the Air, the Turn, the
Fire and Majesty of Poetry that is to be met with there, may well allow us to
say, that it was Poetry: It Is not only the Measures of Feet that make Poetry,
but lively Expressions, bold and surprising Figures, and rich Descriptions:
Such sort of Poems there were among the Greeks and Romans, which are no other
than short Prose, but had such a great and majestic Air of Poetry as was now
mentioned.

POETAE,
Poets, they were formerly courted by and lived with great Princes, as their
Divines, Philosophers, Historians and Privy Counselors. Elian upon the
Reputation of Plato declares, that Hipparchus, Prince of the Athenians, sent a
Gally to fetch Anacreon to him: Hiero of Syracuse, got Pindar and Simonides to
live with him. Elian assures us, that Ptolomy Philopator, King of Egypt having
built a Temple to Homer, he set him therein upon a Throne, and pictured all the
Cities round about him that contended for his Nativity. Lastly, He says, that
Galato represented Homer with a Stream running out of his Mouth, whither the
rest of the Poets came to fetch Water. Plutarch informs us, that Alexander had
always Homer's Iliads at his Bed's Head, with his Dagger, saying, it was
instructive to him in the Military Art. The Romans had a particular Esteem for
the Poets, Scipio Africanus had Ennius always with him: Cicero speaks of many
great Roman Commanders who made use of Poets either to write their History, or
with their Verses to adorn the Temples and other sacred Monuments which they
dedicated to the Glory of the Gods. When the Government of the Republic fell
into the Hands of the Emperors, the famous Latin Poets were much more familiar
with them than the Greek Poets had ever been with their Kings. And in what
Favor Virgil and Horace were with Augustus is well known.

There were Poets in the Land of Canaan before Moses, for Bochart has very well
observed, that Moses in the Book of Numbers has inserted a victorious Song of
a Canaanitish Poet, after he had gained the Victory over the Moabites and
Ammonites: There is no doubt but that there were Poets in the East, and that
there the Springhead was, from whence came all the Greek Poetry. The less
civilized Nations of the West had also Poets, who very often had the Management
of their Philosophical and Theological Schools. Homer lived above 300 Years
before Rome was built, and there were no Poets at Rome till 400 Years after the
building thereof; so that Poetry began not to be cultivated in that City till
700 Years after Homer.

Plutarch assures us, that in the most Ancient Times, Men never expressed great
and divine Things any otherwise than in Poetry, making use even of Verse for
their History and Philosophy it self; for the Poets, for 6 or 700 Years before
the Philosophers, were the Preservers of all the Religion and Morality of the
Heathens. St. Augustine himself does not deny to the ancient Greek Poets the
Title of Divines, and Lactantius is of Opinion, that whereas the Poets, as
being more ancient than the ancientest Historians, Orators or Philosophers,
writ so much Theological Truth, it has proceeded from their collecting together
the Stories that went abroad in the World, which arose from an Intercourse with
the Children of Israel, and their Prophets.

POLLUX,
the Son of Jupiter and Leda, and the Brother of Castor and Helen. Lucian
explains the Story of Castor and Pollux in a Dialogue, between Apollo and
Mercury.

Apollo. Will not you teach me to know Castor from Pollux; for I am continually
mistaken because of their Likeness to one another?


Mercury. He who was Yesterday with us was Castor, and this is Pollux.


Apol. How can one distinguish them, seeing they are so like?


Merc. Pollux has his Face disfigured with the Blows he received in Wrestling,
and especially from Bebrix, in the Expedition of the Argonauts; the other is a
handsome Faced Fellow, without ever a Scar.


Apol. You have obliged me to let me know the Particulars of it; for seeing
each of them has his half Shell, his white Horse, Dart and Star, I always
mistake them; but tell me, why are not they both at the same time with us.


Merc. It is, because it was decreed concerning Leda's Two Sons, that one
should be mortal, and the other immortal, they divided the Good and the Evil
between them like good Brothers, and so lived and died by turns, and their
Business is to assist Mariners in a Storm.


Men swore by Pollux in this manner. Aede-Pol, that is, per aedem Pollucis; and
the Women by Castor, Ecaestor or Mecastor. The Romans more particularly professed
to give them Honor, because of the Assistance they believed to have received
from them, in the Battle they fought near the Lake of Regillus, against the
Latins, and therefore they erected a very fine Temple for them. They performed
a great many famous Actions, as their delivering their Sister Helen out of the
Hands of Theseus, who had stole her, and clearing the Seas of Pirates; they
sacrificed pure white Lambs to them; they were translated to Heaven, and made
one of the Signs of the Zodiac, which is represented by Two Boys. Its the Third
from Aries, and in May the Sun enters into it. Pollux and Helen were the
Children of Jupiter and Leda; Caestor was the Son of Leda, and her Husband
Tindarus; it was pretended they proceeded from an Egg, because they were nursed
in the uppermost Room in the House, which they called (...).

Diodorus Siculus relates, that the Argonauts being overtaken with a great
Storm, Orpheus made a Vow to the Samothracian Gods, thereupon the Storm ceased,
and Two Celestial Fires appeared upon the Heads of Castor and Pollux, who were
of the Number of the Argonauts; from whence came the Custom of invoking the
Samothracian Gods in a Storm, and giving those Two Celestial Fires the Name of
Castor and Pollux. Lucian in a Dialogue between Apollo and Mercury, observes,
that these Two Brothers were also invoked in Storms, because they themselves
had used the Seas; as being in the Company of the Argonauts. Cicero relates a
wonderful Piece of Revenge taken upon one Scopas, for speaking irreverently of
those Two Brothers, called Dioscorides also, he having been crushed to pieces
by the Fall of his Chamber, while Simonides who had made their Elogy, was
called out by Two unknown Persons: The Greek and Roman Histories are full of
the wonderful Apparitions of these Two Brothers, either to gain a Victory, or
to give News thereof, after the obtaining of it. But Cicero himself in another
place tells us, how we are to entertain these Relations: He says, that Homer
himself, who lived a little after these Two Brothers, affirmed, that they were
buried at Lacedaemon, and consequently that they could not come and acquaint
Vatienus of the Gaining of the Victory; that they should rather have
communicated the News to Cato, than to such an insignificant Fellow: lastly,
That we should believe the Souls of such great Men to be Divine and Eternal
Spirits, but that after their Bodies had been burnt and reduced to Ashes, they
could neither ride on Horses, nor engage in Battle.

POLYHYMNIA, or POLYMNIA;
One of the Nine Muses, who presided over the Hymns and Songs that were played
upon the Lute and Harp. Hesiod attributes the Art of Geometry to her, and
Plutarch History.

POLYNICES,
the Son of Oedipus, King of Thebes, and Brother of Eteocles; Eteocles after
the Death of Oedipus, deprived his Brother Polynices of the Kingdom of Thebes,
though they had agreed to reign by turns; Polynices retired to Argos, married
there the Daughter of King A^rastus, and afterward marched with a formidable
Army against Eteocles, to call him to an Account for what he did. Jocasta their
Mother endeavored in vain to reconcile them, so both sides made themselves
ready to give Battle: The Prophet Tiresias declared, the Thebans would get the
Victory, if they sacrificed Menoeceus the Son of Creon to Mars; Creon denied
his Son, but Menoeceus offered himself, then the Battle began, wherein Eteocles
and Polynices killed one another, and Jocasta finding them to be dead, also
slew her self.

POLYPHEMUS;
one of the Cyclops, the Son of Neptune, and the Nymph Thoosa, according to
Homer. Lucian gives a Description of him in his Dialogues of Sea-Gods, where he
introduces Doris and Galatea speaking thus.

Doris. They say, Galatea, that Polyphemus is in Love with you; you have a fine
Lover of him.


Galatea. Doris do not jear, as mean as you think him to be, he is Neptune's
Son.


Dor. What, though he were Jupiter's Son; he is as hairy as a Bear, and has but
one Eye.


Galat. Hair is a sign of Strength, and his Eye looks very graceful in the
middle of his Forehead; so that he looks as well as if he had had two.


Dor. It seems to me as if you were enamoured on him, and not he on you.


Galat. Not in the least; but I cannot endure your, nor your Companions
Jealousy; for while he was feeding his Flocks in the Shade upon Mount Aetna,
as we were playing on the River side, he found me more beautiful than you, and
that I suppose makes you ready to burst for Spite.


Dor. You have Vanity enough to believe that any Body will be jealous of you;
what is there in you worth taking notice of, but your clear Skin, from whence
you have obtained the Name of Galatea: He took you to be handsome, because your
Complexion is just like his Butter and Cheese.


Galat. But for all that, I have got one of Neptune's Sons to be my Lover:
Besides, he is an excellent Musician.


Dor. Galatea, pray never talk of his Music, we heard him the other Day, when
he drew near you to sing. Good God, a strange Musician indeed! A pleasant Harp
made of a Deer's Skull, whose Horns served for Pins to it! As great an
Imitatrix as Echo is, she was ashamed to answer him, for his Voice and
Instrument never agreed; and this fine Spark to make him appear the better,
carried in his Bosom, a little Bear like himself: I do not envy you upon the
Account of this stinking one-eyed Cyclops, who devours his Guests.


As Polyphemus one Evening was gathering his Flock together, he found Ulysses
and his Companions in a Grott, and taking them to be Robbers, he closed up the
Mouth of it with a Rock; but then discerning some of them by the glimmering of
the Fire, which they concealed, he devoured them; hereupon Ulysses to avoid the
like Usage, gave him some Wine, which he had no sooner drank, but he thought
the Cave turned upside down; and Ulysses taking Advantage over this his
Giddiness, put out his Eye with a Firebrand, and saved himself under the Belly
of a Beast, as he was driving them to Pasture.

POMONA;
a Nymph of Latium, reckoned to be the Goddess of Gardens and Fruits.

POMPEIUS;
Pompey, the Son of Strabo, whom Historians compare with Alexander; he was
surnamed the Great, from his great Actions and excellent Endowments: He built a
standing Theater at Rome; for before they erected none but as there was
occasion for them: Dio accuses him of boundless Ambition, and Envy mixed with
Vanity, since he envyed those Honors to Caesar, which he had acquired: He was
defeated by Caesar in the Plains of Pharsalia, and fleeing into Egypt to King
Ptolomy, he was assassinated and killed in a Bark as he was going ashore, his
Head was sent to Caesar, who shed Tears at the sight thereof.

PONDUS;
Weights, wherewith liquid and dry Things are weighed. As the Weights of the
Romans and Greeks agreed very much with their Money, you may see under the Word
Moneta, or under each particular Coin, what has been said concerning them.

PONTES,
Bridges. There were Eight of them in Rome: The Sublician Bridge, which was a
Bridge of Wood: For the Word Sublicae signified Wooden Piles which were driven
under the Water: It was the first that was built upon the Tiber; Ancus Martius
made it of Pieces of Timber set together without Iron or Nails, it stood at the
Foot of Mount Aventine, and joined the Janiculum to the City: 'Twas that which
Horatius Cocles defended against the Tuscan Army, but being ruined through
length of Time, it was rebuilt of Stone by Emilius Lepidus, and called after
his Name: The Emperor Tiberius rebuilt it in his Time, it being destroyed by
the frequent Inundations of the Tiber: Happening afterward to fall down again,
Antoninus built it all of Marble, and 'twas called Pons Marmoratus;
Malefactors, Vagabonds and the Argian Images were thrown off of this Bridge
into the Water. 2. That called the Triumphal otherwise Vatican Bridge, that
stood upon the Middle of the Tiber, over which those that triumphed passed, and
is now ruined. 3. Tons Palatinus, which was near Mount Palatine, and otherwise
named Senatorius. M. Fulvius made the Piles thereof, and L. Mummius finished
the Arches during the Time of his Censorship. 4. Pons Fabricius, which was
divided into two, when the Island of the Tiber was made, it being so called
from him who built it, when he was chief Surveyor of the high Ways. It joined
the Island to the City, and it is at this Day named Di quatro capi, from the
Four Marble Figures, each of which have Four Heads standing at the End of the
Bridge in the Island, or the Jews Bridge, because they live near it: Others
called it Pons Cestius or Equilinus, the Equiline Bridge. 5. Pons Janiculensis
and Aurelius built of Marble by Antoninus Pius; and coming to be ruined, was
rebuilt by Pope Sextus IV. and called after his Name di ponte Sixto. 6. Pons
Elius, so called from the Emperor Elius Adrianus who built it, the same is
called at this Day, Ponto S. Angelo 7. Pons Milvius, now Milvio, which Elius
Scaurus built: It was upon this Bridge that Cicero seized the Ambassadors of
the Allobroges, with Letters about them, whereby Catiline's Conspiracy was
discovered, and it was near unto this Bridge that Constantine defeated the
Emperor Maxentius.

At Three Miles Distance from Rome stands Salaro Bridge under which runs the
Teveron or Anio.

PONTIFEX;
Authors differ about the Etymology of this Word, some deriving it from posse
facere, i. e. from the Authority which the Pontiffs had to sacrifice; others,
as Varro, from Pons, because they built the Sublician Bridge that they might go
and offer Sacrifice on the other Side of the Tiber. Pontifices a ponte arbitror
dictos; nam ab iis Sublicius est factus and restitutus saepe, cum ideo sacra
and uls and cis Tiberim ritu fiant.

Numa instituted Four Pontiffs of Patrician Families which continued to the
Year 454. when in the Consulship of Apuleius Pansa and Valerius Corvus, they
created Four more of Plebeian Race at the Importunity of the Tribunes of the
People, as Livy says. This Number of Eight lasted till the Dictatorship of
Sylla, who added Seven more, and so the College came to consist of 15
Pontiffs, but with this Distinction that the first Eight were more honorable,
and called Pontifices Majores, whereas the others took the Title of Pontifices
Minores.

There was a sovereign Pontiff called Pontifex Maximus instituted by Numa, who
was the chief Person and sovereign Judge in Matters of Religion, and to whose
Care the Direction of all Ceremonies both Public and Private and all the
Articles of their Faith was wholly committed; he prescribed the Ceremonies and
particular Worship wherewith each God was to be honored, after the same by a
Decree of the Senate had been received at Rome, and to him belonged the
Composing of the Rituals or Books of Ceremonies: It was he that approved of the
Vestal Virgins, and appointed them their Habits, that corrected, chastised and
condemned them to be buried alive, when they violated their Vow of Chastity:
All the Orders of Priests and Sacrificers were under his Inspection. Anciently
he took upon him to perform the Functions of an Augur, but C. Servilius, the
great Pontiff, being one Day about to solemnize the Inauguration of Cornelius
Dolabelia, a Storm fell suddenly and broke up the Assembly, and thereupon as an
Effect of their Superstition, it was ordered that the great Pontiff should not
any more intermeddle with the Business of Inauguration, unless he were Augur
and grand Pontiff both: He blessed and consecrated the Images and Statues of the
Gods, before they were set up in the Temples to be adored; he also blessed the
Resemblances of some of Jupiter's Thunderbolts, in order to preserve them from
Storms: Besides these things that related to Religion, it was his Business to
digest the Annals or Histories that were kept for every Year, as Festus says,
Annals maximi non magnitudine; sed quod eos Pontisex Maximus confecisset.

The Choice of a chief Pontiff was at first in the Power of the other Pontiffs,
who elected him out of their own Body; but Cn. Domitius Tribune of the People
deprived them of that Right, and transferred it to the People, because they
would not confer this Dignity upon him in his Father's Place that was dead, and
this Suetonius informs us in Nero's Life: Cn. Domitius in Tribunatu
Pontificibus offensior, quod alium quam se in patris sui locum cooptassent, jus
sacerdotum subrogandorum a collegiis ad populum transtulit: There are some who
believe with more Likelihood, that the chief Pontiff had been always created in
an Assembly of the People held by the Tribune: It being that which Cicero seems
to say in the Agrarian Law. But if the People presented, the College of the
Pontiffs had a Right to examine him, whether he were fitly qualified for that
Dignity, viz. that he were of an unblameable Life, had never shed Blood, and
skilled in both the Civil and Divine Law.

His Consecration was performed with extraordinary Ceremonies, they made him go
down into a Pit made in the Earth, clad in his Pontifical Habit, and laid a
Wooden Trap-door that was full of Holes over him, whereon the Sacrificers
killed a Bull, whose Blood dropping like Dew through the said Holes, wetted the
Pontiff all over; he rubbed his Face, Eyes, Mouth, and even his Tongue
therewith: That being done, they took up the Trap-door, and the Flamines lifted
the grand Pontiff out thence, all besmeared with Blood, and in this State they
saluted him with these Words, Salve, Pontifex Maxim, and conducted him to his
House where he treated them splendidly: This Prudentius tells us in the
Martyrdom of St. Romanus toward the latter End. Summus Sacerdos nempe sub
terram scrobe acta in profundum consecrandus mergitur mire infulatus: He was
the Chief of all the Priests, and to him appertained the sovereign Jurisdiction
of Religion, and Conferring of such Offices as did belong to the Worship of the
Gods. He was carried in a Chair which they called Sella Curulis, and his Door
was adorned with Laurel like the Emperor's Palace: They carried him in a Litter
to the Capitol: He was not obliged to give any Body an Account of his Actions,
and this was the Reason that the Emperors themselves from Julius Caesar took
the Office of chief Pontiff upon them, till Gratian, who of himself laid it
down. The other Pontiffs looked after Matters of Religion in Conjunction with
the chief Pontiff, and they consulted them as the Interpreters of the Gods and
Divine Mysteries, in Marriages and Adoptions; and Tacitus tells us, that Nero
consulted the Pontiffs in order to know whether he might marry a Woman who was
with Child, before she were delivered; Consulti per ludibrium Pontifices an
concepto ne dum edito partu rite nuberet.

POPAE;
were such Persons as attended the Sacrifices, whose Business it was to provide
Victims, and to kill them after they had knocked them down: They were half
naked, their Shoulders, Arms, and upper Part of their Bodies being uncovered as
far as their Navels, and the rest covered to the Mid-leg with a Linen Apron,
or the Skins of the Sacrifices, wearing a Crown upon their Heads which was
usually made of Laurel: Thus they were represented on Trajan's Column: But in
the mean time there are other ancient Figures which represent them with a
Priest's Albe reaching down from their Armpits and tucked up, to which their
sacrificing Knife was fastened: This Apron was called Limus, because at the
lower End of it, it had a Purple Welt which was sowed in such a manner as
represented a Serpent. And this Servius tells us upon that Verse in the 12th
Eneid of Virgil.

Velati limo and verbena tempora vincti.
Limus, says he, vestis est qua ab umbilico usque ad pedes teguntur pudibunda
Poparum: haec autem vestis in extremo sui purpuram limam id est flexuosam
habet: unde and nomen accepit, nam limum obliquum dicimus.

POPLIFUGIUM;
the Flight of the People, which happened according to some Authors, when
Romulus was killed as he was haranging the People, and that an horrible Clap of
Thunder made them fly up and down for Fear, or when after the Desolation of the
City occasioned by the Gauls, the Romans were put to Flight by the Tuscans,
according to Macrobius Saturn. L. 3. C. 2.

PORRICERE;
('it was a Term used at ancient Sacrifices) which signified to throw the
Entrails of the Victim into the Fire of the Sacrifice, after they had been
inspected, in order to observe good or bad Omens from them.

Inter caesa and porrecta; between the cutting of the Victim's Throat and
inspecting his Entrails; the same being a Latin Proverb to denote any Accident
which may happen when we are just finishing of a Thing, and hinders the
Completing of it.

PORTA;
a Gate, Pliny says, that in his Time there were 37 Gates belonging to the City
of Rome: There are still 9 of the ancient Gates in being besides that on the
other Side of the Tiber and the Vatican. 1. The first and principal was of Old
called Flumentana or Flaminia, now del Populo, upon the Banks of the Tiber,
toward the Winter-west, according to Marlian's Description L. 1. C. 8. 2. Was
called Collatina being on the Right Hand, leading toward the Hill of Gardens
and through which they went to Collatia a City of the Sabines, and the great
Road was called via Collatina. 3. Quirinalis, because through it they went to
Mount Quirinal; it is now called porta Salara, because through it they bring
Salt into the City. 4. Viminalis, because of Mount Viminal, the same being now
called Momentane, or St. Angelo. 5. Esquilina, or Taurina and Tiburtina,
because they went through it to go to Tibur. 6. Porta Coelimontana, through which
they went to Mount Coelius. 7. Porta Latina or Ferentina, which lead to the
Country of the Latins. 8. Capena and Fontinalis at the Foot of Mount Aventine,
and near the Tiber, and there they had diverse Fountains, which made Juvenal
call it Madida Capena. By this Gate they entered into the great Road called via
Appia; and 'twas through it that such as triumphed and the whole Cavalcade that
attended them, entered, and so they called it also Triumphalis. 9. Ostiensis and
Trigemina, because of the Three Horatii who killed the Three Curatii, that
entered at it.

There were Three Gates in Trans-Tiberina, 1. Ripa, where the Barks that came
from Ostia and the Sea landed, and the same was formerly called Portuensis and
Navalis. 2. Stood on the Top of the Janiculum, and was formerly called Aurelia,
being so named from the Road, which one Aurelius a Man of Consular Dignity
paved: Through this Gate they went along by the Tuscan Sea as far as Pisa. 3.
Septimiana which stood at the Foot of the Janiculum, and was so called from
Septimius Severus who built it.

PORTICUS,
a Portico or Gallery, joined to private or public Buildings: The Magnificence
and Beauty of their Portico's was something extraordinary among the Romans.
They had private ones for the Convenience of private Houses, and the public
ones served for an Ornament to their Theaters and public Buildings. These
Portico's were sometimes covered and sometimes open: The covered ones consisted
of long Galleries supported usually by one or more Rows of Marble Pillars, and
within side enriched with Statues, Painting, and other Ornaments, with stately
and magnificent Arches. On the Sides were several. Windows shut with a precious
Stone, (which was more transparent than our Glass.) In Winter time they opened
them toward the South to let in the Sun, and in Summer on the North-side:
These covered Portico's served for People to walk under, and to recreate
themselves without being exposed to the Injuries of the Weather: They were
called Stadiatae Portici.

The open Portico's which were called Subdiales Ambulationes, served for Places
to wrestle in: Of all the Portico's built at Rome, the most considerable were
those of Pompey, Augustus and Nero: Pompey built his before his Court, and it
was the pleasantest Walk in all the City and the coolest in Summer, and this
made the Poets by way of Excellency call it Pompeia umbra, as Ovia does,

Tu modo Pompeia lentus spatiare sub umbra,
Cum Sol Herculei terga Leonis adit.
Augustus's served for an Ornament to his Palace and Library: The Pillars were
of Numidian Marble, and there were the Statues of Danaus his 50 Daughters,
ranged in their proper Order. Nero adorned his Palace with Three Portico's each
of 3000 Paces long, and for that Reason they were called Porticus milliariae.

The Athenians were also very curious in Portico's, and therein it was that
their Philosophers kept their Schools: The most famous was that which they
called Poecile, where they had a Brass Statue of Mercury and the finest
Paintings that could be seen, and among the rest that which represented the
Battle of Marathon: There it was Zeno kept his School, for which Reason he was
called the Stoic, and those of his Sect Stoics, from the Greek Word (...)
that signifies a Portico.

The Ancients had also Subterranean Portico's built like arched Galleries, to
cool themselves in in Summer time; they called them Subterraneae porticus, or
crypto-porticus,

PORTORIUM,
Custom or Impost laid upon the Importation and Exportation of Goods.

PORTUMNUS;
a Sea-God called Melicertus and Palaemon by the Greeks, the Son of Ino who was
looked upon as a Deity presiding over Ports, there were Games celebrated in
Honor of him and certain Combats in Greece called Portumnales and Isthmian
Games, because they were performed in the Isthmus of Corinth.

POST-SCENIUM,
the back Part of the Theater, whither the Actors retired and undrest
themselves.

POST-VORTA;
a Goddess worshipped by the Romans, because she foresaw what was to come.

POTITII,
the Potitians, they were Hercules his Priests consecrated by Evander, who were
present at the Sacrifice offered by Hercules after he had found his Oxen which
the Thief Cacus had stole: He invited Two considerable Families to this
Sacrifice, to wit, the Potitians and Pinarians. This Priestly Office was
afterward transferred into the Hands of the public Slaves, which happened in
the Year of Rome 441. when Appius Claudius having corrupted the Potitians with
Money they lost this Office which had been appropriated to their Family by
Evander. These Priests were clad with the Skins of Beasts.

PRAECIAE
and PRAECLAMITATORES, Criers; being Officers that went along the Streets of
Rome before the Flamen dialis, to cause all People to give over their Work on
public Holy Days, for if they saw any one at Work, the Service of the Gods
could not be performed.

PRAECO;
the Public Crier, he was an Officer whose Business it was in the Assemblies
of the People to call the Classes and Centuries according to their Order, and
to cause Silence to be kept in the Temples during the Time of Sacrificing.

PRAEFECTUS PRAETORIO;
he was the chief Commander of the Praetorian Bands, and may be called Colonel
of the Guards. The Institution of this Office is attributed to Augustus who
according to Dio established Two of them out of the Order of the Knights:
Tiberius made but one, viz. Sejanus his Favorite, who persuaded him to keep
all the Companies of the Guards together, (they being before dispersed up and
down the City and in the neighboring Parts) in a Place near unto the Walls,
toward Porta Viminalis, which was called Castra Praetorianorum: His Pretense
for it was, that the Soldiers being dispersed in that manner must necessarily
be debauched; and if any sudden Accident happened, they would be now more in
Readiness to give their Assistance. These Companies of the Guards made 10000
effective Men at first, and in time amounted to a complete Army, which made
them formidable to Rome. The Emperor Commodus made Three Praefecti praetorio,
according to Lampridius, but afterward other Emperors made but Two, and this
lasted till Constantine's Time. These Prefects at first were taken out of the
Order of Knights only, and 'twas a fundamental Law that could not be dispensed
with; whence it was that Mark Antony according to the Relation of Julius
Capitolinus, expressed his Displeasure that he was not able to make Pertinax, who
was his Successor, Praefectus praetorto, because he was a Senator. Doluit
Marcus, quod cum Senator esset, Praefectus praetorio a se fierinon posset. The
Emperor Commodus being afraid to confer this Office upon Paternus, dexterously
disappointed him of it by conferring upon him the Honor of the Laticlavium and
making him a Senator, as Causabon explains that Passage, Per Lati-clavi bonorem
a praefecturae administratione snbmovit: Heliogabalus conferred this Charge
upon his Juglers, according to Lampridius, and Alexander Severus made use of
Senators, which was never practiced before, says the same Author in his Life,
or at least very seldom; for except Titus the Son of Vespasian, who was a
Senator and a Man of Consular Dignity, that was constituted Praefectus
praetorio under his Father, as Suetonius says, or Cremerus Aretinus, according
to Tacitus, we do not find in History that any Senator enjoyed it till this
Emperor's Time.

When the Emperor instituted this Officer, he made a short Speech concerning
the Dignity of the Charge, and the Duties of the Person entrusted with it, then
he presented him with a Sword and Belt, and sometimes put a naked Sword into
his Hand, saying as Trajan did to Licinius Sura, Receive this Sword, and employ
it for my Service, if I govern well, but if otherwise, make use of it against
me. This Dion Cassius informs us in Trajan's Life: This Officer was degraded by
divesting him of the Sword and Belt, as Galba did by Tigillinus and Sabinus who
were Praefecti praetorio, as we read in Philostratus. These Officers commanded
the Guards and all the Armies and administered Justice, the Emperors leaving to
them the Management of all Affairs: They may be compared with the ancient
Mayors of the Palace in France, who were the second Persons in the Kingdom, and
to whose sole Management the Kings of the first Line left all Things; they
thinking it enough to show themselves once a Year to the People. But
Constantine the Great did a little moderate the Power of the Praefectus
praetorio, for to punish him that had declared himself in Favor of the Tyrant
Maxentius and demolished the Citadel at Rome which Sejanus had caused to be
built; and having divided the Empire into Four Governments, he constituted Four
General Governors or Praefecti praetorio over them, each bearing the Name of
their particular Government. These Governments were those of Gaul, Sclavonia
called Illiricum, Italy and the East, so that there was a Praefectus praetorio
Galliarum, or a Praetorian Prefect of the Gauls, one of Italy, another of East
Sclavonia, called Illiricum Orientale, who had his Residence at Thessalonica,
and the Fourth of the East, that resided in Syria. These Two last had all the
East under their Government, which was divided into 60 Provinces; and the first
Two all the West divided into 58. They had Lieutenants under them, whom they
commanded in an absolute manner, and they were called Vicarii. When Constantine
had established these Four Governors, he deprived them of the Command of the
Army which originally did belong to them, and required every one of them to
administer Justice within his Government with supreme Power. There are other
Authors who attribute this Change to the Emperors Valentinian, Gratian, and
Theodosius, but Zozimus does it to Constantine.

They had a Tribunal where they administered Justice, and they passed Sentence
by Word of Mouth and not in Writing as other subordinate Magistrates did, Non
pronuntiabant ex tabella, sed verbo. They had the Privilege of the Sword which
they wore by their Sides, that is, to pass a final Sentence of Death without
further Appeal. In the Place where they administered Justice there stood a Table
covered over with Scarlet Tapistry and Gold Fringe round it, upon which there
was a Book shut, on the Cover whereof was the Emperor's Picture, and on each
Side Two gilded Candlesticks with lighted Wax-Candles; 'twas in this manner he
administered Justice, that so a greater Solemnity might be added to the Majesty
of the Roman Empire. This Book was that which the Emperors gave to these
Governors, when he sent them into their Governments, and therein was contained
the Duties of their Office. Lazius tells us that the Marks of the Praetorian
Praefect's Dignity, were the Privilege of the Sword, the Rods, the
Curule-Chair, the Scepter or Ivory-Staff, the Pretext-Robe, the Laticlavium and
the Trabea; also the Insula or Mitre to wear on their Heads, and a Company of
Archers for a Guard: When these Praefects went from Rome to their Governments,
they left their Children with the Emperors as a Security of their Fidelity.

PRAEFECTUS URBIS;
The Prefect or Governor of the City; he was formerly one of the chief
Magistrates of Rome, who governed it in the Absence of the Consuls and
Emperors. His Business was to look after the Provision, Civil Government,
Buildings and Navigation: His Power extended to a 1000 Stones Throw without
Rome, according to Dion: He was the proper Judge in the Causes of Slaves,
Patrons, and Freed-men: He convened the Senate, judged the Senators, and
defended their Rights and Prerogatives, as Cassiodorus will have it: He was
obliged on the first Day of the Year to go and make the Emperor a Present in
the Name of all the People, of some Gold Cups, with Five Pieces of Money, as
Symmachus says, Vobis solemnes pateras cum quinis solidis ut Numinibus
integritatis offerimus.

PRAEFERICULUM,
a Vase used at the Sacrifices of old, that had a prominent Mouth, like unto
some Vessels now used.

PRAEFICAE MULIERES:
They were a sort of mourning Women, who at Funeral Solemnities praised the
Deceased, made a Lamentation, beat their Breasts, and ditorted their Faces to
incite others to mourn. See Funus and Exequiae.

PRAENOMEN;
it was that which was put before the general Name, and signified as much as
our proper Name which serves to distinguish Brothers one from another, as
Peter, John, James. This Praenomen was not brought in use till long after the
Name; and therefore it was a Custom among the Romans to give to their Children
the Name of the Family, on the the 9th Day after their Birth, if they were
Boys, and on the 8th to Girls, according to Festus and Plutarch, and these Days
they called Dies Lustrici, because it was a Ceremony whereby they acknowledged
them for their lawful Children: Whereas the Praenomen was not given till they
took upon them the Virile Robe, that is, about the Age of 17, as appears by the
Epitome of the 10th Book attributed to Valerius Maximus: This also is manifest
by Cicero's Epistles, where his Children are always called Ciceronis pueri till
that Age, after which they were called Marcus filius, Quintus filius. And
whereas Cicero in his last Epistle of L. 6. calls his Nephew Quintum Ciceronem
puerum; its very likely that he misapplies the Word puer, either to distinguish
him from his Father, who was also called Quintus, or perhaps, because it was
but a very short time since he had taken the Virile Robe upon him. There was
usually Care taken in conferring this Praenomen, to give that of the Father to
the Eldest Son, and that of the Grandfather and Ancestors to the Second, and
so on.

PRAEPOSITUS
sacri cubiculi; this Name may be given with us to the Lord Chamberlain, who
marched, at the Performance of any Ceremonies, after the Master of the
Horse-Guards; as you have it in the last Law of the Code, and in the Law Penul.
eodem, where his Charge is inserted, which was to keep himself in the Emperor's
Chamber, and to take care of his Bed and Clothing. See Panciroli, Notitia
Imperii, and Bollanger, L. 3. C. 13.

PRAETEXTA;
a Robe so called, which was a long and white Vest, edged with a Purple Border,
the Sons of Persons of Quality wore it at Rome till the Age of Fifteen; and
their Daughters till they were married: The Magistrates, Augurs, Priests and
Senators were it on solemn Days, as Authors inform us.

PRAETEXTATI,
were such Children as still wore the Robe called Praetexta.

Praetextata verba, and Praetextatus sermo; they were lascivious and wanton
Expressions used by Children, when a young Woman was married.

Praetextata Comoedia; a Comedy, wherein Kings and Magistrates, who had a Right
to wear the Robe edged with the Purple Border, were represented upon the Stage.

Praetextatae actiones, were such Things as appertained to the Actions of Kings
and Magistrates.

PRAETOR;
a great Magistrate in Rome, At first all the Magistrates were called Praetors:
But afterward the Generals of the Army, and even the Emperors themselves were
called Praetors. Afterward they constituted Praetors to administer Justice to
the Citizens, and others to Strangers: And lastly, there were Praetors made for
the Government of Provinces. His Power was very great, for the Praetor could
alter Laws, repeal them, and make new ones; from whence you have in the Law
mention made often of the Praetor's Edict.

For the better understanding the Dignity of the Praetors, it will be proper
fully to examine the Reason of their Name, Institution, Number, Dignity, and
what their Power and Charge was. The Word Praetor was peculiarly applied to
this new Magistrate, for before it belonged to the Consuls, and all Persons in
Authority, whether in Civil or Sacred Things; hence it is that we read in some
ancient Epitaphs, Praetor Sacrorum, Praetor Juventutis: Which is confirmed by
Asconius Pedianus; Non solum veteres omnem Magistratum, cui pareret exercitus,
Praetorem appellarunt: Sed quemcunque in re profana sive etiam sacra
praefectum; The Ancients not only called those Praetors who commanded the
Armies, but also such as had the Charge either of Sacred or Civil Things. The
Occasion of creating this Magistrate, was a Multiplicity of Business upon the
Consul's Hands (and this was Anno 388,) and the Necessity the Republic found
it self under of granting to the People a Consul of their own Order; for the
Senate did not allow it but upon Condition that a new Magistrate should be
created, that is, the Praetor, who was taken out of the Patrician Order: But in
the Year 416, Q. Philo, a Plebeian, got himself advanced to the Office of
Praetor, notwithstanding the Opposition made by the Consul Sulpicius against
him.

There was no more but one of them from the Year 388, till 510, according to
Lipsius; but Business coming to increase so much by reason of the great Number
of Citizens and Strangers that came to live in Rome, and one being not enough,
they thought it proper to constitute another, and their Business was distinct;
for one administered Justice to the Citizens of Rome, and for that Reason was
called Praetor urbanus; and the other took Cognizance of the Suits that
happened between the Citizens and Strangers, and he was called Praetor
peregrinus: The first was more honorable than the other, and so he was
entitled, Praetor honoratus, and his Edicts named Jus honorarium, as the
Lawyers say. But toward the Year 520, when Sicily and Sardinia were reduced
into Provinces, they appointed Two new Praetors, whom they sent thither in the
Quality of Governors and Judges; and this was likewise done, when the
Spaniards were conquered, as Livy informs us, who says they made Six Praetors
for that Year; sex Praetores eo anno primum creati. Sylla also increased the
Number of them with two more, but the Triumvirs increased them to 64, according
to Dion: However, Augustus reduced them to 12, and Tiberius being solicited to
increase the Number, refused it, as Tacitus says, L. 1. Tiberius afterward
named 12 Praetors, the Number established by Augustus, and as the Senate
pressed him to increase them, he swore he would not do it: However he increased
them to 15, in the Year 786, according to Dion: The Emperor Claudius enlarged
the Number to 18; but upon the Declension of the Empire, they were reduced to 3
only, as we may see by the Laws of the Emperors Valentinian and Macrinus, set
forth, L. 2. C. de Off. Praet.

The Praetorship was the second Office for Dignity in Rome, since 'twas
conferred by the same Auspices as the Consulship, and that the Praetors were in
History called Collegae Consulum, as Livy observes, L. 7. Decad 1. The exterior
Ensigns of this Office were the Robe called Praetexta, the Curule Chair, and
six Lictors. This Office was Annual, and he who discharged the same with
Honor, and without any Disgrace, had a Right for all his Lifetime to wear the
Praetexta, and white Trabea, but such as were guilty of Maladministration
were forced to lay it down, as it happened to Bembius Pamphilus. All their
Business in general consisted in Three Things, viz. to administer Justice to
Citizens and Strangers, to preside over Games, and to take Care of the
Sacrifices: Justice was administered by these Three Words, Do, Dico, Addico; Do
signified to receive and admit the Plaintiff to commence his Suit; Dico to
summon, or give a Summons upon Oath, or deliver it to the Person in Possession,
to dispatch Matters of Adoptions and Emancipations, and to make Edicts as a
Supplement to the Civil Law; and Addico to adjudge, condemn, and pronounce
Sentence: He was to oversee the Games, as Livy has it, L. 8. Decad 1. as also
Martial and Juvenal: They took Care of the Sacrifices offered to the Goddess
called Bona Dea, as Plutarch says in Caesar's Life, and Cicero, L. 1. Ep. 10.
ad Articum.

PRAETORES CEREALES, or FRUMENTARII;
Praetors, whose Business it was to see that Rome was supplied with Corn; they
were established by Julius Caesar.

PRAETORES AERARII;
the Officers. of the Treasury or Exchequer.

PRAETORIUM;
the Place where the Praetor administered Justice; it was also his Palace, and
sometimes his Pleasure-house: Besides which it signified the Tent or Pavillion
of the General of the Army, where the Council of Warmet.

PRAETORIANI;
the Soldiers, who were the Emperor's Guards: Scipio Africanus was the first
who established a Company of the Bravest of his Army, whom he chose for his
Guards, and who did not forsake him in Battle.

PRAXITELES;
a Native of Great Greece, and honored with the Privilege of a Roman Citizen,
an excellent Statuary, whose Works were all Masterpieces: Among others there
was Cupid's Statue, which the Thespians bought for 800 Golden Minae Atticae,
and was brought to Rome by Julius Caesar: But the most Considerable was the
Statue of Venus, which half opened her Lips, as if she smiled: The Industry of
the Artist overcame the Stone it self; insomuch that the Hardness of the Marble
expressed the most delicate Features of so beautiful a Body: There was a Mole
upon the Goddess's Thigh, which was the more conspicuous, because the rest was
of white Marble finely polished. Lucian in his Dialogue of the Lovers, does
also discover unto us the Cause of this Mole: The Sacristan, he or she that
officiated there, for they say, 'twas a Woman, told us somewhat that amazed us;
she said that a young Man of Noble Birth, but one whose Infamy buried his Name
in Oblivion, being prompted by some evil Genius, fell in Love with this Statue;
wherefore he spent all his time in the Temple to contemplate her, having his
Eyes always fixed upon her..... His Passion continuing; all the Temple Walls
and Trees round resounded nothing but his Love: It extolled Praxiteles above
Jupiter, and gave all that it had for an Offering to the Goddess: It was
believed at first that his Devotion lead him thither, but he being at length
transported with Madness, hid himself one Night in the Temple, and some Mark of
the Violence of his Passion was discovered next Day, but he seen no more; and
whether it were that he fell down over the Rocks, or into the Sea, is uncertain.

PRIAMUS;
the Son of Laomedon, he was with his Sister Hesione taken Prisoner by
Hercules, and ransomed for Money; he ascended his Father's Throne, and reigned
over the Trojans, and all Asia: He married Hecuba, by whom he had several
Children; and Paris amongst the rest, who going to Greece, under Pretense of
demanding Hesione his Aunt's Liberty, took away Helen from Menelaus, which
caused the Grecians to engage in that War against the Trojans, that lafted Ten
Years: At last Troy was destroyed, and Priamus killed by Pyrrbus the Son of
Achilles, near unto the Altar of Jupiter Herceius.

PRIAPUS;
the Poets made him to be Venus and Bacchus's Son; he was not a Man, but the
Representation of those Parts that serve for Generation, which Isis caused to
be made and worshipped, when after the rest of Osiris his Body was found, which
had been cut to pieces by his Enemies, there was none but this wanting, the
Picture whereof he required should be adored: this Worship spread it self
everywhere, and this infamous Figure was to be seen in most Temples; in
Vineyards and Gardens over whom Priapus was said to preside. Diodorus adds,
that in order to the advancing the Credit of this Monster of Impurity, they
made him to be the Son of Venus and Bacchus.

Strabo speaks of a City in Troas that bore the Name of Priapus, because he was
much honored there, and that it abounded with excellent Wines: But this Author
says afterward, that the Worship of Priapus was new, that Hesiod did not know
him, but that he was very like unto the other petty Deities of the Athenians:
But this Worship could be no where new except in Greece, if according to
Diodorus Siculus, it prevailed in Egypt in the Days of Isis. Strabo observes,
that even before this Priapus, the Greeks were not without some other the like
Representations. Some have thought, that the Image and Worship of Priapus began
to obtain in the World, after Sesostris, King of Egypt had subdued a great Part
thereof, and left all those immodest Pictures, as an Instance of their
Lasciviousness and Victories, in all the Provinces: Venus prostituting herself
to Bacchus, and being ready to lie in, she retired to Lampsacus, a City in
Phrygia, where she was brought to Bed of Priapus, who was born with a
prodigious large Genital: Venus left him in that City, where after he grew up,
he was so mightily beloved of the Women, that the Lampsacians banished him out
of their City; but finding themselves taken with a strange Distemper in their
privy Parts, and having consulted the Oracle thereupon, they recalled him, and
set up his Statue in their Orchards and Gardens to frighten the birds away,
they represented him like a Man stark naked with disheveled Hair, holding a
Sickle in one Hand, and his Genital in the other: They sacrificed an Ass to
him, because Priapus, according to Ovid, going about to violate the Chastity of
Vesta when asleep, Silenus's Ass brayed, awaked her and prevented her being
debauched by him.

PRIMICERIUS CUBICULI;
the first Groom or first Gentleman of the Bedchamber.

PRIMICERIUS NOTARIORUM,
Secretary of State; who kept a general Register of the whole Empire. Tacitus
in the first Book of his Annals tells us, that the Emperor Augustus had made a
Journal of the Empire, wherein was contained the ^^umber of Roman Soldiers and
Strangers that were in Service, that of the Armies, Kingdoms, Provinces,
Imposts, Revenues, and at last a State of the Charge; the whole was writ by
Augustus his own Hand: The Emperors at first left the keeping of this Journal
to their Freed-men, which were called Procuratores ab Ephemeride, and
afterward Vir spectabilis Primicerius Notariorum, who had several Secretaries
under him called Tribuni Notarii.

PRIMIPILUS,
chief Captain or first Centurion who had Charge of the Banner; Colonel of the
first Legion among the Romans.

PRIMITIAE;
the first Fruits of the Earth, which were offered to the Gods upon an Altar
made like a Trivet.

PROBUS,
a Roman Emperor, that succeeded Tacitus; he was a Pesant's Son of Dalmatia,
but his Valor, Spirit and other excellent Endowments supplied all the Defects
of his Birth, in so advantageous a manner, that it proved to be no Impediment
to him. In Gaul he took Revenge upon 400000 Germans, whom he defeated, for the
Cruelties they had exercised toward those that were faithful to the Empire, in
diverse Irruptions made by them: God gave him a famous Victory over the
Sarmatians in Illyricum, and over the Goths in Thrace: Bonosus and Proculus
rebelled against him, one in the Provinces near the Rhine, and the other in
that Part of Gaul which is about Lions. But they both unhappily perished: It Is
indeed true, that the Inroads made by the Franks into all the Provinces of the
Empire, allayed the Joy of his Victories: Death put a Stop to the Triumphs
which Probus hoped to have won over the Persians in the Fifth Year of his
Reign, according to Vopiscus, and the Beginning of his Seventh according to
Eusebius, Orosus, Cassiodorus, Aurelius, Victor and Eutropius. He was killed by
his own Soldiers, fearing he should subdue all the Enemies of the Empire, left
they should become useless.

PRO-CONSUL;
a Magistrate who was sent to govern a Province with a consulary and
extraordinary Power: He had all the Ensigns of a Consul's Power conferred upon
him, as the Purple-Robe, the Curule-Chair, and the Ivory-Scepter, but he had no
more than Six Lictors: His Equipage was provided at the Charge of the Public,
and the same was called Viaticum, which consisted in Pavillions,
Charging-Horses, Mules, Clerks, Secretaries, etc. as Cicero in his Oration
against Rullus explains it, Deinde ornat apparitoribus, scribis, librariis,
praeconibus: praeterea mulis, tabernaculis, tentoriis, supellectili, sumptum
haurit ex aerario. This Office lasted no longer than one Year, but the Person
many Times exercised it till the Arrival of his Successor, and there were but
30 Days allowed him for his Return to Rome.

PROGNE;
the Daughter of Pandion, King of Athens, who was married to Tereus, King of
Thrace, by whom she had a Son named Itys. Tereus going one Day to Athens, she
desired him to bring her Sister Philomela along with him, which he did, but he
ravished her by the Way, and then cutting out her Tongue, he shut her up in a
dark Prison, and pretended she died by an extraordinary Accident. Philomela
having found out a Way to let her Sister know the Disaster that had befallen
her, by writing to her an Account of it upon a Piece of Linen with her own
Blood; she dissembled her Grief till the Feast of Bacchus, where making one of
the Bacchantes she freed her Sister, and made Tereus eat his own Son Itys, who
intending to revenge the same, the Fable says, the Gods transformed Progne into
a Swallow, and Philomela into a Nightingale; as for Itys, he was changed into a
Pheasant, and Tereus to a Lapwing.

PROMETHEUS,
the Son of Japetus and Clymene and Deucalion's Father; Lucian in a Dialogue,
called Prometheus or Caucasus brings in Vulcan, Mercury, and Prometheus
speaking in this manner.

Merc. There is Caucasus to which we are to tie the Criminal: Let us seek out
some Rock that has no snow upon it, that so we may drive the Nails the deeper,
and he be exposed every way in order to make his Punishment the more exemplary.


Vulc. I see it; but he must not be put so low, that the Men which he has made
can come and unloose him, nor so high as not to be seen. It will do very well
in my Mind, upon the side of this Mountain, above that Abysm, we will tie one
of his Hands to yonder Rock, and the other to that over against it. Merc. You
say well, for they are both steep and unaccessible. Prom. Come hither, that you
may not be forced to it, and get up presently, that you may be tied.


Prom. Have pity upon an unfortunate Man, who is unjustly punished.


Merc. Do not pretend to tell us what to do? Do you think that Caucasus is not
big enough for us Three to be tied to it; Or are you glad to have Companions in
your Misery, which is a Comfort to the Unfortunate? Here, take his Right Hand,
Vulcan; tie it fast; and there is the Left, we will tie it also: It Is very
well. The Vulture will come to tear your Bowels, as a Reward for your excellent
Invention.


Prom. O Earth which have brought me forth! And thou Saturn and Japetus, must I
suffer so much for nothing?


Merc. For nothing, Wretch! Was it nothing to deceive Jupiter at a Feast, and
to give him Bones covered with Fat, that you might reserve the best part for
your self: Besides, who required you to make a Man, that subtle and wary
Animal, and especially Women; and afterward to steal Fire from Heaven, which
belonged to the Gods: Nay, after all this, you come to plead your Innocence,
and to say they do you much Wrong in punishing you?


Prom. Have you the Courage, Mercury, to persecute me in this manner, and to
revile me in respect to Things for which I have deserved well: I swear by the
Gods, that I was brought up at the Charge of the Public, in the Prytaneum. I
was concerned to see Jupiter so vexed, and out of Humor, because he had not
the best part in the Feast; he was going to sacrifice, not a mere Man, but a
God, and one of his old Comrades, who served him in time of need....Let us now
speak of the Creation of Man; and if any will say, that he ought not to be made
at all, or that he should have been made after another manner; I will examine
both the one and the other, and as to the first say, that the Gods have been so
far from losing any thing thereby, that they have been great gainers; and that
it is more to their Advantage that there should be Men, than if there were none
at all. To carry the Matter a little higher, you must know, that at first there
were none but Gods in the World, and that the Earth was no more than a vast
Desert covered with thick Woods: Wherefore, as I have been always studious of
the public Benefit and Advantage, I mixed some Earth with Water, as the Poet
says, and working them together, I made a Man like unto us by Minerva's Help.
This is my Crime....And now let us speak about stealing the Fire; and first did
not I steal it to give it to Men, and is it not the Nature of that Element to
communicate it self without being lost.

The same Lucian in the following Dialogue, makes Prometheus speak to Jupiter
in this manner.


Prom. Free me, Jupiter, for I cannot do it my self.


Jupit. Villain, shall I set you at Liberty? Must I do it because you have made
that Piece of Workmanship, which has occasioned so much Mischief, stole Fire
from Heaven, and deceived your Master at a Feast?


Prom. Have not I suffered enough, to have been tied so long to Caucasus, and
to have mine Entrails fed upon by the Cruellest of all the Vultures.


Jupit. That Is not the Hundredth Part of what you have deserved; you ought to
have been crushed to Pieces by Caucasus and not tied to it, and not only to
have your Liver gnawed by 12 Vultures, but also your Eyes and Heart. So much
for the Fable, now to the History.


Diodorus Siculus says, that Prometheus governed part of Egypt in the Reign of
Osiris: The Nile overflowing, all the Country under Prometheus his Government
had been drowned, if Hercules had not stopped it is Irruptions by the Ditches
which he made. The Nile was formerly named Oceanus; but this Inundation gave it
the Name of Eagle; it was called Egypt in succeeding Times, and Nilus from the
Two Kings who bore that Name. Prometheus his Trouble that the River called the
Eagle had spoiled his Country, gave the Poets occasion to feign, that
Prometheus his Heart was tore by an Eagle, till such time as Hercules came to
free him from that Punishment. Ideo poetarum nonnulli Graecorum factum hoc
detorsere ad fabulam, quod Aquilam Promethei jecur depascentem Hercules
confixerit. The same Historian says elsewhere, that the Reason why the Poets
feigned Prometheus stole Fire from Heaven and communicated the same to Men, was
because he invented Instruments to make Fire with: Ignarii repertor est
instrumenti, videlicet quo ad eliciendum ignem utimur. Jupiter to punish the
Thief put him in Chains, but Hercules having made his Peace with Jupiter set
him free.

Lucian gives an Account of the most probable Way whereby Man was made by
Prometheus, viz. that he was the first that made Statues of Earth with so much
Art and Skill, which was attributed to Minerva, that those earthy Men seemed to
have both Life and Motion: The Poets from hence feigned that Prometheus was the
Maker of Men. Appian in his History of the Mithridatick War, relates, that
Pompey when in Pontus, had the Curiosity to go and see Mount Caucasus, to
which, it was said, Prometheus was tied. Arrian reports, that the Macedonians,
who under Alexander conquered Asia, having entered into a Cave in the Country of
Paropamisus, they were informed by the Inhabitants of the Neighborhood, or
invented it themselves, that 'twas the Place where Prometkeus had been chained,
and where an Eagle tore his Heart, till Hercules, having shot the Eagle with
his Arrows, came and delivered him. This was a Story invented by Alexander's
Flatterers, to transport Caucasus from Pontus to the Eastern Countries, that so
they might say, Alexander had past over Caucasus. It may be said, that the
Fable of Prometheus was transferred from Egypt into Pontus to Mount Caucasus,
where they also feigned that a River called the Eagle overflowing the Country,
Prometheus was put in Chains by his Subjects, and at length set at Liberty by
Hercules.

As they will have Prometheus to have been the Person who brought the Worship
of the 12 Gods into Greece, it is more probable he was an Egyptian by Descent,
and that the History or Fable appertaining to him, was successively carried
into Scythia, Pontus and Greece. Fulgentius Placiades, who wrote Three Books of
Mythology, at the Time that the Vandals conquered and ravaged Africa, says that
Prometheus, that is Providence, formed the Body of a Man of Earth, that going
up to Heaven with Minerva, which is Wisdom, he from thence brought Fire to the
Earth, i. e. the Souls of Men. Prometheus makes a Man, and a Vulture rend his
Heart, because his Mind and Heart were continually engaged in the Contemplation
and Love of Wisdom: Lastly, Prometheus formed Pandora, which is the Soul, and
bears the said Name because of her being enriched with all the Gifts of Heaven:
Thus it is that Bishop explains the Fable of Prometheus, but it is too remote
from the History.

In the Protagoras of Plato, we have it related, that Prometheus having
employed all the Properties of Nature in the Formation of Animals, and having
nothing more to make but Man, he took Knowledge from Minerva, Fire from Vulcan,
and Mercury supplied him with Modesty and Justice. Simonides says, After God
had made Animals, and created Man, and had nothing more to bestow upon Women,
he borrowed the Qualities of each Animal for them: On some he conferred the
Nature of a Swine, on others that of the Fox: To one he gave the Stupidity of
an Ass, to another the Inclination of a Martern, or a Mare: Others he made like
unto Monkeys, and on those, whom he was minded to favor, he bestowed the
Nature of Bees.

PRO-PRAETOR,
a Roman Magistrate, who had all the Power of a Praetor conferred upon him, and
all the Ensigns of Honor belonging to the said Office. See Praetor.

PROSCENIUM;
was a raised Place on which the Actors played, like that which we call the
Theater or Stage: This Proscenium consisted of Two Parts in the Theaters of the
Greeks; one was the Proscenium particularly so called, where the Actors played:
The other was the Logeion, where the Singers came to rehearse, and the Mimicks
acted their Parts. The Proscenium and Pulpitum were the same thing in the
Theater of the Romans.

PROSERPINA,
was sometimes confounded with Diana: Diodorus Siculus relates the Story of her
being stole away by Pluto, as a Thing attested not only by the Poets, but also
by Historians: He alleges it was in Sicily, and near the City of Enna that
Proserpina was carried away, and that Ceres going to search for her lighted her
Torches by the Fire of Mount Etna. Sachuniathon in the Theology of the
Phoenicians informs us, that Proserpina was much earlier known in Phoenicia
than in Greece or Sicily, he makes her to be Saturn's Daughter, and says, she
died a Virgin and very young. From hence it is probable did arise the Fiction of
the Greeks, that she was stole by Pluto: Saturnus liberos procreavit
Proserpinam and Minervam, ac prior quidem virgo diem obiit.

The History of Proserpina passed from Phoenicia into Greece near 200 Years
after Moses his Death, if we believe St. Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria, who
says, that Aedoneus or Orcus, King of the Molossians stole her: Centesimo, and
nonagesimo quinto anno post Mosen ferunt fuisse Proserpinam virginem raptam ab
Aedoneo, id est, Orco Rege Molossorum. Eusebius also says as much in his
Chronicle: And so the Fable or History of Proserpina, like all the rest of the
Fables, came from the East to the West, from Phoenicia to Greece, and from
Greece into Sicily: Appian of Alexandria speaking of the River Strymon, and of
those fine Countries in Macedon and Thrace that were watered by it, says, it
was from thence Proserpina was stole as she was gathering Flowers: Vbi raptam
dicunt Proserpinam, dum flores legeret. Macrobius says, the Ancients called the
upper Hemisphear of the Earth by the Name of Venus and the lower Hemisphere by
that of Proserpina.

As they are no more than different Appellations, it is not necessary we should
take the Trouble to find out the exact Rules of Genealogy herein. Rhea was the
Mother of Ceres, and Ceres the Mother of Proserpina, and yet all the Three are
no other than the Earth: So the Grandmother, Mother and Daughter are nothing
but the same Earth. The Truths are real and natural, the Genealogies are
Poetical and Figurative: Some consider the Earth in a different manner, and
will have Rhea to be the whole Globe of the Earth, that Ceres is no more than
the Surface which is sown and mown, and Proserpina no other than the Hemisphere
of our Antipodes. It Is the Opinion of Vossius. But that Proserpina is the same
as the Earth, we learn from the very Name thereof, for it comes from the Greek
(...), and of Persephone they made Proserpina: Hesychius says, that Persephone
comes from (...), far utilitatem and fructum. Vossius very ingeniously
deduces this Word from the Hebrew Peri, that signifies Fructus, and saphan
tegere, because the Earth covers the Seeds sown in it. But as Proserpina is
taken for the lower Part of the Earth which is buried in Darkness, hence it is
that they take her also for Hell, and the Queen of Hell, as Horace does. Quam
pene furvae Regna Proserpinae,
Et judicantem vidimus Aeacum.
L. 2. Od. 13.

It Is upon the same Account that Plutarch also takes her for the Earth, and
Cicero says, that the Name of Pluto, i. e. Riches, was given her by the Greeks;
because the Earth is the Treasury of all the Riches of Nature all comes from
and returns into it. The Romans imitated the Grecians by giving the Name of
Dis, which signifies Rich to Pluto. They offered Dogs, and black and barren
Victimes in Sacrifice to Proserpina.

PROTEUS,
a Sea-God, the Son of Oceanus and Tethys, who looked after Neptune's Flocks:
He was an excellent Prophet; and those who had a mind to consult him about
Future Events, must surprise and bind him; for he had the Artifice to assume
diverse Shapes, in order to avoid giving an Answer to such as came to consult
him: Lucian pretends that Proteus was no other than an excellent Dancer, who
made 1000 different Postures, and whose active Body and quick Intellects knew
how to counterfeit and imitate every thing so admirably well, that he feemed to
be the very Thing, which he imitated, which was, the Occasion of the Fable.

Herodotus does not doubt but that Proteus was an Egyptian King and Deity: He
says, 'twas he that received Paris and Helen with their Treasures, and who kept
Helen during the Seige of Troy, and restored her to Menelaus, when after the
Destruction of that City the Greeks came to know that Helen had never been
there. Diodorus Siculus agrees with him as to the Reign of Proteus in Egypt
during the Siege of Troy; but he says, that the Greek Fable concerning the
Transformations of Proteus, took its Origin from the different Habits which the
said King affected to wear above other Kings of Egypt, he one while putting on
a Lion's Skin, another while he dressed himself like a Bull or Dragon, and
carried Trees sometimes by way of Ornaments, sometimes Fire or Perfume, which
made the Greeks say, they were so many different Shapes which he was
metamorphosed into; and as this King was much addicted to Astrology, they
feigned also that he foretold Things to come. Lucian in his Dialogue of the
Sea-Gods, makes Proteus and Menelaus speak thus.

Menel. I do not admire, Proteus, that a Sea-God as you are should transform
your self into Water, or even into a Plant; but to become Fire, that I cannot
understand; to be turned into a Lion, may be better allowed of.


Prot. Menelaus, it is true.


Men. I know it very well; for I am a Witness of it my self: But to be plain
with you, I believe there is a Cheat in it, and that you are only a mere
Juggler.


Prot. What Cheat can there be in such things as are so manifest and certain?

St. Augustine by the ^xample of Proteus his Fable shows, that the Poets ought
not to be rejected by the Lovers of true Philosophy; for the Proteus of the
Poets was an excellent Representation of Truth, which escapes from us, and
disguises her self after a thousand different ways, by being concealed under
false Appearances, from which it cannot be separated, without great Difficulty:
But at length, after these Obstructions, she discovers unto us her Beauty and
Solidity, that we may afterward relish the Sweetness of her. Orpheus called
him the Principle of all Things, and the Ancientest of all the Gods, and says
he keeps the Keys of Nature: The Romans named him Vertumnus, because of the
Variety of Shapes which he assumed: He was beloved by the Goddess Pomona.


PROTESILAUS;
the Son of Iphiclus, and Laodamia's Husband, a Grecian Prince, who wakilled by
Hector at the Siege of Troy, as he was coming out of his Ship. Lucian in his
Dialogues of the Dead, makes Protesilaus, Pluto, and Proserpina talk after this
manner:

Prot. Ah! Pluto, and you the Daughter of Ceres, do not reject the Prayers of a
Lover.


Pluto. Who are you that talk thus?


Prot. The Chief of the Grecians that died at the Siege of Troy.


Pluto. And what would you have?


Prot. Leave to go upon Earth a little while.


Pluto. They are the same Requests as all the Dead make, but not one obtains
them.


Prot. It Is not a Desire of Life that makes me speak, but the Passion I have to
see my Mistress, whom I left in her Nuptial Chamber, and hasted away to go
along with the Greeians; and was so unhappy as to be killed by Hector, as I was
coming ashore: The Love which I have for that fair Creature gives me no rest,
and I would desire leave once more to spend a Moment with her.


Pluto. Have not you drunk of the Waters of Lethe, as others have done?


Prot. I have, but the Disease was too strong for the Remedy.


Pluto. She will not be long before she comes, and so spare you the Pains of
going to seek her.


Prot. I have not Patience to tarry; Pluto, you know the Impatience of Lovers,
for your self has formerly been in Love.


Plut. What good will it do you to see her again for a Moment, and then lose
her for ever?


Prot. Perhaps I may persuade her to come along with me, and so I shall thereby
increase thine Empire with one Ghost more.


Pluto. That Is not just, Protesilaus, and it is never granted.


Prot. It Is because you do not recollect your self better; for you did restore
his Euridice to Orpheus, and Alcesta to Hercules who was my Relation.


Pluto. Would you appear before her in this Condition, which will make her die
for very fear? And do you think that she will mind you, or be able to know you?


Proserpina. Let us do him this Favor, Pluto, and command Mercury to carry him
up, and when he comes upon the Earth, to strike him with his Rod, that he may
assume his former Shape, and become such an one as he was when he went out of
her ^uptial Chamber.


Pluto. Since Proserpina will have it, I give my Consent. Mercury, take him and
conduct him thither; but let him remember that there is but one Day allowed him
to tarry. They sacrificed to him in Chersonesus, according to the Testimony of
Lucian himself, in his Dialogue of the Assembly of the Gods.


PROVIDENTIA;
Providence, which the Ancients made to be a Deity, as Cicero says, (...) Not.
Deor. They pictured her like a Roman Lady, holding a Scepter in one Hand, and
with the o her seemed to point at a Globe that was at her Feet, intimating that
she governed all the World like the good Mother of a Family. The Emperor Titus
caused her to be graven with the Helm of a Ship, and a Globe in her Hands.
Maximianus represented her by Two Ladies, holding Ears of Corn in their Hands,
with this Inscription, Providentia Deorum, Quies Augustorum. Alexander Severus
describes her under the Form of a Goddess, holding an Horn of Plenty, and
having a Vessel full of Ears of Corn at her Feet. The Symbol of Providence was
an Ant, holding Three Ear of Corn in her Mouth.

PRYTANEUM;
was a Place in Athens where the Magistrates administered Justice, and where
those who had done some signal Services for the Commonwealth, were maintained
at the Public Charges.

PSECADES;
Chamber Maids, who perfomed their Mistresses Heads, with some Liquid Perfumes,
which they poured Drop by Drop upon them: For the Word Psecas comes from the
Greek Verb (...), which signifies, to drop.

PSYCHE:
The Amors of Cupid and Psyche are known to every Body: Apuleius and
Fulgentius give very pleasant Descriptions of them. We have a Picture wherein
this Marriage is represented, and where Cupid walks on Psyche's Right Hand,
with his Head veiled, his Face uncovered, and in his Hand a Turtle-Dove, which
was the usual Symbol of Conjugal Love; and Psyche, who was by his Side, is
veiled from Head to Foot, this being the Custom among the Ancients, for People
that went to be married, and especially for those of the Female Sex: These Two
Lovers are fastened together with a strong Chain, to in timate there is no
stronger nor more durable Union than that of Marriage; one of them hold, the
Chain in one Hand, and a Torch in the other. Petronius gives the like Account
of the Nuptial Solemnities of these Lovers: They had already, said he, veiled
young Psyche's Head; the Conductor already went before her with a Torch, and a
Company of Women elevated with the Power of Wine, gave a Hundred joyful
Acclamations, and made the Bed of the new married Couple ready.

Psyche has the Wings of a Butterflye fixed to her Shoulders, as all the
ancient Monuments thereof show: The Reason that may be given for this Fiction
is, because the Ancients represented Nature, and the Properties of the Soul,
under the Emblem of Psyche; for the Word in Greek signifies the Soul, of which
the Butterflye is also a Symbol, because they looked upon the Soul to be like a
Breath, which the Lightness of this little flying Insect very well expresses.
We see in Hesychius that Psych: in Greek signifies as much as a Spirit, and a
little flying Insect, such as the Butterfly is. Fulgentius, Bishop of Carthage,
giving a Moral Explication of this Fable, says, that those Two Sisters
represented the Flesh and Freewill, that Psyche who was the youngest, signified
the Soul, because it comes not thither before the Body is formed; that
Concupiscence figured out by Cupid, joins it self to the Soul, in order to
corrupt it, and hinders it to make use of her Eyes, which are the Senses and
Liberty, in order to know God, of whom she is so much beloved: But being at
length illuminated by their Councels, she discovers a Flame, which was before
hid in her Heart, and becomes capable of a Hundred Evils, like the Oil of the
Lamp that discovers the Mystery of Love, and caused Psyche so much Trouble.

PUGILATUS;
an Exercise in use amongst the ancient Greeks and Romans, that consisted in
boxing.

PUGILES;
they were those that fought with Hands and Heels, and endeavored to throw one
another down, and to tumble in the Dirt.

PULPITUM;
a Pulpit, Theater, Stage: It was a Place erected on which the Actors acted
their Plays, and where Victory was represented: It was that part which we in
English call the Stage, wherein we do not comprehend the Pit nor the Galleries,
which are properly what the Ancients called the Theater.

PULVINARIA;
they were Cushions upon which the Statues of the Gods were laid in the
Temples, at the Time that they gave Thanks for some signal Victory; whence came
that Latin Expression, Ad omnia pulvinaria supplieare, to make general
Processions to all the Temples of the Gods, where their Statues were taken down
and laid upon Cushions.

PUTEAL LIBONIS:
Acron takes it to be a Bank that was near unto the Statue of Janus with Three
Heads; Porphyry for a Bar, Tribunal, or Court of Judicature; others for a
Cover, wherewith they covered Wells or Water-Pits. Vigenere thinks it to be the
Brink of a Well: 'Twas a Place much frequented by the Merchants of Rome.

PUTICULI, or PUTICULAE;
they were Ditches, or Holes in the Earth made like Wells, between Mount
Esquiline, the Walls of the City, and the Street which lead to the Gate called
Querquetulana, where the Poor were buried; and which infected all the
Neighboring part of the City: For the removing thereof Augustus gave this
Place to Macenas, who built a stately House, and made very fine Gardens there,
as Horace informs us:

Huc prius angustis eject a cadavera cellis
Conservus vili portanda locabat in arca:
Hoc miserae plebi stabat commune sepulchrum.
Nunc licet Esquiliis babitare salubribus, atque
Aggere in aprico spatiari, quo modo tristes
Albis informem spectabant ossibus agrum.
PYGMEI;
Pigmies; they were a People that dwelt in the Mountains of the East Indies,
according to Pliny; and according to Strabo, in the utmost Parts of Africa;
the People of that Country were not above a Cubit high; and hence they gave
them the Name of Pigmies: They did not live above Eight Years, and the Women
were fit for Copulation at Five. As soon as their Children are born, they hid
them in Caves, for fear of the Cranes, who swallowed them down whole like small
Turnips: They are very temperate, and it is a great deal for one of them to eat
the Leg of a Lark; for usually they roast no more than two or three Bits at a
time, or a little more as their Family is larger or smaller: Their Spits are
made of the Prickles of an Hedgehog; but the largest sort on which they roast
their Larks, are the Darts or Quills of a Porcupine: They drink out of small
Cups made of Cherry-stones; and their Drink consists of two or three Drops of
Rose Water; which they gather in the Spring, and keep the Liquor in Ostridge
Egg-shells, which serves them instead of other Vessels: Their Plates are made
of Crab-shells, the finest of which are those which are most gilt; and their
Dishes consist of small Acorn-Cups. Its from this Country the Dwarf-Trees come;
for all their Forests are but Bushes, which Nature has made on purpose, that
they may not break their Necks in climbing up. They have also Vines growing
there, which they love, because they believe they creep upon the Ground only,
in Consideration of their Weakness: They are well proportioned, considering
their low Stature; and laugh at us upon account of the Danger we run when we
fall: They are at an irreconcilable War with the Cranes, who with a Stroke of
their Bills pierce to their very Brains; but they break their Legs, which are
very small, and get under them in the Conffict.

PYLADES.
See Pilades.

PYLAEMENES,
whom Homer the Prince of the Greek Poets, makes mention of in the Second Book
of his Iliads, was in the famous Trojan War the General of the Paphlagonians.
(...).

The brave Pylamenes was General of the Paphlagonians.

He speaks of him also in the 5th Book, and says he was killed by Menelaus with
his Pike. Livy and Strabo upon Homer's Authority, make him to be descended from
the Heneti, a People of Paphlagonia, and say that he died under the Walls of
Troy. Diclys Cretensis makes him King of Paphlagonia, the Son of Melius, and
related to Priamus, boasting that he was of Agenor's Race, whose Daughter
Amalixo, was married to Dardanus, from whom the Trojan Kings were descended. He
adds, that this Pylaemenes was killed with a Dart by Achilles, in a Battle that
was fought during the Siege of that City. This afterward became a common Name
to the Kings of Paphlagonia, since the first Pylaemenes, as that of Pcolomy
obtained among the Egyptian Kings, of Arsaces among the Parthians, and of
Caesar and Augustus among the Romans.

Its not to be doubted, but there were several Kings of the Name of Pylaemenes
in Paphlagonia, before the Coming of the Romans into Asia; but their famous
Actions having not been celebrated by any Historians that have been preserved
to our Time, we find no mention of any of them before the War of the Romans
against Aristonicus, the Brother of Attalus, under the Conduct of the Consul
Licinius Crassus, of whom Orosus speaks; and in this War Pylaemenes, who then
reigned, assisting the Romans against Aristonicus, was dispossessed of his
Kingdom by Mithridates and Nicomedes.

Authors do not well agree concerning the Reestablishing of Pylaemenes upon his
Throne, and the End of the Kingdom of Paphlagonia. Paulus and Rufus say the
Kingdom was given him after Mithridates had been conquered and expelled; and
that after his Death it was reduced into a Province: Strabo, an Author worthy
of Credit, and that lived near that time, relates, that Dejotarus, a Son of one
Castor Philadelphus, was the last King of Paphlagonia; and it appears by one of
Cicero's Orations, that this Castor was a Grandson of one Dejotarus, whose
Cause he pleaded against the unjust Usurpations of Castor, who had dispossessed
his Grandfather Dejotarus of the Tretrarchy of Gatatia. Justin seems to differ
from all these Authors; for he says, that Nicomedes and Mithridates setting
forth their Pretensions to Capadocia before the Senate, and the Senate
discerning the Artifice of those Kings, who under false Pretenses had seized
upon Kingdoms that of Right did not belong to them, took away Capadocia from
Mithridates, and Paphlagonia from Nicomedes; from whence forwards Paphlagonia
had no Kings: And this Strabo says also.

PYRACMON;
one of Vulcan's Smiths, who is always at the Anvil to forge the Iron; and this
his Name does imply; for (...) in Greek signifies Fire, and (...) an Anvil.

PYRAMID;
is an heap of Square Stones, always rising up in a taper manner, like a Flame;
whence comes the Name, for (...) in Greek signifies Fire: There are some
Pyramids of a vast height; and Pliny speaks of one, for the Building of which
32000 Men were employed for Twenty Years: He says it took up Eight Acres of
Ground. This Author informs us, that the Kings of Egypt, who put themselves to
such great Expense, did it for no other End than to keep the People from
Idleness, and thereby to prevent the Insurrections that otherwise might have
happened. See Obeliscus.

PYRAMUS;
a Babylonian, who was passionately in Love with Thysbe; these Two Lovers
having appointed a Meeting under a Mulberry-Tree, Thysbe came thither first,
and was set upon by a Lion, from whom she made her Escape; but happening to let
her Vail drop, the Beast tore and bloodied it; Pyramus coming and finding the
Vail of his Mistress bloody, thought she had been devoured, and so in despair
killed himself: Thysbe returning and finding her Lover dead, fell also upon the
same Sword. Ovid. L. 4. Metam. describes their Love, and says, that their Death
made the Mulberries change Color, and turn Red from White, which Color they
bore before.

PYRRHICHA;
a kind of Dance invented by Pyrrhus, which was performed with Arms, wherewith
they struck certain Shields by the Cadency and Sound of Musical Instruments.

PYTHAGORAS;
a Philosopher, who intermixed some Tables, Allegories, or Enigmatical
Expressions with his Works; wherein he imitated Numa Pompilius, the Second King
of Rome. He was, indeed, both a King and Philosopher, and was so very much
addicted to the Doctrine which Pythagoras published to the World, that many who
were g^osly ignorant of the Series of Time, took him for one of Pythagoras his
Disciples: but Dionysius of Hallicarnassus has refuted this Error, and showed
that Numa lived Four Generations before Pythagoras, having reigned in the 16th
Olympiad, whereas Pythagoras did not teach in Italy till after the ^iftieth: In
order to let you know the Doctrine and Life of Pythagoras, I Will give you what
Lucian says upon this Occasion, in his Dialogue of the Sects or Sale
Philosophers.

Jupiter. Let these Seats be put in order, and clean every ^lace, as long as
there is an Obligation to make Things ready for the Sects, that so they may
come and show themselves.


Mercury. See, here are Buyers enough, we must not let them cool: With whom
shall we begin?


Jupit. With the Italian Sect: Let that venerable Old Man with long Hairscome
down.


Merc. Ho^ Pythagoras, come down, and walk round about the Place, that you may
show your self to the People.


Jupit. Make Proclamation.


Merc. Here is a Celestial and Divine Life; who will buy it? Who has a mind to
be more than a Man? Who is he that would know the Harmony of the Universe, and
rise again after his Death.


Merchant. Here are great Promises, indeed, and the Person looks with a good
Aspect; but what does he chiefly know?


Merc. Arithmetic, Astronomy, Geometry, Music, Magic, and the Knowledge of
Prodigies; you have an accomplished Prophet here.


Merchant. May one ask him a Question?


Merc. Why not?


Merchant. Where were you born?


Pythagoras. At Samos.


Merchant. Where did you study?


Pythag. In Egypt, amongst the Wise Men of that Country.


Merchant. If I become a Chapman, what will you teach me?


Pythag. I Will teach you nothing, but I Will cause you to call to mind again what
you did formerly know.


Merchant. How is that?


Pythag. By purifying your Soul, and cleansing it from all its Dregs.


Merchant. Suppose it be already purified; how will you instruct me?


Pythag. By Silence: You shall continue Five Years without speaking.


Merchant. Go and teach Craesus his Son; I Will continue to be a Man, and not
become a Statue: But yet, what will you perform after so long Silence?


Pythag. I Will teach you Geometry and Music.


Merchant. Its very pleasant, indeed, a Man must be a Fiddler before he is a
Philosopher: And what will you teach me after that?


Pythag. Arithmetic.


Merchant. I understand that already.


Pythag. How do you reckon?


Merchant. One, Two, Three, Four.


Pythag. You are mistaken; for what you take to be 4 is 10, (that is 1, 2, 3,
4, make 10.) A perfect Triangle; and the Number we swear by.


Merchant. By the Great God Four! I never heard any Thing so strange, and so
divine as this.


Pythag. After this, you shall know that there are Four Elements, Earth, Water,
Air, and Fire; and know also their Form, Qualities and Motion.


Merchant. How! Have the Air and Fire any Form?


Pythag. Yes, and visible enough; for, if they had no Form they could not move:
Then you shall know that God is Number and Harmony.


Merchant. You tell us strange Things.


Pythag. Again, you are another Thing than you appear to be; and there are
several Men in you.


Merchant. What say you, that I am not the same Person that speaks to you?


Pythag. You are the same now, but you have been another formerly, and will
pass again into other Persons by a perpetual Revolution.


Merchant. I shall then at this rate be immortal: But enough of these Things:
What do you live upon?


Pythag. I eat nothing that has Life in it, but every thing else, except Beans.


Merchant. Why will not you eat Beans?


Pythag. Because they have something that is divine in them: 1st, They resemble
the Privy Parts; which you may easily observe, if you will take a green one,
and pull of the Cod: Besides, if they be boiled and exposed to the Moon for
some Nights, they turn to Blood; but what is most remarkable, is, that they
make use of them at Athens, to choose their Magistrates by.


PYTHICI;
the Pythian Games in Greece, instituted in Honor of Apollo, because he killed
the Serpent Python with his Arrows: The Conquerors were crowned with Fruits
consecrated to Apollo.

PYTHIUS;
an Epithet given to Apollo, upon the Account of his killing the Serpent
Python: His Priestesses were also called Pythiae.

PYTHON;
an horrible Serpent, that sprung from the Impurities of the Earth after the
Deluge, and which Apollo shot to Death with his Arrows.

Q.
Q Is a Consonant, and the 16th Letter of the Alphabet, which is pronounced
like K and C before A, O, V, and has this peculiar to it, that it is always
followed by an V. There is so great a Likeness between the C and Q, that many
Gramarians have been inclined to reject the Q as a superfluous Letter,
pretending that the C and V would serve to express what we mean by the Q: And
so we see the Greeks have rejected this Letter, which is only taken from the
Koph or Koppa of the Syrians, and that in the French it has another Force than
the K alone would have, and that which the C it self has before A, O, V: Ramus
also asserts that in the University of Paris, they always pronounced it in
Latin in the same manner as they do now in France, till the Royal Professors
were established by Francis I. insomuch that they used qalis, qantus and qis.
And it is observable that every Body at first opposed the other Pronounciation,
which was then introduced by the Royal Professors as a new Thing, that would by
no means be received, though afterward it always obtained. However the Q still
retains the same Sound as the K or C before O and V, as in quum, which is the
same as Cum, and this made Cicero, as Quintillian has it, to make Sport with a
Cook's Son who sued for a great Employment, tell him by way of Raillery, Ego
quoque tibi jure favebo, because they could not distinguish in point of
Pronunciation, whether he meant the Particle quoque or the Vocative coque, from
coquus a Cook.

Some without just Reason have been inclined to reject the Q; as Varro was,
according to the Relation of Censorinus, and Licinius Calvus according to that
of Victorinus, who would never make use thereof; for it is always of Use, since
it serves to join the Two following Vowels into one Syllable, whereas the C
imports that they are divided; and this is that which makes the Difference
between the Nominative qui, and the Dative cui; the Infinitive sequi, and the
Preterperfect Tence secui from seco. And this is again testified by Priscian
and Terentianus Meurus whom some place in the Fifth Century, but he could not
be higher than the Middle of the Fourth, since St. Augustine cites him as being
already dead in those Books which were writ before 390. And this Difference
between the C and Q, is so true, that you may see the Ancient Poets put the C
in the Place where we put a Q, when they were minded to divide the Words into
more Syllables than they really were. Lucretius has used cuiret with Three
Syllables, for quiret; and so he makes also acua Three Syllables, being put for
aqua. Again Plautus in his Cistell. Act. 2. Sc. 1. uses it in relicuiis. Quod
dedi datum non vellem, quod relicuum non dabo.
For if the Trochaick Verse be not read in this manner it will not have it is
due Number of Feet.

As the Q was put in the Place of C and V, so there have been some Grammarians
who would have it to pass for a dou^^ Letter, and amongst the rest Capella,
Diemedes and Longus. Their Reason for it being this, that the Ancients wrote
qi, qae, qid without an V, as you may still find Examples hereof in some old
inscriptiens: From whence it follows, that the V was enclosed in the Q, and
consequently the same is a double Letter, for otherwise the first Syllable in
aqua, equus, etc. would be long, whereas the same is short in Verse. For it was
the Custom of the Ancients often to take a single Letter for the Characters
which formed the Name of the Letter, as Joseph Scaliger says, for Example they
put the K for ka, though the K for all that was no double Letter. We may farther
say, that when the Ancients wrote qis, they did perhaps pronounce it also qis,
as if it had had a K in it, and that the Writing had changed with the
Pronunciation, says Quintilian; and this Reason appeared so much the more true,
seeing that in Cruter's Inscriptions we find not only the Q but also the C put
alone for qu; Cintus for Quintus, suis for siquis; as on the Contrary the
single Q is put for the C; as Qurtius for Curtius, sequlum for seculum, and
mequm for mecum; and the qu put for the c also, as liquebit for licebit or
liqebit. Q was a Numeral Letter among the Ancients, and signified 500, when
there was a Tittle set over it, it employed 500000.

QUAESTOR,
an Officer among the old Romans who had the Charge of the Public Money, as
our Treasurers, or Lords Commissioners of the Treasury have now a days. Lipsius
opposes the Opinion of those who attribute the Instituting of this Office to
Romulus or Numa or Tullius Hostilius: It may much more truly be referred to
Valerius Publicola, who after the Expulsion of the Kings appointed a Place for
the Public Treasure in Saturn's Temple, under the Custody of Two Officers whom
they called Quaestors, chosen from among the Senators, and were to be created
by the People. Livy and Dyonisius of Hallicarnassus place the Institution of
this Office no higher than about the Year 269. But Tacitus, L. 11. Annal.
speaks very dearly concerning it: Under the same Consuls, Dolabella proposed
that those who were admitted to the Quaestorship should once a Year give a Show
of the Gladiators at their own Charge. Formerly this Office was conferred upon
none but such as had deserved well, and 'twas free for every Citizen to pretend
to this Honor, if he thought himself capable of it: This Office was instituted
at first in the Time of their Kings, and this may be seen by the Law which
Lucius Brutus introduced, whereby the People were obliged to meet together by
Parisies or Wards: Then the Consuls took care to supply it, and at last the
People, who chose Valerius Potitus and Emilius Mamercus, into it, 60 Years
after the Expulsion of the Tarquins. (Some think there is a Mistake in the
Date.) Their first Business was in the Armies; but the Empire growing great,
there were Two new ones created who were to stay in Rome, the Number was again
augmented after the Conquest of ^^ly and the Provinces, insomuch that they
amounted to 8 in all. At last Sylla being desirous to fill up the Senate which
was exhausted by the Civil Wars, and having given an Account to them how Things
stood with them in particular, made up the Number of Quaestors to because that
Charge was as a kind of an Antroduction into that Body: The Quaestorship was
always conferred either upon Persons of Merit, or Reputation, till it came to
be as it were exposed to sale by the Shows they gave: Julius Caesar raised the
Number of them to 40 in order to fill up the Senate; and their Business was to
assist the Generals of the Army that went to War, to receive the Money that
arose from the Spoils and Booty taken from the Enemy, and to pay the Soldiers.
The City Questors received the Taxes and Impositions laid upon the People, went
to meet Foreign Ambassadors, took care to treat them in their Journey, and to
furnish them an House at the Charge of the Commonwealth.

QUAESTORES PARRICIDII;
they were Questors sent into the Provinces by Order of the Senate to try
criminal Cases; their Power was great, they had Lictors and other Officers to
attend them; they were chosen annually, though they continued them sometimes
longer.

QUERCETULANA
See Porta.

QUINQUATRIA;
they were certain Feasts celebrated at Rome in Honor of Pallas, like unto
those called Panathenaea by the Athenians: This Name was given them because
they lasted for Five Days; on the first of which they offered Sacrifices and
Oblations without the Effusion of Blood; the Second, Third and Fourth were
spent in the Fights of the Gladiators, and on the Fifth they went in Procession
through the City: These Feast Days began on the 18th of March, and Scholars had
a Vacation for all that While, and presented their Masters with a Gift which
was called Minerval: They also acted Tragedies now, and there were Disputations
held between the learned Poets and Orators concerning polite Learning, wherein
the Conqueror received a Prize appointed for that Purpose by the Emperor
Domitian: Here it was Stacius vauntingly gloried that he had conquered, and
received a Present from the Emperor himself.

Lux mihi Romanae qualis sub collibus Albae,
Cum modo Germanas acres, modo Daca sonantem.
Praelia, Palladio tua me manus induit auro.
QUINQUENNALES LUDI;
Games celebrated every Five Years, in diverse Cities in Honor of such Emperors
as had been deified.

QUINQUE-VIRI MENSARII; Five Men appointed extraordinarily by the Consuls, to
discharge the Debts of the People that had been ruined by the Usuries exacted
from them.

QUIRINALIS,
see Mons.

QUIRINUS;
the Surname of Romulus, and he was so called from a Javelin, which the Sabins
named Quiris, according to the Testimony of Festus, or else from the Sabins
themselves who were called Cures, to whom he gave a Part of Rome to live in,
and this after they had coalesced into one Body with the Sabines, made the
Romans be called Quirites; or lastly, upon the Account of God Mars; from whom
Romulus said he was descended, and who was called Quiris, because he was
pictured holding a Lance in his Hand: Junius Proculus swore he appeared to him
upon the Via Albina in an august and glorious Manner, with glittering Arms, and
commanded him to tell the Romans that God Mars his Father had taken him up to
Heaven, that they should set up Altars, and worship him as a God by the Name of
Quirinus. Lactantius gives an Account of the Prayers that were made to this new
Deity, which he has taken out of Ennius,

O Romule, Romule, dico o!
Qualem te patriae custodem Di genuerunt,
Tu produxisti nos intra luminis auras:
O pater, o genitor, o sanguen Dis oriundum.
They celebrated a Feast called Populi-fugium in Memory of his Deification,
beause of the Storm which made the People run into their Tents: It was kept on
the Fifth of July.

QUIRITES;
thus the People of Rome were called, from Cures a City of the Sabines with
whom Romulus made an Alliance and shared his City with them; so that the said
Two People being united into one Body were called by one common Name Quirites.

R.
R Is a Liquid Consonant and the 17th Letter of the Alphabet, it was formerly a
Numeral Letter and signified 80, and when there was an Accent above it implied
80000.

RAMNENSES;
a Troop of 100 Horse, that took their Name from Romulus.

RATITI;
Pieces of Money that weighted Four Ounces, on which was graven the Figure of a
round Vessel called Ratis.

RECINIUM, and RECINUM, and RECINUS;
was a kind of a square Mantle or Vail wore by Women or their Heads: Salmasius
will have it to be a sort of a Gown wore by Roman Ladies and tucked up before
with a square Pin, of a Purple Color.

RECUPERATORES;
Judges delegated by the Prator to take Cognizance of a Fact.

REDDIIIO:
The Third part of the Sacrifice of the Heathens, when they put in the Entrails
of the Victim, after they had inspected the same.

REGIFUGIUM;
a Feast celebrated every Year at Rome, on the 24th of February, in
Commemoration of the Expulsion of Tarquinius Superbus, and the Overthrow of the
Monarchy: It was also performed on the 26th of May, when the King of the
Sacrifices, in the Place where the Assemblies were held, offered Bean-flour and
Bacon; and when the Sacrifice was over, they hasted away with all speed, to
denote the precipitate Flight of King Tarquin.

REGIO;
a Part of the City of Rome. Tullius Hostilius was the first that divided Rome
into Four Parts; the same being called Suburana, Esquilina, Collina and
Palatina: Things continued in this State till Augustus his Time, who divided it
into Fourteen Parts, over each of which he settled Two Surveyors, called
Curatores viarum, who were made annually, and took their Divisions by Lot: They
wore a Purple Robe, and had each of them Two Lictors, that walked before them
in the Division where they presided: They had Slaves under them, who were to
take care of the Fires that should happen. Their Charge was to provide for the
Tranquillity of their respective Divisions, and to keep them clean, to take
care that new Buildings did not increase too much, and were not built higher
than the Law did prescribe: They had 2 Officers called Denunciators, to assist
them in each Division, who gave them an Account of all Disorders that happened;
also a Watch to prevent all unlawful Meetings in the Night, and to seize
Vagabonds and Rogues. These Fourteen Divisions contained 424 Streets, 31 of
which were called Great or Royal Streets, which begun at the gilt Pillar, which
stood at the Entry into the open Place, in the Middle of the City; and to each
of these Streets belonged Four Vico-Magistri, who took care of them, and
carried the Orders of the City to each Citizen. Alexander Severus increased the
Number to Fourteen more Surveyors, who served as Assessors to the Governor of
the City.

The first Division began at the Gate Capens, and was 12222 Feet in
Circumference: The same contained Nine great Streets, over which presided Two
Surveyors called Curatores Viarum, Two Denunciators, and 36 Vico-magistri: It
extended without the City as well as within: There stood the Temple of Mars
Gradivns that was supported by 100 Pillars, and was the magnificent Work of
Sylla, where the Senate met to give Audience to Foreign Ambassadors: Near it
was the Stone called Manalis, a manando, because that in the Time of a great
Drought they carried it about in a Procession made for Rain, which failed not
to fall quickly after, as Festus tells us. Manalem vocabant lapidem petransque
extra portam Capenam juxta aedem Martis, quem cura propter nimiam siccitatem in
urbem protraherent, sequebatur pluvia statim, eumque, quod aquas manaret,
manalem lapidem dixere: Near unto this Gate ran the little River Almo, where
the Goddess Pessinuntia was washed at her coming out of the Ship which brought
her to Rome, over it passed an Aqueduct which watered it continually, and made
Juvenal call this Gate Madida Capena: Not far from thence stood the Temples of
Tempests, Hope, and the Muses or Camenae, and the Altar of Apollo: In the same
Division there were Three little Groves called Luci, that had been consecrated
to the Honor of the Gods, viz. Lucus Cuperius Hostiliani, Lucus Egeriae, and
Lucus Camoenarum: Also Four Temples, viz. those of Isis, Serapis, Fortunae
Reduci, and of Mars Quirinus, to distinguish it from that without the Gate
Capena, which was called Martis Gradivi Templum. The First was to denote the
Peace and Tranquillity they expected to enjoy in the City, and the Second to
show that they would employ their Arms without against their Enemies. Ten
Aediculae, of which we know but the Names of Five only, to wit, Aediculae
Fortunae obsequentis, Honoris, Virtutis, Rediculi and Herculis: That of
Rediculi was built without the Gate Cepena, after Hannibal's Retreat. Seven
great open Places called Areae, viz. those of Apollo, Thallus, Gallus, Isis
Eliana, Pinaria, Carsura and Mercury. Six Public Baths or Stoves, viz. those
of Vettius Bolanus, Torquatus, Mamertinus, Abascantianus, Mettianus
Secundianus, Antiochianus, with 82 private ones more. 83 Lakes or Ponds, into
which the Waters of their Springs ran. 4 Arches, viz. those of Drusus Nero,
Trajan, Verus Partbicus, and Janus Bifrons. 14 horrea publica, Public
Granaries. 16 Bake-houses or Hand-mills, called Pistrinae. The Circus of
Caracalla, and the Women's Senaculum; the Mutatory of Caesar at the Gate of
Capena, called Mutatorium Caesaris, which was a Pleasure-house; some famous
Sepulchers, as those of the Cornelii, Attilii, Calatini, Servilii, Caeciliani,
Horatii, etc. 121 Palaces or fine Houses, called Domus. 1250 Insulae, or Houses
not contiguous to any others, about which a Man might walk round.

The second Division called Coelimontium, was so named from Mount Caelius; and
contained 13200 Feet in Circumference, and had 2 Surveyors, 2 Denunciators, 32
Vico-Magistri, and 5 Watches: It contained 12 Streets, 30 private Baths, to say
nothing of the public ones, 65 Lakes or Ponds; 3106 Insulae or separate
Houses, 2 sacred Groves; 32 public Granaries, 23 Hand-mills; 133 Noble-mens
Houses, and amongst others those of Vetellianus, Phillip, Lateranus, Caesar
Dictator, Tiherius Claudius Centimalus, and the Poet Stella; 8 Aediculae; 5
Temples, viz. those of Tullius Hostilius, Bacchus, Faunus, the Emperor
Claudius, Goddess Carnea upon Mount Coelius, where stood also the Curia
Hostilia in which the Senate often met; as likewise Campus Martius where there
were Horse-Races, when the Land below was overflowed with the Tiber,

Between Mount Caelius and Mount Palatine there was a great Street called
Subura, which begun at the open Place in the Middle of the City and ended in
the Via Tiburtina all along the Exquiliae: The greatest Part of the Nobles of
Rome lived in this Street, and from hence might be seen diverse Barbers and
Ropemakers Shops, which made Martial say, L. 2 Epig. 17. Tonstrix Suburae
faucibus sedet primis,
Cruenta pendent qua flagella tortorum.
They also sold all sorts of Fruits and Fowls there, as we are informed by the
same Poet, L. 7. Epig. 30.

The third Division called Isis and Serapis Moneta, was 12450 Foot in
Circumference: It began near Mount Coelius and took up a great Part of the
Exquiliae: It had as well as the foregoing ones 2 Surveyors, 2 Denunciators, 32
Vico-Magistri, and 8 Streets; it contained the Tribe Gratiae Aureae the high
Place, or that of the Players, called Summum choragium; the Entry into the Via
Sacra near the Carinae at the End of the Esquiliae; the Lucus Cuperius of the
Academy where they were instructed in the use of the Catapults; 2 Temples, that
of Isis and Serapis Moneta, and that of Concordia Virilis, near unto which
stood the Portico of Livia, each were built as an Eternal Monument of the
Concord that continually remained between her and Augustus her Husband. 8
Aediculae, viz. Aediculae Bonae Spei, Serapis, Sangi Fidoni, Minervae, Isidis,
Veneris, Esculapii and Vulcani; the Portico of Claudius Martialis, Vespatian's
Amphitheater, otherwise called the Colisaeum, where Fourscore Thousand People
might easily see the Plays; the great Games called Ludi Dacici and Mamertini;
the Camp of the Soldiers of Missena, and their old Camp; the School of the
Quaestors and of Gallius, the Baths of the Emperors Titus, Trajan and Phillip;
70 private Baths, 33 Mills, 29 Granaries, 160 Palaces, among which was Nero's
Golden-House and Portico, those of Brutus, Pompey, Titus with the Portico where
the Statue of Laocoon and his Two Children stood, besides 2807 Insulae or
separate Houses.

The fourth Division called Via Sacra or Templum Pacis, took up 1800 Feet in
Circumference, extending it self between Mount Palatine and the Exquiliae, and
containing no more than 8 Streets; It had 2 Surveyors, as many Denunciators,
and 32 Vico-Magistri: The principal Parts thereof were the ViaSacra which began
at the Carinae and passed by the Exquiliae to the Aedicula Strenia, and
extended as far as the Capitol along the Colisaeum and Titus his triumphal
Arch, passing by that of Septimius, and so made a Part of the Forum Romanum and
Comitia: It was called Sacra, because it was there the Peace was signed between
Romulus and Tatius, King of the Sabines: Julius Casar covered it with Cloth
from his Palace to the Capitol, as he did by the Forum Romanum, in order to
represent the Plays where with he presented the Public: The Entrance into the
Carinae was a Place well inhabited and adorned with fine Buildings, and so
Virgil calls them Lautae Carinae: The chief Edifices were Titus his Baths and
Palace, where there were Subterranean Halls 137 Foot long, 17 broad, end 12
high, built by Vespatian for the College of the Pontifices, Pompey's House,
and the School of the Freedman Lenaeus the famous Grammarian: The old House of
Cicero, who left it to his Brother Quintus to go live on Mount Palatine; The
Aequimelium, which was a round Place before the Temple of Tellus at one of the
Ends of the execrable Street, where formerly stood the House of Sep. Melius, a
Roman Knight, which was demolished and rased by a Decree of L. Quinrius
Cincinnatus the Dictator, because he endeavored to assume the Sovereign Power.
Busta Gallica, the Burying-place of the Gauls, where they were defeated by
Camillus; Tigillum sororium, the Sister's Rafter, placed upon Two Walls, under
which they made Horace pass in order to expiate the Crime he had committed in
killing his Sister: Meta sudans, the sweating Goal, near unto Constantine's
Arch; it was a Pile of Brick-work, made like an Obe^isk, from whence Water
dropped every way as Sweat does from the Body, and at the Top of which there
stood Jupiter's Statue: Ten Temples, viz. that of Peace, of Remus, before which
stood Two consecrated Myrtles, one of which was called Patricia Myrtus and the
other Plebein; that of Faustina the Wife of Martus Aurelius the Emperor, of
Tellus in the Carinae devoted by the Consul T. Sempronius, of Concord, of Venus
Cloacina of the Sun, Moon, Augustus and Nerva in the Passage to the Forum
transitorium: 8 Aediculae, viz. those of the Muses, Hope, Mercury, Lucina
Valeriana, Juno Lucina, Mavors, Juventus and Isis. Vulcanalis, or the Place
where Romulus planted that Lotos whose Roots reached as far as Caesar's Forum;
the sacred Portico, Place of Victory; of Vulcan, and the Colossus of the Sun;
the Odeum, which was a Place erected for the Practicing of Music, made
Theater-ways, with Seats like the Steps of a Ladder covered with a Lantern and
supported by Pillars: There such as played upon Music were taught the Art by a
Master of the Science, and the Actors by a Player before they appeared upon the
Stages: Forum Cupedinis or Macellum Cupedinis, the Market of Dainties; the
Ancient Basilica of Paulus Aemilius, that of Constantine, the sacred Repository
of the Romans, Daphnis Bath, 79 Lakes or Reservatories of Water: The Arches of
Titus and Vespatian, of Septimius Severus, and Constantine: 28 Granaries, 24
Hand-mills, (...) great Houses, and 275 Insulae or separate Houses.

The fifth Division called Esquilina, contained the Mounts Esquiline and
Viminal, and was in Circumference 15950 Feet, containing fifteen Streets, and
having Two Surveyors and as many Denunciators; the most considerable Things in
it were these, viz. Puticuli or Puticulae, Pits dug in the Earth between Mount
Esquiline, the City Walls and Street which lead to Porta Cuerquetulana, where
poor People were buried, which caused a very ill Stench in all that Part of the
City, so that Augustus with the Consent of the Senate and People of Rome, made
a Present of it to Moecenas his Favorite, who built a fine House of Pleasure
there, and the best Gardens in Rome, as Horace tells us, L. 1. Sat. 8.

Huc prius augustis ejecta cadavera cellis,
Conservus vili portanda locabat an arca:
Hoc miserae plebi stabat commune sepulcrum.....
Nunc licet Esquiliis babitare salubribus, atque
Aggere in aprico spatiari, quo modo tristes
Albis informem spectabant ossibus agrum.
Virgil had a House near this Place, and so had Aquilius the Lawyer,
Propertius, Perseus, and Pliny the Younger. Here were several Temples, such as
those of Jupiter Vimineus, of Juno Lucina, Minerva, Medicina, Esculapius, Venus
Erycina that stood at the Gate Collina, round about which the Plays called
Agonalia were celebrated, when the Tiber overflowed: The Amphitheater called
Castrense, Aurelian's Circus, with an Obelisk, the Basilica of Sicinius, the
Praetorian Camp, the Park where the wild Beasts were kept, which was called
Vivarium, several public Baths, 180 Great Men's Houses, amongst which were
those of Servius Tullius, Q. Lutatius Catulus, and M. Licinius Crassus.

The Sixth Division was called Alta Semita, by reason of the Situation
thereof, and contained 15600 Feet in Circumference, began at the Two great
Marble Horses, made by Phidias and Praxitele, and reached to the Gate called
Viminalis, it had 14 Streets in it, and 48 Towers, with 2 Surveyors, 2
Denunciators, and 52 Vico-Magistri: The most noted Place, here was the
Execrable Camp near Porta Collina, 10 Shops where Vermillion was sold, 15
Temples, viz. those of Health, Serapis, Flora, Venus, etc. a Portico 1000 Paces
long, the Statues of Quirinus 20 Foot high, as also that Leaden one of
Mamurius; the Circus of Flora, the Forums of Salust and Dioclesian, the Baths
of Paulus Emilius, and the Senaculum of the Roman Ladies.

The Seventh Division called Via Lata, reached from the Capitol, as far as the
Place called Septa in Campus Martius, even to Trajan's Forum, and met with the
Circus Flaminius, and the great Street, from which the whole Division took its
Name: It contained 23700 Feet in Circumference, and 40 Streets, had 2
Surveyors, and as many Denunciators. Martial's House stood here.

The Eighth Division called Forum Romanum, was the finest and most famous of
all of them: It contained the Forum Romanum, the Capitol, the Tarpeian Rock,
the Gate called Stercoraria, and the new Street: It was 14867 Feet in
Circumference, had 12 Streets in it, 2 Surveyors, as many Denunciators, and 6
Watches: This Division took in also the following Places; the Milliarium
aureum, Puteal Libonis, a Place much frequented by Merchants; the Curtian Lake,
where Curtius in Armor threw himself into a Chasm of the Earth; the Horatian
Pile, to which were fixed the Spoils of the 3 Curatii, and the Statue of
Marsyas, one of Bacchus his Companions, 15 Temples, and among others that of
the Capitol, etc. of Jupiter Feretrius, Julius Caesar, where stood an Image of
Venus proceeding from the Sea, devoted and built by Augustus; those of Concord,
Vesta and Janus. Doliola, which were the Vessels wherein they laid up their
Sacred Relicts, at the Taking of Rome by the Gauls; the Sepulcher of Romulus,
of Acca Laurentia, and many Portico's: Four Courts where the Senate met, viz.
Hostilia, Calabra, Pompiliana or Regia Numae, and the Senaculum aureum; Seven
Basilicae, and the Graecostasis; the Prison called Tullianum, built by Servius
Tulltus, 150 Palaces, among which were those of Tarquinins Superbus, Manlius
Capitolinus, Scipio Africanus, T. Annius Milo and Ovid.

The Ninth Division called Circus Flaminius, took in the Sides of the Gardens,
the Campus Martius, the Vaulted street, Straight-street, and was 30560 Feet
about, containing 30 Streets, who had each of them their particular Officers,
as the preceding ones had: They reckoned eight Temples here, and among the rest
the Pantheon, and that of Janus near the Theater of Marcellus: The Circus
Flaminius, that of Alexander Severus; the Obelisk with the Dial in Campus
Martius, 4 Theaters and Amphitheaters, and the Stables belonging to the 4
Companies of Courriers: The Septa, Ovile, of Place where the People gave their
Suffrages; the Prison of the Centumviri, and Lucullus and Agrippa's Gardens.

The Tenth Division was called Palatium, because it begun on Mount Palatine,
and was 11600 Feet round, containing 7 Streets; 10 Temples, and among others
that of Apollo Palatinus; 190 Noblemens Houses, such as those of Hostilius,
Ancus Martius, Valerius Publicola, L. Crassus the Orator, Hortensius, Catiline,
Julius Caesar and Seneca.

The Eleventh Division was called Circus Maximus, and besides the Great Circus
took in all the Valley which lay between Mount Aventine and the Tiber, as far
as the Gate called Ripa, and Salinae on one side, and on the other the
Herb-Market, and the Foot of the Capitol, the Temple of Piety, and Columna
Lactaria, whither they carried their Bastard Children; besides these it had 8
Streets, that Place called Argiletum, where there were some Booksellers Shops,
4 Temples, 30 Aediculae, and the Sink of a great Kennel that ran into the Tiber.

The Twelfth Division which was called Piscina Publica, reached from the
greater Circus along Mount Aventine, as far as Caracalla's Baths, and was 12000
Feet in Circumference, and contained 12 Streets. This Publica Piscina was in
the City between Mount Celius and Celiolus, where the Boys of Rome went to
learn to swim; it was a large Receptacle of Water at the Foot of Mount
Aventine, into which the Appian Water was conveyed, wherein they watered and
washed their Horses: There were some Temples and inconsiderable Groves in this
Part.

The Thirteenth Division was called Aventinus, and in Circumference contained
163 Feet, and 30 Streets, with the same Officers as the other Divisions had:
The chief Places which it included were Clivus Publici, by which they went up
to Mount Aventine, and began at the Forum Oviarium, and reached to the Temple
of Juno Regina: Scalae Gemoniae, to which they tied Malefactors, from whence
they were thrust down into the Tiber; the End of the Armilustrium; The Doliolum
on Mount Testaceus; Remuria, or the particular Place where Remus took his
Augury by the Flight of Birds, and where he was buried.

The Fourteenth Division was called Trans-Tiberim, and beginning at the
Janiculum contained the Vatican, the Isle of the Tiber, and that which they
called Navalia; it was 3489 Feet in circuit, and had 28 Streets.

The City of Rome in general contained these following Things, 700 Temples or
Aediculae under the Names of Templum, Aedes, Fanum, Delubrum, Sacellum,
Aedicula; a great Number of Altars only comprised under these Words, Ara and
Altar: The Differences of these Words will be found in their respective
Alphabetical Order: Three Senaculum's, which were the Places where the Senate
met; the first was in the Temple of Concord, the second near the Gate called
Capena, and the third in the Temple of Bellona. Several Courts under the Word
Curiae, the Chief whereof were the Hostilia, Julia, Pompeia, etc. where the
Senate sometimes met: 21 Basilicae, which were stately Edifices, whereof I have
spoken in their proper order: 12 or 15 Nympheae, from the Word Nymphaea, which
were Halls to marry in; 1780 Great Men's Houses, comprised under the Word Domus,
and a vast Number of private Houses under the Word Insulae: 144 Jakes or
Privies, which were free for every Body to use: An Hospital in the Island of the
Tiber, where the Temple of Esculapius stood, called Nosocomium; as also an
Hospital where superannuated and inferior Soldiers, who had served in the Army,
were taken care of; they called it Taberna meritoria: 22 famous Portico's to
shelter People from the Rain; diverse Arsenals, where they laid up Arms and
Warlike Machines called Armamentaria: 29 public Libraries; 5 Colleges and
Public Schools for the Breeding up of Youth: 254 Hand-mills, and 327
Granaries, where they had Magazines of Corn, in order to supply the Peoples
Wants at reasonable Rates, in the time of Scarcity; 39 Brass Colossus's, and 51
of Marble; 6 great Obelisks, and 42 lesser ones, with diverse Pyramids: Several
fine Gardens, and 32 Sacred Groves, 23 Water-Pools for Horses to drink of,
whitening of Linen, and quenching Fires; 14 Aqueducts; 105 Fountains, 1352
Lakes or Pools of standing Water, brought from several Springs; 17 great open
Places, comprised under the Word Forum; 117 public Baths, and 909 private ones.

RELIQUIAE;
the Relics, were the Ashes and Bones of the Dead that remained after the
Burning of their Bodies, and which the Ancients kept very religiously in Urns,
and afterward laid them up in Tombs.

REMURIA;
the Place where Remus took his Augury from the Flight of Birds, and where he
was buried.

REMUS,
the Son of Rbea Silvia, and Romulus his Brother, they were Twins, and ordered
by the Command of their Uncle Amulius Silvius to be thrown into the Tiber; but
they were taken up and saved by Faustulus, who was Numitor's Shepherd, who
carried them to his Wife, by whom they were carefully nursed: Some said that
while the Cradle was upon the Brink of the River, a She-Wolf brought thither by
the Crying of the Infants, gave them suck: Others have been of Opinion, that
the Wantonness of Laurentia, Fastulus his Wife gave Occasion to this Fable,
because such Women were called She-Wolves. Authors vary in their Opinions
concerning the Death of Remus; some saying, that Romulus slew his Brother,
because he ridiculed him upon the Account of the Fortifications he had made to
his new City; while others will have him to have been killed by the Soldiery;
but be it as it will, it is certain Remus cemented the Walls of Rome with his
own Blood.

REPETUNDARUM CRIMEN, or DE REPETUNDIS;
Bribes taken by the Magistrates from the Allies and Subjects of the Romans, as
also from the Citizens; this Crime was not at first made Capital, but became
afterward to be so, as may be seen by the Example of Verres,

RETIARII;
Gladiators, who fought with a Trident in one Hand, and a Net in the other,
wherein they endeavored to entangle their Adversary.

RADAMANTHUS;
was feigned by the Poets to be the Judge of departed Souls in Hell, as Virgil
says:

Cnossius bic Rhadamanthus babet durissima regna,
Castigatque auditque dolos, cogitque fateri, etc.
Strabo tells us, that Homer understanding that Radamanthus, an ancient King of
Creet, had formerly made very good Laws in his Country, wherein sometime after
he had been imitated by Minos, he took occasion to make them the Judges of all
Mankind, in a Place where they all met, i. e. in the other World, and called
them Jupiter's Sons, because that they, in order to give a greater Sanction to
their Laws, gave out, that they were dictated by Jupiter. Plato, with admirable
Dexterity, unfolds unto us the Truths concealed under these Poetical Fictions,
when he makes Jupiter to say, that he was weary of the Complaints made him
concerning the unrighteous Sentences pronounced upon Earth, which he would
remedy by concealing from Men the Time of their Death, and passing no Sentence
upon them till after their decease, and that even by departed Souls themselves,
that so neither Favor nor false Witnesses, Relations nor Interests might take
place any more, as they did whilst they were alive: That he entrusted three of
his Sons with the said Judicial Office, giving Rhadamanthus Power over the
Asiaticks, Eacus over the Europeans, and for Minos he was to terminate any
Difficulties that might happen: And so the same Plato places Minos above his
Two Brothers, and represents him with a Golden Scepter in his Hand, whereas he
makes the other Two to carry a Rod only: Minos autem considerans sedet solus
aureum babens sceptrum, (...).

RHAMNUSIA;
Vltrix Dea; a Name given to the Goddess Nemesis, and taken from the Town of
Rhamnus in Attica.

RHEA,
Numitor's Daughter, whom Amulius Silvius made a Vestal; some call her Ilia;
but most Authors name her Rhea and Silvia; this Vestal was got with Child in a
Wood dedicated to Mars, wherein she offered Sacrifice by her self, and where an
armed Man enjoyed her: She was delivered of Two Children, whom Amulius exposed
to be destroyed, and put those Laws in Execution that were made against the
Vestals, who prostituted their Virginity.

Rbea was called also Astarte, Ops, Pessinuntia, etc. as Apuleius says, who
confounds several Goddesses in the Person of Rhea; 'twas therefore rather a
Multitude of Names, than a Multiplication of Deities, according to his Opinion,
and she was in reality Isis, Queen of Egypt, on whom all these Names were
conferred at diverse times, and in diverse Countries, and whom they represented
under the Notion of so many Deities. Strabo also mentions this multiplying of
Names: Et Berecynthes and omnes Phryges, and qui Idam accolunt Troes, Rheam
colunt, eique orgia celebrant. Vocatur ab eis Matter Deorum, and magna Dea; a
locis autem Idaea, Dindymene, Pessinuntia, Cybele. But how ancient soever Rhea
might have been in Phrygia, she was much more so in Egypt, where Diodorus
Siculus makes Osir is and Isis to descend from her and Saturn; or more
immediately Jupiter and Juno, and from them Osiris and Isis. We have an Account
in the Phanician Theology of Sanchuniathon, who was more ancient, that Saturn
having married his Two Sisters Astarte and Rhea, he had Seven Daughters by the
first, and as many Sons by the other: And thus you see from whence it is, the
Greeks have derived the whole Fable of Rhea or Cybele. Livy gives us the
History at large of the Transportation of the Goddess Rhea, from Pessinuntia to
Rome: Plato in his Timaeus says, that Saturn and Rhea his Wife were the
Children of Oceanus and Tethys.

RICA;
a Vail where with the Roman Ladies covered their Heads.

RICULA;
a little Vail for the same use.

RIDICULUS, and AEDICULA RIDICULI;
the Temple of Laughter, built at Rome 2000 Paces without the Gate Capena, in
Commemoration of Hannibal's Flight from before that City, because of the Rains
and Storms that fell during his besieging of it, which made the Romans laugh
and fall to ridicule him: The Romans were not the first who deified Laughter,
seeing we are informed by Plutarch in the Life of Lycurgus, that the
Laecedaemonians erected him a Statue, and the Hypataeans of Thessaly annually
offered Sacrifice to him, as also the Romans did in the Spring, accompanied
with loud Laughter: Pausanias mentions (...), a God of Laughter.

ROBIGO, or ROBIGUS;
a Deity worshipped by the Romans for driving away the Blast which happened to
the Corn in the Ear, occasioned through too much Drought. Numa Pompilius
instituted a Feast in Honor of him about the Month of April, called Robigalia.

ROGATIO LEGIS;
the Proposing of a Law to pass, which was made to the Romans for their
Approbation thereof; from whence came those Expressions so frequent in Cicero,
Rogationem far ad populum, to propose a Law to the People, and Rogator legis,
he that proposes the Law.

ROMA;
Rome; though the Founding of this City be attributed to Romulus, because he
enlarged it, and founded a Monarchy there; yet it may be proved by diverse
Authorities, that there was a City in Italy called Roma, before Romulus was
born. Solinus will have this City to have been founded near Mount Esquiline by
Roma the Daughter of Kittim, to which she gave her Name; but other Authors
there are who attribute the Foundation thereof to Roma, the Daughter of
Ascanius: Sabellicus confirms this Proposition of Plutarch by a Quotation out
of one Cephon Gergetius, who attributed the Founding of Rome to Romus, the Son
of Aeneas.

Plutarch speaks of another Foundress of Rome, named Roma; and says, that after
Aeneas had landed at Laurentum, a Trojan Lady, whose Name was Roma, took the
Opportunity in the Absence of Aeneas, and the other Trojans to persuade the
Women to burn the Ships, that so they might be no longer exposed to the Dangers
of the Sea; and this necessitated them to build a City at the Foot of Mount
Palatine, which from the Name of the said Lady they called Roma. Caius
Sempronius in his Division of Italy, proves that Romulus was not the Founder of
Rome, but that it was the Daughter of Italus; for he says, that he was called
Rumulus, and his Brother Rumus, and not Romulus and Remus, as is commonly
thought. Rome when built or enlarged by Romulus, was divided into Four Parts;
one called Roma, the second Germalia, the third Velia, and the fourth
comprehended Romulus his House. It is plain that Roma was that little City
built by Italus his Daughter; Velia was that Part of Mount Palatine, that
looked toward that Place called Locus Romanus, and was so named from Vellus, a
Fleece, because the Shepherds were wont to shear their Sheep there; Germalia
was a low Place that looked toward the Capitol, where the Twins Cradle was
found under a Fig Tree called Ruminal, from the Word Rumo, to give suck,
because it was under this Tree the She-Wolf gave suck to Romulus and Remus:
From the House of Romulus, who was first King of Rome, built upon Mount
Palatine, they call Princes Houses Palatia.

Romulus made Three Gates to his New City, viz. Carmentalis, Romana and
Pandana; to which some have added Janualis. The Gate Carmentalis took its Name
from Carmenta, Evander's Wife, who was buried there; the same was since called
Porta Scelerata, because the Fabii went out at it, when they were defeated at
Cremera: Porta Romana took its Name from Romulus, says Livy, but I rather
believe it came from the Village Roma; it was also named Mugonia, because of
the Lowing of the Cattle sold at this Gate, and Trigonia, for being fortified
with Three Angles: Pandana came from the Verb Pando, because it lay open to let
in the Provisions that were continually brought into the City; the same was
also called Libera and Romulida; and this confirms the Opinion which I have
advanced, that Porta Romana did not take its Name from Romulus; for it is not
very likely that of but Four Gates, Romulus would have called Two according to
his own Name: Porta Janualis was so named from the Temple of Janus that stood
near it.

Rome was founded in the 3961. Year of the Julian Period, Anno Mund. 3301. 753.
Years before our Savior's Nativity; in the third Year of the sixth Olympiad,
on the 11th and 12th of May, the Day after the Feast of Pales, between the
second and third Hour of the Day, the Sun being in Taurus, the Moon in Libra,
Saturn, Mars, Venus and Mercury in Scorpio, and Jupiter in Pisces, according to
the Testimony of Solinus, Pliny, and Eutropius. Titus Terentius Firmianus, a
learned Astrologer, rejects the foresaid Time and according to his Computation
makes it to be on the 21st of April, at full Moon, and when the Sun, Mercury
and Venus were in Taurus, Jupiter in Pisces, Saturn and Mars in Cancer, about
the third Hour, and Plutarch observes, that the Moon on the said Day suffered a
great Eclipse.

Romulus divided the Inhabitants of his City into Three Tribes or Classes,
under Tribunes or Colonels, and each Tribe into Ten Curiae or Parishes, and
each Curia into Ten Decuriae; the first being under the Command of an Officer
named Curio, as the other was under one called Decurio; he picked out of all
the Tribes such Persons, whose Birth, Age and Virtue made them remarkable, and
called them Patricii or Patres, and the rest of the People Plebeians.

This City was governed by Seven Kings for the Space of 243 Years, and became
afterward a Republic, which was sometimes governed by Consuls, and other
whiles by Decemviri, Tribunes, Dictators, and lastly, by Emperors: The Ancients
represented Rome in the Form of a Goddess clad like Pallas, with a youthful
Air, to intimate that Rome was always in the Vigor of her Youth, and did not
grow old: They put an Helmet on her Head and a Pike in her Hand, with a long
Robe, to denote that she was alike prepared for War and Peace, since she was
dressed like Pallas, whom they represented with a Helmet and Pike, and like
Minerva who was habited with a long Robe: This Head of Rome is very often found
on the Consulary Medals, and even on some Greek ones; the Inscriptions that are
on the Greek Medals for Rome and the Senate, are, (...), the Goddess Rome, and
(...) or (...): The God of the Senate, or the Sacred Senate: They also erected
Temples throughout the Empire to the Honor of the Goddess Rome, and at last
the meanest flattering Titles they used were Roma Victrix, Victorious Rome;
Roma invicta, Invincible Rome; Roma Aeterna, Eternal Rome, and Roma Sacra,
Sacred Rome. The Medals of Maxentius represent Eternal Rome fitting upon
Military Ensigns, armed with an Helmet and holding a Scepter in one Hand, and a
Globe in the other, which she presents the Emperor, who is crowned with Laurel,
to let him know that he was the Master and Preserver of the whole World, with
this Inscription; Conservatori Vrbis aeternae. The Medals of Vespatian
represent her with an Helmet on her Head, and lying upon the Seven Hills of
Rome, with a Scepter in her Hand, and the Tiber in the Form of an old Man at
her Feet; but upon the Medals of Adrian she holds a Lawrel-branch in her
Left Hand, and Victory upon a Globe in the Right, as being victorious over all
the World. The People of Smyrna were the first who erected a Temple to the City
of Rome under the Consulship of Cato Major, when she was not yet come to that
Pitch of Grandeur (she afterward attained to) before the Destruction of
Carthage and the Conquest of Asia. See Regio.

ROMULUS,
the Son of Mars and the Vestal Rhea, otherwise called Silvia and Ilia; Lucius
Terentius Firmianus, a Person well skilled in the curious Sciences of the
Chaldaeans, having exactly observed the Life and Death of Romulus, says, He was
born the 21st Day of Thoth, which is our August, at Sunrising, and that he was
begot the 23d of Cheac, which is our November, at Three in the Afternoon, in
the first Year of the second Olympiad: Plutarch says, that the Sun, on the Day
of his Conception suffered a great Eclipse from Eight to Nine in the Morning:
Ant. Contius will have him to be born in the first Year of the first Olympiad,
and Fuccius asserts he was born in the 3d Year of the second Olympiad. He with
his Brother were by Amulius his Command exposed to be drowned in the Tiber, but
Faustulus, who was Numitor's Shepherd, saved him and his Brother Remus, and
they were both nursed by his Wife: The Story is, that they were suckled by a
She-wolf, because of the Leudness of Laurentia, Faustulus his Wife, which gave
occasion to the Fable; but the Thing has been even so represented on the
Consulary Medals, where you have a She wolf and Two Twins sucking her: Romulus
traced out the Plan of his new City and prescribed Laws to his People, who
coalesced together from all Parts into a Body, for he made an Asylum of a Vale
lying at the Foot of Mons Capitolinus, for all those that came thither; which
increased the Number of his Subjects in a very little time: He regulated
Matters of Religion, dividing his People into Three Tribes, and each Tribe into
Curiae or Parishes: Each Curia chose it is own Priests, Priestessess, Augurs,
and Camillae, who were to supply what was requisite for the Charge of the
Sacrifices and sacred Feasts that were solemnized throughout a Curia at certain
Times. Pliny speaks of a Society instituted by Romulus, somewhat like unto the
Knights of the French King's Order, and they were called Fratres Arvales;
Romulus was the Sovereign or Grand-master of the Order, the Ensigns of which
was a Crown of Ears of Corn tied with a white Riband, and this Dignity they
held for Life: He was killed in a Scufflle, others will have it that he was cut
in Pieces by the Senate, who gave out that the Gods had carried him into
Heaven; he was deified and worshipped under the Name of Quirinus, according to
the Relation of Proculus: Dionysius of Hallicarnassus says, he lived 55 Years,
and Plutarch 54, and that he reigned 37. We have Medals of the Emperor
Antoninus Pius where Romulus is represented habited like Mars with a Javilin in
one Hand, and with the other holding a Trophy on his Shoulders with this
Inscription Romulo Augusto.

Gronovius excepts against all that has been said by such a Multitude of
Authors concerning the Origin of Romulus for near 2500 Years. He pretends that
a Greeck named Diocles was the first who invented the Fable of the She-wolf's
suckling Romulus and Remus, who were exposed by Amulius his order to be
destroyed, and begotten by Mars upon Rhea Silvia a Vestal; and he is so assured
that there is no need to refute this Fable, that he lays it down as an
established Principle that Romulus was not born in Italy, but that he came
thither from another Country; and the Proof he gives for it is, That no People
of Italy would supply the first Inhabitants of Rome with Wives. But it is by no
means to be thought, in case Romulus was owned to be the Grandson of Numitor,
after his expelling of the Usurper Anulius, and re-establishing his Grandfather
upon the Throne, but that he would have found the Albans inclined to make an
Alliance with him, and to supply him and his People with Wives. Whereas it is
supposed he had Recourse to the Sabines or some other People; who having
refused him, he resolved upon the entire Extirpation of them. Other Authors
will have Romulus to be a Greek by Birth; for this his Name implies, as
Salmasius says, who thought the Word Romulus to be a Diminitive of (...), that
in the Eolick Dialect signifies Strength: Grorovius is of Opinion, that Romulus
was neither a Gaul nor Affrican, but a Syrian, since Josephus and Nicephorus
translate the Name by (...), the Son of Romelia, of whom mention is made in
Scripture.

ROSTRA;
Stages or raised and spacious Theaters which were adorned with the Prows of
the Ships that were taken from the Antiatae in the first Sea Fight obtained by
the Romans: It was the Place from whence Orations were made to the People.

RUDIS;
a knotty rough Stick, which the Praetor gave the Gladiators as a Mark of their
Freedom, whence the Latin Phrase Rude donare, to make a Gladiator free, to
discharge him from fighting any more; they were also called Rudiarii.

RUDUSCULANA PORTA;
an Ancient Gate of Rome, built after a rustic clumsie manner, or called so
because it was adorned with Brass, according to Valerius Maximus.

RUMA or RUMINA;
this Goddess presided over the Nursing of Children at the Breast; there was a
little Temple built her at Rome wherein they offered Milk unto her.

RUTUMENIA;
an Ancient Gate of Rome, so called from a Charioteer of that Name, who proving
victorious in a Horse-race from Veii to Rome, entered through this Gate into the
City.

S.
SIs a Consonant, and the 18th Letter in the Alphabet; it was a Numeral amongst
the Ancients, which signified Seven. It Is called a hissing Letter by reason of
its Sound, and has met with a different Reception from the Ancients, some
having been much for rejecting it, while others affected the Use of it. Pindar
calls it (...), adulterinam, and has avoided the Use of it almost in all his
Verses; Quintilian says, it is rough and makes an ill Sound in the Conjunction
of Words, which made it be often totally rejected, as dignu' omnibu' and the
like are to be met with in Plautus and Terence. Some of the Latins also changed
it into a T in Imitation of the Atheneans, saying Mertare for mersare, pultare
for pulsare, etc. But others on the Contrary affected the Use of it every
where, as Casinoenae for Camoenae, dusmosae for dumosae. And Quintilian says,
that from Cicero's Time and so onward, they often doubled it in the Middle of
Words, as in Caussa, Divissiones, etc.

SABAZIA;
the Feasts of Bacchus; see Bacchanalia.

SABAZIUS;
Bacchus, or according to some, the Son of Bacchus. See Bacchus.

SABATHUM;
the Sabbath; the Jeros reckoned their Years by Weeks, the Seventh whereof was
the Sabbathick Year, wherein it was not lawful to till the Ground, and their
Slaves then were made free: They had also their Year of Jubilee or Remission,
which was every 50th Year, or as some will have 49th; insomuch that every
Jubilee was also a Sabbathick Year, but more famous than the other, and the
Years comprehending these Two Terms, i. e. the proceeding and following Jubilee
were always comprised within the Number of Fifty, and then all Estates, and
whatever had been alienated, returned to the Possession of the first Owner.

SACERDOS;
a Heathen-Priest, whereof there were different Orders consecrated to the
Service of several Deities: There was a Society of Priests named Luperci, who
were engaged in the Worship of Pan Lycaeus, and on his Festival-Day, ran stark
naked through the City, with Thongs in their Hands, which were made of the Skin
of a Goat, that they had sacrificed to their God, and with which they lashed
the Women, who willingly received the Blows out of a supersticious Belief they
had, that the same contributed to make them fruitful. Hercules his Priests,
called Potitii and Pinarii, were instituted by Hercules, they being taken out
of those Two Noble Families in Evander's Time, because they had assisted
Hercules at a Sacrifice which he offered to Jupiter, of the best Cow he had in
his Herd. Fratres Arvales to the Number of 12 were appointed by Romulus to
sacrifice to Ceres and Bacchus, and to pray to them to make the Earth fruitful;
Romulus was their Institutor. Curiones, they were Priests established with
Supreme Power, as to Spiritual Matters, in the Curiae, to the Number of 30,
into which the Three Tribes of the People of Rome were at first divided: Numa
added Two Priests more in every Parish, to assist the Curiones, and these he
called Sacerdotes publici: The Curiones had the Tenths and Parish-Offerings
allowed them for their Maintenance; and this was called, aes Curionum, quod
dabatur Curioni ob sacerdotium curionatus, says Festus. Titii Sodales, the
Titian Priests, to the Number of 25, whom Titus Tatius introduced formerly to
Rome, in order to retain somewhat of the Sabines Religion, as Tacitus says, L.
1. Annal. C. 7. However this Author seems to contradict himself when he
attributes the Instituting of this Priesthood to Romulus, Titii Sodales faces
Augustales subdidere, quod sacerdotium ut Romulus Tatio Regi, ita Caesar
Tiberius Juliae genti sacravit. It may be said if Tatius instituted this
Priesthood; Romulus, after his Death, having made the Sabines and Romans
coalesce into one Body, ordered these Priests to offer an Yearly Sacrifice in
Honor of Tatius, King of the Sabines. Varro will have these Priests to have
been called Titii from some Birds of that Name, from which they took Auguries:
Titiae aves quas in auguriis certis Sodales Titii observare solebant. They
dwelt without the City of Rome, from whence they observed the Augury of the
said Birds. Flamines, Priests consecrated to the Worship of each particular
Deity, every one of which bore the Name of his God, as Flamen Dialis, Martialis
and Quirinalis, the Priests of Jupiter, Mars and Romulus. See Flamen. Salii, an
Order of Priests instituted by Numa, who danced a Sacred Dance in Honor of
Mars, carrying the Sacred Shields, named Ancilia, and striking upon them
musically. This was a very honorable Priesthood at Rome, and held by the
chiefest Men in the Empire. Augustales, 25 Priests instituted by the Emperor
Tiberius, in Honor of Augustus, for whom they erected Temples and Altars, and
instituted Sacrifices: The same was also done for other Emperors, who came
afterward to be deified through Flattery, for we find there were such as they
called Sodales Flavii, Adrianales, Aeliani, Antonini, etc.

SACRIFICIA;
Sacrifices; they did not anciently sacrifice Animals, if we believe Porphyry,
but the Fruits of the Earth, or Perfumes which were altogether bloodless
Sacrifices. Porphyry in his Books concerning Abstinence, treats of this Matter
at large; he says, upon the Relation of Theophrastus, that the Egyptians were
the first who made an Offering of the First fruits to their Deity, and not of
Incense and Perfume, much less of Animals, but of plain Herbs, which are the
first Productions of the Earth. These first Sacrifices were consumed by Fire,
and thence come those Greek Words (...), which signify to sacrifice, etc. They
afterward burnt Perfumes called (...), from the Greek (...), to pray. They did
not begin to sacrifice Animals till they had first eaten some Herbs or Fruits,
that ought to be offered upon the Altar. Theophrastus adds, that before the
sacrificing of Beasts, besides the Offerings made of Herbs and Fruits of the
Earth; the Sacrifices of Libations were very common when they poured out Water,
Honey, Oil and Wine; and these were called Nephalia, Melitosponda, Elaeosponda,
and Oenosponda. Ovid says, that the very Name of Victim imported, that the same
was not killed till Victories were obtained over the Enemy; and that that of
Hostia denoted that Hostilities had been committed: In short, while Men yet
lived upon Pulse, they minded not the offering of Beasts in Sacrifice, since
the Law of Sacrificing required that some Part of them should be eaten, Ante
Deos homini quod conciliare valeret,
Far erat, and puri lucida mica Salis.
Qvid adds a fabulous Narration to this Historical Truth, viz. that Ceres was
the first that sacrificed a Hog, because he had spoiled the Corn: The same Poet
in another Place brings in Pythagoras speaking against this Slaughtering of
Beasts, whether the same were designed for Food or Sacrifice, he makes him say,
that it might be very pardonable to sacrifice a Hog to Ceres, and a Goat to
Bacchus, because of the Havoc, made by those Animals in the Corn and
Vineyards, but it must be extreme Cruelty to offer innocent Sheep, and Oxen
that are so useful for Tillage, though Men endeavored to conceal their Fault
in vain, under a Pretense of the Worship of the Gods.

Nec satis est quod tale nefas committitur, ipsos
Inscripsere Deos sceleri; Numenque supernum
Caede laboriferi credunt gaudere juvenci.
Horace also gives us to understand that the purest and plainest Way of
appeasing the Gods, was to offer them Flower and Salt, and some Odoriferous
Herbs.

Te nihil attinet
Tentare multa caede bidentium...
Mollibit aversos Penates
Far pio and saliente mica,
Servius observes they threw Flower and Salt upon the Victims, the Fire and the
Knives; for they roasted the Corn, and then mixed Salt therewith, reducing the
whole into salted Flower or Meal and this anciently was Men's Food, and the
Matter of the ancient Sacrifices, which they sometimes continued to celebrate
apart after the Instituting of Sanguinary Sacrifices, which was never used by
the Ancients. Not but that Noah sacrificed Animals at his coming out of the
Ark, as Moses ordered Sanguinary Sacrifices to be made at the Promulgation of
the Law; but when Moses published the Law, all the World was overspread with
Idolatry, and it is very probable that the Worship of false Deities was grown
very common even before the Deluge. And thus it was convenient to offer
Sanguinary Sacrifices to God, in order to hinder Men from doing the same to
Idols or worshipping Beasts.

The Example of Abel may be objected herein, of whom the Scripture seems to
say, that he sacrificed the best and fattest of his Lambs unto God from the
Beginning of the World, but it is much more probable that he only offered his
Lambs to God, without killing them; and Grotius has made it appear, that since
Sacrifices were offered only of such things as were in use among Men, it is by
no means probable, that Abel offered unto God the Flesh of Animals, which Men
did not yet make use of for their Food. That which Flutarch calls Immolation
was the Ceremony of throwing the salted Flower, called Mola Salsa, and Wine
upon the Victim before he was slain; Macrobius says, that the first Sacrifices
of the Egyptians had nothing that was bloody in them, and that when they were
even necessitated to receive the Worship of Serapis and Saturn, to whom Victims
were to be sacrificed, they would not allow their Temples to be built within
the City.

The most common Victims were Sheep, Lamb, Oxen, Cows and Bulls, because these
were Men's most usual Food: Ovid observes that Perseus sacrificed Horses to the
Sun; the Greeks an Hind to Diana, and the Arabians Dogs; and that an Ass was
sacrificed to Priapus: He then goes on to Birds, which he says were offered in
Sacrifice to the Gods, in Revenge for the Injuries they sometimes did them, or
the Displeasure they conceived at their Discovering their Secrets by diverse
sorts of Auguries: Amongst the Birds that were sacrificed, there are no other
mentioned than Doves: Goslings and Cocks were offered in Sacrifice to none but
Nox, and that even in the Nightime.

The most remarkable of all the Pagan Sacrifices were those wherein Men were
offered. Pausanias says, that Lycaon, the second of that Name King of Arcadia,
built the first City in Greece, which he called Lycosura, that he there
sacrificed Men to Jupiter; and that from thence they took occasion to say, that
he made that God eat Humane Flesh; who to punish him for the said Crime,
transformed him into a Wolf. Porphyry says, that these Humane Immolations
continued in Arcadia till the Time of Theophrastus, that they also spread
themselves into Peloponesus, and that they were abolished by Lycurgus at Sparta
who changed this barbarous Custom, and brought the People to be content with
the Blood of some young Men, that were whipped for this Purpose. Pausanias
speaks of an annual Sacrifice made to Diana Triclaria of a young Boy and Girl
by the Oracle's Command in order to expiate the incestuous Familiarity that
passed between a Virgin Priestess of this Temple and a young Man. Strabo gives
an Account of the several Ways used by the Gauls in Respect to Humane
Sacrifices, and says, that at Leucadia, in order to expiate the public Sins,
and avert the Misfortunes wherewith they were menaced, they every Year threw
some Body down headlong from an high Rock, after they had first tied a great
many Feathers and live Birds to him to keep him up in the Air, and that they
received him below as gently as could be, for which End they made a Ring with
their small Boats: Dionysius of Hallicarnassus says, that there were Humane
Sacrifices offered to Saturn in the first Ages, not only at Tire and Carthage,
but also in Italy; that Hercules abolished the said Custom, by persuading the
People to substitute the Effigies of Men instead of real Men, which they were
wont to tie together to the Number of 30 and throw into the Tiber: And this was
done afterward on the Ides of May. Plutarch in his Book of Superstition treats
of these Sacrifices offered to Saturn: The Fathers and the Mothers sacrificed
their own Children and those that had none bought some: They imposed a Fine
upon such as could not forbear shedding Tears at so horrible a Sight, played
upon Flutes and beat Drums, that so the Cries of those innocent Victims might
not be heard: The same Historian in his Questiones Romanae, asks, why the
Romans has forbid the People of Blatonae to offer Humane Sacrifices any more,
seeing they had themselves but a few Years before buried two Men and two Women
alive, viz. Two Greeks and as many Gauls? To which he answers, it is not
allowable to sacrifice Men to God; but that it was not the same Thing in
respect to the Genii or Demons, whose evil Designs they thought to avert by
such Sacrifices. Plutarch says, when Gelon, King of Sicily, had overcome the
Carthaginians, he would not grant them a Peace, but upon Condition that they
should no longer offer their Children in Sacrifice to Saturn: This barbarous
Custom was not disused at Rome, according to Pliny, till the Year 657, from the
Building thereof. Porphyry in his Second Book concerning Abstinence, makes a
long Enumeration of the Places where they formerly offered Human Sacrifices,
viz. Rhodes, Cyprus, Egypt, Phoenicia, Arabia, Thrace, Athens, and Megalopolis:
And he adds upon the Credit of Pallas the Historian, that the Emperor Adrian
did almost abolish these abominable Sacrifices throughout the Empire; and he
assures us, that as to Egypt, King Amasis was the first who forbad Humane
Sacrifices, according to Manetho, and that the Representations of Men made in
Wax were substituted in the room of them. Macrobius says, that at the Feasts
called Compitalia, they sacrificed Children to the Lares, and their Mother
Mania, because Apollo had commanded that Heads should be offered to them; and
that Brutus the Consul, after the Expulsion of the Tarquins, offered the Heads
of Garleek and Poppy instead of those of Children unto them: He says also, that
the Pelasgi arriving in Italy, introduced a Custom thither of offering Humane
Sacrifices to Pluto and Saturn, till such time as Hercules prevailed with their
Descendants to sacrifice the Effigies of Men made of Clay, called Oscilla,
Sigilla, to Pluto, and Wax-Tapers to Saturn, instead of Men; for the Word (...)
signifies a Man and a lighted Taper.

The Pagans, says Vigenere, had Three sorts of Sacrifices, viz. Public,
Private and Foreign: The Public ones were performed at the Charge of the
Public for the Good of the State, to render Thanks unto the Gods for some
signal Favor, or to pray unto them for averting the Misfortunes and other
Calamities wherewith a People or City were menaced or afflicted: The Private
Sacrifices were made by each Family; of such sort were those of the Family of
Clodia done for some particular Persons of it, and at their Charge, whereunto
they many times obliged their Heirs. Plautus also makes a Servant named
Ergasilus, who had found a Kettle full of Gold, to say, that Jupiter had sent
him so much Riches, without obliging him to offer any Sacrifice, Sine sacris
hereditatem sum adeptus effertissimam,
I have got a good Inheritance without being obliged to go the Charge of a
private Sacrifice. Foreign Sacrifices were so named when the Tutelary Gods of
Cities and conquered Provinces were brought to Rome, together with their
Mysteries and Ceremonies. They were offered either for the Benefit of the
Living, or Good of the Dead; these last, according to Festus, were called,
Humana sacra, or humanum sacrificium quod mortui causa fiebat: For the
Ancients, as the Papists do now, had their Feast of the Dead in February, as
Cicero says; Februario mense, qui tunc extremus anni mensis erat, mortuis
parentari voluerunt.

The Matter of which the Sacrifices consisted, were, as before said, the Fruits
of the Earth, or Animals, whose Flesh and Entrails they sometimes presented to
the Gods, and at other times contented themselves to offer them only the Animal
Power of the Victims, as Virgil makes Entellus do, who sacrificed a Bull to
Eryx for the Death of Dares, and so gave Soul for Soul. Hanc tibi, Eryx,
meliorem animam pro morte Daretis
Persolvo.
The Sacrifices varied according to the Diversity of Gods, worshipped by the
Ancients; for there were those that were offered to the Celestial, Infernal,
Marine, Aerial and Terrestrial Gods, to the first of which they sacrificed
white Victims of an odd Number; to the second, black ones, with a Libation of
pure Wine and warm Milk, which were poured into the Gutters with the Victim's
Blood; to the third they sacrificed black and white ones on the Seaside, and
threw their Entrails as far as they could into the Water, and poured some Wine
on;

.... Candentem in littore taurum
Constituam ante ar as voti reus, extaque salsos
Porrtciam in fluctus, and vina liquentia fundam;
To the fourth they sacrificed white Victims, and raised Altars to them in the
same Manner as to the Celestial Gods: To the fifth they only offered Wine and
Honey. As for the Gods of the Air, they kindled a Fire upon their Altars where
the Body of the Victim was burnt, the same being powdered with salt Paste and
Incense.

In choosing of the Victim, it was required it should be found and whole,
without any blemish or Imperfection, his Tail was not to be too small at the
End, his Tongue not black, nor Ears cleft, as Servius observes upon those
Verses in the Aeneid,

Totidem lectas de more bidentes.
Idest, ne habeant caudam aculeatam, nec linguam ^gram, nec aurem fissam: And
those Bulls were not to be such as had drawn in the Yoke. When the Victim was
pitched upon, they gilded his Forehead and Horns, especially if they were
Bulls, Heifers and Cows: Et statuam ante ar as aur ata front juvencum.
Macrobius, L. 1. Saturn. recites an Order of the Senate, whereby the Decemviri
at the Solemnizing of the Ludi Apollinares, were ordered to sacrifice an Ox
with gilded Horns, and Two white Goats with gilded Horns likewise to Apollo,
and a Cow also with gilt Horns to Latona: They adorned their Heads with a
Woollen Infula, from whence hung down two Rows of Chaplets with twisted
Ribands; and in the middle of the Body a kind of a Stole, that was pretty
large, and hung down on both sides: The lesser Victims were only adorned with
Bundles of Flowers and Garlands, together with white Tufts or Garlands. The
Victims being thus made ready, were brought before the Altar, and this Action
was expressed by the Greek Word (...), agere, ducere: The Victim was called
Agonia, and those that conducted it Agones. The lesser Victims were not lead in
a String, but were only conducted to the Place by driving them gently before
them; whereas the greater ones were brought in an Halter to the Place of
Sacrifice: The Victim was not to struggle, or refuse to go, for the Resistance
made by it, was taken for an ill Augury, the Sacrifice being required to be
free: The Victim being brought before the Altar, was examined again and viewed
very circumspectly, in order to see whether there was any defect in it; and
this Action was called Probatio hostiarum and exploratio. Then the Priest being
clad in his Sacerdotal Habit, and accompanied with the Sacrificers and other
Attendants, and being washed and purified according to the Ceremonies
prescribed them, of which we have already spoken, began the Sacrifice with
making a loud Confession of his Unworthiness, acknowledging himself to be
guilty of diverse Sins, for which he begged Pardon of the Gods, hoping that
without their having regard thereunto, they would be pleased to grant him his
Requests.

The Hebrews made also a like general Confession, with this difference, that
the Pagans confessed the Frailty of Mankind, and owned their Faults; but the
others consisted in a Confession of the Greatness of God, which was accompanied
with Hymns played upon Musical Instruments; Cum Dominum laudare coepissent, and
dicere: Consitemini Domino quoniam bonus, quoniam in saeculum misericordia
ejus, Paralipom. 2. C. 5.

This Confession being over, the Priest cried aloud, Hoc age, compose your
selves and mind your Sacrifice; and presently a kind of an Usher holding a Rod
in his Hand, called Commentaculum, went through the Temple, and made all those
withdraw who were not instructed in the Mysteries of Religion, or such as were
excommunicated: For the Custom of the Greeks, from whom the Romans borrowed
theirs, was that the Priest coming to the Altar should ask aloud, (...), Who is
here? The People answered, (...), Many good Persons. Then the Usher or Verger
went through the Temple, crying, (...); that is, Away with the Wicked; or else,
(...), Away with the Profane. The Romans commonly made use of these Words,
Nocentes, profani abscedite. All those who were driven out of the Temples among
the Greeks, were comprehended under these general Words, (...), etc.

Ovid comprizes a great many of those who were forbidden to assist at the
Mysteries of the Gods in these Verses, L. 2. Fast.

Innocui veniant: procul binc, procul impius esto
Frater, and inpartus matter acerba suos:
Cui pater est vivax: quimatris digerit annos,
Quae premit invisam socrus amica nurum.
Tantalidae fratres absint, and Jasonis uxor,
Et quae ruricolis semina tosta dedit:
Et soror and Progne, Tereusque duabus iniquus,
Et quicunque suas per scelus auget opes.
We understand by these Verses in general, that there were two sorts of
Persons, who were forbidden to assist at Sacrifices, viz. The Profane, that
is, such as were not yet instructed in the Worship of their false Deities, and
those who had committed some enormous Crime, as to kill or strike a Father or
Mother: They had some kind of Sacrifices in Greece, whereat it was not allowed
Virgins and Slaves to be present. The Priest at Cheronaea with a Whip in his
Hand, stood at the Gate of the Temple of Matuta, and with a loud Voice forbad
the Etolian Slaves to enter in: Those among the Magi, who had Red Spots in
their Faces, must never draw near the Altars, as Pliny says, L. 30. C. 2. no
more than those must do among the ancient Germans, who had lost their Shield in
a Conflict; so also among the Scythians, he that had not killed an Enemy in
Battle must not come: The Roman Ladies were to assist at the Sacrifices with
Vails on.

When profane and excommunicated Persons were withdrawn, they cried, Favete
linguis, or animis, and pascite linguam, to require Silence and Attention
during the Sacrifice: The Egyptians for the same End were wont to expose the
Statue of Harpocrates, the God of Silence, whom they called (...). As for the
Romans, they placed the Statue of the Goddess Angeronia upon the Altar of
Volupia, the said Goddess having her Mouth sealed up, to intimate that Men
ought to be attentive both in Body and Mind at the Mysteries of Religion, and
submit thereunto: In the mean time the Priest bleft the Water, in order to
sprinkle it with the ordinary Ceremonies, either to throw the Wood-Ashes into
it, that had been used in burning the Sacrifice, or to extinguish the Taeda or
Sacrificial Torch therein. He first sprinkled the Altars, and then all the
Peowith this Lustral Water, while the Chorus of Musicians sung Hymns in Honor
of the Gods: Then they perfumed the Altars, Statues of the Gods and Victims
with Incense, and the Priest turning his Face to the East, and laying hold on
the Horns of the Altar, read the Prayers out of the Book of Ceremonies, and
began them with Janus and Vesta, as believing there could be no access had to
the other Gods but by their Interposition: They also offered them Wine and
Incense before all the rest.

The Emperor Antoninus, surnamed Heliogabalus, ordered that the Preface of
those Prayers should be addressed to the God Heliogabalus, as Lampridius says in
his Life. Domitian would also have them begin with addressing themselves to
Pallas, whose Son he called himself, as Philostratus says: Nevertheless the
Romans restored this Honor to Janus and Vesta, which was allowed them from all
Antiquity. After this Preface addressed to Janus and Vesta, the Person that
officiated began a long Prayer, which he directed to the God to whom the
Sacrifice was made; and afterward to all the rest of the Gods, whose chief
Virtues he recounted, and whom he prayed to be propitious and favorable to
those for whom the Sacrifice was offered, according to the Institution of
Orpheus, who ordered that in all Prayers they should summarily touch upon the
principal Virtues of the Gods, and that at last they should be entreated to
assist the Empire, Emperors, chief Ministers, particular Persons, and generally
to relieve all the Necessities of the Public. This is that which Virgil, L. 8.
Aeneid. has religiously observed in the Prayer, which he makes the Salii put up
to Hercules, adding after having recounted his glorious Actions, Salve, vera
Jovis proles, decus addite Divis,
Et nos and tua dexter adi pede sacra secundo.


Apuleius makes a Prayer to the Goddess Isis, consisting of Thanksgiving, for
her having restored unto him his former Shape, and which I shall relate here
for the Benefit of the curious Reader. Tu quidem sancta and humani generis
sospitatrix perpetua, semper fovendis mortalibus munifica, dulcem matris
affectionem miserorum casibus tribuis, nec dies, nec quies ulla, ac ne momentum
quidem tenue tuis transcurris beneficiis otiosum, qua mari, terraque protegas
homines, and depulsis vitae procellis salutarem porrigas dexteram, quafatorum
etiam inextricabiliter contorta retractas licia, and fortunae tempestates
mitigas, and stellarum varios meatus cohibes. Te superi colunt, observant
inferi, tu rotas orbem, luminas Solemn, regis Mundum, calcas Tartarum, tibi
respondent sidera, redeunt tempora, gaudent Numina, serviunt elementa, tuo nutu
spirant flamina, nutriunt nubila, germinant semina, crescunt gramina. Tuam
Majestatem perborrescunt aves coelo meantes, ferae montibus errantes, serpents
solo latentes, belluae ponto natantes. At ego referendis laudibus tuis exilis
ingenio, and adhibendis Sacrificiis tenuis patrimonio: Nec mihi vocis ubertas
ad dicenda quae de tua Majestate sentio, sufficit; nec ora mill, linguaeque
totidem, vel indefessi sermonis aeternaseries. Ergo quod solum potest
religiosus quidem, sed p^^per, alioqum efficere curabo, divinos tuos vultus
numenque sanctissimum intra pectoris mei secreta conditum porpetuo custodiens
imaginabor.

These Prayers were usually made standing, sometimes with a low, and sometimes
with a loud Voice, unless it were at the Sacrifices of the Dead, when they were
performed sitting: Multis dum precibus Jovem salutat
Stans summos resupinus usque in ungues.
Mart. L. 12. Epigr. 78. And Virgil, L. 9. Aeneid. -- Luco tum forte parentis
Pilumni Turnus sacrata valle sedebat.
There was a kind of an Oration made with the Prayers for the Prosperity of the
Emperor and Government, as Apuleius L. 11. of his Golden Ass informs us, After,
says he, the Procession was come back to the Temple of the Goddess Isis, one of
the Priests, called Grammateus, standing up before the Door of the Quire,
brought together all the Pastophori, and getting up to a high Place like a
Pulpit, took his Book and read several Orations aloud, and made Prayers for the
Emperor, Senate, Roman Knights and People, adding some Things by way of
Instruction in Religion: Tunc ex iis, quem cuncti Grammateum vocabant, pro
fo^ibus assistens, coetu Pastophorum (quod sacro-sancti Collegii nomen est)
velut in concionem vocato, indidem de sublimi suggestu, de libro, de litteris
fausta voce praefatus Principi magno, Senatuique, Equiti, totique populo,
nauticis navibus, etc.

These Ceremonies being ended the chief Sacrificer being set down, and the rest
of them standing, the Magistrates or private Persons who offered Sacrifice,
came before him and presented him with the first Fruits and Victime, and made
sometimes a short Discourse or kind of Complement, as we find Homer makes
Ulysses do, when he presented the High Priest Chryses with Iphigenia
Agamemnon's Daughter to be sacrificed. I come to you, said he, in Agamemnon my
Master's Name, who gives his Daughter a Sacrifice to Apollo, whose Displeasure
the Greeks have but too much felt, in order to appease him.These Words being
over, he delivered her into his Hands, and Chryses received her: We have also
such another Speech in Lucian, which he makes Phalaris his Ambassador deliver
to the Priests at Delphi, as he made them a Present from him of a brazen Bull,
that for Workmanship was a Masterpiece.

As every one came to present his Offering, he went to wash his Hands in a
Place appointed in the Temple for that Purpose, that he might the better
crepare himself for the Sacrifice he was to make, and to thank the Gods for
being pleased to accept of the Victims. Lastly, When the Offering was made the
Priest that officiated, perfumed the Victims with Incense, and sprinkled them
with Lustral Water; and having washed his Hands, and got up again to the Altar,
he prayed to the God whom he presented the Sacrifice to, with a loud Voice,
that he would accept of those Offerings, and be pleased with the Victims he
went to sacrifice to him, for the public Good, and for such and such Things in
particular: Thus the Priest Chryses, in Homer, L. 1. Iliad. when he had
received Iphigenia, and the other Sacrifices, lift up his Hands to Heaven, and
made loud Prayers to Apollo, earnestly beseeching him to pardon the Greeks, and
accept of his Petitions.

In the close of the Offertory and Prayer made by the Priests to the Gods, he
came down the Steps of the Altar, and from the Hand of one of his Assistants
received the Sacred Paste called Mola salsa, that was made of Barley or Wheat
Flour, mixed with Salt and Water, which he threw upon the Head of the Victim,
sprinkling a little Wine upon it, and this was called Immolatio, quasi molae
illatio, being as it were the Diffusion of this Paste: Mola salsa, says Festus,
vocatur far tostum and sale sparsum, quod eo molito hostiae aspergantur. Virgil
has expressed this Ceremony in several parts of his Poem; one of which take from
Aeneid. 2.

Jamque dies infanda aderat mihi sacra parari,
Et salsaefruges, and circam tempora vittae.
Upon which Servius says, that the Priest scattered little bits of this Paste
upon the Head of the Victim, the Altars where the Sacred Fire burnt, and
Knives, as by way of Consecration. The Priest having scattered the Crumbs of
this salted Paste upon the Head of the Victim, which made the first part of the
Consecration; he took some Wine in a Vessel called Simpulum, which was a kind
of a Cruel; and having tasted it himself first, and then made his Assistants do
the same, to show that they partaked of the Sacrifice, he poured it between the
Horns of the Victim, pronouncing these Words of Consecration, Mactus hoc vino
inferio esto; that is, Let this Victim be improved and honored by this Wine,
that it may be the more pleasing to the Gods: I have explained the Word Mactus
elsewhere, which you may see: This done, they pulled off the Hair from between
the Horns of the Victim, and threw them into the Fire, as Virgil says, Et
summas carpens media inter cornua setas,
Ignibus imponit sacris.
He then commanded the Sacrificer, who asked him Agon', Shall I strike? To
knock down the Victim with a great Blow on the Head with a Hammer or Ax; and
presently another of the Assistants named Popa, thrust a Knife into his Throat,
while another received the Blood of the Animal, that gushed out, wherewith the
Priest sprinkled the Altar. Supponunt alii cultro^, tepidumque cruorem
Suscipiunt pateris.
Virg. When the Victim was slain, they flead him, if the same were not a
Burnt-offering, which was burnt Skin and all: They took the Flesh off of the
Head, and then adorning it with Garlands and Flowers, fastened it to the
Pillars of the Temples, as well as the Skins, as Ensigns of Religion, which
they carried about in Procession in some public Calamity; and this we learn
from that Passage in Cicero against Piso: Ecquid recordaris cum omni totius
provinciae pecore compulso, pellium nomine, omnem quaestum illum domesticum
paeternumque renovasti? And again from this other in Festus: Pellom habere
Hercules fingitur, ut homines cultus antiqui admoneantur: Lugentes quoque
diebus luctus in pellibus sunt. Not but that the Priests oftentimes wore the
Skins of the Victims, and that others went to sleep upon them in the Temples of
Aescu^^pius and Faunus, that they might receive favorable Responses in their
Dreams, or be cured of their Maladies, as Virgil says, L. 7. Aen. v. 87.

-- Et caesarum ovium sub nocte silenti
Pellibus incubuit strais, somnosque petivit:
Multa modis simulacra videt volitantia miris,
Et varias audit voces, fruiturque Deorum
Colloquio, atque imis Acheronta affatur Avernis.
Hic and tum pater ipse petens responsa Latinus,
Centum lanigeras mactabat rite bidentes,
Atque harum effultus tergo, stratisque jacebat
Velleribus.
And Capadox, a Merchant that dealt in Slaves complains in that Comedy of
Plautus, entitled, Curculio, that having lain in Aesculapius his Temple, he
saw that God in his Dream remove far from him, which made him resolve to leave
it, as having no hopes left of a Cure,

Migrare certu'st jam nunc e fano for as,
Quando Aesculapi ita sentio sententiam:
Vt qui me nihili faciat, nec salvum velit.
They opened the Victim's Entrails, and after they had circumspectly viewed
them in order to draw good or bad Presages therefrom, according to the Art of
the Auruspices; they floured them with Meal, and sprinkled them with Wine, and
made a Present of them to the Gods, reddebant exta Diis, by throwing them into
the Fire in small bits boiled or parboiled. Thus Alexander Neapolitanus, L. 4.
C. 17. speaks of it: As soon as the Entrails were floured over, he put them
into Basins upon the Altars of the Gods, sprinkling them with Wine, and
perfuming them with Incense, and then threw them into the Fire that was upon
the Altar.And this made the Entrails to be called Porriciae, quae in arae foco
ponebantur, Diisque porrigebantur: Insomuch, that this ancient Form of Speech,
porricias infer signified to present the Entrails: Ignis, says Solinus, in
hanc congeriem adponitur, cum poricias intulerint. They often also sprinkled
the Entrails with Oil, as we read, Aen. 6. Et solida imponit taurorum viscera
flammis,
Pingue super oleum fundens ardentibus extis;
And sometimes with Milk and the Blood of the Victim, particularly in the
Sacrifices of the Dead; which we learn from Stacius, Theb. L. 6. Spumantesque
mero paterae verguntur, and atri
Sanguinis, and rapti gratissima cymbia lactis.
The Entrails being burnt, and all the other Ceremonies finished, they believed
the Gods to be fully satisfied, and that they could not fail to find their Vows
accomplished, which they expressed by this Verb Litare, that is, all is finished,
and well done; whereas non Litare on the contrary intimated there was something
wanting for the Perfection of the Sacrifice, and that the Gods were not
appeased. Suetonius speaking of Julius Caesar, says he could not sacrifice one
favorable Victim on the Day he was slain in the Senate; Caesar victimis caesis
litare non potuit, that is, says Macrobius, sacrificio facto placare numen. The
Priest afterward dismissed the People with these Words, I licet, which were also
made use of at the End of Funeral Solemnities and Comedies for dismissing the
People, as you may see in Terence and Plautus: The Greeks made use of this
Expression upon the same account (...), and the People answered feliciter: Then
they made a Sacred Feast of the Flesh of the offered Victims; an Account of
which is given under the Word Epulum.

From what has been said, you may see, that the Sacrifices consisted of Four
principal Parts; the first of which was called Libatio, or the pouring a little
Wine upon the Victim; the second Immolatio, when after they had scattered the
Crumbs of salted Paste thereon, they killed it; the third Redditio, when they
offered the Entrails to the Gods; and the fourth was called Litatio, when the
Sacrifice was perfected and accomplished, without any Fault: Among the public
Sacrifices, there was one sort called Stata, fixed, immovable, which was
annually performed on the same Day, and other extraordinary ones named Indicta,
because they were appointed extraordinarily upon some important Occasion:
You Will find these Sacrifices described in their Alphabetical order, or under
the Months of the Year.

SACROS;
Arabian Weights consisting of an Ounce, worth Seven Denarii.

SAGUM;
a sort of Coat or Habit for Soldiers, which the Greeks and Romans used, and
was peculiar to the Gauls, according to the Testimony of Varro and Diodorus
Siculus: It was made of Wool, and of a Square Form; they had one for Winter and
another for Summer.

SALACIA;
the Wife of Neptune, the God of the Sea, according to the Poets.

SALAPITIUM;
Die magni Salicipplum disertum, Catul. Epigr. 54. Some said it ought to have
been called Salaputium, others Salpiticium, and some Saliiputum. Vossius in his
Comment upon Pomponius Mela, declares himself in favor of Salicippium; but he
forsakes it for Salapicium, and thereupon informs us that Salappita, in the
best Glossaries signifies a Blow or Buffet; and hence it was that the Buffoons,
who received a thousand Blows upon their Heads and Faces, in order to divert
the Company, were called Salpitones, salvitones, and salutiones: He took these
Words to be derived from the Greek Verb (...), which signifies to sound a
Trumpet, and that the Buffoons who suffered themselves to be buffetted as
aforesaid, were called Salpittones, i. e. Trumpeters, because that like
Trumpeters they blew out their Cheeks as much as they could, that so the Blows
they received might make the more noise, and afford greater Diversion; from
this Remark he deduces the Etymology of Buffoon; for he pretends that the Title
of Buffoon was not given to those, who to make others laugh, acted and said a
thousand Fooleries, but upon account among other things, that they suffered
themselves to be struck on the Face; and to the end that the Blow might make
the more noise, they blew out their Cheeks as much as they could.

SALARIA;
one of the Gates of old Rome, so called because Salt was brought through it into
the City; it was named also Quirinalis, Agonalis and Collina.

SALII;
they were the Priests' of Mars; they wore round Bonnets on their Heads, with
Two Corners standing up, and a parti-colored Tunick: They also wore a kind of a
Coat of Arms, of which nothing could be seen but the Edges, which was a
Purple-coloured Band fastened with Copper Buckles, carrying a small Rod in the
Right Hand, and a little Buckler in the Left: These Salii confisted of young
Noble Men, of whom there were Two very ancient Colleges in Rome: They began
their Ceremonies with Sacrifices, and so we find a Trivet placed near a Salian
upon a Medal, which Trivet was commonly made use of at Sacrifices.

When the Sacrifices were over, they walked along the Streets, one while
dancing together, other whiles separately at the Sound of some Wind-musick;
they used a great many Gestures and set Postures, striking musically upon one
another Bucklers with their Rods, and singing Hymns in Honor of Janus, Mars,
Juno and Minerva, who were answered by a Chorus of Virgins dressed like
themselves, that were made choice of to assist at that Solemnity.

Authors give diverse Originalls to this Word, those who are for having the same
to have been instituted before Romulus, say, that the Salii were so called from
one Salius of Arcadia whom Aeneas brought from Mantinea into Italy; where he
taught the Youth of the Country a sort of Dance which they performed in Arms,
called by the Greeks (...): Critolaus will have it to proceed from one Saon,
who transported the Dii Penates from Samothracia to Lavinium, and instituted
this sacred Dance; but Varro says, that the Salii took their Name a Saltando
and Saliendo, from the Dances and Capers they made: There were Two sorts of
Salii, viz. Salii Palatini, and Collini: The Institution of the first is owing
to Numa, according to Livy and Dionysius of Hallicarnassus, who appointed
Twelve of them to attend the Service of Mars upon Mount Palatine; the Occasion
of this Institution was that the City of Rome being afflicted with a great
Plague in Numa's Reign, he made his People believe, that a Brass-shield was
sent him from Heaven, as a sure Pledge of the Gods Protection, and Affection to
the Romans. He assured them that the Nymph Egeria and the Muses advised him to
keep it carefully, the Fate of the Empire depending upon it; and to the end
that it might not be stolen, he caused Veturius Mammurius to make Eleven more
so like it, that the sacred Shield could never be distinguished from the rest.
Thus Numa erected a College of Twelve Priests taken out of the Patritian
Order, to whom he entrusted the Care of those Bucklers, which he laid up in
Mars his Temple, and which were carried yearly with Dancing and Capering through
the City at the Feast of Mars. This Priesthood was very august in Rome, and
officiated by the chief Persons in the Empire, who were assumed into the Number
of the Twelve: For we read in History that several Great Captains among the
Romans made themselves of the Order of the Salii, such as Appius Claudius, the
Emperor Titus, Antoninus and Scipio Africanus, who, Livy says, left the Army
because he was of the Order of the Salii, and that their Festival Day drew
near; and this was the Reason that the Army continued for some time encamped at
the Heliespont, till the Return of Scipio who stayed in some Place in order to
perform his Devotion on the Day of the said Feast. Stativa deinde ad
Heliespontum aliquandiu habuerunt, quia dies forte quibus Ancylia moventur,
religiosi ad iter inciderant: iidem dies P. Scipionem propiore etiam religione,
quia Salius erat, disjunxerant ab exercitu, causaque and is ipse morae erat dum
consequeretur.

The Salians called Collini were also to the Number of Twelve instituted by
Tullius Hostilius, and all of the Patrician Order; for the said King fighting
against the Fidenates, as Livy says, and finding he had the Worst of it, made a
Vow to Mars that he would increase the Number of the Salii, if he won the
Victory, who when he had so done, created Twelve Salians more.

SALINAE,
Salt-houses. Pliny says, that Ancus Martius was the first that erected
Salthouses near Ostia toward the Tiber's Mouth; Rex Ancus Salinas primus
instituit. There were Granaries of Salt at Rome which stood near the Gate
called Trigemina.

SALTATIO;
a Dance; Lucian in his Dialogue concerning Dancing, says, it is as ancient as
the World, and took it is Original with Love; witness, adds he, the various
Motions of the Stars and the different Conjunctions of those fixed and wandering
Bodies; it is from the Motion of the Heavens and their Harmony that this Divine
Art took it is Origin, which has been improved in Time: It Is said, that Rhea was
the first who took Delight in this Exercise, and that she taught it her Priests
both in Creet and Phrygia; and this Invention was not useless to them, for by
Leaping and Dancing they saved Jupiter's Life, whom his Father intended to
devour, insomuch, that the King of the Heavens owed his Safety to Dancing; but
in those Times it was a Military Exercise, which consisted in striking their
Swords and Javelins upon their Shields: Pyrrhus invented the Pyrrhica, which
was a Dance performed in Arms: The Lacedaemonians, after they had learnt this
Art of Castor and Pollux; improved it with that Care, that they never went to
War without dancing to the Flute, insomuch, that it may be said they owed part
of their Glory to Dancing; and their Youth accustomed themselves as much to the
Exercise of Dancing as they did to that of Arms, for a Player upon the Flute
fixing himself in the Midst of them, began the Motion with Piping and Dancing,
and they followed him making a Thousand warlike Postures, in good order: The
same Thing was practiced at the Dance called Hormus, which was a Mixture
composed of Boys and Girls, wherein the Boys lead the Dance with manly and
warlike Postures, and the Girls followed with a gentler and more modest Pace,
with a Design to compose a Harmony of Strength and Moderation: They had also
another Dance which they performed barefoot, to say nothing of that which
Homer represents in Achilles his Shield, wherein Daedalus instructed the fair
Ariadne, nor of the Caperers and great Dancers that went before, who cut
dangerous Capers: The Thessalians esteemed it so much, that their chief
Magistrates borrowed the Name from it, and called themselves Proorquestres,
that is, those who lead the Dance, for this Inscription was to be met with
under their Statues, as well as that, To the Honor of such an one, for having
danced well in Fight, that is, for having been valliant in Battle.

They offered no Sacrifice at Delos without a Dance, and here they had young
Boys, the Chief whereof lead a Dance by the Sound of the Flute and Harp: But
what need we speak of the Greeks since the Indians themselves worship the Sun,
not by kissing their Hands, but dancing, as if thereby they meant to imitate
the Motion of that admirable Planet, and they have no other Divine Worship,
since that same is performed at Sunsetting and Rising: The Ethiopians went
dancing to Battle, and before they let fly their Arrows, which were set in
order about their Heads in the Form of Sunbeams, they leaped and danced to
terrify the Enemy; let us now go into Egypt, where the Story of Proteus
represents an excellent Dancer, making a Thousand different Postures, and who
with his supple Body and Ingenuity of Mind knew how to counterfeit and imitate
every thing.

The Three Sorts of noblest Dances, are the Cordacismus, Syncinnis, and
Emmaelia, who took their Names from the Satyrs. I Will pass by several other
sorts of Dances with their Names and Authors, says Lucian, my Design being no
other than to show the Pleasure and Benefit that may be got by this Exercise,
especially, since the Time of Augustus. I have not spoken of the Phrygian
Dance, which was done for Debauchery, where you might see the Peasants jumping
and tumbling about while the Flute played, and the same is a painful and
laborious Dance, still practiced in the Country.

SALUS,
Livy mentions the Goddess Salus; by it was meant the Public Weal: Aedes,
Cereris Salutis, de caelo tactae.

SANCTUS or SANCUS and SANGUS, and SEMO-SANCTUS and FIDIUS.
Ovid informs us, that all these Names meant one Thing, and that this was a God
peculiar to the Sabines, which they communicated to the Romans:

Quaerebam Nonas Sancto, Fidio-ne referrem,
An tibi, Semo Pater; tunc mihi Sanctus ait
Cuicumque ex istis dederis, ego munus habebo;
Numina ternafero, sic voluere Cures:
Hunc igitur veteres donarunt aede Sabini,
Inque Quirinali constituere jugo.
St. Augustine L. 18. de Civ. Dei. C. 9. believed that he was the first King of
the Sabines, who was communicated to the Romans, he having been deified after
his Death. Varro and Festus believed the Contrary, and that he was the same God
as Hercules: These are Varro's Words: Putabant hunc esse Sanctum a Sabina
lingua, and Herculem a Graeca; and for Festus he says: Fit sacrificium Herculi
aut Sanco, qui scilicet idem est Deus. This Contradiction may be removed in the
same manner as that concerning the Father of Picus, which some said was
Stercetius: They often gave unto Kings the very Names of the Gods; and so
Stercetius was called Saturn, and Sanchus Hercules, as Encas was also named
Jupiter: Dionysius of Halicarnassus shows how the Sabines were originally
descended from the Lacaedemonians: The Name also of Sabines came from the Greek
(...), colere: Livy likewise mentions the God Sancus: In old Inscriptions these
Words are to be met with, Semoni Sanco Deo Fidio Sacrum.

SANDALIUM,
a Sandal, being a rich kind of Wear for the Feet made of Gold, Silk, or some
valuable Stuff, and particularly used by Ladies, consisting of a Sole, and
hollow above the Foot; Terence speaks of this Sandal, Vtinam tibi commitigari
videam sandalio caput, I wish she would strike thee with her Sandal. Aulus
Gellius call Apollo Sandalarium, because he had a Temple in one of the Streets
of Rome, where Sandals were made.

SANDAPILA;
a Bier, or Coffin to bear the Bodies of poor People, and such as were executed
to be buried, and those who carried the Corpse were also called Sandapilarii.

SANGUS.
See Sanctus.

SANITAS;
Health, of which the Ancients made a Deity: Pausanias shows us, that the
Worshipping of the Goddess of Health was very common in Greece. Posita sunt
Deorum signa Hygiae, quam filiam Aesculapii fuisse dicunt: and Minervae, cui
itidem Hygiae, id est, Sospitae cognomentum. by the first was plainly meant the
Health of the Body, and by the other that of the Mind: He says elsewhere, that
there was an Altar for Jason, Venus, Panacer, Health, and Minerva in the Temple
of Amphiaraus: lason comes from (...) Sanatio; and Panacea in Greek is the same
as Sanatio: They also make her to be Aesculapius his Daughter: Pliny in like
manner says very well, that the Name of Panacea implies the Cure of all
Distempers: The Pagans herein pretended to no more than to worship the Deity
that bestowed and preserved Health. The Romans worshipped Health upon Mount
Quirinal; by her Statue she is represented like a Roman Lady holding a Serpent
crowned with medicinal Herbs in her Right Hand: She was covered with Hair which
Women cut off in Honor of her; her Temple, as Publius Victor says, stood in
the Sixth Division of the City of Rome, and Domitian erected a little Temple
for her (after he had been freed from the Danger he was in upon Vitellius his
coming to Rome) with this Inscription: SALUTI AUGUSTI.

There is a Medalion in Relidro of Marcus Aurelius, whereon is represented a
Sacrifice made to Aesculapius under the Form of a Serpent by Minerva, who holds
a Cup covered with an Olive Tree in her Hand, and before her appears Victory,
holding a Basket full of Fruit.

SARCOPHAGUS
and SARCOPHAGUM: It was a Stone-Tomb, wherein those Dead were laid, they had
no mind to burn. The Word Sarcophagus, which is derived from the Greek,
signifies in strictness of Sense, one that eats Flesh, because at first they
used a sort of Stones for the making of Tombs, which quickly consumed the
Bodies: The Quarries from whence they dug them were in a City of Troas, named
Assum: They had the Virtue to waste away a Body to nothing, save the Teeth, in
Forty Days: This Stone was like unto a reddish Pumice-stone, and had a saltish
taste; they made Vessels of it to cure the Gout, into which they put the Feet,
not suffering them to continue there too long. D. M.

To the Manes; Cuspia Aeglalis rests here; its not lawful to open this Coffin.

SATURNALIA.
See after Saturnus.

SATURNUS;
Saturn; all idolatrous Nations in general had a Saturn of their own, as they
had also their Jupiter: Its certain in respect to Saturn as well as Jupiter,
that the first of all of them was he of Babylon, or Assyria, who was no other
than Noah, as we shall show, whose Son they made to be Jupiter Belus. The
Egyptians and Phoenicians receiving their Religion as well as their Colonies,
and peopling from Assyria, dignified also their Countries with a Saturn and
Jupiter of their own: The Religion and Worship of Saturn passed from Egypt and
Phoenicia into Greece; and the Greeks likewise framed a Saturn and Jupiter to
themselves, in Imitation of those of the Eastern People: At last the same
Superstition was carried from Greece into Italy; and this is that which
Tertullian calls post multas expeditiones, post Attica hospitia: For these
Military Expeditions consisted in no more, than that Progress made by the
Worship of Saturn, which successively ran through all the Provinces from the East
to the West; and by that Hospitia or Entertainment which Greece gave to Saturn,
is meant the long abode which that Religion had in Greece, before it was
carried into Italy. Tertullian adds, that the Reason, upon Saturn's landing in
Italy, why he was taken there for the Son of Heaven and Earth, was because they
did not know his Descent: As Noah was the Saturn of the Assyrians, and the
Original from which all the other Saturns were copied, its not to be wondered
that those Things which appertained more peculiarly to him, have been
attributed to others; for he with the Ark coming out of the Waters of the
Deluge, that had drowned all his Predecessors, gave Men some Pretense to
believe, that he had no other Father nor Mother, besides the Heaven and the
Earth.

Lactantius was of Opinion, that Saturn being a very potent King, did in order
to eternize the Memory and Glory of his Father and Mother, give their Names to
the Heaven and Earth as many others did theirs to Rivers and Mountains, from
which afterward they feigned themselves to be descended: Hence it is, that
Trismegistus makes Saturn to be the Son of Vranus, who was a Man that had the
same Name as that of Heaven. The same Lactantius, after having refuted the
Allegorical explication given by the Stoics, concerning the maiming of Caelum,
by his Son Saturn, concludes they were the real Enterprises of Men against one
another; and as to what he says concerning Saturn's devouring his own Children;
he relates out of Euhemerus his History how that Men in Saturn's Days, fed
indifferently upon Humane Flesh, which came afterward to be forbidden by an
Edict of Jupiter: The same Sacred History of Euhemerus, as recited by
Lactantius, imports that Vranus was the first King upon Earth; and that Titan
his Eldest Son pretending to the Crown after his Death, was however persuaded
by his Mother and Sisters, to yield the Empire to Saturn, on Condition that all
Saturn's Male Children should be put to Death, that so the Empire might return
to Titan and his Children: They killed Saturn's eldest Son, but Jupiter,
Neptune and Pluto, and such as were born afterward, were delivered from
Titan's Cruelty, and brought up in remote places. Titan coming to understand
the News, took up Arms with his Children the Titanes, made War upon Saturn,
took him with his Wife Ops, and put them in Prison. Jupiter in the mean time
was brought up in Crete, from whence with an Army he came and defeated Titan,
delivered his Father out of Prison, reestablished him on his Throne, and then
returned again into Crete; Saturn understanding that his Son had a mind to
dethrone him, was willing to prevent it, and so laid Ambushes for him: Jupiter
perceiving the Design, made himself Master of the Empire, by the Expulsion of
his Father Saturn, who fled, and went and reigned in Italy. This is the Story
as Lactantius has borrowed it from Eubemerus. Diodorus Siculus recounts the
ancient Tradition of the Egyptians, who would have Saturn to have been married
to Rhea his Sister, and to have Osiris and Isis by her; or else Jupiter and
Juno, of whom Osiris, Isis, Typhon, Apollo and Venus were born.

Saturn, according to the Poets, was the Father and King of the Golden Age;
that was the Age of Bliss wherein Adam lived in the Delights of a Terrestrial
Paradise: The Name of Saturn agrees admirably well with the first Man, who for
his Sin went to hide himself, as not daring to appear before God; for Satar in
Hebrew signifies to bide ones self; whence also it is, that the Poets having
made Saturn to pass into Italy, gave the Name of Latium to the Country where he
landed, and reigned, according to their Relation: And so Saturnalia Tellus and
Latium was but the same Country, these two Names bearing the same
Signification, though the one was Hebrew and the other Latin. The Poets make
Saturn to be the Son of Heaven and Earth; so Adam was formed of the Earth, and
the God of Heaven was he that made him: The Empire of Saturn and the Golden Age
ended together; after which Saturn applied himself to Agriculture: Adam also,
after he had sinned, was driven out of the Terrestrial Paradise, and from a
King as he was, was reduced to the Condition of a Labourer: Lastly, All
profane Authors, as well Historians as Poets, have recorded, that all Men
lived free in the Reign of Saturn, without any mention yet made amongst them of
Vassalage or Servitude. And so during the Saturnalia, or Feasts of Saturn,
Servants and Masters eat together; and this was a Resemblance of the first Age
under Adam.

Noah's History has been also applied to Saturn; for Noah was the Father of all
Mankind after the Deluge; he was also the King and Author of another Golden
Age: There were no Slaves in the first Age after the Deluge; all the Race of
Men that were in the World making yet as it were but one numerous Family: As
Noah, according to Scripture, was the first who planted a Vineyard, and began
the Use of Wine; the Pagans also gave unto Saturn the Glory of having taught
Men the Way to cultivate Vineyards and the Earth, and the Use of the Sickle.
Plutarch says, Saturn taught Icarus the Use of Wine, and dressing the
Vineyards. Athaenaeus, after Berosus, says, that the Saturnalia were celebrated
at Babylon, as well as in Greece and Italy: In short, all the Ancients observe,
that the Saturnalia were Days appointed for Debauchery and Drunkenness; as if
the Pagans had had a mind to keep in Remembrance the Drunkenness of Noah, which
he unadvisedly fell into, he having not yet tried the Strength of Wine; of
which the Babylonians, as being nighest, might he best informed.

Plato in his Timaeus says, that Saturn and Rhea his Wife proceeded from the
Ocean and Tetbys; and so Saturn's Symbol at Rome was a Ship: They feigned the
Ocean to be the Father, and Tethys the Mother of Saturn, because he came out of
the Waters of the Deluge; and this Ship was no other than Noah's Ark.

As Noah left all Mankind to perish in the Waters of the Deluge, except his
Three Sons, the Poets have imitated the History herein, by saying that Saturn
had devoured all his Children, but Three.

Lucian in his Saturnalia brings in a Minister speaking to God Saturn in this
manner:

Minister. Do but tell me whether what they say is true, that you devoured your
Children, and would have done as much by Jupiter, if your Wife had not conveyed
him away, and put a Stone in his room, which you swallowed down like a Pill:
But when he grew up he dethroned you, and threw you Headlong into Hell, with
all those who took your part.


Saturn. Though I should have been so cruel as to devour my Children, could I eat
a Stone without being choked, or breaking my Teeth? Neither did Jupiter
dispossess me at all, but I have voluntarily resigned him the Throne, and am
not in Hell, as you see.


Minister. But what moved you to relinquish your Dominion?


Saturn. It was because I was Old and Gouty, which has given them occasion to
say, that my Feet were put into Irons; insomuch, that I was incapable to take
care of every thing, and to punish the Wicked, whole Number increases daily. --
Besides, I thought it the Duty of a good Father to part with his Estate to his
Children in his Lifetime, to avoid Quarrels after his Death: I Will live at
Ease, without having my Head tormented with a thousand importunate Petitions
that are contradictory to each other, to say nothing of the Trouble I was
continually put to by causing Thunder, Rain, Wind and Hail: Now I live easily,
and solace my self with Nectar and Ambrosia, in the Company of Japetus and
other Old Men like my self; without being encumbered with the Affairs of the
World, as Jupiter is; for he has no rest any longer than while my Feast lasts,
when I reassume the Empire for some Days, to the End I may not be despised,
and to put Men in mind of the Gentleness of my Reign, when Corn grew without
sowing, Rivers flowed with Milk, and Fountains with Wine and Honey: All Things
were then in common; there were neither Rich nor Poor, none cheated nor
betrayed; in short, it was the Golden Age.


Saturn was represented like an old Man grown crooked with Age, pale, sad, and
with his Head covered; in his Right Hand he held a Sickle, and a Serpent biting
her Tail, and a Child which he endeavored to devour in his Left. The first
Temple that was built to him at Rome, was that of Tatius, King of the Sabines,
upon Mons Capitolinus; the second was consecrated by Tullius Hostilius; and the
third dedicared by the Consuls A. Sempronius Atratinus and M. Minutius.
Valerius Publicola made it to be the Place where the public Treasure was kept,
and 'twas in this Temple that Foreign Ambassadors caused their Names to be writ
down in the public Registers by the general Treasures: Here also it was that
they kept the Minutes and Registers of Contracts, and all such Actions as
Parents did. Those who had recovered their Freedom, were discharged out of
Prison, or freed from the Hands of their Enemies, went to consecrate their
Chains in that Place: The Statue even of Saturn himself were Chains made of
Wool, in Commemoration of those which Jupiter his Son put upon him; which
Chains at the Saturnalia were taken off, to denote the great Liberty Men
enjoyed at that time. They sacrificed anciently a Man to him; but Hercules
abolished this cruel Custom, and instead thereof appointed them to offer little
Statues made of Plaster unto him.

Saturn is also one of the Seven Planets, and the farthest from the Earth, who
appears to move flower than the rest: Its placed between the Firmament, and the
Orbit of Jupiter; and though it appears to be the least of the Planets, yet it is
the greatest, for its Diameter contains 97 times that of the Earth: It performs
its Revolution in the Zodiac in 29 Years, 157 Days, and 22 Hours. It has two
Satellites about it; there is something new daily discovered concerning it: The
Astrologers call it the Great Infortune: Its Nature is cold and dry; and its
accused of being the Cause of all the Evil that happens upon Earth; its two
Houses are Capricorn and Aquarius, and its Exaltation is in Libra.

SATURNALIA;
they were Solemn Feasts instituted in Honor of Saturn, and kept at Rome
December. 17, or on the 16 Calends of January, the same lasting a Week: This
Feast was instituted long before the Foundation of Rome. Macrobius, L. 1.
Saturn. relates Three Opinions concerning the Original thereof: Some say, that
Janus appointed it by way of Acknowledgment for the Art of Agriculture, which
he had learnt of Saturn: Others attribute the Origin thereof to Hercules his
Companions, for their having been kept from Robbers by Saturn, to whom they put
up their Prayers for that Purpose: And lastly, Others maintain that the Pelasgi
of Greece landing in the Isle of Delos, learnt of the Oracle that they ought to
erect an Altar to Saturn, and celebrate a Feast in Honor of him: This Feast
was therefore instituted at Rome, according to the Relation of the said Author,
in the Reign of Tullus Hostilius, after he had triumphed over the Albans. This
Opinion is opposed by Varro, who says Tarquinius Superbus built Saturn a
Temple, and that T. Largius the Dictator dedicated the same to the Saturnalia.
Livy shows us, that they dedicated a Temple to Saturn, and instituted
Saturnalia, Three Years after the Victory which Posthumous the Dictator won
over the Latins, near the Lake Regillium, which happened in the Year 257, in
the Consulship of Aulus Sempronius, and M. Minutius Augurinus: His consulibus,
says he, Aedes Saturno dedicata: Saturnalia, institutus festus dies. This Feast
lasted but for one Day at first, and this continued to the Reign of Augustus,
who ordered it to continue for three; and afterward they intermixed the
Saturnalia with the Sigillaria, which made the Feast last sometimes five, and
sometimes seven Days, as Martial says.

Lucian in his Saturnalia brings in Saturn himself speaking in this manner
concerning the said Feast. During my whole Reign, which lasts but for one Week,
no public nor private Business is to be done, but only to drink, sing, play,
create imaginary Kings, place Servants with their Masters at Table, smut them
with Soot, or make them leap into the Water with Head foremost, when they do
not perform their Duty well. He afterward recites the Laws of the Saturnalia.
They shall do no public nor private Business during my whole Reign; and of all
Trades, none but common Cooks, Pastry-Cooks, and the like shall follow their
Occupation: All Exercises of Body and Mind shall be banished, saving such as
are for Recreation, and nothing shall be read or recited but what is
conformable to the Time and Place: The Rich, Poor, Masters, Slaves, all shall
be equal; there shall be neither Disputes, nor Quarrels, Reproaches, Injuries,
nor Menaces, nay, Men shall not be allowed to be so much as angry: No Account
shall be kept of Income or Expense; no Inventory taken of Movables and Plate
used at my Feast. The Rich beforehand shall take an Account of all such as
they are minded to treat, or ought to send Presents to, and for that End lay
aside the Tenth part of their Income, without being permitted to apply it to
any other use under any Pretense whatsoever: They shall also lay by their
Superfluities, whether the same be Movables or Clothes, and that which is of
no use to them, in order to make a Present of the same to their necessitous
Friends. After they have on the Eve before cleared the House of all Pollution,
and expelled Pride, Ambition, and Covetousness from thence, in order to
sacrifice to Sweetness of Temper, Courtesy and Liberality, they shall read
over the List they have made, and having laid every ones Portion by it self;
they shall toward Night send their Presents to them by the Hands of some
trusty Persons, with Orders to take nothing of them, unless a Cup of Drink; and
for the surer delivery of the said Present, mention shall be made thereof in a
Letter writ for that Purpose: When the Master of the House shall treat his
People according to Custom, his Friends shall serve at Table with him, and
Liberty shall be given them to jest, provided the Raillery be neatly done, and
that he who is Raillied laughs first.

Thus Slaves had Liberty to say what they would at this Feast, and to ridicule
their Masters to their Faces for their Faults, as Horace says, Sat. 7. L. 2.
Age liberate Decembri,
Quando ita majores voluerunt, utere, narra.


They sacrificed at the Saturnalia bare-headed, contrary to the Custom of other
Sacrifices.

SATYRI;
Satyrs; they were fabulous Demigods among the Pagans, who with the Fauni and
Sylvani preside over Forests. They were represented with Horns on their Heads,
erected Ears, a Tail, Goat's Feet, and hairy all over, and the Hair standing an
end in their Foreheads: Its thought this Word comes from Sathen, which in the
old Greek signified a Man's Genital; because the Satyrs were naturally very
lascivious: They were usually Bacchus his Companions.

SATYRA,
or rather SATIRA; a Satyr; its a Word that signifies all manner of Discourse,
wherein any Person is reprehended: But a Satyr is commonly a Poem that wittily
reproves Men's Vices. Casaubon makes a Distinction between the Satirical Poetry
of the Greeks, and the Satyr of the Romans, which was peculiar to themselves
only; and this is justified by Quintilian, L. 1. C. 10. Satira quidem tota
nostra est; for which Reason Horace calls it, Graecis intactum carmen, a sort
of Poetry unknown to the Greeks. See Causabon upon the Word: A Satyr ought to
be lively, pleasant, moral and full of variety; wherein Juvenal and Horace
excelled, though their Satyrs ought to be read with Precaution.

SCABILLA, SCABELLA, SCAMILLA, and SCAMELLA;
a sort of Castianets, which were like a little Joint-stool, or Footstool, and
which they beat after different ways, with Wooden or Iron Shoes: It was a kind
of Sandal made of two Soles, between which a Castianet was tied.

SCALAE GEMONIAE;
to which they fastened the Bodies of Criminals after their Execution, and from
whence they dragged them with Hooks into the Tiber, after they had exposed them
for some time.

SCELERATA;
Porta is understood; otherwise called the execrable Gate, was one of the Gates
of Rome; being so named from the Misfortune which befell the Three hundred and
six Fabii there.

SCENA;
a Scene; the Theater whereon were represented the Dramma, and other public
Shows: According to Vitruvius, L. 5. C. 8. there are Three sorts of Scenes,
viz. the Tragical, Comic and Satirical: Their Decorations vary, in that the
Tragical Scene has Columns, raised Cornishes, Statues, and such other
Ornaments as appertain to a King's Palace: In the Decoration of the Comic
Scene are represented private Houses, with their Balconies and cross Bars, like
common and ordinary Buildings: The Satirical is adorned with Groves, Caverns,
Mountains, and whatever is represented in Landskips.

SCENE;
by this Word is also meant the Parts of a Drammatick Poem, when a fresh Actor
enters upon the Stage, or that one that was thereon, goes off: A Drammatick
Poem is divided into Acts, and Acts into Scenes.

SCHOENOBATES;
a kind of a Ropedancer, who tumbled about a Rope as a Wheel does round the
Axle-tree, and hung by the Feet or Neck. Nicephorus Gregoras says, that these
sorts of Tumblers or Rope-dancers lived in his time at Constantinople.

SCHOLASTICI;
those who assisted the Governors and Intendants of Provinces in the Exercise
of their Office, and were as Counselors, who drew up Petitions, and instructed
them in Matters of Law.

SCRIBA;
a Secretary, who was an Officer appeartaining to the Public or Magistrate,
that wrote Acts or Decrees, and gave out Dispatches. Every Magistrate had his
Secretary, so that there were Secretaries, whom they called Scribae Aedilitii,
Praetorii, Quaestorii: They were not admitted to the Management of the
principal Offices of the Republic, unless they relinquished their Profession,
as we have an Instance of it in the Person of Cn. Flavius, a Libertine's Son,
who was Secretary to an Aedilis Curulis, who having sued for and obtained the
Office of Aedile, was opposed therein, and not allowed to enter upon it, as
Livy says, before he was first obliged by Oath to exercise the Profession of
Secretary no more: They were called by other Names in the Time of the Emperors,
viz. Notarii, because they made use of Abbreviations, and short Notes in
writing, insomuch that they writ as fast as one could speak, of which Martial
informs us, L. 14. Epigr. 208. Current verba licet, manus est velocior illis:
Nondum lingua, suum dextra peregit opus.


SCRINIUM;
it was a Desk or Cubboard to put Papers in, but we may call it an Office or
Chamber.

SCRINIUM MEMORIAE;
a Place where Minutes were kept, to put a Person in remembrance of the
Prince's Order, to the End he might afterward dispatch Letters Patents at
large for the same: There were 62 Secretaries, who were called Scriniarii
Memoriae and Memoriales, belonging to this Office; 12 of whom served the
Chancery; and 7 more named Antiquarii, whose Business it was to transcribe old
Books, in order to transmit them to Posterity: The first of these Officers was
called Magister Scrinii Memoriae, and received a Golden Belt from his Prince at
the Time of his Creation.

SCRINIUM EPISTOLARUM;
the Office of those who wrote the Emperor's Letters; Augustus Caesar wrote his
own Letters, and gave them afterward to Maecenas and Agrippa to correct them,
as Dio says, L. 35. Other Emperors commonly made use of Secretaries, to whom
they dictated, or only contented themselves to tell them the Substance of such
Things as they should write, and only subscribed underneath Vale with their own
Hand.

SCRINIUM LIBELLORUM;
the Office of Requests, where the Petitions presented to the Emperor to beg
some Favor of him, were kept: In Pancirolus his Notiria Imperii, C. 96. we
have the Copy of a Petition presented to the Emperor Antoninus Pius, by Arrius
Alphius, the Freedman of Arria Fadilla, the Emperor's Mother, importing his
begging leave to lay up the Bones of his Wife and Son in a Marble-Coffin, which
before he had laid in an Earthen one, till such time as the Place which he had
bought to erect a Monument for them, was ready: The Words are these: Cum ante
hos dies conjugem and silium amiserim, and pressus necessitate corpora eorum
sarcophago fictili commendaverim, donec quietis locus quem emeram aedificaretur
via Flaminia inter milliare secundum and tertium euntibus ab urbe part laeva,
custodia monumenti Flam. Tymeles Amelosae M. Signii Orgili. Rogo, Domine,
permittas mihi in eodem loco, in marmoreo sarcophago quem mihi modo comparavi,
ea corpora colligere, ut quando and ego esse desiero, pariter cum iis ponar.
The Answer below was: Decretum fieri placet. Jubentius Celsus Promagister
subscripsi.

SCRINIUM DISPOSITIONUM,
was the Office or Chamber where the Orders and Commands of the Emperor were
dispatched, and he that was the chief Officer here was called Comes
dispositionum.

SCRINIUM
VESTIMENTORUM; the Wardrobe where the Emperor's Clothes were kept.

SCRIPTURA;
a Tribute paid for Wood and Pasturage, and secured to him that bid most.

SCRUPULUS;
a Scruple; the least of the Weights used by the Ancients, and among the Romans
was the 24th part of an Ounce.

SCULPTURA;
Sculpture; its an Art, whereby in taking from or adding to some Matter, are
formed all sorts of Figures, made of Earth, or Wax, or else of Wood, Stones or
Metals. Its very difficult, by reason of the Obscurity of former Ages to find
out who were the first Inventors of Sculpture; the Antiquity whereof is
apparent to us from the Holy Scriptures, by the Idols of Laban, which Rachel
stole, and the Golden Calf made by the Children of Israel in the Wilderness: As
to profane Authors who have written hereof, some will have it, that a Potter
of Sicyone, whose Name was Dubitadus, was the first Sculptor; and that his
Daughter first began Portraiture, by drawing her Lover's Picture upon the
Shadow, which the Light of a Lamp marked upon a Wall: Others maintain that this
Art had its Origin in the Isle of Samos, where Ideocus and Theodorus who were
the Inventors of it, made some Pieces long before any mention was made of
Dibutadus; that Demaratus, the Father of Tarquinius Priscus, was he that
brought it into Italy, upon his retiring thither; for having brought Eucirapus
and Eutigrammus, who were excellent Artists in this kind, along with him, they
communicated the same more especially to the Tuscans, who applied themselves to
it, and went on with it to Perfection; that Tarquin caused one Taurianus
afterward to come thither, who was one of the most famous of them, to make an
Earthen Statue of Jupiter, and Four Horses of the same Matter to be placed in
the Frontispiece of that God's. Temple: Its also thought, the same Sculptor
made a Figure of Hercules, which was for a long time to be seen at Rome, and
named upon account of the Matter whereof it was made Hercules of baked Earth.

There were several Sculptors in those Times, both in Greece and Italy, who
wrought in Earth: There is mention made of Calcostenes, an Athenian, who made
his Name and House famous, upon account of the many Earthen Figures wherewith
he adorned it; of Demophiles and Gorsanus, who were also Painters, and
beautified the Temple of the Goddess Ceres with Pictures and Earthen Images;
and so the Representations of all the Heathen Gods, were at first no otherwise
than in Earth and Wood; and 'twas not so much because of the Brittleness of the
Matter, and the little Value thereof, as from the Luxury and Riches of People,
that they proceeded to make of Marble, and the most precious Metals: In the
mean time how rich soever the Matter was which Sculptors used, they never laid
Earth aside, which they always used to make their Models of; and whether they
went about to make them Statues of Marble, or cast them in Metal, they never
undertook these laborious Works, before they had first made a Model of Earth of
them; and this without doubt gave Praxiteles occasion to say, that the Art of
making Earthen Figures, was the Mother that as it were brought forth the Art of
making Marble and Brass Figures; which began not to appear in its Perfection,
till about 300 Years after the Building of Rome.

Phidias of Athens, who lived at that time, excelled all those that went before
him, either in working in Marble, Ivory, or Metals; but quickly after there
came up a great Number of excellent Artists, who advanced Sculpture to the
highest Pitch, it arrived to: For in Sicyone appeared Polycletus, whose Figures
were admired by all the World, and a Model for all those that studied the Art.
Afterward Myron came on, who was inimitable in all he did; Lysippus, whose
Name will live as long as Alexander's, and who alone had the Reputation to cast
that Prince his Statue in Brass; Praxiteles and Scopas, who made admirable
Figures, and the Horses which are still to be seen at Rome before the Pope's
Palace at Monte-Cavallo: This Scopas had Briaxis, Timotheus and Leochares for
Competitors, who wrought at the famous Tomb of Mausolus, King of Caria:
Fisodorus, Canachus, Daedalus, Buthireus, Myro's Disciple, Nyceratus,
Euphranor, Theodorus, Xenocrates, Phyromachus, and Stratonicus Antigonus, who
wrote a Treatise concerning his Art. Those excellent Persons, who made the
Laocoon, viz. Agesander, Polydorus and Athenodorus, are all Three worthy of
immortal Praise for such curious Workmanship; and an infinite Number more, the
Names of some of whom have been transmitted to Posterity, and others have
perished with their Works. For, though there were so great a Number of Statues in
Asia, Greece and Italy, and that in Rome alone, there were more, as was
reported, than there were living Persons; yet at this Day there are but very
few remaining, especially of any value. In the Time that Marcus Scaurus was
Edile, as he was obliged by his Place to provide for what was requisite toward
the public Rojoycings, he adorned the stately Theater, which he erected with
3000 brazen Statues; and though L. Mummius and Lucullus brought away a great
Number out of Asia and Greece, yet there were still above 3000 remaining in
Rhodes, as many at Athens, and more at Delphi; but what is most strange, is the
Bigness of the Figures, which those ancient Artists had the Courage to
undertake: Amongst those which Lucullus caused to be transported to Rome, there
was a Statue of Apollo 30 Cubits high; the Collossus of Rhodes, made by Cares
of Lyndos, the Disciple of Lycippus, far exceeded it. Nero's Statue made by
Xenodcrus after that of Mercury, was also of an extraordinary size, as being
110 Feet high. In the mean time it is to be observed, that Sculpture, after
Phidias his Time, continued not in any great Perfection but for about 150
Years, and that then it began insensibly to decline; not but that after the
said time there were still some fine Pieces of Workmanship both in Greece and
Italy, though not performed with so great a Fancy and exquisite Beauty: Besides
the Greek Statues are more esteemed for the Excellency of the Work: There is a
special Difference between them and those of the Romans; in that the greatest
part of the first are almost always naked, like those who wrestle or perform
some other bodily Exercise, wherein the Youth of those Times placed all their
Glory, whereas the others are clad or armed, particularly have the Toga on,
which was the greatest Mark of Honor among the Romans.

SECESPITA,
was the Knife wherewith they killed the Victims appointed for Sacrifices.

SECULUM;
an Age. This Word which is often used comprehends the Space of 100 Years
complete, according to Festus. Servius observes that an Age is also taken for
the Space of 30 Years, sometimes for 110 and sometimes for 1000: The Ancients
divided Time into Four Ages, which they called the Golden Age, that is
attributed to Saturn's Reign, the Silver Age, to that of Jupiter, and the
Brazen and Iron Ages, under which they comprehend that of the present Time.

SECULARES LUDI;
Secular Games, were formerly one of the most solemn Feasts kept at Rome:
Several ancient Authors have writ concerning it; but their Works being lost, we
should have remained ignorant of the chief Ceremonies thereof, if Zozimus, who
lived toward the End of the fourth Century, had not taken Care to give us an
abridged Account thereof, in the second Book of his History, and what he says
thereupon, we find confirmed and explained by some Medals of those Secular
Plays still in being, especially by those of Domitian: The Original therefore
of the said Plays take as follows.

The City of Rome being afflicted with a great Plague, the very same Year
wherein they expelled the Tarquins, Valerius Publicola, who was then Consul, in
order to appease the Wrath of the Gods, ordered them to celebrate this
Solemnity, the Ceremonies whereof were found in the Oracles of the Sibylls,
which they kept with great Care; 'twas the Year after the Foundation of Rome
245. according to the Calculation of Varro, which is the best and most
followed, that is 509, Years before our Savior's Nativity. These Plays were
called Secular, because they were obliged to renew them from Age to Age; that
is every 100 Years, according to the most received Opinion; or every 110 Years,
as the 15 Officers, called Quindecim-viri, pretended in Augustus his Time, who
at Rome were to look after the Ceremonies of Religion, and by the said Excuse
found a Way to clear themselves before that Emperor, who accused them for not
having celebrated the said Plays at the Time appointed, as you may see in
Father Tassin the Jesuite's Treatise concerning the Secular Plays: Augustus
having celebrated them under the Consulship of Furnius and Silanus in the Year
of Rome 737. the Emperor Claudius would renew them Anno 800. because it was the
Beginning of a Century: But Domitian without any Respect to Claudius, conformed
himself to what Augustus had done, and celebrated them 103 Years after that
Prince had done them, that is, in the Year of Rome 840. Some time before it was
published over all the Empire, according to ancient Custom, That every one
might come and see those Plays, which he never had seen nor never should again.
They opened those Games thus. Toward the Beginning of Harvest, the Emperor, as
sovereign Pontiff, haranged the People in the Capitol, and exhorted them to
prepare themselves for so solemn a Feast, by purifying both their Bodies and
Minds. The like Exhortations were made at the great Feasts, and particularly at
the Mysteries of Ceres Eleusina, whose Ceremonies were very like those of the
Secular Plays, as Herodian observes: The Emperor being seated on a Tribunal
before a Temple, which was that of Jupiter Capitolinus, gave some Perfumes to
be distributed to the People, and these Perfumes consisted of Sulphur and
Bitumen; the Quindecim-viri received them of the Emperor, and afterward
distributed them among the People, adding thereunto a little Piece of Fir-wood,
called Taeda; they-lighted it at one End, and threw some of the said Perfume
upon it, the Smoke whereof every one caused to go round him, in order to
purify himself: They also gave of the same to Children, who were at Years of
Understanding.

The Days whereon these Plays were to be celebrated being come, they began with
a Procession, whereat the Priests of all the Colleges assisted; the Senate and
all the Magistrates were present, the People being clad in White, crowned with
Flowers, and every one having a Laurel in his Hand. As they went along the
Streets they sung some Verses made on Purpose for this Feast, and as they went
into the Temples and Cross-ways worshipped the Statues of the Gods, which were
exposed to view upon Beds of State, and these were called Lectisternia Deorum.
They met in the Temples on the Three following Nights to watch there, and put
up their Prayers and Sacrifices, and this was called Pervigilium; and to the
end that nothing that was undecent might be committed in these public
Assemblies, the Youth of both Sexes assisted hereat under the Inspection of
their Parents, or some Person at Years of Discretion of their Family, who might
be responsible for their Behavior, as Augustus had ordered it; and because
this Feast was chiefly instituted to appease the Gods of Darkness, that is,
Pluto, Proserpina, Ceres, the Destinies and Lucina; there were no other than
black Victims offered to them, and that in the Night Time, which was then
illuminated by the Fires made in the Streets and an infinite Number of Lamps
lighted upon that Occasion. They then sacrificed a black Bull to Pluto, and a
black Cow to Proserpina. On the Morrow during Daylight they offered the like
Victims, but such as were white, to Jupiter and Juno. And this we learn from a
Medal of Domitian, where the said Emperor powers a Cup of Wine upon the Ashes
of the Altar: Here you have Two Musicians also, one playing upon the Harp, and
the other upon Two Flutes; a Man upon his Knees holding a Bull, to which, he
that was to sacrifice him, whom they called the Victimary, seemed to give a
Blow on the Head with an Ax.

At these Sacrifices they brought the Victims washed and dressed with Garlands of
Hours, to the Altar, then Orders were given that all profane Persons should
withdraw, and others be silent, and attentive to what was done. After this the
Pontiff, who was the Emperor himself, put a little Flower mixed with Salt upon
the Victim's Head and then poured a little Wine on, which he gave to the
Assistants to taste: Then the Sacrificer presently gave the Victim a great Blow
on the Head with his Ax, and his Throat being cut at the same Time by the other
Officers, they presented his Blood to the grand Pontiff, who immediately powered
it upon the Fire of the Altar: This being done, they narrowly observed the
Entrails of the Animal, from the different Disposition and Color of which the
Aruspices drew good or bad Omens; wherein the Romans were so circumspect, and
had so much Faith, that Julius Caesar himself, as Macrobius says, at least writ
Sixteen Books upon that Subject. They afterward burnt the same Entrails, when
they had taken Three Turns round the Altar, offering this Sacrifice to the God
or Goddess for whom the same was designed; and this they never did but they
invoked all the other Gods at the same Time, as if they could do nothing but
altogether; they usually reserved the Victim for the Feast which was made;
after the People were dismissed, with these Words, Iicet, that is, you may
withdraw: These Sacrifices being over, they assisted at the public Plays,
which were more particularly consecrated to Apollo and Diana, and went to the
Theater where Comedies were acted; and to the Circus, where they were
entertained with Foot, Horse and Chariot Races: The Athletes also signalized
themselves at Wrestling and other Exercises: In the Amphitheater they saw the
Combats of the Gladiators, and wild Beasts fight, the last of which were
brought thither on purpose from all Parts.

They resumed their Prayers and Sacrifices the second Night, which they addressed
to the Destinies, and to whom they sacrificed a Sheep and a Goat, both black:
Next Day such Women as were free and no Slaves, went to the Capitol and other
Temples, where they made their Prayers to Jupiter and the other Gods before
mentioned: There they sung Hymns, to entreat them to prosper the Empire and
People of Rome, they also prayed for what related to their own particular
Occasions, and among other things for Ease in Childbearing: The rest of the
Day was spent in public Rejoycings, and much the same as those used the
preceding Day.

The third Night they sacrificed a Hog to the Earth, which the Ancients
esteemed as one of their chief Goddesses, and adored under different Names;
they believed this Animal to be the most pleasing Victim they could offer her,
as well because it always looked toward the Earth, as by reason, they said, a
Hog formerly eat the first Corn that was sowed: This Sacrifice was offered upon
the Banks of the Tiber at a Place in Campus Martius, called Terentum, from the
Verb Tero, to use, because the Bank of the River was there worn away, and as it
were consumed by the Water. On the Day following which was the third and last
of the Secular Games, they had Two Consorts of Music, one consisting of Boys,
and the other of Girls, all of them of the best Families in Rome, and whose
Parents were yet alive; a Circumstance observed, that there might be no
Occasion administered for Mourning and Sadness at a Feast, where there should be
nothing found but Joy: They sung an Hymn composed on Purpose for the Secular
Plays; we have that extant which was sung in Augustus his Time, and composed by
Horace, which is to be found in the End of his Book of Epods. It was
undoubtedly, the same Day that was appointed for the Mystic Dance of the
Salii, instituted formerly by Numa, second King of Rome; we should not have
known that this Dance made one of the chief Ceremonies of the Secular Plays, if
we had not learnt it from two Medals, one of Augustus, and the other of
Domitian, which were stamped on purpose for these Plays, and upon which may be
seen the Figure of a Salian, as represented by the Ancients: He has a round
Bonnet on his Head, ending with two very long Corners; upon his parti-colored
Tunick, he wears a kind of a Coat of Arms, of which nothing but the Edges is to
be seen, which consisted of Purple Bands fastened with Brass Buckles; he holds a
small Rod in his Right Hand, and a Buckler in the Left, in the midst whereof
Minerva's Head is to be seen, she being the Goddess chosen by Domitian to be
his Protectress: They assisted the same Day at the Shows, in the same manner as
on the preceding Days. This Feast being over, the Emperor gave the Offerings to
such Officers, as were to take care of these Ceremonies, who distributed part
of the same amongst the People. They afterward recorded these Plays in the
public Registries, and inscribed them on Marble.

They were called Secular Games, because the Time prescribed between the
Celebration of one and the other of them had the same Extent as the longest
Life of Man, which is that called (...) by the Greeks, but Seculum by the
Romans. In short, this Solemnity contributed very much to the Diverting of the
Plague, Morality, and other Epidemical Distempers; and now we will give you the
Occasion of the Institution of them. Valesius, from whom the Family of the
Valefii among the Sabines was descended, having a Wood before his House, the
tall Trees whereof were reduced to Ashes by Thunder, he was troubled that he
could not understand the Reason of such a Prodigy. In a short Time after, his
Children happening to fall sick of a dangerous Distemper, against which no
medicinal Remedies could prevail, he had Recourse to the Aruspices, who telling
him, that the manner of the Thunder denoted that the Gods were very angry, he
went in the Way of his Duty to appease them, by Sacrifices; and being both
himself and his Wife extremely concerned for the Safety of his Children, of
which they had no Hopes, he prostrated himself at the Feet of a Statue of
Vesta, making a Tender to that Goddess of his own, and their Mother's Life to
redeem theirs; then turning his Eyes toward the Wood that had been burnt, he
thought he had heard a Voice commanding him to go to Tarentum, and there give
them some of the Water of the Tiber to drink, after he had warmed it upon the
Fire of Pluto and Proserpina's Altar: At these Words he despaired still the
more of the Lives of his sick Children; for how should he find the Water of the
Tiber at Tarentum, which was a little Town situated in the farther Part of
Italy; besides he took it for an ill Augury, for him to heat that Water upon
the Altar of the Infernal Gods: The Aruspices had no better Opinion of it than
he, however they advised him to obey, wherefore he embarked with his Children
upon the Tiber, and took care to carry Fire along with him, but finding he
could do it no longer because of its excessive Heat, he caused the Men to row
toward a Place on the Shore, where the Stream was not so rapid, and having
stopped near a Shepherd's Cottage; he came to know of the said Shepherd that
the Name of the Place was Tarentum or Terentum, as well as the City situate in
the Promontory of Iapyx: He gave God Thanks for this good News, caused the
Water of the Tiber to be warmed upon the Fire he had lighted, and no sooner
gave it his Children to drink but they fell asleep; and when they awoke, found
themselves well. They told their Father, that while they were asleep, a Man of
an extraordinary Size appeared to them, who had an Air all Divine, and
commanded them to offer black Victims to Pluto and Proserpina, and to spend
Three Nights successively in singing and dancing to the Honor of those Deities
in a Place in Campus Matrius, appointed for the exercising of Horses: Vaicsius
going about to lay the Foundations of an Altar there, had not dug very far, but
he found one to his Hand with this Inscription: TO PLUTO AND PROSERPINA.

And having then his Doubts fully cleared to him, he sacrificed black Victims
on the said Altar, and spent Three Nights in this Place as 'twas ordered him to
do: Now this ^ar had been erected for those Gods upon a remarkable Occasion
during the War of the Romans against the Albans; whea their Armies were just
going to engage, all on a sudden there appeared a Man with a monstrous Aspect
and clad in black Skins, crying out with a loud Voice, That Fluto and
Proserpina commanded them before they engaged, to sacrifice to them under
Ground, after which he vanished: The Romans being astonished at this
Apparition, immediately built an Altar 20 Foot deep under Ground, and after
having sacrificed according to Order, they covered it, to the end no Body but
themselves might have Knowledge of it: Valesius having found it, after he had
offered Victims thereon, and spent the Nights in the Rejoycings prescribed by
the Gods, he was called Manius Valerius Terentinus; Manius in Commemoration of
the Infernal Gods called Manes by the Latins, Valerius from the Word valeo
which signifies to be in Health, and Terentinus, in respect to the Place where
he had offered Sacrifices.

Sometime after this Adventure, that is, the first Year after the Expulsion of
the Tarquins, the City of Rome being afflicted with the Plague, Publius
Valertus Publicola, who was then Consul, freed the People from this Evil, by
offering in the same Place a black Ox to Pluto, and a black Cow to Proserpina,
and he caused this Inscription to be graven on the same Altar; Publius Valerius
Publicola has consecrated a Fire to Pluto and Proserpina in Campus Martius;
and celebrated Games in Honor of the said Gods, for the Deliverance of the
People of Rome.

Rome being after that afflicted with Wars and Pestilence in the Fourth
Consulship of Marcus Potitus, 352 Years after the Foundation thereof, the
Senate ordered the Sibyll's Books to be consulted by those whose Business it
was: They answered, that those Evils would be at an end, if they did but offer
Sacrifices to Pluto and Proserpina: They presently sought out the Place where
the Altar of these Gods was buried, found it, and consecrated it anew, and they
had no sooner finished their Sacrifices thereon, but the Romans found
themselves freed from the Evils they labored under; after which they buried
the said Altar again, and the same is in a certain Place at the End of Campus
Martius; but these Sacrifices having been neglected from the Consulship of
Lucius Censorinus, and Manlius Puelius, and new Misfortunes befalling them in
Augustus his Reign, the said Prince renewed those Plays under the Consulship of
Lucius Censormus, and Caius Sabinus, after Ateius Capito had informed them of
the Ceremonies they were to observe thereat, and that the Quindecim-viri, in
whose Custody the Sibyll's Books were, had found out the Place where the
Sacrifices and Shows ought to be performed. The Emperor Claudius, after
Augustus caused the same Games to be celebrated, without any regard had to the
Law, that required they should not be performed, but once every Age. Afterward
Domitian not minding what Claudius had done, celebrated them at the full
Revolution of an Age from the time of Augustus his solemnizings of them:
Lastly, Severus assisted by his Sons Caracalla and Geta, renewed the same Games
under the Consulship of Chilo and Libo.

Here follows the Manner how these Plays are set down in the public Registers;
the Heralds went about to invite the People to a Show which they had never
seen, and should never see again but this once: Harvest-time being come a few
Days before this Feast, the Quindecim-viri, whose Business it was to look after
the Ceremonies of Religion, sat upon a Tribunal before the Capitol and
Apollo's Temple, from whence they distributed Torches of Sulphur, and Bitumen,
to the People which every one used to purify himself with: They gave none to
the Slaves, but only to such as were free: Afterward all the People went to
the Temples we have mentioned, and to that of Diana upon Mount Aventine; every
one of which carried some Wheat, Barley and Beans thither, and kept the sacred
Eve there all Night in Honor of the Destinies with a great deal of Company:
Lastly, They solemnized this ^east for Three Days and Three Nights, beginning
with offering Sacrifices in Campus Martius upon the Banks of the Tiber in a
Place named Terentum: The Gods to whom they offered, were Jupiter, Juno,
Apollo, Latona and Diana, as also the Destinies, Lucina, Ceres, Pluto and
Proserpina. The first Night Two Hours after Sunset, the Emperor being assisted
by the Quidecim-viri, of whom before, sacrificed Three Lambs upon Three Altars
raised upon the Banks of the Tiber, and when he had sprinkled the Altars with
the Victims Blood, he burnt them all whole, during which Time the Musicians who
were set upon an advanced Place, sung an Hymn made for that Purpose: They
lighted Fires and Lamps every where, and gave Shows that agreed with those
Sacrifices: Those who were to provide for Ceremonies, by way of Recompense
received the first Fruits of the Earth; after some of them had been distributed
to all the People: In the Morning they met in the Capitol, from whence after
they had sacrificed the usual Victims, they went to the Theater to celebrate
Games there in Honor of Apollo and Diana: On the second Day the Women of
Quality went to the Capitol, at the Hour assigned them in the Sibyll's Books,
and there sacrificed to Jupiter, and sung Hymns in his Praise. Lastly, On the
third Day, a Company of Youths of good Birth, to the Number of 27, and as many
young Girls, all whose Parents were alive, in fix Chorus's, sung Hymns in Greek
and Latin, and Sacred Songs, for the obtaining all manner of Prosperity to the
Cities of Rome. There were moreover many other Things done according to the
Prescription of the Gods, and as long as these Ceremonies were observed, the
Roman Empire remained entire; but to the end you may know the Truth of what has
been said, I Will here recite the Oracle of the Sibylle her self, as others have
already done.

Roman, remember every 110th Year, which is the longest Time of the Duration of
a Man's Life; I say, remember to offer Sacrifice to the immortal Gods, in the
Field, that is watered by the Tiber. When the Night is come, and that the Sun
is set, then offer Goats and Sheep to the Destinies; afterward offer proper
Sacrifices to Lucina, who presides over Childbearing; next sacrifice a Hog and
a black Sow to the Earth; and this done, offer white Oxen on Jupiter's Altar;
and this must be performed in the Daytime, and not by Night; for those
Sacrifices that are made in the Daytime please the Celestial Gods; by the
same Reason thou shall offer to Juno a young Cow that has a good Hide; the like
Sacrifices thou shall make to Phoebus-Apolio, the Son of Latona, who is also
called the Sun; and let the Roman Boys, accompanied with Girls, sing Hymns with
a loud Voice in the Sacred Temples, but so that the Girls sing on one side, and
the Boys on the other, and the Parents both of the one and the other must be
then alive; let married Women fall upon their Knees before Juno's Altar, and
pray that Goddess to give Ear to the public Vows, and theirs in particular;
let every one according to his Ability offer first Fruits to the Gods, to
render them propitious, and these first Fruits ought to be kept with Care, and
they must not forget to distribute some of them to every one that assists at
the Sacrifices; let there be a great Number of People Night and Day at the
Resting-places of the Gods, and there let serious and diverting Things be
agreeably intermixed: See therefore, O Roman, that these Injunctions be always
kept in mind by thee; and thus the Country of Italy, and that of the Latins
will always be subject to thy Power.

SELLA SOLIDA;
a Chair or Seat made of a piece of Wood, wherein the Augurs sat, when they
were taking their Augury.

SELLA CURULIS;
the Curule-Chair, which was adorned with ivory, and on which the great
Magistrates of Rome had a Right to sit and to be carried.

SEMELE;
the Daughter of Cadmus, King of Thebes, with whom Jupiter was in Love; Juno
being jealous persuaded Semele, whom Jupiter loved, to lie with him in all his
Glory; insomuch that the Fire of his Thunderbolt catching hold on the Wainscot
of her Chamber, burnt her: All that could be done upon this Occasion, was to
save the Child, for she was big, and to take him hot out of his Mother's Womb,
and put him in Jupiter's Thigh, where he staid his time, and was called Bacchus.

SEMENTINAE FERIAE;
Feasts instituted in Seed-time, in order to pray unto the Gods to vouchsafe
them a plentiful Harvest.

SEMONES;
Demigods: Fulgentius in his Treatise of ancient Words, says, that the
Ancients would have the Semones to be the certain Gods, who were not of the
Number of the Celestial Deities, but such as were Demigods, quasi
semi-homines.

SENACULA;
they were Places where the Senate of Rome met, of which there were Three.

SENATOR;
a Senator. Romulus instituted the first Hundred Senators at Rome, which made
up the King's Council: In order to be a Senator, a Man must be a Citizen of
Rome, or of one of the Municipal Cities that had the same Privileges or
Freedom: Respect was had to their Manners, Birth and Estate; for a Senator
ought to have a Revenue of 4000 Pounds for the Maintenance of his Dignity; but
Augustus required he should have 300000 Crowns: Senatorum censum ampliavit,
says Suetonius, ac pro octingintorum millium summa, duodecies H. S. taxavit,
supplevitque non habentibus. He was to be at least Thirty Years old before he
was made a Senator.

We are not without Instances of Children affranchized, and of Persons yet of a
meaner Condition, and even Strangers, who have arrived at the Dignity of
Senators; but this was brought about either by Intreague, or the Emperor's
Authority. The Choice of Senators belonged at first to the Kings; the Consuls
afterward were invested with this Power; and lastly, the Censors being obliged
every five Years to take an Account of them, substituted others in the room of
those that were dead, or had been degraded: But in the decaying Time of the
Republic, the Emperors arrogated this Power to themselves, and made as many
Senators, and of what Quality they pleased.

The Number of Senators varied according to various Times: Romulus at first
created a Hundred of them, which he called Patres; and after the Alliance made
with the Sabines, increased their Number to a Hundred more. Tarquinius Priscus,
according to Livy, or as others will have it, King Servius added also an
Hundred, which he named Patres minorum gentium, because they were not of so
noble an Extract as the former. This Number of 300 Senators continued to the
Time of C. Gracchus, Tribune of the People; who opposing the Nobles, made the
People add 300 Roman Knights to the rest, in order to counterballance the
Number of the 300 Senators: Thus the Number of 600 Senators lasted to the Time
of Julius Caesar, who being willing to gratify a great many brave Men, who had
faithfully served him in his Wars against Pompey; increased the Number to 1000
of all sorts of People, without distinction. But Augustus to purge this Body
that was in an ill habit, reduced it to the former Number of 600, and expelled
such as were most unfit for the Dignity; and this he did with so much
Moderation, that in order to make those easy whom he thus reduced, he granted
them to wear the Laticlavium, and allowed them the Privilege to assist at the
Plays with other Senators in the Orchestra; as also at public Feasts, which
were solemnized with Plays and Triumphs. And so of the 300 Senators, the 200
created by Romulus were called Patritii majorum geniium, and the other 100
Adlecti, or Conscripti, a Name which afterward continued to be given to the
whole Senate.

Among these Senators, there was some who had a decisive Vote, and spoke their
Sentiments in the Matters that were proposed; and others who did no more than
follow those Sentiments which to them appeared most reasonable; and this made
them be called Pediarii Senatores, who did not declare their own Opinions, but
sided with those whose Opinions they approved of: Qui sententiam in Senatu non
verbis dicerent, sed in alienam sententiam pedibus irent. Aulus Gellius rejects
this Interpretation, and seems to follow that of Q. Bassus, who says in his
Commentaries, that those of the Senators who had never bore the Office of
Curule-Magistrate, went a foot to the Senate; and for that Reason were called
Pedarii Senatores: But Varro pretends, that the Advice of such Senators as were
last admitted, was not asked, and that they were obliged to espouse some others
Opinion: Et qui in postremis scripti erant, he speaks of the List of Censors,
non rogabantur sententias, sed quas principes duxer ant, in eas descendebant:
For which reason Laberius says, that a Pedarian Senator's Vote was a Head
without a Tongue, Caput sine lingua pedaria sententia est.
Hence it is that when the Consuls would have the Senate meet, they must say,
Senatores, quibusque in Senatu sententiam dicere licet; and this shows the
Difference between sententiam verbis dicere, and sententiam pedibus far, or
dicere, which appertained to none but the Senatores Pedarii.

The Senators wore a very large Purple Tunick, with broad Edges called
Lati-clavium; from which the Senators were called Lati-clavii, they had a Right
to sit or be carried in the Curule-Chair, to assist at Plays and Shows in the
Orchestra, and likewise at Feasts and the Banquet consecrated to Jupiter in the
Capitol. The Censors took an Account of them every five Years, calling them
with a loud Voice; and those whom they passed over, were degraded from the
Order of Senators, which was called Praeterire: But if the Person who was
passed over was minded to oblige the Censor to tell the Reason of it, he was
under an Obligation to do it, says Lipsius, and then he was degraded with the
greater Ignominy and Shame; this being called ejicere Senatu. He who was thus
degraded had the Remedy of appealing to the People, who in spite of the
Censor, did many times re-establish him.

SENATUS;
the Senate; a Body consisting of Counselors of State, commonly called
Senators, constituted to give Advice to those who had the Sovereign Authority
vested in them; they called them Senators, that is, Old Men, wherein the Romans
imitated the Greeks, who called their Senate (...), that is, An Assembly of Old
Men: So when the Athenians assembled the People to consult about the Affairs of
the Public, the Officers summoned none but such as were Fifty Years old: The
Egyptians and Persians followed the same Example after the Hebrews. The
Lacedamonians and Carthaginians received none but such as were Sixty Years of
Age.

The Senate's Authority in the Republic of Rome was very considerable; they
decided concerning what was to be done in Matters of Peace and War, without
saying any thing to the People, to whom the Sentiments of the said Body were
communicated in these Terms, Senatus decrevit, populus jussit. It was the
Senate's Right to give the first Audience to Foreign Ambassadors, to dispose of
Provinces, appoint Triumphs, and recerve Letters from the Generals of their
Armies concerning the Success of the Republick's Arms. Their Power came
somewhat to be lessened under the Emperors; for Augustus constituted to himself
a Privy Council, consisting of a certain Number of Senators, with whom he
consulted concerning the most important Affairs of State. Tiberius endeavored
by little and little to assume the Power into his own Hands. Nero on the
contrary ordered, that the Senate should retain their ancient Rights and
Privileges; but we may say with Tacitus, that all this was but a specious
Pretense, wherewith he was minded to color his Usurpations. All Authors are
agreed, that the Senate of Rome, was of great Dignity and Authority, but had
not a full Power, nor an absolute Dominion, they having none to command, and
much less to execute their Orders, as Dionysius of Hallicarnassus has well
observed; and so we meet with diverse Passages in Livy to this Purpose; Senatus
decrevit, populus jussit, that is, the Senate have thought it good, and the
People commanded it: And, in short, the least Tribune, that opposed the Senate,
could obstruct all their Decrees, and the Senate gave out their Orders to the
Consuls and Praetors, no otherwise than if it pleased them, si eis it a videtur.

All the great Magistrates had a Right to enter into the Senate, but not to
give their Opinions there, unless they were Senators: The Senators Children had
also the same Right that they might betimes use themselves to the Affairs of
the Republic: The Tribunes of the People at first stood at the Door of the
Senate to know their Deliberations, and to oppose them in case they were
contrary to the Rights of the People, but they were afterward admitted in: The
Consuls, Dictators, Tribunes of the People, and the Governor of Rome in the
Consul's Absence, had a Right to call the Senate together; which they did in
these Words, Quod faustum felixque sit, P. Cornel. Cos. edicit sic Senatores,
quibusque in Senatu sententiam dicere licet, conveniant ad XIII. Call. Jan. They
notified the Place and Day, which was pitched upon sometimes in one, and
sometimes in another Place.

The Senate usually met three times a Month, viz. on the Calends, Nones and
Ides, according to Suetonius; and this stated Assembly was called legitimus
Senatus; and all the Senators were obliged to be present under the Penalty of a
Fine: They might be extraordinarily called together any Day in each Month, and
this they called Senatus indictus or edictus. These Assemblies might be held
from Morning to Evening in three places in the City appointed for this Purpose,
viz. in the Temple of Concord, between that Place and the Capitol, at the Gate
Capena, and in the Temple of Bellona, where they gave Foreign Ambassadors
Audience, before they were introduced into the City: There were also a great
many more places appointed for this Purpose, as Curia Hostilia, Pompeia, and
Julia, which the Augurs first consecrated, according to Aulus-Gellius and Varro.

The Assembly of the Senate began with a Sacrifice offered to the Gods, but
Augustus altered this Custom, and ordered every Senator, to offer a Sacrifice
of Wine and Incense upon the Altar of the God, in whose Temple the Senate met,
before he took his Seat, or could consult about any Business, as Suetonius in
his Life, C. 35. informs us. After which he was obliged to take an Oath, by
touching the Altar, and calling the Gods to witness it, that he would give his
Opinion with Sincerity, and without Hattery: This Ceremony was expressed by these
Words, Jurejurando obstringere Senatum, and from thence came Juratus Senatus,
as we read in Tacitus, Lib. 4. Annal. This being done, the Senators took their
Places when the Consul, or he who sat as President, proposed both the public
and private Affairs, which they were to consult about, and ended with these
Words: P. Conscripti, quid fieri placet?

When the Question was put about the choosing of an Emperor to succeed
Aurelian, the Senate having met in Curia Pompilia, Cornificius Gordianus the
Consel proposed the Thing in this manner: Referimus ad vos P. C. quod sape
retulimus. Imperator est deligendus. Exercitus fine Principe diutius stare non
potest; and concluded, Quare agite P. C. and Principem dicite: Aut acciptet
exercitus quem elegeritis; aut fi refutaverit, alterum faciet. He asked their
Opinion, and began with the Highest, and so on to the Lowest: This Method was
not always observed; for sometimes they asked the Opinion of one and then of
another, without any regard had to their Quality; these Votes were given either
Viva voce, or only by holding up the Hand, or else by separating into two
Parties; and this is comprehended by Flavius Vopiscus in a single Passage of
Aurelian's Life: Post haec, says he, interrogati plerique Senatores sententias
dixerunt; deinde aliis manus porrigentibus, aliis pedibus in sententias
euntibus: plerisque verbo consentientibus conditum est Senatus consultum.

When the Debate contained several Heads, which required several Opinions to be
given, they debated each of them in particular, dividebatur sententia: When any
Business was determined by a Plurality of Voices; the Consul pronounced the
Decree of the Senate in these Words: S. C. A.

By these Three Letters they meant Senatus-Consulti Authoritates, the usual
Title of all the Decrees of the Senate. Pridie Kalend. Octobris in aede
Apollinis scribendo adfuerunt L. Domitius, Cn. filius, Aenobarbus, Q.
Caecilius, Qu. F. Metellus, Pius Scipio, etc. Quod Marcellus Consul. V. F. (i.
e. verba fecit) de Provinciis Consularibus, D. E. R. I. C. (that is, de ea re
ita censuerunt) uti L. Paulus, C. Marcellus Coss. cum Magistratum inissent,
etc. de Consularibus Provinciis ad Senatum referrent, etc. and after having
explained the Matter in Debate, and the Senate's Resolution, he adds, Si quis
huic Senatus-consulto intercesserit, Senatui placere auctoritatem perscribi,
and de ea re ad Senatum populumque referri. After which if any one opposed it,
they wrote his Name underneath; Huic Senatus-consulto intercessit talis.
Auctoritatem or auctoritates perscribere, is to register the Names of those who
have agreed to the Decree, and caused it to be registered: The Consuls at first
carried the Minutes of the Decrees to their own Houses, but because of the
Alterations sometimes made therein, it was ordered in the Consul hip of L.
Valerius and M. Horatius, that the Senate's Decrees should be laid up in the
Temple or Ceres under the Custody of the Aediles; and at last the Censors
carried them into the Temple of Liberty, putting them up in the Armories called
Tabularia.

SENECA;
a Philosoper, Nero's Praeceptor and Governor of the Empire during his
Minority: This Emperor put him to Death, as suspecting him to have a Hand in
Piso's Conspiracy. He died by opening his Veins and bleeding to Death.

SENTINUS DEUS;
a God who gives Thought to an Infant in his Mother's Womb, according to the
Fable.

SEPTA;
Enclosures or Rails made of Boards through which they went in to give their
Votes in the Assemblies or the Romans.

SEPTEMBER.
The Seventh Month of the Year, if you reckon from the Vernal Equinox, and the
Ninth, if you begin with January; they celebrated diverse Feasts at Rome in this
Month, such as the Dionysiaqui or the Vintages; the great Circensian Games: the
Dedication of the Capitol, etc. See Calendarium. They would have given the
Names of diverse Roman Emperors to this Month, the Senate would have had it
called Tiberius in Honor of the Emperor Tiberius, as Suetonius in his Life
informs us, C. 26. Domitian named it Germanicus, according to the Authority of
the same Author. They gave it the Name of Antoninus, in Honor of the Memory of
Antoninus Pius, as Julius Capitolinus relates in his Life: The Emperor Commodus
named it Herculeus or Hercules, as Herodian says: And lastly, the Emperor
Tacitus would have it called Tacitus after his own Name, as Vopiscus says; but
for all these, it has always retained the Name of September, given it by Numa.
This Month was under Vulcan's Protection: On the 1st Day of it there was a
Feast celebrated in Honor of Neptune; the 2d Day was remarkable for Augustus
his Victory over Antony and Cleopatra in the Fight of Actium. On the 4th the
Roman Games were celebrated, which lasted Eight Days. The Eighth was remarkable
for the taking of Jerusalem by Vespatian. The 13th the Praetor drove the Nail
into the Wall of Minerva's Temple, thereby to denote the Number of the Years of
the Roman Empire, Writing being not frequently used; but afterward the
Ceremony of driving the Nail was applied to other Uses, especially to make the
Plague cease, and for that end they constituted a Dictator. On the 14th there
was a Cavalcade of Horses, in order to try them, which they called Equiria. On
the 20th Romulus his Birthday was celebrated. On the 23d that of Augustus by
the Roman Knights, and the same lasted Two whole Days: The 25th was dedicated
to Venus: The 30th they prepared a Banquet for Minerva, and celebrated a Feast
called Meditrinalia.

SEPTIMIANA PORTA;
it was one of the Gates of Rome between the Tiber and the Janiculum, being so
named from Septimius Severus, according to Spartian in his Life, where he
caused Baths to be built for the Public Use.

SEPTIMONTIUM,
the Seven Mountains of the City of Rome, whereon they celebrated a Feast
called Septimontium.

SEPTIZONIUM;
They were Baths built by Septimius Severus on the other Side of the Tiber, on
Seven Rows of Pillars.

SEPTUNX;
Seven Ounces of the Weights of a Roman Pound.

SEPULCRA.
See Sepulturae.

SEPULTURE;
Buryings; the Pagans always had a Regard to the Care that was taken of
Sepulcres, as a Religious Duty grounded upon the Fear of God, and the Belief of
the Soul's Immortality; and the Ancients accounted the Buryings of the Dead to
be a Thing so holy and inviolable that they attributed the original Invention
thereof to one of the Gods, viz. to him whom the Greeks called Pluto, and the
Romans Dis or Summanus. Priam in Homer's Iliads asks and obtains a Cessation of
Arms for burying the Dead on both Sides; and in another Place Jupiter
interposed and sent Apollo to procure Sarpedon to be buried: Iris also is sent
by the Gods to stir up Achilles to fight, and to pay this Duty to Patroclus:
Thetis promised Achilles she would take care his Body should not corrupt,
though he lay unburied a whole Year. Homer grounds this upon the Ceremonies of
the Egyptians; for the People of Memphis did not bury their Dead till after
they had examined into the Deceased's Life, and if they found him to have been
an ill Liver, Burial was denied him: This Refusal was the Cause why they would
not allow the Bodies of the Wicked to be carried to the other Side of the River
and Marish, near unto which lay the Graves of the Just. And hence it was, that
to be deprived of a Burial, was a kind of an Excommunication by which the Soul
was excluded from the Elisian Fields, and loaded with Infamy: In speaking of
these Burials I make use of the Terms in Fashion nowadays, and such as have
been used long before Homer; for in those ancient Times they put the Bodies
into the Earth, after they had inbalmed them, as we do now. The most ancient
Books of the History of the Old Testament bear witness hereof, and furnish us
with diverse Examples in the Persons of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Joseph; but in
the Book of Kings it seems as if there were some Examples of a contrary Custom
that was introduced of burning the Bodies. It was about Homer's Time: Thus in
his Iliads and Odysses you find all the Bodies of the Dead consumed with Fire:
The Terms of Interring and Burying have been always commonly used, either
because the same could not be abolished, or because there was still something
remaining either of Bones or Ashes which the Fire consumed not, and which they
interred in Urns. The Places appointed for Buryings grew to be sacred, and were
reckoned in the Number of holy and unalienable Things: They anciently allowed a
Burial to those who were put to Death for their Offenses. Josephus, L. 4. C. 6.
of the Antiquities of the Jews, against Appian L. 2. says, that Moses commanded
those to be buried who had suffered Death according to the Laws. The Romans
practiced the same Thing: Pilate gave Leave to take down the Body of the Son of
God, and to lay it in a Tomb, though he were put to Death as a Person guilty of
Treason. The Emperors Dioclesian and Maximinian ordered that they should not
hinder the burying of those who had suffered Punishment by Death, the Romans
being of Opinion, that the Souls of such Bodies as were not buried, wandered up
and down for an Hundred Years, as not being able to get into the Elisean
Fields: Haec omnis quam cernis, inops, inhumataque turba est. Virg. Aen. 6. In
the mean time, Suetonius in the Life of Augustus says the Contrary: Vni
sepulturam precanti respondisse dicitur, jam illum in volucrum potestatem fore:
When a Prisoner of War prayed for Leave that he might be buried; the Answer
made him was, that he should quickly become Birds Food; and Horace says, Non
bominem occidisti, non pasces in cruce corvos; thou has killed no Man,
therefore thou shall not be Crows Meat.

SEPULCRA;
Sepulchers, Tombs, Funeral Monuments. They were Places appointed wherein to
bury the Bodies of the Deceased, or the Bones and Ashes of the Bodies which
they burned. The Pyramids were built for Sepulcres to the Kings of Egypt: Those
who violated the Sepulcres of the Dead, or searched them, were hated by all
Nations, and very severly punished: It was in order to comfort themselves upon
Account of their Mortal State, that the Egyptians built them Eternal Houses, as
they were wont to call those Sepulchers, whereas they honored their Palaces
and Mansion Houses only with the Title of Inns, in Regard to the short Time we
dwell here on Earth in Comparison of the Stay we make in the Grave. Perpetuas
sine fine domos mors incolit atra.
Aeternosque levis possidet umbra Laros.
It was not enough that the most famous Persons among the Heathens bore witness
by their Conduct, that Vanity was the chief Spring of their Actions, without
they also made the same to survive after their Deaths; the Mausoleums,
Obelisques, and stately Monuments erected by them are Eternal Proofs thereof;
It was a fine Thing, said a Queen, in Herodotus his History, to be honored
after her Death with a magnificent Monument which should be a Testimony of our
Glory to Posterity. Varro speaks of a Barber whose Name was Licinus, that had
the Ambition to have a Marble Tomb erected for him. Marmoreo, Licinus tumulo
jacet; and Cato, parvo;
Pompeius nullo: Credimus esse Deos.
Cestius his Pyramid which is still in being at Rome, and which had within it a
Room painted by a very good Master among the Ancients, is only the Tomb of a
private Person. Persons of Quality had their burying Vaults, wherein they
placed the Ashes of their Ancestors, and formerly there was such an one at
Nismes with a rich Pavement of inlaid Work, that had Niches round its Walls, in
each of which there were Rows of Urns of gilt Glass full of Ashes. The Romans
after the Expulsion of their Kings did no longer bury their Dead within the
City, the same being expressly forbidden by the Law of the 12 Tables, In urbe ne
sepelito ne-ve urito, in order to prevent an Infection which the buried Corpse
might occasion in so hot a Climate as Italy, and also to avoid Fires, as it
happened at the Funeral Solemnities of Clodius, who was burnt in the Place of
the Rostra, for the Fire catched hold of the Palace, and burnt all the Front
looking toward the Place with several neighboring Houses. Although the Laws of
the 12 Tables forbad the burying of any Body within the City Walls, yet there
were some Romans who had that Privilege both before and after the making of
the said Law, as the Family of the Claudii, who had a Burying-place in the
Capitol, so had also Valerius Publicola and Posthumous Tubertus, to whom and
their Descendants the People of Rome by a particular Order granted Liberty to
be buried within the City: Indeed Plutarch writes, that in his Time they
interred none there of Publicola's Race, they thinking it enough to put a
burning Torch over the Burying place, which was presently taken off, in order
to show they had a Privilege to bury there, but they voluntarily divested
themselves of that Honor, and carried their dead Bodies to the Burying-place
they had in the Country of Velia; those Persons also enjoyed the same
Privilege, who had done any considerable Service for the Commonwealth, or
triumphed over the Enemies of the Empire: The Vestal Virgins, as well as the
Emperors, had a Right to be buried there; but otherwise besides the Three sorts
of Persons now mentioned, we do not find in History that any other was buried
in the City. The Emperor Adrian laid a Fine of Four Pieces of Gold upon those
that buried within the City, and extended the Penalty to the very Magistrates
that did allow it; he did moreover injoin, as Vlpian the Lawyer says, that the
Burying-place should be forfeited and held profane, and that the Body or Ashes
of him that was buried there should be taken up. This Edict was renewed by the
Emperors Dioclesian and Maximinian in the Year of Rome 1042. and of our
Redemption 290. on the 28th of September.

They built Burying-places upon the most frequented Highways, as upon the Road
to Brundusium, called via Appia; upon via Flaminia or Latina, whereon stood the
Burying-places of the Calatini, Scipio's, Servilii and Marcelli; and this with
an Intent to put Passengers in mind of their Mortal State, and to excite them
to imitate the Virtues of those great Men, who were represented upon those
stately Tombs, or in the Inscriptions on them. Agenus Vrbious mentions some
other Places in the Suburbs, that were used for Sepulcres, one of which was
named Culinae, wherein the Poor and Slaves were buried, another Sestertium,
where their Bodies were laid who were put to Death by the Emperors.

There were some Burying-places belonging to certain Families, and others
Hereditary: Those belonging to certain Families were such as a Person caused to
be built for himself and all his Family, that is, his Children and near
Relations, and also his Freed-men: Hereditary Sepulcres were those which the
Testator appointed for himself and his Heirs, or acquired by Right of
Inheritance: Persons might reserve unto themselves a particular Burying-place,
where no other had been laid; they could also by Will hinder any of their Heirs
to be interred in the Burying-place belonging to their Family; and when they
were minded to show that it was not allowed an Heir to be buried in a
Sepulcher, they inscribed these Letters upon it, which are still to be met with
in a great many Places. H. M. H. N. S. that is, Hoc monumentum heredes non
sequitur, or these, H. M. ad H. N. TRANS. that is, Hoc monumentum ad heredes
non transit: The Right of Burying here does not descend unto the Heir: They had
also another sort of a Burying-place which they called by a Greek Word (...),
which signifies a Sepulcher made in Honor of some Person, and wherein his Body
is not laid, the Use of these empty Sepulchers came up from a Superstitious
Opinion the Ancients entertained, that the Souls of those whose Bodies were not
buried, wandered by the Sides of the Rivers of Hell for an Hundred Years, and
could not pass over. They first made a Tomb of Turf, which they called Injectio
glebae: After which they practiced the same Ceremonies, as if the Corpse were
actually there. Thus Virgil, in L. 6. makes the Soul of Deiphobus pass over to
Charon, though Aeneas had erected him no more than a Cenotaphium, or empty Tomb.
Suetonius in the Life of the Emperor Claudius calls them Honorary Tombs; and
they were inscribed with these Words, Ob Honorem, or Memoriae; whereas on
others where they deposited their Ashes, these Letters were put, D. M. S. in
order to show they were dedicated to the Manes: When the Words Tacito nomine
were added, it was to intimate that the Ashes which were enclosed in it, were
declared infamous for some Crime or other, and buried in a By-place, by the
Emperor or chief Magistrate's Leave.

SERAPIS;
the God of the Egyptians: Some derive the Word from Sara and Apis, as Julius
Maternus: Its not likely it should come from the Greek (...), Apis, i. e.
Loculus Apis, as if it were the Tomb wherein the Ox Opis was embalmed after his
Death: Wherefore it is very probable the Word must be derived from Osirapis, by
cutting off the first Letter: For the Learned are almost agreed, that Osiris
and Apis were but one and the same Deity; or else Serapis comes from Sor Apis;
for Sor signifies an Ox; as if they should say, Joseph the Father of Egypt;
which is symbolically signified by an Ox: Sor or Sar does also signify a
Prince: Sara is the same as Dominari: Nothing agrees better with Joseph's
Character, than to be the Father, Nourisher, and Ruler of Egypt. Tacitus, L. 4.
Hist. says, truly enough, that Ptolomy the Son of Lagus was he who sent to seek
for the Statue of Serapis to Synope, a City in Pontus, in order to set it up in
Alexandria; from which Scaliger concludes that Serapis was a Foreign Deity.
Clemens Alexandrinus repeats what Tacitus says, with some Variation of
Circumstances; but he adds, that the Statue which was sent by the People of
Synope, was placed by Ptolomy upon the Promontory of Racotis, where a Temple of
Serapis stood before; from whence it is concluded against Vossius, that if there
was a Temple of Serapis before in the said Place, it was not then the first
Time that they began to worship him in Egypt; Tacitus himself agrees thereunto
by giving the same Testimony as Clemens Alexandrinus does, that there stood a
Temple of Serapis and Isis in the same Place where they built one for the
new-brought Statue.

Adrian in his Return from Alexandria brought to Rome the Worship of Serapis
and Isis, who were celebrated Deities among the Egyptians, to whom doubtless he
promised to erect Altars when he arrived at Rome; In a Medal we have of his,
Serapis holds out his Hand to him and promises him his Protection; and Isis
swears by the Brazen Timbrel, that she would accomplish his Desires.

Macrobius says, the Egyptians ever excluded Saturn and Serapis from their
Temples, because they offered no other to them than bloody Sacrifices, to which
they had a strange Aversion in all their Religious Worship; but that after
Alexander's Death, their King Ptolomy forced them to receive those Two Deities
in Imitation of the People of Alexandria; the Egyptians yielded to Necessity;
but they still retained Marks of their old Aversion, since they would not allow
of these new Temples and new Worship, within the Walls of their City: Pausanias
says, it was King Ptolomy that persuaded the Athenians, to erect a Temple to
Serapis, who had a very magnificent one at Alexandria, but the most ancient
stood at Memphis, into which the Priests themselves never entered, unless it
were when they buried the Ox Apis.

The God Serapis was usually represented by a kind of a Basket upon the Head,
which Macrobius says, signified the Highth of the Sun. Suidas and Rufinus call
it a Bathel or Corn-measure, because it was believed Serapis taught Men the Use
of Measures, or because he afforded Men Abundance of Fruit by the Help of the
Nile, whose Overflowings made Egypt fruitful. Some are of Opinion that the
Bushel was attributed to this God, in Commemoration of Joseph, who saved Egypt
from Famine, by the Stores of Corn he took care to lay up during the Seven
Years Plenty, as the holy Scriptures inform us.

SERPENS,
a Serpent, an Animal worshipped by the Heathens; they kept Serpents in Baskets
made of Bullrushes or Ozier Twigs, which they consecrated to Bacchus, Ceres and
Proserpina: Epiphanius in his first Book contra Haereses, speaks of a sort of
Heretics called Ophitae, who in their Temples kept a Serpent in a Chest,
worshipped and kissed it, and fed it with Bread: The Egyptians kept one of them
in their Temples, and especially in those of Serapis and Isis: Aesculapius, the
God of Physic was worshipped under the Form of a great Serpent, and Justin
Martyr, who had been a Pagan, upbraiding them with their Superstitions, says,
You represent next unto those whom you account Gods a Serpent, as a Thing that
is very mysterious. Clemens Alexandrinus in the Celebration of the Bacchanalia
says, that those who assisted thereat, placed Serpents round their Bodies, and
besmeared their Faces with the Blood of the He-goats which were sacrificed to
that unclean Deity.

SERVUS,
a Slave, one that is brought under his Master's Power whether by Birth or War.
The Riches of the Romans conusted in Slaves: There were Three Ways of having
Slaves, either when they bought them with the Booty, taken from the Enemy,
distinct from the Share reserved for the Public, or of those who took them
Prisoners in War, whom they properly called Mancipia, quasi manu capta, taken
with ones own Hand, or of Merchants who dealt in them, and sold them in Fairs
and Markets. They used Three sorts of Ceremonies in the Sale of them, for they
sold them either sub hasta, sub corona, or sub Plleo: Sub hasta, to the highest
and last Bidder, by sticking a Spear in the Earth; sub corona, when they put a
Garland or Crown of Hours upon their Heads like a Nosegay upon the Ear; sub
Pileo, when they put a Cap on their Heads, that Notice might be taken of them,
and the Sellers not be obliged to warrant them. They wore a Writing about their
Necks, wherein their good and bad Qualities were contained, also their State of
Health, or Infirmities, their Usefulness and Faults, according to Aulus
Gellius. Titulus servorum singulorum ut scriptus siet curato; ita ut intelligi
recte possit quid morbi, vitiique cuique siet.

Those who were taken in War and sold, wore Crowns upon their Heads, and thence
comes the Phrase, sub coronis venere. Those Slaves which were brought from
beyond Sea to be sold, had their Feet rubbed with Chalk, and so they called
them Cretati. The Slaves were so entirely subjected to their Masters, that they
had Power of Life and Death over them, might kill them and make them suffer all
imaginable Torments. In the mean time Suetonius gives us an Account of the
Edicts of some Emperors, which lessened this Power in Masters over their
Slaves, as that of Claudius, who ordered that in case Slaves falling sick, came
to be forsaken by their Masters in the Isle of Esculapius, they were declared
free if they recovered; and that of the Emperor Adrian, which prohibited
Masters to kill their Slaves any more.

Slaves were made free, and obtained their Liberty diverse ways: Their Masters
many times granted them Freedom, and many affranchised them, when they had
affectionately and faithfully served them; as Simon does in Terence, -- Feci e
servo ut esses libertus mihi,
Propterea quod serviebas liberaliter.
They sometimes purchased their Liberty with the Money they saved or got by
their Labor, for they had a Peculium apart; and this is also justified by
Terence;

Quod ille unciatim vix demenso de suo
Suum defraudans genium, comparsit miser,
Id illa universum abriptet,
All that which a poor Slave took the Pains to gather Penny by Penny, by
sparing it out of his Belly, and from what was allowed him for his daily
Sustenance, this Women stole at once. Slaves had formerly Four Bushels of Corn
allowed a Month for their Subsistence, of which they were allowed to spare as
much as they pleased, and make it their own, and this was called Peculium. When
the Masters had committed any Crime that was punishable by Law, they granted
their Slaves their Liberty, and so made them Citizens of Rome, for Fear they
should be tortured, and brought Witnesses against them. For it was not lawful
to put a Roman Citizen upon the Wrack: There were some who affranchised their
Slaves out of Covetousness in the Time of the Emperors, that so they might
participate of the Prince's Liberality, who bettowed somewhat upon every one of
the People; this Freedom was usually granted them before the Praetor at Rome,
and before the Proconsul in the Provinces with a certain Form of Speech and a
Switch called Vindicta wherewith they struck them. Cic. L. 3. of his Topics,
speaks of it in this manner: The Vindicta is a small Switch which the Prator
lays upon the Head of the Slave he is about to make free, and pronounces
certain Words, which are to be seen in a Greek Manuscript, in the French King's
Library.

(...).

(...).

Vindicta is a Rod with which the Magistrate struck him on the Head, whom he
made free; saying, we do declare this Man here present to be free, and a
Citizen of Rome. Festus will have it to be the Master, who taking his Slave by
the Hand, said these Words, Hunc hominem liberum esse volo. They also give us
an Account of another Form used by the Praetor, who said, Aio te jure Quiritium
liberum esse; and in pronouncing of the said Words he struck the Slave with a
Switch, and gave him a turn round, which was called Vertigo, from whence
Perseus says, Vna Quiritem vertigo facit.
They also affranchized Slaves by Will, or upon some sudden and severe War,
when they were necessitated to arm their Slaves for the Defense of the
Commonwealth: But this Freedom they did not obtain till they had signalized
themselves by some considerable Action; this was called servos ad pileum
vocare: Those who were made free, were called Liberti, and their Children
Libertini: The Slaves were commonly skilled in Arts and Sciences, and they
conferred diverse Imploys on them, as the Tutoring of Children, etc.

SERVUS AB EPHEMERIDE;
a Slave, whose Business it was to consult the Roman Calendar, and acquaint his
Master with the Days of the Calends, Nones and Ides.

SERVUS AB EPISTOLIS;
was one who wrote his Master's Letters, who dictated to him.

SERVUS a MANU, or AMANUENSIS, and SERVUS AD MANUM;
a Slave that was ready to do, and undertake any thing.

SERVUS a PEDIBUS;
a Footman or Lacquey, who a foot carried his Master's Orders.

ACTORES SERVI;
Stewards of the House.

PROCURATOR SERVUS;
he who had the Care of his Master's Business upon him.

CELLARIUS SERVUS;
the Butler.

DISPENSATOR SERVUS;
the Home-Steward, that buys and pays.

NEGOTIATORES SERVI;
those who traded or trafficked.

NUTRITII SERVI;
those whose Buness it was to nurse the Children of a Family in their Infancy.

MEDICI SERVI;
Slaves who understood and practiced Physic, according to Suetonius in
Caligula's Life: Mitto tibi praeterea unum e servis meis medicum; I also send
you one of my Slaves who is a Physician.

SILENTIARII SERVI;
those who caused Silence to be kept among the Slaves, as Seneca says.
Procopius tells us, they were in the Emperor's Palaces, to keep every Body
silent, and carry themselves with due Respect. They were also the Prince his
Confidents; and were called Ministri ad ea quae sunt quietis.

CUBICULARIUS SERVUS;
a Slave who was in the Emperor's Chamber, like a Valet de Chamber.

VILLICUS SERVUS;
a Slave, whose Business it was to look after the Country-houses and Lands of
his Master.

ATRIENSIS SERVUS,
or ad Limina custos; a Slave who kept the Atrium or Porch of his Master's
House, where stood the Waxen Images of the Ancestors of the Family, and the
Movables: The Housekeeper, as Columella informs us: Tum insistere Atriensibus
ut supellectilem exponant, and ferramenta detersa nitidentur atque rubigine
liberentur. This was the chiefest of the Slaves.

LECTICARII SERVI;
Slaves who carried their Master's Litter, like unto our Chair-men, Martianus
says, they were also those who made Litters.

POLLINCTOR SERVUS;
a Slave, whose Business it was to wash, anoint and trim the Bodies of the Dead.

CAPSARII SERVI;
Slaves, who at the Baths looked after the Clothes of those who bathed
themselves; they were also Slaves who waited upon Persons of Qualities
Children, when they went to the Schools, and carried their Books; as likewise
those who were Merchants, and Bankers Cash-keepers; and again, such as made
Desks and Chests to keep Money in: They were also called Arcarii Servi.

SACCULARII SERVI;
Slaves who could convey Money out of a Bag by their Slight and Dexterity, of
whom Vlpian speaks.

VESTISPICI;
Slaves who looked after their Masters Clothes: They were also called Servi a
vest and ad vestem; as may be seen by these ancient Inscriptions: CATULINO ET
APRO. COSS. EJUS. VALENS. AUG. LIB. PHE-

And this other, T. STATILIUS. MALCHIO.

EMISSARII SERVI;
Procurers, Horse-Coursers, or others who endeavored to injure and trick every
Body.

NOMENCLATORES SERVI, or NOMENCULATORES;
Slaves who accompanied their Masters, and told them the Names of those that
passed by, when they put in for some great Office in the Commonwealth.

CALCULATORES SERVI;
those who made use of small Stones to reckon by, instead of Counters.

LIBRARII SERVI;
Slaves who transcribed Books by way of Abbreviations.

TABELLARIUS SERVUS;
he that carries his Master's Letters.

CALATORES SERVI;
those Slaves who called the Assemblies of the People together by Curiae and
Centuriae, or the other Assemblies of the Priests and Pontiffs.

ANTE-AMBULONES SERVI; Slaves who went before their Masters to make way for
them to go along.

SALUTI-GERULI SERVI; Slaves who came to complement their Masters Friends in
their Names.

CURSORES SERVI;
Couriers who ran to carry News.

TOPIARII SERVI;
those who pruned the Flower-Garden, Orchard, etc. and formed them into the
Shapes of diverse Animals.

VIRIDIARII SERVI;
were those who looked after Orchards and Bowling-Greens.

PASTORES SERVI;
Shepherds.

SALTUARII SERVI;
Wood-Wards, or Foresters.

VENATORES;
Hunters.

AUCUPES SERVI;
Fowlers or Falconers.

VESTIGATORES;
those who hunted Beasts by their tract.

DIAETARII SERVI;
those who were to look after the Halls, wherein they eat in Summertime.

AQUARII SERVI;
Water-Carriers.

ANALECTAE;
Slaves, whose Business it was to gather up what fell down at a Feast, and to
sweep the Floor and Hall where they eat.

POCILLATORES, or AD CYATHOS SERVI;
Cup-bearers, or those who served with Drink.

PRAEGUSTATOR SERVUS;
he that tasted the Wine as he served his Master.

OBSONATORES;
those who bought Provision for the Family.

STRUCTORES SERVI;
those who waited at Table, and set the Dishes in order.

VOCATORES;
those who went to invite Persons to Dinner.

ADMISSIONALES;
those that introduced Persons into the Emperor's Presence.

PISTORES and MOLITORES;
those that pounded Corn to make Meal of it, before Mills were invented.

OSTIARII and JANITORES;
Porters who attended at the Gate, to open and shut it.

SCOPARII;
Sweepers, who were to clean the Privies, and Close-stools.

PENICULI;
those who were to clean the Table with a Sponge.

FORNACATOR;
was he that kindled the Furnace of their Baths.

BALNEATORES;
Bathers; and UNCTORES were those who with perfumed Oil anointed the Bodies of
those who were bathed.

SESTERTIUS;
the Ancients marked their Sesterces with these Two Letters H. S. the
Sestertius was a Piece of Silver Money, worth about the 4th part of a Roman
Denarius; and in English Money 1 d. For the Romans having for a long time made
use of Brass Money, which they called As, quasi Aes, or Libra and Pondo,
because it weighed a Pound, begun at last with the Denarius to coin Silver
Money, in the Year of Rome 585. This Denarius was marked with an X, because it
was worth Ten Asses, and divided into two Quinarii, marked with an V, because
each of them was worth five Asses; and the Quinarius was again divided into two
Sesterces, marked L-L-S, because they were each of them worth two Asses: But
the Transcribers at last for their own Convenience have given us an H for the
two L-L-, which signified Pounds, and always retained the S, which is Half;
insomuch that Sestertius is put for Semistertius, two and an half; as if one
should say an half taken from three; insomuch that the Greek say, (...),
Tertium semitalentum, for two Talents and an half. It may be asked whether the
two sorts of Sestertii, viz. the greater or lesser must be distinguished.

There are Two Opinions concerning this Point, one is Budeus's, and the most
received of the two, who distinguishes the Sestertii into two sorts, viz. the
lesser called Sestertius, which, as we have said, was a little piece of Silver
Money, worth two Asses and an half; and the greater called Sestertium in the
Neuter Gender, which was a Word relating to Accounts, and imported a thousand
small Sestertii: The other Opinion is that of Agricola, who says, that the Word
Sestertium is the same as Sestertius, insomuch that Sestertii Deni and
Sestertia Dena, were the same thing: But the Difference, says he, consists in
the Way of Reckoning; for when you find Dena Sestertium for Sestertiorum in the
Genitive Case, Millia is understood; and the Transcribers, adds he, not
understanding this Sense, have put Sestertia inftead of Sestertium, when they
saw the Mark of the Sestertius, as you have it in this Example of Cicero
against Verres, H. S. Ducenta and quinquaginta. But whether upon these
Occasions we read Sestertium ducenta, with millia understood, or Sestertia
ducenta, as taking the Word Sestertium in the Neuter Gender for a thousand
small Sestertii; there is no Body but must be satisfied in the main, that it
always comes to the same Number.

The only Difficulty that remains, consists in an Objection that may be made
concerning the Force of these Words Sestertius and Sestertium, which being
Adjectives, as well as Semistertius and Semistertium, require a Substantive:
For this Substantive can be no other than Assis nummus, for Sestertius, (two
Asses and an half) and Assis pondo for Sestertium: As Masculine, and Pondo
Neuter, being the same with the Romans, for the As was a Pound weight. I know
Scioppius answers, that Minae pondo is understood with Sestertium, insomuch
that the great Sestertius, may in respect to the Grecian Mina be the lesser one
in regard to the Roman As: But is there any likelihood that the Romans should
invent Money, that had no other Foundation for it than that of the Greeks, and
not that which was peculiar to themselves? To which we may add, if it were so,
the Mina must of necessity answer exactly to the Roman Pound, or the Dram to
the Denarius; to the End, that as the Mina was worth 100 Drams, this also
must be worth 100 Denarii, that is, 1000 Asses, in the same manner as the great
Sestertium is worth 1000 lesser ones: But this we can never be sure of; at
least wise Agricola, Manucius, Andreas Scotus, and Capella do not in the least
agree about it. But whereas we find in Historians, that the Greeks use the Word
Dram, or the Latins that of Denarius; that, says Manucius, comes to pass,
because they had not a more proper and nearer Word to express themselves by; or
else because the Emperors of latter Times, did really reduce the Denarius to be
of the same Weight with the Dram, that is, to a matter of eight to the
Ounce; whereas formerly it is certain from the Testimonies of Pliny and Livy, it
was heavier, six of them only at first, and afterward seven going to the
Ounce. Hence its manifest, that what has given way to Budaeus his Opinion,
whether in respect to the great Sestertium, or in Comparison of the Denarius
with the Dram, was no more than because it was found to be the most easy,
and came first to obtain. And, indeed, if we do but consider what Sanctius
says, that of old almost all Nouns ending in us ended also in um, with the same
Signification; and that besides this, the Expressions of the Romans were always
concise, insomuch that there was nothing so common amongst them as the Figure
Ellipsis, whereby they did not speak so little as two Words together, but
somewhat was understood, and whereby they also regulated their other Terms of
Accounts; we shall find Agricola's Opinion is much better grounded than the
others, which either came from the Ignorance of the Transcribers, who upon a
thousand Occasions have corrupted those Words, that were written with single
Letters, or by way of Abridgment; or from the Error of those, who not observing
that Sestertium was the Genitive Case, and put for Sestertiorum, have taken it
to be the Accusative or Nominative of the Neuter Gender.

If with H. S. the Mark of a Sestertius we find a Noun of Number which is
declined, and is of the Masculine Gender: It denotes the Sum it simply
expresses and no more: For Example, H. S. deni signifies Ten small Sesterces;
if it be of the Neuter Gender, as H. S. dena, denotes 1000 small Sesterces; so
that whether you read Sestertia dena, according to Budeus, or Sestertium dena,
subaudi millia, according to Agricola, H. S. dena signifies 10000 small
Sesterces. But if with H. S. the Mark of a Sestertius, you find an indeclinable
Noun of Number, or one that in the declining of it may be taken for Masculine
and Neuter; you cannot find out the Signification of it but by the Consequence,
Subject and Sense: Thus when Cicero, L. 5. contra Verrem, said, Ad singula
medimna multi H. S. duorum, multi H. S. quinque accessionem cogebantur dare,
you cannot judge but by what follows what Sum he means; for his Expressiion may
suit with simple Numbers and with 1000, but the Consequence discovers that he
speaks only of single Sesterces, for should they be taken for Thousands, the
same would be ridiculous for that Occasion. Care must be had to observe that
the Words Sestertius or nummus signify oftentimes the same thing; insomuch
that mill nummum, mill Sestertium, or mill mummum Sestertium may be
indifferently used for one another; but there are various Opinions concerning
the Reason that is given for this Construction and these Expressions; for to
say nothing of that of Nonius and some of the Ancients, who thought without any
Grounds, that these Genetives mummum and Sestertium (put by a Syncope for
nummorum and Sestertiorum) were Accusatives, they usually take the Word mill
for a Noun Substantive, that governs the Genetive nummum and Sestertium;
however, if we believe Scioppius, Mill is ever an Adjective, as well as other
Nouns of Number, and therefore we must suppose a Nominative Case of which this
Genetive is governed: This Author in his 14th Letter endeavors to prove, that
the Word Res or Negotium must be understood so as when Juvenal says, Quantum
quisque sua nummorum possidet arca,
Here quantum being an Adjective must necessarily suppose Negotium understood,
insomuch that if we should say, Res or Negotium mill nummorum, the Syntax
would be plain and very regular, but if it should be said, Mill nummorum est
in arca; the same will be figurative and the Word Res still understood, which
will govern the Genetive mill mummorum (which are the Adjective and the
Substantive.) But Res mill nummorum is the same thing as mill nummi, just as
Phoedrus says, Res cibi for cibus.

Where we meet with Sestertium decies numeratum esse in Cicero, it is a
Syllepsis numeri, where numeratum, which refers to negotium, is put for
Numerata which should have been so expressed, as it is indeed in some Editions,
because they suppose centena millia understood: Again, An accepto centies
Sestertium fecerit, in Velleius Paterculus, is put for acceptis centies
centenis millibus Sestertium; farther, you have in Plautus, Trapezitae mill
Drachmarum sunt redditae, put for res mill Drachmarum est reddita: But as the
Ancients used decies Sestertium, or decies centena millia Sestertium, so they
also said, decies aeris, for decies centena millia aeris. Authors often omit
the Word Sestertium by an Ellipsis, as Suetonius does in Caesar's Life;
Promissumque jus annulorum cum millibus CCCC distulit; and the same he does in
Vespatian's Life, Primus e fisco Latinis Graecisque Rhetoribus annua centena
constituit, that is, centena millia Sestertium.

The Roman As was worth 3 Farthings of our Money; the Roman Denarius 10 As's
being 7 Pence of English; the little Sestertius 1d. ob. qa. q. but the great
Sestertium contains 1000 Sesterces, which in our Money is 7 l. 16 s. 3 d. and
in Latin they use unum Sestertium, duo Sestert, etc.

SEVA,
a Knife used at Sacrifices wherewith they cut the Throat of the Victims.

SEVERUS,
a Roman Emperor, born in Africa, and of a fierce and cruel Disposition, he
was cruel to the highest Degree against his Competitors to the Empire, the
Nobility, and those who sided with his Enemies; he grossly abused the famous
City Bizantium, and subjected it to Heraclea, because she took the Part of
Pescennius Niger; he also used the City of Lions after an inhumane manner,
putting it to Fire and Sword, because she stuck to the Interest of Albinus. He
is commended for his Sobriety, Frugality and Modesty in Apparel, which were
Virtues common enough in Africa: He was courageous, valiant, indefatigable, and
very useful to the Commonwealth, insomuch that the Senate being sensible both
of the good and bad Qualities of this Prince, thought it might have redounded
to the Benefit of the Empire, either that he had never been born, or never died.

SEXAGENARIUM DE PONTE DEJICERE:
It signified to deprive an old Man of 60 Years of Age, of his Right to give
his Vote in the Elections made at Rome; because the People went over a little
Bridge in order to throw their Ballot into an Urn, for the choosing of
Magistrates; and old Men of sixty were put by.

SEXTANS;
the Romans divided their As, which was a Pound of Brass into 12 Ounces: The
Ounce was called uncia, from the Word unum; and 2 Ounces sextans, being the
sixth part of 12 Ounces, which made the As or Pound: It was also a Measure
which contained 2 Ounces of Liquor: Sextantes, Calliste, duos infunde Falerni:
Fill me two Sextans, or 2 Ounces of Falernian Wine.

SEXTARIUS;
a Measure which held 24 Ounces of Wine, but according to Weight contained no
more than a Pound and 8 Ounces; it held about a Pint English Measure.

SEXTILIS;
the Month of August, or sixth in the Year, if you begin it as the Romans did
with March, and the 8th, to reckon as we do: This Month was under the
Protection of Ceres, and had several Feasts in it. See Calendarium.

SI VOBIS VIDETUR, DISCEDITE, QUIRITES;
Citizens, if you please, you may depart: It was an ancient Form of Speech
among the Romans, for dismissing the Assembly of the People.

SI SCIENS FALLO, ME DIESPITER SALVA URBE ARCE QUE BONIS EJICIAT, UTI EGO HUNC
LAPIDEM.
If I have not an Intention to observe this Treaty and Alliance, may Jupiter
throw me out of my Estate, with as much Violence as I do this Stone, without
any Harm done to the City. It was the Form of an Oath used at the making of
Treaties and Alliances, which imported an Imprecation against him who did not
act sincerely in the said Treaty; for 'twas a Custom to throw a Stone at the
Victim, and to wish the Gods served them so, if they used any Cheat or Deceit
in the Matter.

SIBYLLAE;
the Sibylls, Virgin-Prophesses so called from (...), which in the Laconic
Tongue was the Genitive of the Word (...), and from (...) Deliberation: Others
derive it from the Hebrew Kibel and Kabala. Authors differ about the Number of
the Sibylls, and concerning the Places where they uttered their Predictions:
Martianus Capella reckons but two Sibylls, viz. Erophile of Troy, the Daughter
of the Marpessus, whom he confounds with the Phrygian and Cumaean Sibylls; and
Symachia born at Erithraea, a City of the Lower Asia, who came to Cumae, and
there pronounced Oracles. Pliny, L. 34. C. 5. speaks of Three Statues of the
Sibylls at Rome, near the Rostra, one erected by Pacuvius Taurus, the Aedile of
the People; and the other Two by Messala, whom Solinus calls Sibyllae Cumeae,
Delphicae and Erith^e. Elian L. 12. Hist. makes them to be Four, viz. Those of
Erithrea, Samos, Egypt and Sardis, some have increased their Number even to
Ten, as Varro does in his Six Books concerning Divine Things, dedicated to
Julius Caesar, the Pontifex Maximus. The Persian Sibyll, of whom Nicanor
speaks, was born according to Suidas at Noa, a City near the Red Sea, which
they would have to be same as the Chaldaean and Hebrew Sibyll, properly called
Sambetha, who foretold diverse Things concerning the Messiah, his Birth, Life,
Circumstances of his Death, and second Coming. The Libyan Sibyll, of whom
Euripides the Poet speaks in his Prologue to Lamia, who was the Daughter of
Jupiter and Lamia, Neptune's Daughter, as Pausanias writes in his Phocica: The
Grecians, says he, make her to be the Daughter of Jupiter and Lamia, Neptune's
Daughter; the first of Womankind that delivered Oracles, and was called Sibylla
by the Lybians: She spent a great part of her Life in the Isle of Samos, at
Claros, a City of the Colophonians, at Delos and Delphi; she died in Troas. The
Sibyll of Delphi, of whom Crysippus makes mention in his Book of Divination.
Diodorus, L. 4. C. 6. calls her Daphne, the Daughter of Tiresias, whom the
Argians, after the Destruction of Thebes, sent to Delphi, where she delivered
Oracles, being inspired by Apollo, and sat upon the Tripod. Virgil, L. 6. Aen.
speaks of her, where he introduces Aeneas entering into the Sibyll's Cave, and
praying to unfold unto him the Will of the Gods viva voce, and not as she
sometimes did upon the Leaves of Trees, which the Wind carried thither, and
promising withal to build a magnificent Temple for Apollo, and to recommend his
Oracles to his Posterity. Sibylla Cumaea, which was born at Cuma in Iona.
Lactantius says, 'twas she that carried the Nine Books to Tarquinius Priscus.
Sibylla Erytbraea, Apollodorus will have her to be his Fellow-Citizen, and that
when the Grecians went to the Siege of Troy, she prophesied to them, that they
should take it: Eusebius places her above 450 Years after the Siege of Troy, in
the Reign of Romulus. Strabo speaks of several Sibylls of the same Name, one
before and another after the Time of Alexander, whose Name was Athenais:
Lactantius makes Babylon to be the Place of her Nativity, and calls her
Erythraea, because she was born in the Country of the Erythreans, in a Place
called Bata, where the City Erythraea was afterward built: There are some
Authors who make Sardis to be the Place of her Birth, others Sicily; some
again, Rhodes, Lybia and Samos. She composed Odes and Oracles, and invented a
kind of a Triangular Lyre; she is the most Famous of all the Sibylls. The
Senate sent to Erythraea for the Verses, and they were laid up in the Capitol.
The Sibyll of Samos, of which mention is made in the Samian Annals; her Name
was Pitho.

The Cumaean Sibyll, or she of Cuma in Italy, of whom Virgil speaks; Huic ubi
delatus Cumaeam accesseris urbem.
And again in Eclogue 4. Vltima Cumaei venit jam carminis aetas.
And Ovid de Fastis, Cumaam veteres consuluistis anum.
The Sibyll of Hellespont, born at Troy, that lived in Solon and Cyrus his
Time. The Phrygian Sibyll, that prophesied at Ancyra. The Sibylla Tiburtina, or
of Tibur, a Country Five or Six Leagues from Rome, upon the River Anio.

These are the Names of the Ten Sibylls spoken of by Varro; besides which,
there were also the Sibyll of Collophon, whose Name was Lampusia, the Daughter
of the Prophet Colchas; also she of Th-ssaly, called Mantha, the Daughter of
Tiresias of Thebes, and Cassandra, King Priamus his Daughter.

SIBYLLINILIBRI;
the Sibylls Books, wherein the Predictions of the Sibylls were written; these
Books were had in so great Authority among the Romans, that they did nothing of
moment, either in Peace or War, without first consulting of them: They
committed them to the Custody of two Persons of the Patrician Order, who were
called Duumviri sacrorum, who had leave to consult them by an Order of the
Senate. Tarquin, who was the first that instituted this Sacerdotal Office,
threw one of the Keepers of these Books, whose Name was M. Attilius, into the
Sea, sowed up in a Leathern-Bag, because he had given a Copy of them to
Petronius Sabinus; and this sort of Punishment was afterward appointed for
Parricides. This Priesthood was exercised by Two Persons only till the Year
384, when they were increased to the Number of Ten, half of them Patricians,
and the other half Plebeians; and Sylla made them Fifteen; and at last they
amounted to Sixty, but still retained the Name of Quindecim-viri.

These Books of the Sibylls were preserved entire above 450 Years, till the War
with the Marsi, in a Vault of the Capitol, shut up in a Stone-Trough: They were
burnt with the Capitol in the Year 670. The Senate Seven Years after sent
Deputies to all the Cities of Asia and Italy, to collect and transcribe the
Verses of the Sibylls that might be yet in being. Tacitus also relates, that
Augustus finding the Verses and Predictions of these Sibylls passed through the
Hands of several Persons, ordered an exact Search to be made for them at Samos,
Erythraea, Troy, in Africa, and throughout the Colonies of Italy, and to put
them into the Hands of the respective Governors, that so by the Advice of the
Quindecim-viri, they might retain those that were Genuine, and reject the rest;
and this is also witnessed by Suetonius.

SIGILLARIA:
Feasts celebrated after the Saturnalia, wherein they offered little Statues of
Gold, Silver, and other Metals to Saturn, instead of Men which before were
sacrificed to him: Hercules changed this cruel Custom, by giving a favorable
Interpretation to the Oracle.

SIGNA,
Roman Ensigns, whereof there were different sorts, on some of them the Image
of the Emperor was represented, and they that carried them were called
Imaginiferi; others had an Hand stretched out as a Symbol of Concord, and these
Ensign-bearers were called Signiferi; some had a Silver-Eagle which made those
that carried them be called Aquiliferi, Eaglebearers; others had a Dragon with
a Silver-head, and the rest of his Body of Taffety, which was blown by the Wind
as if he were a real Dragon, and these Dragon-bearers were named Draconarii;
lastly, the Emperor's Ensign was called Labarum which they carried out when he
went into the Field: It was of a Purple Color beset with Gold Fringe, and
adorned with precious Stones: All these Ensigns were sustained by a Halfpike
sharp at the And that it might the more easily be fixed in the Groand: Those
who carried the Labarum were called Labariferi.

SIGNUM RUGNAE;
the Signal of Battle; it was a Coat of Arms of a Purple Color, set upon the
General's Pavillion.

SILENTIUM;
the God of Silence; who was represented with his Finger in his Mouth: Ammianus
Marcellinus says, they also worshipped this God of Silence, Silentii quoque
colitur numen. The Egyptians called him Harpocrates, and made him to be the Son
of Osiris and Isis. Ausonius calls him Sigaleon, An tua Sigaleon Aegyptius
oscula signet: The Name comes from (...) silere: The Angerona of the Romans was
also a Goddess of Silence, and her Mouth was sealed up.

SILENUS,
a Phrygian living in the Reign of Midas, who, as Tertuliian says, gave him his
great Ears: Silenum Phrygem, cui a pastoribus perducto, ingentes aures suas
tradidit: It Is also likely he might have been one of the Princes of Caria, who
was famous for his Wisdom and Learning: Diodorus Siculus speaks of him in this
manner: Primum enim omnium Nysae aiunt imperasse Silenum, cujus genus ignoratur
ob temporis longinquitatem: The Fable of Midas his lending him his long Ears
only denoted the great Knowledge he had in all Things, Cicero in his
Quaestiones Tusculanae, says, that Midas having seized upon the Person of
Silenus, he paid his Ransom, and bought his Liberty with this excellent
Sentence; That it was best not to be born, but the second Degree of Happiness
to die betimes. And now we may believe, that the Drunkenness in which Midas
surprised Silenus, was a mysterious Drunkenness of superabounding Wisdom: So
Bochart following the Steps of Justin Martyr, thinks, that the Name and Fable
of Silenus, imported the Prophecy of Jacob under a Disguise, when he promised
the Messiah to Judah. Bochart will have the Name of Silenus to come from Silo,
which is the Messiah Name in the said Prophesy: And whereas Diodorus Siculus
makes Silenus to be the Director of Bacchus his Studies and his Guide, this is
because the Doctrine of the Messiah in the same Prophecy ought to be admired
and attended to by all Nations; again, the Poets making Silenus to ride upon an
Ass, to be tied to Bacchus, with their seeming to drown him in Wine tend only
to express these Words of the Prophecy concerning the Messiah; Ligans ad vinam
pullum suum, and ad vitem asinam suam. Lavabit in vino stolam suam, and in
sanguine uvae pallium suum. pulchriores sunt oculi ejus vino. Diodorus Siculus
made Silenus to be Bacchus his Master, in respect to the Whole of his Education
and Exercises: Virgil makes Silenus make a very serious and learned Discourse
concerning the Creation of the World, when he was scarce recovered out of his
Drunkenness. Pausanias says, they showed the Stone in Attica where Silenus
rested, when he accompanied Bacchus thither; that in short, they gave Silenus
his Name to all the Satyrs when they began to grow a little-old. They used to
represent Silenus with a bald Pate, large Forehead, and flat Nose, which
denoted the Physiognomy of a Man given to Wine and insolent, as Silenus was
said to be: He was also known by a Pot which he carried in one Hand, and a
Basket of Fruits in the other. Pausanias says, Silenus had Temples built him,
wherein Drunkenness presented him with a Cup full of Wine.

SILVANUS;
the God of Fields and Cattle, whom they were wont to represent with his Right
Hand stretched out, and holding a Cypress branch in his Left, or that of some
other Tree; he was crowned with the Leaves of Trees, because he was more
especially worshipped in the Country; Horace calls him the God of Bounds, as
well as Mercury, Et te pater
Silvane, tutor finium.


See Sylvanus.

SIMPULUM;
a Vessel with a long Handle, and made like a Cruet; In some Editions of
Juvenal we read Simpuvium.

SIMONIDES;
a Lyrick Poet of the Isle of Ceos: Being at Supper with Scopas the Statuary,
he was told there were Two young Men (who were Castor and Pollux) that wanted
to speak with him; and as soon as he was gone out of Doors, the House fell and
crushed the Guests to pieces. Phed. L. 4. Fab. 22.

SIRENES;
Sirens; the Pagans feigned they were Sea Monsters, with Women's Faces and
Fishes Tails. They were thought to be the Three Daughters of the River
Achelous, whose Names were Parthenope, Ligea and Leucosia, dwelling upon the
Shore of Sicily, they sung admirably well, and threw themselves into the Sea
for having been slighted by Ulysses, or Grief for the Loss of Proserpina their
Companion; but the Gods transformed them into those Monsters, who drew
Passengers to the Rocks, where they lost their Lives, and were devoured by
them. The Sirens, of whom Homer in his Odysses makes so long a Discourse, had
in all appearance no other Foundation, than the Likeness there is between She-
Tritons and Women. People have experienced in their Course of Sailing, that
there are some Sea-shoars and Promontories, where the Winds by the various
Reverberations they make there, cause a kind of Harmony, that surprises and
stops Passengers: This, perhaps, was the Ground of the Sirens Song, and was the
Cause of giving the Name of Sirens to these Rocks.

The Sirens are undoubtedly an Invention of the Phoenicians; they were Three
Female Musicians, half Birds and half Virgins, of whom Servius gives this
Description: Sirenes secundum fabulam tres, in part virgins fuerunt, in part
volucres; Acheloi fluminis and Calliopes Musae filiae. Harum una voce, altera
tibiis, altera lyra canebat: and primo juxta Pelorum, post in Capreis insula
habitarunt, Aen. L. 5. Near unto the Isle of Caprea stood the Isles called
Sirenussae, the City and Promontory of Sorento, where there was a Temple
dedicated to the Sirens, according to Strabo; lastly, the City of Naples, where
stood the Funeral Monument of Parthenope, one of the Sirens. Though the Sirens by
these Authorities, and diverse Testimonies of the Poets, seem to be confined
either to Sicily, or the Coasts of Italy; yet it is very certain their Name is
Hebrew, Sir, Sirum, Canticum, Cantica, and that they were the Phoenicians who
peopled these Islands and Seacoasts, that left there some Footsteps of their
Language, as they did also of their History and Religion.

SISTRUM;
an Instrument of the Goddess Isis, adored by a particular sort of Worship in
Egypt: The Form of it was Oval, like a Racket with three Sticks, which crossed
the Breadth thereof, and moved freely, that so they might thereby make a Sound,
which the Ancients found very melodious: One of these Sistra made all of Copper
is to be seen in the Library of Genevieve at Paris; it was the usual Metal
they were made of, as Apuleius informs us, who gives a Description of it.
Several Authors have spoke of this Sistrum, and Jerome Bosius among others, who
has writ a Treatise on Purpose, entitled, Isiacus de Sistro.

SISYPHUS;
the Son of Aeolus, a famous Robber, slain by Theseus: The Poets feigned that
he rolled up a great Millstone in Hell to the Top of a Mountain, from whence
it presently fell down again, and oblieg'd him to begin again, and so eternally
perpetuated his Punishment.

SITICENES;
were those who sounded upon a kind of a Trumpet that had a very sorrowful and
mournful Tone, at the Burying of the ancient Romans.

SOCCUS and SOCCULUS;
a sort of Shoe used by the Greeks, the same was also in use among the Roman
Ladies: It was a kind of Covering for the Feet among the Ancients who came upon
the Theater, to represent Comedies, and was opposed to the Corhurnus, which was
a kind of Snooe or Busk in acting Tragedies.

SOCRATES;
a Philosopher of Athens, who by the Oracle of Apollo, was called the wisest
Man in Greece. This Philosopher applied himself very much to Morality; but
being accused by diverse Persons of having spoke ill concerning the Gods, he was
sentenced to poison himself, which he did with Hemlock.

SOL;
the Sun. Macrobius endeavors to show, that all the Deitis of the Poets were
only the Sun under a Disguise, which being the Ruler of the other Stars, whose
Influences reached unto all this lower World, it is by Conquence the Governor
of the Universe. The Poets agree, that Apollo is the Sun: In short, Apollo's
Name being composed of the Negative Particle, and (...) multus, it bears the
same Signification as Sol or Solus; and this Macrobius says, whereunto he adds,
that Plato gave it another Greek Etymology, tending to the same purpose:
PlatoSolem (...), cognominatum scribit, (...), a jactu radiorum. The same
Author says, that as for Apollo's being called (...), Medicus, a Physician; the
Reason is, because the Sun is the Preserver of Health: But as it is sometimes
also the Cause of Diseases, it has likewise been called (...), Destroyer,
(...), a feriendo. They have called the Sun Delius, quod illuminando omnia
clara (...) demonstrat. The Name of (...) has been given it, (...), quod vi
fertur: As also Phaneta, (...); and (...), because of the Corruption which
always proceeds from Heat, or from the Serpent Python; for the Fable says, that
Latona being brought to Bed of Apollo and Diana, Juno sent a Serpent to devour
them in the Cradle, but Apollo, as little as he was, killed her with his
Arrows. Now the natural Signification of this Fable is, that the Sun and Moon
being come out of the Chaos, the Earth remaining yet moist produced Serpents,
or rather thick Vapors, wherewith Juno, that is, the Air, would darken the
Light of the Sun and Moon, but the Force of the Sunbeams did at length
dissipate these Fogs.

The Sun is also the same as Bacchus, or Liber, according to Macrobius; he says
that the Sun in their mysterious Prayers was called Apollo, while it continued
in the upper Hemisphere, or during Daylight, and that they called it Liber
Pater, in the Night, when it ran through the lower Hemisphere. Orpheus calls it
also (...). The Name of Dionysius comes from (...), according to Macrobius,
quia solemn mundi mentem esse dixerunt: Others deduce the Name (...), quod
circumferatur in ambitum. Macrobius pretends that it was to the Sun, the Oracle
of Apollo gave the Name of (...), saying he was the greatest of all the Goods:
(...).

The said Macrobius endeavors also to prove that Mars is the same as the Sun,
because it is the same Principle of Martial Heat and Fire that inflames Men's
Hearts and animates them to fight. Mercury also according to the said Author is
the Sun or Apollo, and this is the Reason why they represent Mercury with Wings
to intimate the swift Course of the Sun.

Apollo presides over the Quire of Muses, and Mercury is the Father of
Eloquence and polite Learning, the Sun is the Soul and Understanding of the
World, and this agrees with Mercury whose Name is derived (...), ab
interpretando.

Mercury is the Messenger of the Gods, being often sent by the Celestial to
the Infernal Deities: because the Sun by Turns passes through the Superior and
the Inferior Signs: Mercury slew Argus, who had 100 Eyes to watch Io that was
transformed into a Cow; that is, the Sun ecclipses the Light of the Stars and
the Heavens by its Presence, these Stars during the Night having been as so
many Eyes, to watch over and observe the Earth, which the Egyptians represented
under the Symbol of a Cow. Lastly, The Caduceus of Mercury composed of Two
Serpents tied together and kissing each other, signifies the Four Gods that
preside over Men's Nativities, viz. the Sun, Moon, Love and Necessity; the Two
Serpents are the Sun and Moon, the Knot is Necessity, and their kissing imports
a Dove.

Again, the Sun is Aesculapius, which imports nothing else but the wholesome
Influences of the Body of the Sun, and hence it is that they have made him to
be Apollo's Son, the Father of Physic and Health: They also place at the Feet
of these Statues the Image of a Serpent that grows young by casting off her old
Skin, as the Sun annually reassumes Vigor and as is were a fresh Youth in the
Spring. They make Aesculapius to preside over Divinations as well as Apollo,
because it is requisite a Physician should foresee many Things to come.

Hercules was also confounded with the Sun, not Hercules of Ihebes, but he of
Egypt, who was the ancientest of all of them, and was Sun it self, to whom they
owed the Victory obtained over the Giants; for 'twas this Sun that had the
Power and Virtue of the Heavens, that slew those Sons of the ^arth who rose up
in Arms against the Gods. Farther; the Sun is the Serapis or Osiris of the
ancient Egyptians, on whose Head they represented the Head of a Lion, Dog or
Wolf, to denote the Three Parts of Time, viz. the Times present, past and to
come: The Lion and the Wolf intimated the Time present and past, because of
their Swiftness, and the Dog by his Fawnings signified the vain Hopes Men
entertain concerning Futurity. Tho the Sun also is Adonis, who while in the six
superior Signs of the Summer continues with Venus, that is, with this
Hemisphear of the Earth wherein we dwell, and for the other fix inferior Signs
of the Winter, stays with Proserpina, that is, our Antipodes: The Egyptians
also took Apollo and Horus for the Sun, from whence the Four and Twenty Hours
of the Day and the Four Seasons of the Year assumed their Names.

Jupiter Ammon in like manner is taken for the setting Sun by the Lybians, and
that is the Reason why they represent him with Rams-horns, which denote the
Beams of the Sun.

It need no longer to be doubted but that the Sun is Jupiter himself, that it is
the Opinion of Homer, when he says, that Jupiter went to Oceanus his House in
Ethiopia to a Feast, where all the Gods followed him, and that he returned to
Heaven Twelve Days after: For the Ocean of the Western Ethiopians is the Place
where the Sun sets, and whither he is followed by all the Stars, who set there
also, and find Aliment to allay their Eternal Fires, without returning to the
Place from whence they parted under Twelve Hours, or till after they have run
through the Twelve Houses or Signs of the Zodiac. Macrobius farther adds, that
the Assyrians worshipped Jupiter, as being but the same Deity with the Sun, and
they called him Jupiter Heliopolitanus, because he was chiefly worshipped in
the City of Heliopolis in Assyria. Lastly, Macrobius says, that the Assyrians
worshipped the Sun as their only and sovereign Deity, and hence it is, that
they called his Name Adad that is only: Adad was represented by the Beams of
the Sun, that came down from on high, whereas Adargatis, which was the Earth,
was on the Contrary pictured with reversed Rays, with the Points turning upon
herself, to show, that all was done by the Influences which the Sun had on the
Earth, and that the Earth received the same from the Sun.

Julian the Apostate observes, that the People of the Isle of Cyprus erected
Altars to the Sun and Jupiter, pretending they were the same Deities whom the
Sovereign God of the Universe constituted to govern this visible World: He
adds, that Homer and Hesiod were of the same Opinion, when they made the Sun to
be Hypereon and Thea's Son. For these Two Names do plainly denote a Supreme
Deity: They seem to say, that Bacchus, Apollo, Musagetes and Aesculapius are no
other than the Emanations and different Virtues of the Sun.

The Mithra of the Persians was the Sun likewise, to whom the Parthians and
several Eastern Nations give this Epithet, because of the Head-dress wherewith
he was represented: He was also worshipped by this Name among the Romans, as
you may see by these Verses of Statius.

Indignata sequi torquentem cornua Mithram.
And by several Inscriptions at Nismes and elsewhere. Deo Invicto Mithrae L.
Calphurnius And at Rome this other Inscription may be seen. Numini invicto Soli
Mithrae. M. Au- And again, M. Aurelius Aug. Lib. Euprepes

These Two Roman Inscriptions were those upon the Two Altars, which Marcus
Aurelius Eliprepes the Emperor's Freedman had dedicated to this God, who
appeared to him in a Dream. Mithra was an Epithet given to the Sun and used in
the East, from whence it was brought to Rome, and Lactantius says in the
forecited Verses of Statius, that Apollo was represented by the Persians with a
Lyon's Face and a kind of Tiara on his Head, because the Sun is in its Vigor
when he comes to the Sign Leo; the Phoenicians worshipped no other Deity than
the Sun, which they called Beelsamen, that is, the King of the Heavens. The
Lybians as well as the Messagetes sacrificed a Horse to him. The Emperor
Galienus, after his Expedition into the East, represented Apollo like a
Centaur, holding his Lyre in his Right Hand, and a Globe in the other with this
Inscription, Apollini Comiti.

Probus represented him like a Charioteer, sitting on his Chariot and crowned
with the Sunbeams and with this Title Soli Invicto. Other Emperors, such as
Constantine, Aurelian and Crispus, set him forth under the Form of a naked Man,
crowned with Sunbeams, and holding a Globe in his Right Hand, and a Whip in
the Left with these Words: Soli invicto comiti.

Lucius Plautius caused a Medal to be coined, whereon was represented the Head
of Apollo with Two Serpents kissing him: There was a Temple built him at Rome
of a Spherical, i. e. a round Form.

SOLARIUM,
a Sundial; Vitruvius describes several sorts of Sundials in L. 9. C. 9. of his
Architecture. The Hemicycle or half Circle hollowed square-wise and cut so as
to incline in the same manner as the ^quinox, was the Invention of Berosus the
Chaldean: It Is likely that Berosus his Dial was a sloaped Plinthis, like the
Equinox, and that this Plinthis was intersected into an Hemicycle, or Concave
Demicircle, at the Top of a high Place looking northwards, and that there was a
Style or Pin coming out of the Middle of the Hemicycle whose Point answering to
the Center of the Hemicycle represented the Center of the Earth; and its Shadow
falling upon the Concavity of the Hemicycle, which represented the Space
between one Tropic and another, marked out not only the Declinations of the
Sun, that is, the Days of the Months, but also the Hours of each Day, for that
might be done by dividing the Line every Day into Twelve equal Parts; by which
must be meant the Days that are between the Autumnal and Vernal Equinox; it
being necessary to increase the Hemicycle for the other Days, which contain
above Twelve Equinoxial Hours. The Hemisphear of Aristarchus his Dial was
Sperical and Concave, and not Oval. The Discus of Aristarchus of Samos was an
Horizontal Dial, whose Edges were a little elevated in order to remedy the
Inconveniency of the Style, being straight and raised up prependicularly upon
the Horizon, for these Edges thus raised up, hindered the Shadows from extending
too far.

The Astrologer Eudoxus found out the Araneus some say, Apollonius invented the
Plinthis or square Dial, which was also set up in the Flaminian Circus: Scopas
of Syracuse made that called Prostahistoroumena; Cisaranus believes this Name
was given it, because the Figures of the Celestial Signs were represented
thereon. Parmenio was the Inventor of the Prospanclima, that is, such an one as
might serve for all sorts of Climates. Theodosius and Andreas Patrocles found
out the Pelecinum which is a Dial made Ax-wise, wherein the Lines which cross
one another mark out the Signs and Months; being close toward the Middle and
open toward the Sides, which makes them be of the Shape of an Ax on both
Sides, Dionysiodorus invented the Cone, Apollonius the Quiver Dial; these Two
last Dials are plainly Vertical, which being long, and posited in an oblique
manner represent a Quiver.

SOLARIUM,
was a Piece of Ground levelled, or Place raised up and exposed to the Sun,
where People walked, as Isidorus and Cyrill's Glossary informs us.

SOLEAE,
Sandals; among the Ancients it was a rich Wear or Covering for the Feet made
of Gold and Silk with Leather Soles only, tied with Thongs on the back part of
the Foot.

SOLITAURILIA;
a Sacrifice consisting of a Sow, Bull and Sheep, which the Censors offered
every Five Years, when they performed the Lustrum or numbered and taxed the
Citizens of Rome.

SOLON,
one of the Seven wise Men of Greece, born at Salamis, and Lawgiver to the
Athenians, They attribute the Erecting of the Court of the Areopagites to him:
This wise Man said, no Man could be called happy before his Death.

SOMNUS,
the God of Sleep, according to the Poets, was the Sun of Nox and Erebus. Ovid,
L. 11. Metamorph. describes him thus: Near unto the Cimmerians, says he, there
was a great Cave dug in a Mountain, where stupefied Sleep dwelt, the Sunbeams
never enlightened that Place, the same being covered with a very thick Mist:
The Birds never sing there at Break of Day, neither do the Dogs disturb the
Silence of the Nights by their Barkings: A profound Silence reigns continually
there; at the Cave's Mouth there grows a great many Poppies and Mandrakes,
Plants that create Stupidity, whose Juice the Night extracts in order to throw
it into the Eyes of Men. In the Midst of the Cave there is a Bed of Ebony all
of one Color, where the God Sleep lies down soft and takes his Rest; there are
a great many Dreams who skip up and down round about him.

Seneca the Tragedian gives an admirable Description of Sleep, whom he
represents in the same manner as Ovid does, to be a favorable God that gives
Rest to the Mind, and puts an End to our Labors. The Greeks, as Pausanias
says, sacrificed on the same Altar to Sleep and to the Muses, pretending that
Sleep was the best Soul of the Muses: Sleep is a good old Man, King of a
certain Palace, whose Masters were Taraxion and Plutocles; the sovereign Lord
of the Fountain Careotis, great Master of the Temple of Imposture and Truth,
and Possessor Time out of Mind of a Sanctuary or Oracle taken away by Antipho;
he is Death's younger Brother; who is an old Carcass as ancient as all Ages,
says Coluthus. M. Iollius pretends that Sleep is a young Man, and this he
grounds upon the Inscription wherein Sleep is represented much like unto a
Youth. This Sleep appeared indeed young, but according to M. Cuper, it was
Somnus aeternalis, because of the Torch that was thrown down which was a true
Representation of a Life extinct; or by reason of this Torch being thrown down
it was necessary for keeping of the Children harmless, to light one for them in
Hell, His datum solis minus ut timerent,
Igne praelato relevare noctem.


M. Tollius insists upon it and instances in Euclids Two Sleeps, one of which
was easy to be persuaded and driven away from the Soul, and the same belonged
to young People, and the other was perfectly gray with Age, and appertained to
old Men. But the Moral is very good, Euclid would hereby show that young People
were easily brought of from their idle Fancies, but that it is hard to bring old
Men from their Opinions: Euclid did not pretend they were Two Deities.

SOMNIUM;
a Dream. Ovid puts an infinite Number of Dreams under the Empire of Sleep, but
he takes notice of Three who were much more potent than the rest; viz.
Morpheus, Icelus or Phobetor and Phantasos: The first imitated Men, the second
Animals, and the third Mountains, Rivers and other inanimate Things: All these
Names were taken from the Greek, and they very well signify what they intimate
to us: Hereby we may know that the Grecians were those who formed both the
Names of and made Distinctions between Dreams, as well as the God of Sleep.
Lucian tells us, Dreams were painted with Wings, because they flew away in an
Instant; Homer mentions Two Gates through which Dreams come to us; the one made
of Ivory from whence proceeded doubtful and troublesome Dreams, the other of
Horn through which clear and certain Dreams passed: Virgil in these Verses
borrowed the Thought from Homer.

Sunt gemina Somni portae, quarum altera fertur
Cornea, qua veris facilis datur exitus umbris:
Altera candenti perfecta nitens elephante,
Sed falsa ad coelum mittunt insomnia Manes.
Lucian describes the Island of Dreams unto us in this manner. We had not
sailed long before we saw the Isle of Dreams, but obscurely, as Dreams are wont
to be; for she seemed to remove farther off as we drew nearer to her; at last
having reached the Island we entered into the Haven of Sleep, and there went
ashore: The Island was encompassed with a Forest of Poppies and Mandrakes, full
of Owls and Bats, for there were no other Birds upon it: It had a River whose
Waters did not run but in the Night, and Two Fountains of standing Water; the
Wall of the City was very high and of a changeable Color, like the Rainbow: It
had Four Gates, though Homer makes it to have but Two, the first looked toward
the Plain of Negligence, the one being made of Iron and the other of Earth
through which frightful and melancholy Dreams passed; the other Two look
toward the Harbor, the one being made of Horn and the other of Ivory, which
is that through which we enter: Sleep is the King of the Island, and his Palace
stands on the Left Hand as you go in: On his Right Hand is the Temple of Night,
which the Goddess worshipped there, and afterward that of the Cock: Sleep has
Two Lieutenants under him, viz. Taraxion and Plutocles, who were begotten of
Fancy and Nothing: In the Midst of the Place stands the Fountain of Sense,
which has Two Temples by the Sides of it; the one of Falsehood, and the other of
Truth: There is the Oracle and Sanctuary of that God, to whom Antipho, the
Interpreter of Dreams, is Prophet, and has obtained this Favor of Sleep: All
the Inhabitants of the Island differ from one another, some are handsome and
tall, others little and ugly, these appear to be rich, and clad in Gold and
Purple, like Kings in a Play, and the others poor, beggarly and all in Rags. We
met with several of our Acquaintance who carried us to their Houses and treated
us nobly.

Prophetic Dreams were formerly as frequent as they are now rare, and so they
made a Part of and were an Ornament to History, both sacred and profane. God
threatened King Abimelech in a Dream, and made him release Sarah Abraham's
Wife: It was in a Dream that Jacob saw the mysterious Ladder: The Angel
appeared to Jacob in Mesopotamia, and told him in a Dream that he was the God
who appeared to him in Bethel: Joseph's Dreams are well known, his Brothers
Sheafs of Corn which worshipped his, and the Sun, Moon and Eleven Stars which
they adored, have in a manner no need of Interpretation: The Dreams of
Pharoah's Two Eunuchs, and the Interpretation given them by Joseph, and
Pharaoh's Two Dreams after that, which were so happily interpreted by the said
Joseph, were the Steps by which he was advanced to the Height of Honor and
Power: Gideon was also instructed what he should do by a Soldier's Dream: Saul
answered Samuel who was conjured up by the Witch of Endor, that he made his
Application to her, because God would neither answer him, by the Mouths of the
Prophets, nor by Dreams; for they were the Two usual Ways they had to learn the
Will of God under the Old Testament.

The Devil imitated these Prophetic Dreams, and made it a Piece of the wicked
Superstition of the Heathens: Nebuchodonozor told Daniel the Dream he had had,
and he gave him the Interpretation thereof, that he should be dethroned and be
for Seven Years sent to dwell among the Beasts of the Field: There were a vast
many People who made it their Business to interpret Dreams, especially in Great
Men's Courts. Virgil represents unto us how the Oracle of Faunus was consulted
by all the People of Italy, and the Answers were given them by Dreams; for the
Priests after they had offered Sacrifice, spent the Night lying upon the Skins
of the Victims, and there received those Prophetic Visions in a Dream.

.... Et caesarum ovium sub nocte silenti
Pellibus incubuit stratis, somnosque petivit,
Multa modis simulachr a videt volitantia miris,
Et varias audit voces, fruiturque Deorum
Colloquio......
It was the Custom of the Ancients to sleep upon Skins, and the Latin Word
dormire comes from thence, being derived from the Creek (...), pellis: And when
they sought for Prophetic Dreams, they affected to sleep upon the Skins of
Victims: Lucan makes Julia Pompey's first Wife foretell him in a Dream all the
Evils of the Civil War, wherein he should be engaged: Pompey despised this
Dream; but it came to him through the Horn-gate; the Effect followed, and the
Dream came to pass; but some time after when Pompey dreamed, that is, on the
Day before the fatal Battle of Pharsalia, that he was admired and applauded in
his Amphitheater at Rome; it was a Dream that came to him through the Ivory-Gate,
and had nothing but a false Light in it. Juvenal speaks of the base Practices
or shameful Trade drove by some Jews, who for Money sold such Dreams as were
desired of them; Qualiacumque voles Judaei somnia vendunt:
Macrobius gives the Reason of the Difference of these Two Gate, by which
Dreams come to us: The Horn-Gate was very small, but transparent, the Ivory was
not so. And so they are the true Dreams, when the Soul being disengaged from
the Body pierces and penetrates through that Vail which hides the Sight of Truth
from it; and Dreams have nothing that is real in them when this Vail is not
transparent; the Soul then continues involved with the Obscurity of Matter.

SORTS;
Lots; Lot is the Effect of Hazard, and as it were the Decision or Oracle of
Fortune; but Lots were the Instruments made use of in order to know what this
Decision would be. Lots were very often a kind of Dice, on which certain
Characters were graven, or some Words for the Explication of which they had
recourse to Tables made for that Purpose. The Use of Lots was various; in some
Temples they threw themselves, in others they took them out of a Box, which
gave occasion to this Form of Speech among the Grecians: The Lot is fallen.
Sacrifices and many other Ceremonies always preceded this Dice-playing: The
Priests in all appearance knew how to manage the Dice; but if they had no mind
to be at that Pains, they had no more to do than to let them go, for they were
always Masters of the Explication given.

The Lacedamonians went one Day to consult the Lots of Dodona concerning some
War they were engaged in: For besides, the speaking Oak-Trees, Doves, Basins,
and the Oracle; there were Lots at Dodona: After all the other Ceremonies that
were performed with much Veneration and Respect, there went a Monkey belonging
to the King of the Molossi into the Temple, and threw down the Lots and Urn:
The Priestess in a Fright told the Lacedamonians, that they must not think of
overcoming, but only of saving themselves: And all Authors assure us, the
Lacedaemonians never received a more fatal Presage. The most Famous of all Lots
were those of Preneste and Antium, two small Cities in Italy; Fortune was at
Praeneste, and the Fortunes at Antium: The Fortunes moved of themselves, as
Macrobius says, and their different Motions. either served for an Answer, or
intimated whether they could consult the Lots or no. Cicero, L. 2. de Divin.
says, they consulted the Lots of Praeneste, with the Consent of Fortune; and
this gave occasion to believe, that this Fortune also knew how to move its
Head, or give some other Sign of its Will.

In the East Arrows were their Lots, and still the Turks and Arabs make use of
them in the same manner. Ezekiel says, that Nebuchadnezzar mixed his Arrows
against Ammon and Jerusalem, and that his Arrow went forth against Jerusalem:
That was the pretty Way they had of resolving on which of those two Nations they
should make War. In Greece and Italy they often drew the Lots from some famous
Poet, as from Homer and Euripides; and that which presented it self first to
view at the opening of the Book, was the Decree of Heaven: History furnishes us
with a thousand Examples of this kind: We also find that about 200 Years after
Virgil's Death, they valued his Verses so much, as to believe them to be
prophetical, and to use them instead of the ancient Lots of Praeneste: For
Alexander Severus, who was yet but a private Man, and at a time when the
Emperor Heliogabalus had a Kindness for him, received for Answer in the Temple
of Praeneste, that Passage out of Virgil, that signifies thus much; If thou
can surmount the contrary Destinies, thou shall be Marcellus.

Lots continued even to the Time of Christianity; they took them out of the
Scriptures, whereas the Pagans did it from their Poets, St. Augustine, Epist.
119. ad Januarium, does not seem to disapprove of this Custom, unless practiced
in secular Affairs. Gregory of Tours does himself inform us, that it was his
own Practice; he spent many Days in Fasting and Prayer, then went to St.
Martin's Tomb, where he opened what Book of Scripture he had a Mind to, and
took the first Passage he saw for God's Answer; but if the said Passage was
nothing to the Purpose, he opened another Book of Scripture: Others took the
first Thing they heard sung as they entered the Church for a Divine Lot. The
Emperor Heraclius being sollicitous about the Place he should Winter-quarter
with his Army, was resolved by this kind of Lot: He caused the Army to be
purified for Three Days, then he opened the Book of the Gospels, and found his
Winter Quarters assigned him in Albania.

SOTERIA;
a Sacrifice for Health; being the Games and Solemnities made by the People for
the Health and Preservation of the Emperor, especially when he recovered of any
sickness.

SPHINX;
a fabulous Monster, feigned by the Poets to have been begotten by Typhon, to
have a Woman's Face, the Wings of a Bird, Claws of a Lion, and the rest of his
Body like a Dog. He ravaged the Country very much about Mount Sphingio, and
could never be destroyed till Oedipus had explained the Riddle proposed by him;
from which they have since been wont to say concerning Riddles hard to be
resolved, that it was Sphinx his Riddle, and wanted an Oedipus. Diodorus says,
there were real Sphinx's, which were a sort of Monkeys, with long Hair, great
Teats, and for the rest of their Bodies like unto the Representations made of
them. Sphinx, says Palephatus in a little Treatise concerning incredible
Stories, was Cadmus his first Wife, who designing to be revenged on him, for
having married another, retired with some Troops to the Mountains, where she
laid Ambushes for Passengers, and put them to death: These Ambushes were
Riddles, Cedipus escaped them, and slew Sphinx.

SPORTULA;
a small present of Money, which with Wine and Bread was distributed at certain
Feasts, or other solemn Days in the Year. These Presents often consisted of
Silver Medals, and Denarii were used upon this Occasion: But when the Emperors
or other great Men bestowed these Presents, they consisted of Gold Medals: Thus
Trebellius Pollio speaking of the small Presents made by the Emperor Gallienus
in his Consulship, says he gave a Sportula to every Senator, and one of his
Gold Medals to every Roman Lady: Senatui sportulam sedens erogavit, Matronas ad
consulatum suum rogavit, iis denique manum sibi osculantibus, quaternos aureos
sui nominis dedit. It was also a Custom for those who entered upon the Office of
Consul to send their Friends these Presents, of which Symmachus speaks thus;
Sportulam Consulatus mei, and amicitiae nostrae and honori tuo debeo, hanc in
solido misi.

The Name of Sportulae, which signified small Baskets, was given those Presents
because they were sent in Baskets; and herein we are confirmed by these Verses
of Coripus, L. 4. wherein he speaks of the Consulship of Justin the Emperor;

Dona Calendarum, quorum est ea cara, parabant
Officia, and turmis implent felicibus aulam,
Convectant rutilum sportis capacibus aurum.
And for this Reason the Greek Glossaries in the Explication of the Word
Sportula, say they were Presents sent in Baskets; the Consuls with these
Sportulae bestowed also small Pocket-books made of Silver or Ivory, wherein
their Names were written, and these were those that they called Fasti.
Sidonius, L. 8. E. 6. speaking of the Consulship of Asterius, mentions the
Sportulae and Fasti that were given.

STADIUM;
a Furlong; it was a Space of 125 Paces, and the Word is derived from the Verb
Sto, which signifies to stop; for it is said Hercules run over such a Space of
Ground at one Breath, and stopped at the end of it: This sort of Measure was
peculiar to the Grecians: Eight of them goes to an Italian Mile: There were
Stadia of different Measures, according to the Difference of Times and Places.

STATERA;
a kind of Balance, otherwise called the Roman Balance. Vitruvius, L. 10. C.
8. describes it in this manner: The Handle which is as the Center of the Flail,
being fastened, as it is, near unto the End to which the Scale is hung; the
more the Weights, which run along the other farther End of the Flail, are
pushed forward upon the Points marked thereon, the more Power it will have to
equalize a great Weight according as the Weight's distance from the Center,
shall put the Flail into an Aequilibrium; and so the Weights which were weak
when they were too near the Center, could in a Moment gain a great Power, and
raise up a very heavy Burden with little trouble.

STATUAE;
Statues; the Use and Liberty given to make Statues increased the Number of
Temples and Heathens: We do not know (says Cicero) the Gods by their Faces, but
because it has pleased the Painters and Statuaries to represent them so unto
us: Deos ea facie novimus qua pictores and fictores voluerunt. Statues at first
were no more than shapeless Stones; but Daedalus was the first who left the
Custom of imitating the Egyptians, and separated the Feet and other Parts of
the Statues, which he made so as to be distinguished from the rest, and for
that Reason they were called Moving Parts, as Palephatus says: Thus
Aristophanes calls Statuaries (...), Makers of Gods; and Julius Pollux names a
Statuary, (...), a Former of Gods.

The Romans were 170 Years before they had either Statuaries or Painters, as
were the Persians, Scythians, and Lacedaemonians for a long time: Constantine,
as Eusebius says, forbad Statues to be set up in the Temples of the Heathens,
for Fear they should give them Divine Honors, which before was very common;
for Tatius (says Lactantius) consecrated the Image of the Goddess Cloacina,
whom he took out of a Gutter and gave it the Name of the Place from whence he
had it: They also dedicated (continued he) and consecrated Kings Statues after
their Decease, and represented them as they pleased; and Valerius Maximus says,
the Rhodians gave the Statues of Harmodius and Aristogito the same Honors as
they did to the Gods. The Statues, said he, being come to Rhodes, the Citizens
received them in a Body and having placed them in an Inn, they exposed them
upon sacred Beds to the View of the People.

As to the Bigness of the Ancients Statues there were Four sorts of them; the
greatest were the Colossus's which were made only for the Gods: There were
lesser ones made for Heroes; those for Kings and Princes somewhat bigger than
the Life, and for other Men who for some special Desert were allowed this
Honor, they were made of the Bigness of the Life.

STOLA,
a long Robe in use among the Roman Ladies; they put a large Mantle or Cloack
called Palla, and sometimes Pallium, over this Robe when they wore their
ceremonious Habits.

STRENAE,
New Years Gifts; the Use of them is almost as ancient as the Building of Rome.
Symmachus says, these were brought up in the Time of Tatius, King of the
Sabines, who was the first that received Vervein gathered from the consecrated
Wood of the Goddess Strenia, for a good Augury of the New-year, much like the
Gaulish Druids who held the Mistetoe in so much Veneration, that they went to
gather it on New Year's Day with a Golden Bill, or else they did herein make an
Allusion between the Name of the Goddess Strenia, in whose Wood they gathered
the Vervein, and the Word Strenuus, which signifies Valiant and Generous; and
so the Word Strena, which signifies a New Year's Gift, is sometimes found
written Strenua by the Ancients, as you have it in the Glossory of Philoxenus:
And so this Present was properly to be made to Persons of Valor and Merit, and
to those whose Divine Minds promised them more by their Vigilance, than the
Instinct of an happy Augury. Strenam, says Festus, vocamus quae datur die
religioso, ominis boni gratia. After that Time they came to make Presents of
Figs, Dates and Honey, by which they did as it were, wish nothing might befall
their Friends but what was sweet and agreeable for the rest of the Year: The
Romans afterward rejecting their primitive Simplicity, and changing their
Wooden Gods into Gold and Silver ones, began to be also more magnificent in
their Presents, and on that Day to send several sorts of Things and of greater
Value to one another, but more particularly Silver Medals, as finding they were
very silly in the foregoing Ages, to believe that Honey was sweeter than
Silver, as Ovid brings in Janus pleasantly talking of it. Wherefore Dio
speaking of New Years Gifts, plainly calls them (...), Silver. With these
Presents they sent to wish one another all manner of Prosperity and Happiness
for the rest of the Year, and gave reciprocal Testimonies of Friendship to each
other: And as they prevailed as much in their Religion as they did in the
State, they were not wanting to enact Laws relating to them, and made that Day
a Festival, dedicated and particularly consecrated to Janus, who was
represented with Two Faces, one before and another behind, as looking upon the
Year past and present: They offered Sacrifices to him on that Day, and the
People in Crowds and all new clad went to Mount Tarpeius where Janus had an
Altar: However though the same were a Feast and solemn one too, since it was
also dedicated to Juno, under whose Protection the first Days of this Month
were, and that on the said Day they also celebrated the Dedication of the
Temples of Jupiter and Aesculapius, that stood in the Isle of the Tiber; yet, I
say, notwithstanding, all these Considerations, the People did not remain idle,
but on the Contrary every one began to do something in the Way of his
Profession, that so he might not be sloathful the rest of the Year.

In short, the Custom of New Years Gifts by Degrees became so common in the
Time of the Emperors, that all the People went to wish him a happy Year, and
each Man carried his Present of Money according to his Ability; that being
looked upon as a Mark of the Veneration and Esteem they had for their Princes;
whereas now the Method is altered, and they are rather the Great ones who
bestow New Years Gifts upon meaner Persons. Augustus received so much of it,
that he was wont to buy and dedicate Gold and Silver Idols for it, as being
unwilling to apply the Liberality of his Subjects to his own private Use.
Tiberius his Successor, who did not love a Crowd, purposely absented himself on
the first Day of the Year, that he might avoid the Inconveniences of the
Peoples Visits, who would have run in Shoals to wish him a happy New-year, and
he disapproved of Augustus his receiving these Presents, for the same was not
convenient, and must have put him to Charge to make his Acknowledgments to the
People by other Liberalities: The People were so taken up with these Ceremonies
for the first six or seven Days of the Year, that he was obliged to make an
Edict, whereby they were forbid to make New Years Gifts any longer than for the
first Day: Caligula who immediately succeeded Tiberius in the Empire, let the
People understand by an Edict, that he would receive the New Years Gifts on the
Calends of January, which had been refused by his Predecessor, and for this end
he staid every Day in the Porch of his Palace, where he readily received the
Money and the Presents made him by the Crowd. Claudius his Successor disanulled
what he had done, and by an Order forbad them to come and present him with any
New Years Gifts. From thence forwards the Custom continued still among the
People, as Herodian observes, under the Emperor Commodus; and Trebellius Pollio
makes mention of it in the Life of Claudius Gothicus, who also attained to the
Imperial Dignity.

And here we might take Occasion to enquire why the Romans were wont to make
Presents to and mutual Vows for one another, on the first Day of the Year
rather than any other Time? It Is the Question which Ovid puts to Janus, who
answers with a Gravity becoming himself: It is, says he, because all Things are
contained in their Beginnings; and it is for that Reason, adds he, they drew
Auguries from the first Bird they saw. In short, the Romans thought there was
something Divine in the Beginnings of Things: The Head was accounted a Divine
Thing, because it was, as a Man may say, the Beginning of the Body. They began
their Wars with Auguries, Sacrifices and public Vows; and so the Reason why
they sacrificed to Janus on the first Day of the Year, and would make him
propitious to them, was because that he being Doorkeeper to the Gods, they
were in Hopes by this means to have obtained Admission of the others for the
rest of the Year, If they made Janus to be their Friend at the Beginning of it:
And as he presided over the Beginning of the Year, they hoped for his Favor to
themselves and their Friends, if they could draw this God to espouse their
Interest: They sacrificed Hour and Wine to him, which undoubtedly gave
Occasion to the Merriments and Debauches of that Day.

The Grecians amongst whom New Years Gifts were not in Use, before they
received them from the Romans, had no particular Word to signify Strena; for
the Word (...), which is to be met with in ancient Glossaries, and which was
not used by ancient Authors, signifies only a good Beginning; that of (...), in
general a Present; (...) in Philoxenus his Glossary, is rendered Verbena,
Strenua, because the said Word signifies a Branch, a Plant, such as Vervein
was, of which at first, as we have told you, their New Years Gifts consisted.
Athenaeus brings in Cynulcus reproving Vlpian for calling a New Year's Gift
(...), in all likelihood because that signifies no other than a Thing that is
given above a Gratification: The Way of sending New Years Gifts to Magistrates
and Emperors did not cease in the first Ages of Christianity, after the
Destruction of Paganism, as you may see by these Verses of Ceripus already
mentioned,

Dona Calendarum, quorum est ea cura, parabant
Officia, and turm is implent felicibus aulam:
Convectant rutilum sportis capacibus aurum.
This Custom of solemnizing the first Day of the Year by Gifts and Rejoycings
having passed from Paganism unto Christianity, the Councils and Fathers
declaimed against the Abuse made thereof, as you may see in. Tertullian and the
sixth Council in Trullo.

STYMPHALIDES AVES;
Birds of an extraordinary Seize, which, they said, in their Flight obscured
the Light of the Sun. They fed only upon Humane Flesh, but Hercules by the Help
of Minerva, drove them out of Arcadia by the Noise of Cymbals.

STYX,
a River in Arcadia near Nonacris, its Water was of so cold and killing a
Nature, it was present Poison, wherewith Historians say, Alexander the Great
was poisoned: Pausanias speaks at large of the Grecian Styx, and cites the
Places in Homer and Hefiod wherein it is mentioned: The Poets made it to be a
River in Hell, the solemn Oaths of the Gods were made by the Water of Styx: The
Fable says, that Victory the Daughter of Styx, having given Jupiter Assistance
against the Grants, he by way of Acknowledgment ordered the Gods to swear by
its Water, and that if they perjured themselves, they should be deprived of
Life and Feeling for 9000 Years: Servius gives us the Reason of this Fable, and
says, that the Gods being possessed of all Bliss and Immortal, swore by Styx,
which is a River of Grief and Sorrow, as by a Thing that was quite contrary to
them; and the Oath was taken by way of Execration. Hesiod in his Theognis says,
that when one of the Gods lied, Jupiter sent Irts to fetch some of the Water of
Styx in a Gold Cup, by which the Liar was to swear, and if he perjured himself,
he was to be for a Year without Life or Motion, but it must have been a great
Year that continued several Millions of Years.

SUADA and SUADELA;
the Goddess of Persuasion, owned by the Romans, and called Pitho by the
Grecians.

SUETONIUS,
named Tranquillus, wrote the Lives of the first Twelve Emperors, and was
Secretary to the Emperor Adrian; his History reaches to the Year of our
Redemption 98, and comprehends 144 Years.

SUFFRAGIUM;
a Suffrage, given by the Romans either at the Choosing of Magistrates for the
Receiving of Laws, or in Judgments: The People for a long time gave their
Suffrages by Word of Mouth in Matters relating to the Commonwealth, which were
taken by the Officers of the Tribes, called Rogatores, who afterward
acquainted the President of the Assembly with the Sentiments of their Tribes:
This Method continued to the Year 615, after the Building of Rome, under the
Consulship of Q. Calpurnius Piso, and M. Popilius Lenas; when Gabinius, Tribune
of the People passed the first Law of Ballotting for the Choosing of
Magistrates, that enjoined the People from thence forward no longer to give
their Suffrages viva voce, but that they should throw a Ballot into a Box or
Urn, whereon the Name of the Person they were minded to choose should be
written. This Law they called Tabellaria, because their Ballots were named
Tabellae. Papyrius Carbo, who was also Tribune of the People, got another Law
passed called Papyria in the Year 625, whereby the People were required to give
their Suffrages by Ballots in enacting of Laws: And Cassius, Tribune of the
People likewise obliged the Judges by a Law to give their Votes by Ballots in
Matters of Judgments. All these Laws were very good for the Commonalty, who
before durst not give their Votes freely, for fear of offending the Great ones:
And this Cicero tells us in his Oration pro Plancio: Grata est tabella quae
frontes aperit, hominum mentes tegit, datque eam libertatem ut quod velint
faciant: And it is also in the Agrarian Law called Vindex libertatis; and in the
Cornelian, Principium justissimae libertatis. Now these Ballots were little
pieces of Wood, or other Stuff, made very narrow, and marked with several
Letters, according to the Nature of the Business in hand: For Example, if they
were about to choose a Magistrate; they wrote down the first Letters of the
Candidates Names, and gave as many of them to every one as there were
Competitors for the Place. In the Assemblies held for Receiving of a Law, they
gave every one two, one of which was marked with these two Letters V. R.
signifying as much as uti rogas, and the other only with an A, which denoted
Antiquo, I reject the Law. In Matters of Judgments or Sentences to pass, they
gave three of them, one marked with an A, and signified Absolvo, I acquit the
Persons accused; the other with a C. Condemno, (...) condemn him; and the third
with these two Letters L. N. non liquet, Judgment cannot pass, the Matter is
not clear enough.

The Ballots were delivered at the Entry of a Bridge by the Distributors of
them, who were called Diribitores, and the Place of Office where they were
given was named Diribitorium: They went up to the Tribunal of the Consul, or of
him who sat as President of the Assembly, qui cistellam deferebat, and threw
what Ballot they thought fit into the Urn and then the Centuria or Tribe whose
Right it was first to draw the Lots gave its Suffrage, having done, they told
the Suffrages; and the Crier said with a loud Voice; Praerogativa renunciat
talem Consulem: If the Matter related to the Enacting of a Law; Praerugativa
legem jubet, or non accipit: The Magistrates afterward ordered the Centuria of
the first Class to be called; those of the Cavalry first and the Infantry next:
When there were not a sufficient Number of Suffrages for the entituling of a
Person to an Office, the People might choose whom they pleased, and this in
Latin they called, Non conficere legitima Suffragia, and non explere trihus.

SUMMANUS,
an Epithet which the Poets gave Pluto, being as much as to say Summus Manium,
the Chief of the Manes.

SYLLA,
surnamed Lucius Cornelius, a Roman General of a Patrician Race; he was chosen
Quastor, and had a great Quarrel with Marius the Consul, which proved fatal to
the Commonwealth of Rome, for he banished diverse Illustrious Citizens, and
filled Rome with Blood and Slaughter: He was surnamed the Happy. He died of the
lousy Disease.

SYLVANUS or SILVANUS.
A God whom the Poets said did preside over Forests and Landmarks: Some made
him to be the Son of Faunus; but Plutarch in his Parallels will have him to
have been begotten incestuously by Valerius on his Daughter Valeria. Fenestella
says, that Pan, Faunus and Sylvanus were the same Deity: The Luperci were their
Priests, and their Feasts the Lupercalia. See Lupercalia, etc.

SILVIUS POSTHUMUS,
King of Alba, the Son of Ascanius and Grandson to Aeneas; he was named Sylvius
because he was born in a Forest, and Posthumus by reason his Birth happened to
be after his Father's Death.

SIRE ES.
See Sirenes.

SYRINX and SYRINGA,
were Pipes or Reeds of a different Length, joined together, wherein they blew,
as Tinkers and Boors do nowadays, who are the Inheritors of the wretched
Music of the Satyrs. Pan was the Inventor of this Instrument, who running like
a hair-brained Fellow after the Nymph Syringa, whom he was desperately in Love
with, could catch nothing but Reeds, into which she was transformed: so comfort
himself for his Loss, he made Muical Instruments of those Reeds joined
together, which bore the Name of his Nymph, and were in Request with Shepherds:
Ovid gives the Story of it in these Verses.

Panaque, cum prensam sibi jam Syringe putaret,
Corpora pro Nymphae calamos tenuisse palustres:
Dumque ibi suspir at, motos in arundine ventos
Effecisse sonum tenuem, similemque querenti;
Art nova vocisque Deum dulcedine captum,
Hoc mihi concilium tecum dixisse manebit:
Atque it a disparthus calamis compagine cerae
Inter se junctis nomen tenuisse puellae.
SYRTES,
Two Gulphs in the farthest Part of Africa, full of quick Sands, and so called
from the Word (...), to draw, because Ships at tracted to it, by the Current of
these Gulphs are there swallowed up and buried. The Poets represent them to us
as if they were Monsters.

T.
It Is a Consonant, and the 19th Letter in the Alphabet, which is very like unto
the D; and for that Reason they are often found put one for the other a at ^^r
ad; which made Quintilian raisly those who scrupled to write one indifferently
for another, as set for sed, haut for haud. (...) among the Ancients was a
Numeral Letter, that signified 16^; but if Tittle was put (...) it signified
16000.

TAB^RNA MERITORIA, Mars's Hospital; was a Place in Rome where disabled
Soldiers were maintained at the Charge of the Government.

TABERNAE TRES.
Cic. Epist. 12. ad Auicum. The Three ^averns. It was a Place between Rome and
Capua, upon the great Road called Via Appia, which was that that lead from
Brundasium to Greece, where ^ravellers willingly stopped: There is men ion made
of it in the Acts of the Acts of the Apostles, C. (...).

TACITA,
the Tenth (...), which (...) Pompilius added to the Nine, and caused to be
worshipped at Rome: The King pretended he had frequent Conversation with the
Nymph Egeria, and the Muse Tacita, that he might thereby give the greater
Authority to his Actions, and obtain more Esteem for his Laws: It Is easy to
find the Moral of these Two Fables, since the Names themselves lead us to it.
By the Nymph Egeria Necessity is only meant, which doubtless is an ingenious
Councellor and a very bold Executioner of all sorts of Designs; and the Muse
Tacita or Silence is necessary to the Counsels of a wise Prince, whose Bengns
ought to be kept secret.

TACITUS.
See Cornelius Tacitus.

TACITUS,
a Roman Emperor, chosen by the Senate; he was a wise Prince and made good
Laws: He was killed by the Soldiery after he had reigned Six Months: or as
others will have it, died of a Fever at Tarsus, in the Year of our Lord 274.

TAEDA,
a Torch, Pliny says, they used Torches made of a kind of a Thorn, or as
Dalechamp says, of white Thorn, at Weddings. By the Description which
Aristaenetus gives of the Marriage of Acontius and Cydippe, he says, there was
Incense in their Torches, that so with their Light they might also afford a
fragrant Smell. They likewise made use of Pine-branches, and other Trees which
produce Pitch and Rosin, which made them call the Pine and Fir from the Word
Taeda, which signifies a Torch.

TANARUS,
a Cape in Laconia, near unto which there was a Cave by which the Poets feigned
there was a Descent into Hell: There stood here, as Suidas says, a Temple
dedicated to Neptune, where the Lacedaemonians killed the Pilots who offered
Sacrifices therein: Near unto it was the Place where Hercules pulled the Dog
Cerberus out of Hell.

TAGES,
was the Son of Genius, according to Festus, and the Grandson of Jupiter, who
taught the Tuscans the Art of Divination, as Cicero says, L. 2. de Div. Ovid
makes him to be the Son of the Earth; a Ploughman, said he, ploughing his
Field, and the Coulter-Iron of his Plough happening to sink deeper than
ordinary into the Ground, he saw a Child come out of a Clod of Earth, which the
Coulter-Iron had turned up, who was called Tages and who presently applied
himself to teach the Tuscans the Way to know Things to come, wherein they
became so skillful, that they taught several Nations this Art, and particularly
the Romans.

TALARIUS LUDAS;
Dice-playing; Indeed, we have no proper Term whereby to express this Play in
English; but it is certain, it was performed with a sort of Gold or Ivory Dice,
which they shook as we do in a kind of a Box, before they threw them: There was
this difference between them and ours, that whereas our Dice have six Squares,
because they are Cubical, those had but four, for they had but two opposite
sides for the six which they ought to have, and they were conically shaped.
They made use of them for Divination, as well as Playing; and they concluded on
a good or evil Augury, according to what came up. As they usually threw four of
them at a time, the best Chance was when four different Sides came up, for
these Squares they called by the Name of some Animals, as the Dog, Vulture,
Basilisk, etc. or of some Deity, as Venus, Hercules, etc. Some Authors have
been of Opinion, that they were marked with the Forms of Animals, or the Images
of those Gods, and not with Numbers or Dots as our Dice are: But if that be
true, those Figures or Images must have been applied each of them to signify
some particular Number; for it is certain, that if two of the opposite Sides
signified one, and the other six; and that also of the two other opposite ones,
one was accounted three, and the other four: This Game was very ancient, seeing
the Lovers of Penelope played at it in the Temple of Minerva, for it was a
Custom to play in the Temples; 'twas a Game used by old Men at Rome, as
Augustus himself says, but among the Grecians Childrens Play, as appears by the
Description of an excellent Picture of Policletus, by Apollodorus in Pliny, who
there makes Cupid play with Ganimede; and by Diogenes Laertius, who says, the
Ephesians laughed at Heraclitus, because he played with the Children.

TALASSUS, and TALASIO, and TALASSIUS;
a God whom the Romans made to preside over Marriages, as Hymenaeus was with
the Greeks: They invoked him at Weddings, that they might prove happy; and here
take Livy's Account of the Origin of this Superstition, when the Romans
ravished the Daughters of the Sabines, who came to Rome to see the Plays given
there by Romulus, there was one very beautiful Virgin amongst them, who was
designed for Talassius, a young Roman, that was mightily beloved by his
Fellow-Citizens, and to the End she might not be forced out of the Hands of
those who designed her for him, they bethought themselves to cry out, a
Talassio, a Talassio; she is for Talassius. In short, she was presented to him,
and because it proved to be a very happy Marriage, the Romans called upon him
at their Weddings, that so they might have as much Content in their Marriage as
he had in his.

TALENTUM;
a Talent; this Word with the Ancients one time signified Weights, another time
a Sum of Money, and sometimes a Piece of Money; these were several sorts
thereof; that which Authors speak oftenest of is the Attick ^alent, of which
there were two sorts, the greater and the lesser; the lesser was 60 Minae in
value, and the greater 80, that is the greater in English Money was worth about
233 l. 6 s. 8 d. or as some 133 l. and odd Money, and the other 165 l. as some
100 l. as others 120 l. and after some 180. When you find nothing added to the
Word Talentum, then the common Attick or lesser Talent is meant: The Hebrew
Talent was worth two of the Greeks; so that twenty Grecian Talents amounted
only to ten of the Hebrews; its the same thing in respect to the Drams, and
Greek Minae; for two Greek Drams go to make one Hebrew, and two Grecian
Minae the same.

TANTALUS,
King of Phrygia, and Jupiter's Son, who treating the Gods with a Supper, dressed
his own Son Pelops for them, in order to try whether they could perceive it or
no; there were none of them deceived but the Goddess Ceres, who eat some of the
Shoulder; the Gods conceived such a Horror at this Cruelty, that they condemned
Tantalus to be tormented with Hunger and Thirst in the midst of Waters, and
plenty of all sorts of Fruits, in Hell, where all of them vanished as soon as
ever he put forth his Hand to reach them. Lucian in his Dialogue of the Dead
makes him speak to Menippus in this manner:

Menippus. Tantalus, why do you weep, and what Torment do you endure in this
Lake where you dwell?


Tantalus. Menippus, I die with Thirst.


Men. Are you so lazy, that you cannot stoop to drink, or as much as take up
some Water in the Hollow of your Hand?


Tant. The Water disappears when I draw near it, and when I fancy I have taken
some in my Hand, it presently glides away.


Men. That is strange! But what occasion have you to drink, since you have now
no Body left you; for that which was capable of Hunger and Thirst was buried in
Lydia, and the Soul has no need of drinking and eating.


Tant. It Is my Punishment, Menippus, that my Soul should undergo the same
Change, as my Body.


Men. I believe it, since you say it, but tell me what is it you fear? Are you
afraid to die of Thirst, as if there were another Death after this?


Tant. No, but that is part of my Punishment, to be thirsty and yet have no
need to be so.


Men. Tantalus, you rave, and if you have any need to drink, it is of Hellebore,
to cure you of an Evil contrary to the Madness of feeling Thirst, and not Water.


Tant. I do not refuse to drink, provided any be given me.


Men. Tantalus, be satisfied, you are not the only one of the Dead that does
not drink; for all of them, who ever they be, having no Bodies, cannot drink;
but all of them are not so extremely thirsty as you are, so as not to be able
to quench it.


TARPEIA;
the Daughter of Tarpeius. As she was one Day upon the Walls of the Capitol,
and beheld the Sabines going by, she was much taken with the rich Bracelets,
which those People wore on their Left Arms; and this made her treat with
Tatius, King of the Sabines, about delivering the Capitol up to him, upon
Condition they gave her their Bracelets: Tarpeia gave up the Capitol, but the
Sabines crushed her to Death with the Weight of their Shields: Some Authors
impute the Surrendering of the said Place to Spurius Tarpeius, who was
Governor, and affirm, that Romulus caused him to be thrown down headlong over
that famous Work, which since bore his Name, and was called the Tarpeian Rock.

TARQUINIUS PRISCUS,
before was called Lucumon, who withal his Family came and settled at Rome;
and as he drew near the Janiculum, an Eagle fell upon him, and took away his
Cap, with which he played for some time in the Air, and then put it upon his
Head again: Tanaquilla his ^ife, who was a Tuscan by Descent and well skilled
in the Art of Augury, gave her Husband a favorable Interpretation of this
Prodigy, and assured him he should be King, which came to pass accordingly; for
he succeeded Ancus Martius: He defeated the Sabines and Tuscans, the last of
which submitted to him, and as a Mark of their first Homage made him a Present
of a Gold Crown, and a Scepter, at the Top of which there was an Eagle in
Relievo, an Ivory Throne, a Purple Vest wrought with Gold, and embrordered with
Figures of various Colors, and 12 Lictors, acknowledging him for their King,
and rightful Lord of the Twelve Divisions of the Tuscans: When he had consulted
the Augur, Acctus Naevius, in order to know of him whether what he thought of
might be put in Execution, and the Augur having assured him of the fulfilling
of it, ^ook a Razor, and cut a Stone with it in two: He died when he was Eighty
Years of Age by a Blow given him on the Head with an Ax, by the Heirs of Ancus
Martius.

TARQUINIUS LUCIUS;
Tarquinius surnamed Superbus, the Son of Tarquinius Priseus, and King of Rome.
As the Foundations of the Capitol were a digging up by his Order, they found a
Man's Head there newly cut off. This Accident was taken for a Prodigy that
prognosticated the City of Rome should one Day be the Mistress of the World;
another Prodigy also happened, which was a strange Woman who came to Tarquin,
and presented him with Nine Volumes, which she offered to sell him for a very
great Sum of Money; Tarquin refusing them at that extravagant Price, the Woman
burnt three of them in his Presence, and asked him if he would take the six
that remained at the same Price she had asked for the Nine: Tarquin looked upon
this Proposal to be ridiculous, but the Woman again burnt three of the six
Volumes, and then applying her self to the King, asked him still the same Price
for the three that were left, which she had done for the Nine. Tarquin having
consulted the Pontiffs thereupon, paid her the whole Sum. Those Books were
found to be full of Predictions in Verse, which were thought to have been
composed by Sibylla Cumaea, and were so much esteemed at Rome, that they
created two Magistrates, whose Business alone it was to keep these Books, and
to consult them as occasion required: They were called Duumviri: They had no
recourse to these Books, but when the Affairs of the Commonwealth were very
urgent, and that in order to find out a Way to expiate the Prodigies, and avert
public Calamities. Tarquin was expelled Rome, after he had reigned 25 Years,
and they set up a popular Government in the Year of the World 3545. of the
Julian Period 4205, 509 before Christ's Nativity; after the Building of Rome
244 Years, in the 67 Olympiad.

TARTARA;
by this Name Hell was called by the Ancients, and Homer names it (...).

TAUROPOLIUM,
or TAUROPOLION: Sacrifices of Bulls, which were offered to Cybele, the Mother
of the Gods, to render Thanks to the Goddess of the Earth, for her teaching Men
the Art to tame those Animals, and fit them for Labor: They also sacrificed
black Bulls to Neptune, to denote the Fury of the Sea. Strabo, L. 14. Of his
History of the World, says, There stood a Temple of Diana, in the Isle of
Icaria, named (...); and Livy, L. 4. Dec. 5. calls this Temple Tauropolum; and
the Sacrifices offered therein to Diana Tauropolia: In the mean time Dionysius
in his Book de situ orbis says, That Diana was not called Tauropola from the
People, but from the Multitude of the Bulls in that Country, and over whom the
said Goddess presided, which was the Occasion of giving her the Name of
Taurica. Diodorus Siculus, L. 3. Hist. relates that the Queen of the Amazons,
who trained up her Daughters to Hunting and Arms, instituted a Sacrifice called
(...). The Silver Medal of Aulus Posthumus represents this handsomely enough;
for you have Diana on one side with her Crescent, Bow and Quiver, and on the
other a Bull sacrificed.

TAURUS;
a Bull; which anciently consisted of the great Sacrifices appertaining to the
Pagan Religion: Its also the second Sign in the Zodiac, into which the Sun
enters on the 21st of April: It consists of 14 Stars: Those who have writ of
fabulous Astronomy, say, that this Sign is the Bull that carried Europa from
Phoenicia into Candia: Others will have it to be Io, whom Jupiter changed into
a Cow, and afterward placed in the Heavens among the Stars. There are diverse
Mountains of this Name, and among the rest, one in Asia, that is extraordinary
large and high, they gave it several Names, because it is composed of many other
Mountains; and the Greeks call it altogether by the Name of Ceraunius.

TAYGETE;
the Daughter of Atlas and Pleione, and one of the Pleiades, by whom Jupiter
had Lacedaemon, who was the Founder of the City Lacedaemon. There was a
Mountain of this Name in Laconia, near Sparta, consecrated to Castor and
Pollux, at the Foot of which they were born, as Homer says.

TEGEA;
a City of Arcadia; Statius says, that Pan and Mercury, who were much honored
here, from hence took the Name of Tegaeus.

TELAMONES;
the Romans called by this Name that which the Greeks named Atlas, which were
the Figures of Men supporting the Out-jettings of Cornishes in Architecture: An
Author who lived in these last Ages, thinks that the Word Tlemon, which in
Greek is (...), a Wretch that bears Misfortune with Patience, does not disagree
with those Statues which in Architecture sustain the Cornishes of Buildings.

TELCHINES,
the Sons of Minerva and Sol, or of Saturn and Aliope: There are some Authors
who say, they were very wicked Persons, who bewitched People with their Looks
only, and made it rain and hail when they pleased; wherefore Ovid says, Jupiter
turned them into Rocks because of their Wickedness: Some there are who confound
them with the Curetes and Corybantes. See Corybantes.

TELLUS,
the Earth, the Romans worshipped the Earth under the Name of Tellus and
Tellumo, of whom Tellus was the Female and the other the Male; and so there was
both a God and Goddess of them: St. Augustine recites Varro's Words hereupon;
Vna eadem terra habet geminam vim, and maseulinam, quod semina producat; and
femininam, quod recipiat atque nutriat, unde a vi feminina dicta est Tellus,
and a vi masculina Tellumo: The same Earth has a double Virtue, viz. a
Masculine for the Production of Seeds, and a Feminine for the receiving and
nourishing of them: From this last it came to be named Tellus, and from the
other Tellumo.

TEMPE;
a very pleasant and delightful Place in Thessaly watered by the River Peneus:
The Agreeableness of this Place has been the Occasion of giving the Name of
Tempe to all Houses of Pleasure.

TEMPLUM,
a Temple; there was no Nation so barbarous as not to acknowledge and worship
some Deity; but there have been many People who would not build any Temples to
the Gods whom they adored, for fear of confining them within too narrow Limits;
Thus the Persians who worshipped the Sun believed they should wrong his Power
to go about to enclose him within the Walls of a Temple, who had the whole
world for his Habitation: And therefore when they ravaged the Territories of
Greece, their Magi persuaded Xerxes to destroy all the Temples he met with, for
they seemed to confine the Divine Majesty to Bounds, who had the Heaven and the
Earth for his Habitation. Nec sequor, says Cicero, leg. secun. Magos Persarum,
quibus auctoribus Xerxes inflammasse templa Graeciae dicitur, quod parietibus
includerent Deos, quibus omnia deberent esse patentia and libera, quorumque hic
mundus omnis templum esset and domus. Zeno and and all the Stoics would have
no Temples built to the Gods, Diogenes says, this World served them for a
Temple; the Bithynians went up to Mountains when they were about worshipping of
Jupiter; the Sicyonians would never build a Temple to their Goddess Coronis,
nor the Athenians erect a Statue to Clemency, because they said, she ought to
dwell in the Hearts of Men, and not in Places not capable to contain her, as
Statius says; Nulla autem effigies, nulli commissa metallo
Forma Deae, mentes habitare ac pectora gaudet.


The Ancient Germans worshipped the Gods in Woods only, as did also a great
many other Nations.

There are some Authors who attribute the Original of Temples to Janus, others
to Faunus some to Jupiter King of Crete, and many to Merops or Eacus Jupiter's
Son: There are some who will have the Egyptians or Arcadians to have built
Temples to the Gods. Apollonius Tyaneus says, that Deucalion was the first who
founded Cities and erected Temples for the Gods: Vitruvius says, that the
Architect Pythius was the first who built a Temple at Priene; but Herodotus and
Strabo are for the Egyptians having been the People who first built Temples and
Altars to the Gods, and appointed Sacrifices. Livy informs us, that Romulus was
the first who built a Temple at Rome to Jupiter Feretrius.

Temples were built after a different Manner: There was one sort of Temples
called Antes or Parastates, because there were no Pillars or Pediments, but
only square Pilasters, called Antes by the Ancients: Vitruvius gives us a Model
thereof, which was a Temple of Fortune, the Particulars of which are not known.
The second kind of Temple was called Prostilus, because it had no Pillars but
in the Front, such was the Temple of Ceres Elusina begun by Ictinus and
finished by Philo: The History which is in Bas-relievo in the Gable End of the
Front, is recounted by Pausanias, who says, that near the Temple of Ceres
Elusina there were Two great Stones one on the Top of the other, from between
which the Priests went every Year to take a Writing, wherein was contained the
Ceremonies that were to be performed at their Sacrifices during the Year; and
because the Ancients were wont to represent the particular Methods they used in
offering Sacrifices in the Front of their Temples, and that the same in Respect
to the Sacrifices offered in the Temple could not be done, because they varied
every Year, it was thought fit to give this Account here, which shows one of
the main Particulars relating to these Ceremonies, which was to take a Writing
from between those Stones wherein the Method was prescribed that ought to be
observed at the Sacrifices offered during this Year. The third sort of Temple
they called Amphiprostylus, that is a double Prostylus having Columns behind as
well as before, such as the Temple of Concord was. The Fourth was called
Periptere, because it had Pillars round it, and of this kind was a Temple built
to Honor and Virtue by Mutius the Architect. The fifth sort of Temple they
named Pseudodipterus, that is, a false Dipterus; because it had not those Two
Rows of Pillars which the Dipterus has, and of this sort was the Temple of
Diana in the City of Magnesia built by Hermogenes Alabandinus the first and
most famous Architect among the Ancients, who was the Inventor of this kind of
Temple. The sixth they called Dipterus, because it had Two Rows of Pillars
round it, and of this sort was the Temple of Diana at Ephesus built by
Cresiphon and Metagenes: Pliny says, they went to the Top of the Temple by a
Pair of Stairs made of Vine-wood which was all of one Piece and made of one
Vine only. The seventh was a Temple called Hypaethrum, it was open at Top and
exposed to the Injuries of the Air, of which sort was the Temple of Jupiter
Olympius built at Athens by Cossutius, a Roman Architect: Pausanias says, the
Altar was raised, and there were several Steps to go up to it.

The Temples of the Gods ought to be so contrived, that provided nothing were
in the Way, the Image which was in the Temple should look toward the West,
that so those who were to offer Sacrifice, might turn toward the East and the
Image; and that in making their Prayers they might see all at once, both the
Temple and that part of the Heavens lying to the East, and that the Images
seemed to rise with the Sun, to look upon those who prayed unto them at the
offering of Sacrifices: The Temples of the Ancients were either round or
square, the round consisted of two sorts, viz. the round Peripters, and the
Monopters; the square were also twofold, one had no Pillars, or if any they
were enclosed within the Walls of the Porch; the others had Columns without
side. There were Four Temples, says Vitruvius, in Greece built of Marble and
enriched with such fine Ornaments that they rendered their Names famous who
built them. The Design of these Four Temples was so well contrived, that the
same was even admired in the Council of the Gods. The first of these was the
Temple of Diana begun by Ctesiphon a Native of Crete and his Son Metagenes, at
Ephesus of the Ionick Order, and which Demetrius Diana's Slave and Paemius the
Ephesian finished: The second was that which the same Poeonius and Daphnis the
Milesian built to Apollo in the City Miletus, and which was also built
according to the Ioniek Order. The third was the Temple of Ceres and Proserpina
at Eleusis, which Ictinus built according to the Dorick Order of a Prodigious
Bigness, without any Pillars on the Outside, that so there might be the more
room for Sacrifices, and to which Philo afterward on the Time that Demetrius
Phalereus commanded at Athens, made a Prostylus by setting Pillars before it,
to render the Building more Majestic, and also make more room for those who
were not yet admitted to the Mysteries appertaining to the Sacrifices of those
Goddesses. The Fourth was the Temple of Jupiter Olympius begun by Cossutius at
Athens, of the Corinthian Order, very large and magnificent: Pausanias says it
had Pillars within, that made a Peristylue; he also mentions a Ceremony
represented on the Front thereof, which was, that the Priests every Year on the
19th of February besmeared the Altar of Jupiter Olympius with Stuff made of
Asnes, brought from the Prytaneum, and the Water of the River of Alphaeus mixed
together.

The Romans built several Temples at Rome, and in other Parts of the Roman
Empire to their Gods, since Numa's Time; before, says Tertullian, the Romans
worshipped their Gods without any Temples and Images, and practiced their
Religion without Ceremonies: They had Three Temples at Rome in Honor of Janus;
the first was built by Romulus after he had made Peace with the Sabines,
wherein he put Janus his Statue with two Faces, intimating that the Romans and
Sabines were united into one People, and that the two Kings Romulus and Tatius
made but one Head to govern them. This Temple had but two Gates, which were
only open in time of War, and shut in time of Peace. Into this Temple the
Consuls, after the Declaring War, went accompanied with the Senate and
Soldiery, and opened the Gates thereof; here also they took Possession of their
Office, and for that Reason it was said they opened the Year. Janus his second
Temple was built by Cn. Duillius in the Pear Market, after the first Punick
War; but being half ruined by time, it was rebuilt by the Emperor Iiberius, as
Tacitus says, L. 2. Annal. The third under the Name of Janus Quadrifrons, or
with four Faces, was built in the Ox-Market, in a little Valley called the
Velabrum, between Mount Palatine and the Capitol, and the Occasion of it was:
The Romans, says Servius, at first represented Janus with two Faces, but after
the Taking of Faleria in Tuscany, having met with a Statue of Janus that had
four Faces, they were desirous to have one like it at Rome, and to honor him
the more, they built him a Temple with four Faces, each having 12 Niches in it,
with a great Gate, which denoted the four Seasons of the Year, and the 12
Months: Varro says there were Twelve Altars dedicated to Janus, each of which
represented a Month of the Year. But besides these Three Temples, there was
also a Chapel, known by the Name of Ae^des Jani Curiatii, dedicated to Janus
by that Horatius, who defeated the three Curiatii: There is also mention made
of Janus Septimianus, though it was believed to have been an open Building for
all comers and goers, built by Septimius Severus.

TEMPLUM SATURNI;
the Temple of Saturn. The first Temple built to Saturn was that erected by
Tatius, King of the Sabines, at the Capitol, after the Peace made between him
and Romulus; the second was consecrated by Tullus Hostilius, after he had
triumphed 3 times over the Sabines, and twice over the Albans: He dedicated it
and instituted the Saturnalia. The third was dedicated by the Consuls A.
Sempronius Atratinus, and M. Minutius: Though others say it was Tarquinius
Superbus that built it, and that according to the Advice of Valerius Publicola,
he made it the Place wherein the public Treasure was kept: It was in this
Temple Foreign Ambassadors were first received by the public Treasurers, who
set down their Names in the Registers of the Treasury, and defrayed their
Expenses: There it was they kept the Minutes of Marriage-Contracts, and all
Acts made by Parents; as also the Names of all the Citizens of Rome, writ upon
Ivory-books: Those also who had obtained their Freedom went thither to hang up
their Chains, and consecrate them, according to the Testimony of Martial: Has
(...) gemina compede dedicat catenas,
Saturn, tibi Zo^lus annulos prtores.


TEMPLUM CYBELES;
the Temple of Cybele, the Mother of the Gods. The Romans had no knowledge of
this Deity till toward the Year 548, in the Consulship of Cornelius Scipio,
surnamed Africanus and P. Licinus, when a Shower of Stones fell during the
second P^ni^k War. They had recourse to the Books of the Sibylls, and found
that in order to drive the Carthaginians out of Italy, they must bring the
Mother of the Gods from Pesinuntia to Rome; wherefore they presently dispatched
Ambassadors to King Attalus, who delivered the Goddess to them, that was
represented by a thick shapeless rough Stone. M. Valerius, one of the Deputies,
being come to Terracina with this Stone, sent Advice to the Senate of it, and
told them it was necessary, together with the Ladies, to send the richest Man
in all the City to receive her. The Senate pitched upon P. Cornelius Scipio
Nasica, who with the Roman Ladies went to receive her to the Port of Ostia, and
brought her to Rome, where they placed her in the Temple of Victory, upon Mount
Palatine: Next Year M. Livius and Claudius the Censors built a Temple on
purpose for her, and M. Junius Brutus dedicated the same 13 Years after.

TEMPLUM JOVIS;
Jupiter's Temple; the most famous was that of Jupiter Opt. Max. built at the
Capitol, who from the Capitol was surnamed Capitolinus, as may be seen by a
Medal of Aurelia Quirina, a Vestal Virgin, where Jupiter is represented sitting
in the middle of his Temple, that was of a Square Form; he holds his
Thunderbolt in one Hand and his Scepter in the other, with this Title, Jupiter
Optimus Maximus Capitolinus. This Temple was first devoted by Tarquinius
Priscus, and afterward built by Tarquinius Superbus. Upon the Frontispiece of
it were the Trophies of Arms and Triumphant Chariots represented. Historians
say Tarquinius Superbus expended in the Building of this Temple above 3000 l.
Sterling. Here the Statue of that God was set up of massy Gold 10 Foot high, with
several Vessels of Emeralds, and other precious Stones: The Sibylls Books were
kept in this Temple. They built him also other Temples under various Names, as
that of Jupiter Vindex, which I. Papyrius Cursor vowed to build him in a Fight
against the Samnites; and which Fabius built after the Defeat of that People:
That of V^-Jovis, or Jupiter Tonans, which Augustus caused to be built on Mons
Capitolinus, and that of Jupiter Vltor, or Vindex, which M. Agrippa dedicated
to him.

TEMPLUM JUNONIS;
the Temple of Juno, which Camilla dedicated upon Mount Aventine after the
taking of Veii.

TEMPLUM APOLLINIS;
Apollo's Temple; that doubtless was the chiefest and most Famous of all, which
was built by Augustus upon Mount Palatine, after his Victory over Antony and
Cleopatra, at Actium: In this Temple he erected a fine and spacious Portico for
a Greek and Latin Library; the Daughters of Danaus were placed according to
their Order in this Portico, and over against them the Statues of Egyptus his
Sons a Horseback; in the Court before the Temple were Four brazen Cows, which
were made by Myron; and by Propertius are called Armenta Myronis, The Flock of
Myron, which represented the Daughters of Proetus, King of Argos, who were
transformed into Cows for preferring themselves before Juno. The Gates of this
Temple were made of Ivory, upon one of which might be seen the Gauls, who fell
off the Capitol; and on the other the Fourteen Children of Niobe, the Daughter
of Tantalus, who died miserably for the Pride of their Mother, who had incurred
the Displeasure of Latona and Apollo. Upon the top of the Temple the Sun
appeared sitting in a Chariot of massy Gold, that gave so lively and bright a
Light, that Men could not bear the Splendour of it. Propertius gives a
Description of this Temple, L. 2. Eleg. 31. where he speaks to Cynthia: In this
Temple there was a Brass Candlestick of wonderful Workmanship: It resembled a
Tree and its Branches, to which there hung lighted Lamps instead of Fruit; to
these Branches the Poets fastened their Works, after they had got them approved
by the Public.

TEMPLUM DIANAE;
the Temple of Diana; the first Temple built her at Rome was upon Mount
Aventine, in the Reign of Servius Tullius, by whose Persuasion the Romans and
the Latins erected her a Temple at a common Charge, and there met every Year to
offer Sacrifice in the Name of all the People, and to terminate all their
Differences; and to the End they might have an eternal Monument of this
Confederacy, they graved the Conditions of this Alliance upon a Pillar of
Brass, with the Names of all the Cities comprised therein, and of the Deputies
that had signed them. This Temple was adorned with Cows-horns, the Reason
whereof Plutarch and Livy relate unto us. They say, that a certain Sabine,
whose Name was Autro Coratius, having an extraordinary beautiful Cow, an Augur
told him, if he offered the said Cow to Diana in her Temple upon Mount
Aventine, he should never want, and that his City should bring all Italy under
Subjection: Autro upon this Occasion coming to Rome, one of his Servants
acquainted King Servius with the Augur's Prediction, who consulting the Pontiff
Cornelius thereupon, Autro was ordered to go and wash himself in the Tiber,
before he sacrificed the Cow, and in the mean time King Servius offered the
same in Sacrifice, and affixed her Horns to the Walls of the Temple. Augustus
built her a Temple in Sicily after the Defeating of Sextus Pompeius, and the
Recovery of Sicily; on the Frontispiece of the said Temple he caused three Legs
to be graven, as a Symbol of Trinacria or Sicily, with this Inscription,
Imperator Caesar. Strabo, L. 14. of his Description of the World, says there
was a Temple of Diana named (...), in the Isle of Icaria: And Livy, L. 4. Dec.
5. calls the said Temple Tauropolium, and the Sacrifices offered there
Tauropolia; however, Dionysius in his Book de situ Orbis, says, that Diana was
not named Tauropola from the People, but from the Bulls, which were very
numerous in that Country.

TEMPLUM MINERVAE;
the Temple of Minerva: The Rhodians were the first People that built Temples
to Minerva for having taught them the Art to make Colossus's; but having not
prepared Fire for a Sacrifice they made to her, she in Spite withdrew to
Athens, where she was worshipped under the Name of (...), that is, a Virgin.
They built a very magnificent Temple for her, and got her Statue to be made by
Phidias, all of Gold and Ivory 39 Feet high: They graved upon her Buskins the
Fight between the Centaurs and Lapithae, round her Shield was represented the
Battle fought by the Amazons against the Athenians, and on the inside the
Battle of the Giants with the Gods: She had also several Temples and Chapels
at Rome, but the most famous was that which stood upon Mount Aventine,
mentioned by Ovid, L. 6. Fast.

TEMPLUM MERCURIJ,
the Temple of Mercury, the Greeks and the Romans had Mercury in great
Veneration, and the Germans worshipped him as the Sovereign of the Gods, as we
are informed by Tacitus, to whom they offered Humane Sacrifices; Deorum maximum
Mercurium colunt, cui humanis quoque hostiis litare fas habent. The Grecians
erected Statues to him, which they placed before their Houses, as the Romans
set them in the Cross-ways and great Roads: These Statues they called Hermae,
which had neither Arms nor Legs, and were only a great shapeless Lump of
Matter, except the Head.

TEMPLUM MARTIS;
the Temple of Mars; Augustus built a Temple to Mars upon Mons Capitolinus,
inscribed Marti Vltori, to Mars the Avenger; he had vowed to do it in the
Phillippick War, to revenge his Father's Death, acacording to Ovid. Templa
seres, and mevictore vocaberis Vltor:
Voverat, and suso laetus ab host redit.


Dio, L. 50. of his Roman History, says, that Augustus built to Mars the
Avenger a Temple on the Capitol, where their Ensigns and other Military
Cognizances were put up; and the Senate ordered that the Chariot wherein Casar
had triumphed should be put into the Temple, in Commemoration of his Victories.

TEMPLUM VENERIS;
the Temple of Venus; Caesar Augustus built a Temple to Venus Genetrix, which
stood in the public Place that Julius Caesar made in Rome.

TEMPLUM VESTAE,
the Temple of Vesta; the Romans built it round as supposing her to be the
Earth: Men were forbid to go into this Temple, and the Goddess was served by
the Vestal Virgins: The Palladium brought by Aeneas from Troy was deposited
here, and when the Temple was burnt, the Vestals saved the Palladium, by
conveying it through the Midst of the Via sacra, and carrying it into the
Emperor's Palace, the Figure of this was to be seen on the Reverse of the
Medals of Vespatian and Julia Pia, which was only a small Statue of Pallas
holding her Spear in one Hand and her Shield in the other.

TEMPLUM CERERIS ELUSINAE;
the Temple of Ceres Elusina of the Dorick Order, which was begun by Ictinus
and finished by Philo, who made it a Prostylus, having added Pillars in the
Front thereof.

TEMPLUM VIRTUTIS and HONORIS;
the Temple of Virtue and Honor built by the Architect Mutius by Marius his
Order, this Temple might have been reckoned of the Number of the most excellent
Buildings, had it been made of Marble, and that the Magnificence of the Matter
had been answerable to the Greatness of the Design. St. Augustine speaks of
this Temple, and lets us know that the first Part of it was dedicated to
Virtue, and the other to Honor, as a Foundation of good Morality, which
Vitrutius also intimates by something particularly related by him, which St.
Augustine does not mention, and that is, that the Temple had no Posticum or
Backdoor as most of the rest had; for that does intimate, that we must not
only pass through Virtue to attain to Honor, but that Honor is also obliged
to repass through Virtue, that is, to persevere therein, and acquire more of it.

TEMPLUM FORTUNAE EQUESTRIS,
was built by Scylla at Preneste, where the Figure of the Goddess was gilt: the
Pavement of the said Temple consisted of Mosaic or inlaid Work.

TEMPLUM HERCULIS,
the Temple of Hercules built near the Circus Magnus.

TEMPLUM CASTORIS and POLLUCIS,
the Temple of Castor and Tollux that food in the Circus Plaminius.

TEMPLUM SOLIS,
the Temple of the ^un, which the Phoenicians in their Language called
H^^iogabalus: He was worshipped at Rome by Antoninus from him surnamed
Heliogabalus, who (...) him a Temple on Mount Palatine, w^^^^er, as Lampridius
says, he would not only have removed the Sacrifices of the Romans but also of
the J^ws.

TEM^LUM LIBERTATIS; the Temple of (...), which Clodius built upon Mount
Aventine, (...) with Brass-pillars and beautified with several curious Statues
made by the best Statuaries.

TEMPLUM
FOE^^C^TATIS, the Temple of (...), to whom the Romans built a Temple and an
(...) and (...) the Statue of that Godde^s to be made by Arch^cilas surnamed
Plates or Statuary, that cost Lucullus Sixty great Sisterces.

TEMPLUM CONCORDIAE;
the Temple of Concord, dedicated by Tiberius according to the Order he
received from his Mother Livia, Augustus his Wife.

TEMPLUM PIETATIS,
the Temple of Piety dedicated by Attilius in the Place called Locus Romanus,
where that Woman who nourished her Father in Prison with the Milk of her
Breasts, lived.

TEMPLUM AESCULAPII,
the Temple of Aesculapius, the God of Physic; He was at first worshipped at
Epidaurus a City of Slavonia, where he had a magnificent Temple built him, and
a Statue made of Gold and Ivory by Trasimedes the Parian: They built him a
Temple at Rome in a little Island formed by the Tiber after his Image had been
brought thither from Epidaurus under the Form of a Serpent.

The Temples of the Tutelary Gods, says Vitruvius, as well as those of Jupiter,
Juno and Minerva, were situated in a high Place, that so from thence they
might see the Walls of the City, those of Mercury, Isis and Serapis were in the
Marketplace, those of Apollo and Bacchus near the Theater; that of Hercules in
the Circus, if there be no Place particularly set aside to perform their
Exercises in, nor any Amphitheater; that of Mars in the Field without the City,
as well as that of Venus which ought to be near the Gates: The Reason hereof
might be found in the Writings of the Tuscan Aruspices, who would have the
Temples of Venus, Vulcan and Mars to stand without the City, to the end that
they might deprive young People and the Mothers of Families of many
Opportunities to debauch themselves, by the Romoteness of Venus Temple, and
free Houses from the Danger of Fires by drawing out of the City (in offering
Sacrifices to Vulcan) all the evil (...), that Deity might cause, who presided
over Fire, and also by placing Mars his Temple without the Walis, prevent
Murders and Quariels among the Citizens, and secure them against the Attempts
of their Enemies. The Temple of Ceres should also be built without the City in
a remote Place, and whither they were not obliged to go but when they offered
Sacrifice, because that Place ought to be used with much Respect and great
Purity of Manners. In the mean time we do not find these Precepts of the Tuscan
A^^spices were observed at Rome, for the Temple of Mars the Avenger stood in
that called Augustus hi Place, and that of Venus in the Place of Julius Caesar:
Nay, there were several Temples of the mischievous ^eities within the City, as
those of Febris, Vulcan. Mala Fortu^^ and Idleness.

T^RMINALIA. the Feast of Landmarks, Numa set (...), to prevent Men from (...)
upon their Neighbors Land, and (...) end he instituted yearly Sacrifices upon
(...) Landmarks, that so Religion might be conjoined with justice, and that
every Year they might refresh their Memories in the Knowledge of the said
Landmarks, which were accounted as so many Gods, they having no other
Representations of the God Terminus. They sacrificed Wheat-cakes with the first
Fruits of the Field to him, but no Animal, for they would not have the Stones
blooded, because the Landmarks ought to be settled by a mutual Agreement, and
not by Force with the Effusion of Blood: However, this Appointment of Numa did
not continue always, as to the Point of unbloody Sacrifices, for we find by
Ovid and Horace that they sacrificed Swine and Lambs to the God Terminus,
Spargitur and caeso communis Terminus agno,
Nec queritur lactens cum sibi porca datur.
Ovid.

TERMINUS,
a God consisting of square Stones, to which the Ancients sometimes added a
Head, which they perfumed, and whereon they set Crowns, which they wrapped up
in Linen, and were made use of to distinguish the Bounds of Fields and every
Man's Estate: Terminus on the Revers of a Silver Medal of Augustus is
represented over a Thunderbolt to express the Device of that Emperor, Festina
lent: Terminus which should not be removed from his Place not illy denoting
Slowness, but a Thunderbolt on the Contrary Swiftness, with which it ought to
be joined. Numa Pompilius dedicated a Temple to him upon Mons Tarpeius, which
was open at Top. His Feasts which were celebrated in February were called
Terminalia. It was forbidden both by the Greek and Roman Laws to take away
these Landmarks, as also by the Law of Moses in Deuteronomy; Thou shall not
remove thy Neighbor's Landmark.

TERPSICORE,
one of the 9 Muses, to whom they attribute the Invention of Dancing and Balls.

TERRA,
the Earth, a Sublunary Globe looked upon by the Philosophers to be a simple,
cold and dry Element; modern Astrologers maintain that the Earth moves round
the Sun: Alexander sent Diogenettus and Beto to measure the Earth; the Romans
also sent Zenodorus, Theodotus and Policlitus upon the same Account by the
Authority of Julius Caesar. Pliny makes an Encomium upon the Earth, where he
says, that we have with Reason given it the Name of Mother, and that God has
bestowed it upon us for our Palace, as Heaven is his. The Pagans called it the
Mother of the Gods, because they meant those Gods who had been Men, and they
worshipped it under the Name of Rhea, Cybele, Ceres, Atergatis, Isis, Tellus,
Ops, Vesta and Proserpina: The Temple of Vesta at Rome was of a round Form, to
denote the Rotundity of the Earth: The Earth was also worshipped under the Name
of Maia, which signified a Nurse or Mother. The Germans, says Tacitus,
worshipped the Earth as our Common Mother, and called her Herthe, they believed
she walked up and down the World, and intermedled with the Affairs of Men; they
had also a Forest consecrated to her in one of the Isles of the Ocean, where
she had a covered Chariot, that none durst draw nigh to but her Sacrificer: He
took notice of the Time when she went into it, and very respectfully
accompanied her Chariot which was drawn by two Heifers: where ever she came her
Arrival was celebrated with Festivals and public Rejoicings: It was not then
lawful for them to wage War, every Man locked up his Arms, and Peace and Rest
feigned everywhere: Then the Sacrificer brought her back to her Temple,
wearied with the Conversation of Men, after which the Chariot-Covering and even
the Goddess her self, if we must believe them, plunged down into a Lake, where
she was washed by the Slaves, whom they presently drowned.

TESTAMENTUM,
a Testament or Will, was a solemn and authentic Act, whereby a Man at his
Death expressed his Will concerning the Disposal of his Estate: The Laws which
gave Men Power to make Wills, and to extend the same even beyond their Lives,
thought these Wills ought to be expressed with Care, and for that end several
Essential Solemnities accompanied them to make them valid. That of the Twelve
Tables, was the most ancient Law we hear mentioned among the Romans, and the
first that introduced the conferring of this Power upon the Father of the
Family, that is, upon him that was the Master and Possessor of his Privileges,
and not in the Power of another, from whence it follows that the Children of
the Family who were under the Authority of their Fathers, could not make a
Will; but herein Soldiers were excepted, though the Sons of a Family, the
Imperial Constitutions empowered them to dispose by Will the Goods obtained in
War, which were called Bona castrensia aut quasi castrensia, and over which the
Father had no Power. Slaves could not make a Will, because they had nothing of
their own which they could dispose of, nay, they could not do it with the
Consent of their Masters: All such as were condemned to die or to the Galleys,
could make no Will after their Condemnation, because they were Slaves by way of
Punishment, but even their Wills that preceded were not valid, for they, by
being condemned to undergo a Capital Punishment, ceased to be Citizens: It was
the same thing in respect to those who were condemned to perpetual Banishment
and to Strangers, for the one lost the Right of Citizens, and the other had
never got it of the Emperor, Those who were given for Hostages could make no
Will, at leastwise unless the same were made before their Captivity, Children
could not make a Will before they became of Age, that is, Boys must be full
Fourteen and Girls Twelve.

TETHYS,
the Daughter of Coelum and Vesta, and Saturn's Sister, she was Neptune's Wife,
and the Mother of all the Nymphs and Rivers according to Hesiod in his
Theognis. See under Thetis.

THALIA;
one of the Nine Muses whom the Poets made to be the Inventress of Geometry and
Agriculture.

THAMUS,
a Pilot whose Ship one Evening sailing near unto certain Islands in the Egean
Sea, they were suddenly becalmed, when a Voice was heard which came from the
Islands, and called Thamus; he suffered himself to be called twice without
answering, but answered the third time: Then the Voice commanded him, that when
he arrived at such a Place, to cry that the Great Pan was dead: All the Men in
the Ship were much frightened therewith; they consulted whether Thamus ought to
obey the Voice, but Thamus concluded that if when they were come to the Place
appointed they had Wind enough to pass by, he should say nothing, but if they
were there becalmed, he must pursue the Order he had received: They were
surprised with a Calm in the said Place, when presently he cried out aloud that
Great Pan was dead; he had scarce done speaking, when they heard Groans and
Complaints round about them, as if a great many People were surprised at and
afflicted with this News: All the People in the Ship were Witnesses of what
happened; the Noise whereof in a short time reached as far as Rome; and the
Emperor Tiberius being desirous to see Thamus himself, appointed a Meeting of
all those learned in Pagan Theology, that he might know of them who this Great
Pan was, and they concluded he was Mercury and Penelope's Son. Thus it is
Cleombrotus relates this History in a Dialogue where Plutarch treats of
Oracles; and he says, he had it of Epitherses his Grammar Master, who was in
Thamus his Ship when the Thing happened. We may say this Great Pan who died in
Tiberius his Reign was Christ, whose Death caused a general Grief and
Consternation among the Demons, who could not now as formerly exercise their
Tyranny over Men.

THAUMATRON,
a Greek Word signifying a Reward to be conferred on him who had showed some
wonderful Thing to the People: It was a Gift consisting of Denarii, which they
were to pay who were present to see it; and this was like unto the Prize called
Niceterium at the Olympic and Circensian Games, and to the Brabeia, a Prize
among the Ancients, given to those that acted on their Theaters, Dancers,
Pantomimes or Jumpers.

THEATRUM;
the Theater, the Romans intended it farther than the Sense we take it in; for
hereby we mean no more than a Stage, whereon Actors appear and act, whereas the
Ancients by it meant the whole Circumference of the Place within which the
Actors and Spectators were contained: Their ancient Theaters were only built of
Wood, and served but once, just as the Stages or Scaffoldings we now erect upon
some extraordinary Occasions. M. Valerius Messala and Cassius Longinus when
Censors took the Freedom so far as to begin a Stone Theater upon Mount
Palatine, near the Shewolf's Picture that suckled Romulus and Remus, but Scipio
Nasica did so vigorously oppose it, that their Design miscarried.

L. Mummius after he had destroyed Corinth, carried to Rome the Vessels
appertaining to a famous Theater there, and they were made use of at the Plays
acted at his Triumph, some will have him to have been the first Author of
Wooden Theaters at Rome. M. Scaurus, says Solinus, undertook to build a very
costly Theater, enriched with extraordinary Ornaments: It had 360 Pillars in
Three Rows one upon another, whereof the first was Marble, the second Crystal,
and the third was of gilt Pillars; there were 3000 Brass Statues between the
Pillars. Curio built a Kind of a suspended and folding Theater, which might be
divided into two at Pleasure. Pompey built a Stone Theater with so solid a
Foundation, that it seemed to have been built to last for ever. There was a
kind of an Aqueduct made here, to convey Water into all the Rows of the
Theater, either to cool the Place, or to quench the Thirst of the Spectators.
Julius Caesar erected one of Stone near the Capitol, and Marcellus built
another at the farther End of a Piece of Ground called Argiletum at the End of
the Tuscan-Street by the Foot of the Capitol in the second Division of the
City. It was consecrated by Augustus. There were no less than Four Theaters in
Campus Flaminius only; Trajan built a pompous and magnificent one, which was
ruined by Adrian.

The principal Parts of the Ancients Theaters were the Scene or Building which
separated between the Proscenium and Postscenium, or Place whither the Actors
withdrew, and where they had their Paintings, Tapistry-works, Curtains designed
for Machines and Music. The Scene took its original from the Simplicity of the
first Actors, who contented themselves with the Shade of Trees, to divert the
Spectators with and so the meanest at first consisted of no other than Trees
set together and well matched Greens: They made them sometimes of plain Linen
Cloth, or shapeless Boards, till Men's Luxury caused them to be adorned with the
best Paintings, and made use of the richest Hangings to set them out. C.
Pulcher was the first who adorned the Scene with Paintings, for till his Time
they rested satisfied with Diversity o^ Columns and Statues without any other
Ornament: Antony to appear extraordinary adorned the Scene with Silver: One
Petrelus gilt it, Catulus covered it with Ebony, and Nero to entertain
Tiridates gilt the whole Theater. As for the Curtains, Hangings, etc. the one
served only to distinguish and adorn the Scene, the other were for the
Convenience of the Spectators: Those of the Scene represented somewhat of the
Fable that was acted: They had a kind of Versatile Scene, which was a suspended
Triangle, and such as could easily turn about, and on whose Curtains some
things were painted, that had a relation either to the Subject of the Fable, or
Chorus, or Interludes. The Sails served instead of Coverings, and they made use
of the same for the Convenience of the Spectators only, wherewith they were
shaded from the Heat of the Sun. Catulus was the first Inventer of this
Convenience; for he caused the whole Theater and Amphitheather to be covered
with Sails, extended with Lines tied to the Masts of Ships, or pieces of Trees
fastened in the Walls. Lentulus Spinther made them of such fine Linen as was
never before known: Nero not only dyed them Purple, but also added Gold Stars
thereunto, in the midst whereof he was painted in a Chariot, all of it wrought
with Needle Work, with so much Art and Judgment, that he appeared like an
Apollo in a Serene Heaven, who moderating his Beams formed a Day in respect to
its Light, which was agreeable to a fine Night. The Machines were very
ingenious; with them they drew Heroes up to Heaven, made the Gods descend upon
Earth, and represented Hell, Palaces and Prisons: They used both Vocal and
Instrumental Music.

The Scene in the Theater of the Ancients generally comprehended all that
belonged to the Actors: It consisted of four Parts, viz. Proscenium, Scena,
Postscenium and Hyposcenium. The Proscenium was a raised Place where the Actors
played; and is that which we call the Theater or Stage; and this Proscenium
consisted of two Parts in the Grecian Theaters, the one was the Proscenium
purely so called where the Actors acted, the other was the Legeion or Thymele,
or Bomos, where the Chorus came to rehearse, and the Pantomimes acted their
Parts. It was called Bomos and Ara, because of its square Form that was like an
Altar: Scena was the Front of the Building, by which the Proscenium was
separated from the Postscenium, which was the Attiringplace behind the Stage,
whither the Actors withdrew and dressed themselves. The Hyposcenium, according to
Polliux, was before the Proscenium, and reached from the lowest part of the
Orchestra, to the Level of the Proscenium: This Author says it was adorned with
Pillars and Statues, which shows that the said Hyposcenium could be no where
but in the Greek Theaters, where the Proscenium was raised 12 Foot high, for
that of the Romans was too low to admit of Pillars: The Orchestra among the
Grecians made a part of the Scene; but in the Roman Theaters none of the Actors
went down to the Orchestra, which was taken up with Seats for the Senators. The
Doors of the Theaters called Hospitalia, were those by which they made strange
Actors enter, that is, those who were to appear to be of another Scene than the
common one, wherein they entered by a Door that was in the middle, or else it
was the Place whereby they entered into the Scene, as from another Place than
that where the principal Actors were. Pollux says, that one of these Doors
which was the Left, was the Door of a Prison: Lipsius will not allow that they
sat any where else but upon the gradual Seats of the Theater, and explaining
these Verses of Calphurnius, who mentions Chairs for Women to sit on,

Venimus ad seeds ubi pulla sordida vest
Inter foemineas spectabat turba cathedras,
He thinks they ought not to be taken for Chairs placed upon the Steps of the
Theater, but such as were set above them, on the top of the Theater, between
the Pillars of the Portico, which crowned the Theater; which he proves by
Suetonius, who says, that Augustus made a Law that forbad Women to sit upon the
raised Seats of the Theater, and were allowed to place themselves no were but
above among the common People. Propertius also intimates the same thing, when
he says in order to express the Prohibition of his Mistress, that he should not
look upon her, when she was at the Play, Colla cave inflectas ad summum obliqua
Theatrum.
But for all this Vitruvius informs us, that in Augustus his Time, and so on,
they laid some thing upon the Seats of the Theater, whether the same were
Pillows, or somewhat else to sit on.

THEBAE;
Thebes; there were several Cities of this Name, the Chief of which was that in
Boeotia, built by Cadmas, and famous for the Birth of Bacchus, and Death of
Oedipus; they will have it to have been thus named from the Syriac Theba, which
signifies an Ox, because this Animal conducted Cadmus thither: Varro assures
us, that Thebes is a Boeotic Word, signifying Hillocks, and that the same was
still used in his time among the Sabines, who were descended from a Greek
Colony: But Pausanias says, this Name was given it by a Daughter of Asopus,
whose Name was Thebae. In the mean time all these Opinions are ill grounded
since the Word Thebes is Phoenician, and signifies Dirt, and this Name was
given it, because it was really a dirty City. Dicoearchus speaks thus of it;
Thebes is very inconvenient in Winter, because of the Rivers wherewith it is
watered, the Winds that blow upon it, and Snow and Dirt wherewith it is filled.

THEMIS;
a Goddess of the Ancients, whom Clemens Alexandrinus does not distinguish much
from Ceres, in the fearful Account he gives of her obscene Mysteries: But
Diodorus Siculus in the Relation he gives us of the Theology of the Cretians,
represents her quite otherwise, for he makes her to be Sister to the Titans,
and Mistress of Oracles, Laws and Sacred Ceremonies: Themis vaticinandi artem,
sacrorum ritus, and leges Deum cultui servientes princeps informavit, and qua
ad bonam jurisdictionem ac pacis studia pertinent, edocuit. -- Quin and ipsum
Apollinem, quando responsum editurus est, (...), Themidis munus obire dicimus:
quod Themis nimi^^m inventrix oraculorum extiterit. This Portraiture seems to
represent unto us a Moral Deity, rather like Virtue, Justice and Wisdom than an
Historical Goddess; and hereof the Readers may be farther convinced, if they do
but take the Pains to examine Hesiod's Verses upon the same Themis; Postea
duxit Jupiter splendidam Themin, etc. Its no more than an Allegory of Justice,
which produced Laws, Rules, Rights, Peace, and at last fixed Men's Fortunes,
punishing their Vices, and rewarding their Virtues.

The Word Themis in all probability comes from the Hebrew Tham, perfectum and
integrum esse. It might also come from the famous Thummim, which was one of
those precious and mysterious Stones wore by the Mosaic High Priest, whose
Luster served the Israelites for Oracles when they consulted God, as Josephus
has explained the Scripture, and Tradition of the Synagogue. Ovid speaking of
the Time of Deucalion's Deloge, says, Themis then pronounced Oracles:
Fatidicamque Themin, quae tunc oracla tenebat.
Lucian speaking of the same Subject, says, Cum regna Themis Tripodasque
teneret.


The Poets will have the Earth to have been the first that delivered Oracles,
then Themis, and lastly Apollo: Ammianus Marcellinus gives us another Etymology
of the Word Themis, deducing it from the Greeck (...): The Marriage of Jupiter
and Themis according to this Author was nothing but the Divine Wisdom and
Prescience which lie in the same Bed, and reign upon the same Throne as he.
Plutarch in his Roman Questions says, that Carmenta was named Themis, and adds
she was surnamed Carmenta quasi carens mente, because the Divine Spirit of
Prophecy took place of Man's Spirit.

THERAPHIM,
an Idol; when Jacob with his Family withdrew in order to return to (...)
Father Isaic in Palestine, Rachel privately stole her Father Laban's Idols;
Rachel furata est Idola patris sui: The Hebrew Text has Theraphim instead of
Idola. Laban pursued Jacob, and complained of his being robbed of his Gods: Cur
furatus es Deos meos? Eth Elohai: Its not without Reason that the vulgar
Translation, and the Septuagint have taken Theraphim for Laban's Idols, which
Rachel hid in the Baggage and sat upon them. When Michal saved Divid when he
was pursued, she put the Theraphims in his room in the Bed, to amuse those who
looked for him: Hosea says, the Children of Israel were during a long Captivity
without Altar, Sacrifices, Ephod, and Theraphims. We find in Ezekiel the King
of Babylon consulted his Theraphims which were his Idols, that he might know of
them what was to come: And this made St. Augustine believe that Rachel stole
her Father Laban's Theraphims for no other end than to learn of them the Way
Jacob should take in his Flight.

THESEUS;
the Son of Egaeus, King of Athens, who was Cotemporary with Hercules, and
related to him, and so was the frequent Companion of his Adventures and great
Courage: He set upon one named Sciron, who took Delight to drown all Passengers
he met with in the Sea, he revenged the Cruelties of Procrustus, who miserably
quartered the Bodies of those that fell into his Hands: He vanquished the
Marathonian Bull, and Caledonian Boar; but his most illustrious Exploit was the
killing of the Minotaur, who was shut up in the Labyrinth of Crete: As he went
with Pirithous to Hell to fetch back Proserpina, he was there detained by
Pluto, and could not get out but by the Favor of Hercules: He retired into the
Island of Scyros, where he was slain by King Lycomedes.

THESMOPHORIA;
Feasts instituted in Honor of the Goddess Ceres, otherwise called Cerealta.
See Cerealia.

THETIS,
a Sea-Goddess, the Daughter of Chiron, or rather according to Homer, of Nereus
and Doris, who was beloved of Jupiter, but being informed by Prometheus, that
if he enjoyed her, he should get a Child that should dispossess him of the
Kingdom of Heaven, he gave over the Intreague: And this we are informed of by
Lucian, in a Dialogue between Prometheus and Jupiter:

Prometheus. If I tell you whither you are going, will you believe me?


Jupiter. Why not?


Prom. You go to lie with a Nereid.


Jup. Suppose it should be so?


Prom. You will get a Child who shall dethrone you, as you have done your
Father, at leastwise the Destinies threaten it; and therefore you will do well
not to go.


Jup. I Will believe you for once.


Jupiter gave Thetis to Pelaeus; and this Wedding was celebrated by the Golden
Apple, which Discord threw into the Hall, and fell as on purpose at the Feet of
Venus, Pallas and Juno; and about which was written, It is for the most
beautiful. The Word Tethys comes from (...), Nutrix, because it nourishes all
Sublunary Bodies, and even the Stars themselves with its Moisture. Some took
Tethys for the Earth, because the Ocean embraces it, as if she were his Wife:
Now if Tethys be taken for the Earth, the Name might be as well deduced as that
of the Titans from the Phoenicians or Hebrew Word It Is, Lutum: But yet it is much
more common to take Tethys for the Sea it self: There was another Thetis, to
whom Tethys was Grandmother, for Doris who married Nereus, and had Thetis by
her, was the Daughter of Oceanus and Tethys; and so Tethys was the Grandmother
of Thetis, who married Peleus, and bare Achilles to him.

THYESTES;
the Son of Pelops and Hippodamia, Father of Egistus, and Atreus his Brother,
who made him eat the Children he got on his Sister-in-Law. In Seneca's
Tragedies you have the Sun disappearing and obscured with Darkness, when Atreus
tore Thyestes his Brother's Children in pieces and made him eat them; and
Thyestes on his part, who had committed a Crime no otherwise than through a
Surprise and Ignorance, by having to do with his own Daughter, without knowing
her to be so, conceived such an Horror for the Fact, that he prayed Jupiter to
dart all his Thunderbolts at his Head. Jaculare flammas, lumen ereptum polo
Fulminibus exple.


THYMELE,
a certain noted Dancer, whom Domitian took Delight in: Some Songs made in
Honor of Bacchus were called Thymeliae from his Name: And all the Persons
belonging to the Stage, who danced and sung in the Interludes were also called
Thymelici, and the Place where they performed their Parts Thymele.

TIBERIUS,
a Roman Emperor, Son to the Empress Livia, who was adopted and made Partner in
the Empire and Tribunicial Power by Augustus: By his Medals we find he was fat
and tall and had also large Eyes: Suetonius observes somewhat very
extraordinary in Respect to this Prince's Eyes, that he could see as well in
the Dark when he awoke, as at Noonday, which shows there was a great deal of
Fire and Subtilty in his Nature: The same Author says, that besides this he had
a fixed Look, and extended his Neck so as he walked, and was oftentimes so
thoughtful, that 'twas a hard Matter to get a Word from him: Augustus taking
Notice of his Air and Deportment, took him to be arrogant, though he
endeavored to excuse him, saying, it was rather a Defect of Nature than of the
Mind; he had a small Chin that was a a little turned up which was a Sign of
Cruelty, and indeed he was cruel, for he put his Wife Julia to Death, and slew
Sempronius: Tiberius was smoothered with the Bed-cloaths at the Age of 78. He
was very famous as long as he continued a private Man, or commanded under
Augustus, having the Art to conceal his Vices and discover his Virtues.

TIBIA,
a Pipe, used among the Ancients in their Comedies: The Title of their ancient
Comedies ran thus, Egerunt L. Ambivius Turpio L. Attilius Praenestinus: Modos
fecit Flaccus tibiis, paribus dextris and sinistris: This Comedy was acted by
the Company of L. Ambivius Turpio and L. Attilius of Preneste: Flaccus invented
the Music, wherein he made use of equal Pipes on the Right and Left: There is
nothing about which the Ancients differed so much as about the Pipes which they
called Right and Left, equal and unequal: The Pipers always played upon two
Pipes at once in their Comedies: That which they touched with the Right Hand
was called the Right for that Reason, and that with the Left must consequently
be termed the Left. The first had but a few Holes and made the Base, the other
had more and a clearer and sharper Sound: Now when the Musicians played upon
these two Instruments of a different Sound, they said the Part was played
Tibiis imparibus, with unequal Pipes, or Tibiis dextris and sinistris, with
Right and Left ones; and when they played with two Pipes of the same Sound,
with two Rights or two Lefts, they said, that Part was played with Tibiis
paribus dextris, with equal Right-pipes, if they used the Base; or Tibiis
paribus sinistris, with equal Left-pipes, if they used the Treble. Donatus
says, if the Subject was grave and serious, they only made use of equal
Right-pipes which they also called Lydian Pipes, and made a Base; but that when
it was a merry Subject; they used no other than the Left-pipes, which were
named Tyrian Pipes or Sarranae, that performed the Treble, and consequently
were fitter for the Occasion: Lastly, when the Subject was an Intermixture of
Things merry and serious, they used the unequal Pipes, that is the Right and
the Left; which were called Phrygian Pipes.

TIRESIAS,
the Gods took him to be a Judge of their Differences, and Juno took his Sight
from him, but Jupiter in way of Recompense gave him the Gift of Prophecy, he
had been both a Man and a Woman, and said, the Woman's Pleasure was greater
than that of a Man's, he having tried both of them.

TISIPHONE,
one of the three Furies of Hell, and a Revenger of Murders, as her Name
imports.

TITAN,
the Son of Coelum and Vesta, and Saturn's Brother, whose Right it was to
succeed his Father, but he quitted it in Favor of Saturn upon Condition he
should put all his Male Children to Death; but Rhea his Mother privately
conveyed Jupiter away, which coming to be known by Titan, he made War upon
Saturn, but Jupiter set him free. See Gigantes.

TITANES,
the Titans were the Sons of Vranus and Titea, who gave them her Name, and who
her self was called the Earth: This Name comes from the Earth or Mud called Tit
by the Hebrews. See Gigantes.

TITHONUS,
the Son of Laomedon, whom Aurora stole away for his Beauty, and by whom she
had Memnon: Jupiter at Aurora's Request made him immortal: He forgot to ask of
him that he might not grow old, therefore when he became very aged, and took no
more Pleasure in worldly Things, he was transformed into a Grasshopper.

TITUS,
a Roman Emperor and Vespatian's Son; he proved quite contrary to other
Prince's who grew more wicked when they became Emperors, than they appeared
before to be in a private State; for he grew better, and by his wise Conduct
effaced all the evil Impressions that had been entertained of him so far that
he was styled The Delight of Mankind; being of a sweet Disposition, liberal and
benificent to every Body, which made him utter these excellent Words to his
Domestics, who put him in mind he should not promise more than he could
perform, No Man, said he, ought to return with Dissatisfaction from his Prince.

TITYUS,
the Son of Jupiter and Terra; this Giant was killed by Apollo, or as others
will have it, Thunderstruck, for endeavoring to enjoy Lacona, the Poets
feigned he was racked in Hell, and that a Vulture tore his Heart without
killing him.

TOGA,
It was a great Woollen Mantle, without any Sleeves, very large, and used both
by Men and Women; but in Process of time none wore them but lewd Women hence
that of Horace, In matrona, peccesve togata:
If you commit Sin with a Woman of Quality or a Courtizan: The Toga was of
diverse Colors, and admitted of various Ornaments: There was that called Toga
domestica, wore within Doors, Toga forensis, abroad, Toga militaris, used by
Soldiers, and tucked up after the Gabinian Fashion; and Toga picta or
triumphalis, wherewith the Victorious triumphed, with imbroidered Palms, that
which had no Ornaments was called Toga pura.

TRAGOEDIA,
a Tragedy; a Drammatick Poem which upon the Theater represents some signal
Action performed by Illustrious Persons, and has often a fatal End. Suidas
says, that Thespis was the first Author of Tragedy, who began by making his
Actors ride in a Chariot, painting their Faces with Wine-lees in order to
disguise them, for Masks were not yet invented: Horace de art Poetica gives us
all these Particulars,

Ignotum Tragicae genus invenisse Camoenae
Dicitur, and plaustris vexisse poemata Thespis
Qui canerent, agerentque peruncti fecibus ora.
Eschylus was the first who invented Masks and Habits to disguise the Actors,
and in short, 'twas he that advanced the magnificent and noble Character of
Tragedy to the highest Pitch.

Post hanc personae pallaeque repertor honestae
Aeschylus, and modicis instravit pulpita tignis,
Et docuit magnumque loqui, nitique cotburno.
Diogenes Laertius in Plato's Life, and Aristotle in his Ars Poetica say, that
at first there was but one Person in a Tragedy, who alone made the Chorus;
Thespis added a Comedian thereto, in order to give the Chorus Leisure to take
Breath: Eschylus added a second, and Sophocles a third, and so Tragedy came to
its Perfection; he that won the Prize in a Tragedy received a He-goat which he
was to sacrifice to Bacchus, from whence came the Name of Tragedy (...),
Hircus, signifying a He goat.

TRAJANUS,
Trajan; a Spaniard by Birth, and the first Emperor of a Stranger that mounted
the Throne of Rome: His Head was like a Mallet, broad at Top and with very
considerable Eminences before and behind, his Forehead broad, and Neck thick,
which was an infallible Sign of a prudent, vigorous Man and one that was steady
in his Designs rather than of a lively and brisk Wit; and so indeed he
performed great Things, having extended the Bounds of the Roman Empire much
beyond any of his Predecessors; Armenia and Mesopotamia being fallen under the
Yoke of the Roman Power: He had a Fit of an Apoplexy, which turned into a
Palsy in some Part of his Body, but he died of a Dropsy, aged 64, when he had
reigned full 20 Years, and most justly acquired the Title of an excellent
Prince.

TRIBUNI PLEBIS,
Tribunes of the People, being Magistrates taken from among the People and
chosen of the People themselves, to withstand whatever the Senate might attempt
against their Liberty and Sovereignty, insomuch that no other Power could do
any thing if they opposed it: The Occasion of creating them was this. The
People finding themselves oppressed by the great Ones, by the Instigation of
Sicinius withdrew to a Mountain Three Miles off from Rome, which afterward was
called Mons Sacer, and would not return to Rome but by the Persuasion of
Menenius Agrippa, and being allowed two Tribunes to protect them against the
Oppressions of the great Ones, and this happened in the Year 266, and the two
Tribunes were Sicinius Bellutus and L. Junius. The Law for creating them was
called Sacred, and the same declared the Tribunes to be sacred and inviolable
Persons, who must not be injured upon Pain of Death, and the Mountain whither
the People had retired was called Mons Sacer, because of the Oath which the
Deputies of the Senate made to the People for allowing this Magistrate to them:
These two Tribunes took in three more, and their Number increased to ten.

They had a Right to withstand the Deliberations of the Senate, and the Orders
of the very Consuls; there being nothing to be concluded on without their
Consent, which they expressed by putting a T under the Order, and if the same did
not please them, they hindered it to be put in Execution by subscribing the Word
Veto without giving any Reason for it: They wore a Purple Robe, and they were
the only Persons whose Office did not cease upon the nominating of a Dictator:
They could banish or imprison such as they thought criminal: They summoned a
Consul and a Dictator to be tried before the People, when they were out of
their Offices, and they could not tarry above one Day out of the City: The
Doors of their Houses were open Night and Day, that so the People might have
Recourse to them at all times; they had no Curule Chair, nor a Seat at first in
the Senate; but their Seats were at the Door, where they examined the
Deliberations of that Body: They had no Lictors to walk before them, but only
one Usher: By the Atinian Law they were admitted into the Senate, and had a
Right to give their Advice there; but their Authority was much lessened by the
Cornelian Law, in point of publishing of Laws and haranging the People, and the
same also suppressed Appeals to the People; but afterward the Consuls Q.
Aurelius Cotta and L. Octavius in the Year of Rome 678 admitted them to the
Exercise of the highest Offices in the Republic, and allowed them the Honor
of having the Fasces carried before them, and the same was confirmed to them by
Pompey. The Office of Tribune became yet more considerable and illustrious
under the Emperors, who took the Quality of Tribunes upon themselves; Augustus
began it and held the Power of Tribune for 57 Years; A Quality, says Tacitus,
that was invented for preserving of the Sovereign Authority above the other
Magistrates, without taking that of King or Dictator upon them. Tiberius also
held this Office for Five Years, and so did all the succeeding Emperors to
Constantine the Great: It Is true, they annually created Tribunes of the People,
but this was only nominal, the Emperors carried all the Power from them. Vlpian
places the Tribunes among those who administered Justice at Rome, as they sat
upon little Benches in Subselliis.

TRIBUNUS MILITUM,
a Military Tribune, was an Officer who commanded in Chief over a Body of
Soldiers, being the Master de camp of a Roman Legion.

TRIBUNUS COHORTIUM PRAETORIANARUM;
the Tribune of the Praetorian Cohorts, much like our Captains of the Guard,
whose Business it was to guard the Emperor.

TRIBUNI CELERUM,
The Captains of the Guards.

TRIBUNI AERARII,
Tribunes of the Treasury; they were Officers taken from among the People, who
kept the Money designed for the Use of the War, in order to distribute the
same, as Occasion required, to the Quaesiors of the Army; They chose the
richest Persons they could into this Office, for 'twas an Employment where a
great deal of Money was to be managed.

TRIBUS,
a Tribe; a certain Number of the People of Rome, which were distributed into
several Divisions: Romulus divided his People into three Tribes or Regiments,
whose Collone^s were called Tribunes, but different both from the Tribunes of
the People and Military Tribunes: These three first Tribes were thus called;
viz. the first Ramnensium, from Romulus, Tatiensium, from Tatius, and Lucerum,
for which we can give no Reason: Livy confesses he was ignorant of it, Varro
says, they were so called from the Lucumones or Tuscans who assisted Romulus
against Tatius: Each Tribe was divided into ten Curiae or Parishes: Servius
Tullius, the sixth King of Rome, finding its Inhabitants much increased added
more Tribes to the rest, and assigned them several Parts of the City to live
in: He therefore divided all the Inhabitants of the City into Four Tribes, for
that reason called Tribus Vrbanae, to whom he gave particular Names according
to the Divisions they lived in, viz. Suburana, Palatina, Esquilina and Collina.
The first inhabited Mount Coelius and the Valleys round about to the Eastward;
the second almost all the old City, viz. the Mounts Palatine and Capitoline,
with that Part called Locus Romanus; the third the whole Mountain called
Esquiliae, and the fourth all the Quirinal and Viminal.

He divided the Inhabitants of the Country into Fifteen Tribes which by one
general Name were called Tribus Rusticae, of which this is the List, viz.
Romulia, Lemonia, Pupinia, Galeria, Pollia, Volsinia, Claudia, Aemilia,
Cornelia, Fabia, Horatia, Menenia, Papyria, Sergia, Veturia, whose Names were
either taken from the Places of their Abode, or from those who were the Authors
of them. Sigonius informs us, there were two more added, viz. Crustumina and
Veientina in the Year of Rome 258; and in 366 Four others were also added, viz.
Stellatina, Tormentina, Sabatina, Arniensis or Narniensis; neither did they end
with this Number, for in the Year 421 there were two new ones appointed, called
Maetia and Scaptia; in the Year 435 those called Vfentina and Falerina; in 454
Aniensis and Terentina, and lastly, in the Year 512 Velina and Quirina,
insomuch that there were 35 added at several Times and upon several Occasions
which continued so till the War called Bellum Sociale, when there were ten more
added in order to pacify them: But they were sometime afterward incorporated
into the old ones by the Censors, L. Martius Philippus and M. Perpenna.

Here follows the Reason of the Names given to the 35 Tribes, as taken out of
Gruchius and Vigenere: Suburana, which was the first Tribe of the City and took
in Mount Coelius and the adjacent Valleys, and was so named, according to
Varro, Quod sub terreo muro Carinarum esset. 2. Esquilina, which comprehended
the Esquiliae, from whence it took its Name. 3. Collina the Quirinal and
Viminal that were two little Hills. 4. Palatina that took in the Mounts
Palatine and Capitoline, with that called Locus Romanus. 5. Romulia or Romilia,
which was the first of the Country Tribes and contained all the ancient
Territory of Romulus, from whom it had its Name, or because it was near Rome.
6. Lemonia so called from the Village Lemonius by which they passed through the
Gate Capena along the great Road called Via Latina. 7. Pupinia, from the
Pupinian Territory beyond the Tiber in the Country of the Latins. 8. 9. 10.
Galeria, Pollia and Volsinia, the Original of these three Tribes is not known.
11. Claudia, from Appius Claudius, who retired to Rome from the Country of the
Sabines. 12. Aemilia, from one Aemilius from whom many illustrious Families
descended. Cornelia, from the Familly of the Cornelii. 14. Fabia from Fabius.
15. Horatia, from the Family of the Horatii. 16. Menenia, from Menenius. 17.
Papyria, from Papyrtus of whom Livy speaks in his first Decad. 18. Sergia, from
Sergius. 19. Veturia, from the Veturian Family. 20. Crustumina, from a City of
the Sabines called Crustuminum. 21. Veientina, took in part of the Territory of
the Vetentes in Tuscany. 22. Stellatina, from the Territory of Stellata in
Tuscany. 23. Tormentina, from the Territory of Tormentum. 24. Sabatina, from a
Lake of the same Name in Tuscany. Arniensis or Narniensis, from the River Arnus
that runs by Florence. 26. Pomptina, from a Territory so called three Leagues
from Terracina, Seven or Eight Miles from Rome on the Road to Naples. 27.
Popilia, whose Original is not known. 28. Maetia, from a Castle named Maetium.
29. Scaptia, from the City of Scaptia. 30. Vfentina or Oufentina, from the
River Oufens in the Country of the Privernates, between Terracina and the Sea.
31. Falerina, from the City Falerii belonging to the Falisci. 32. Aniensis from
the River Anio. 33. Terentina, from a Place called Terentum in Campus Martius.
34. Velina, from the Lake Velina in the Country of the Sabines. 35. Quirina
from Cures a City of the Sabines.

TRIPTOLEMUS,
the Son of Elusius, or Coelaeus King of Elusis, who, according to Pausanias,
was the first that brought the Invention of Tillage into Greece. Ceres took an
Affection to Triptolemus while he was yet but a Child, taking care in the
Daytime to feed him with Divine Milk, and by Night to hide him under the Fire,
which made him grow mightily: She also gave him a Chariot drawn by a Couple of
Dragons, that so he might go into all Parts of the Earth to settle the Art of
Agriculture: He was the first that instituted the Feast called Thesmophoria at
Athens in Honor of Ceres, by way of Acknowledgment for the Kindness she had
showed him.

TRIQUETRA,
Sicily, so called by the Romans, as the Grecians named it Trinacria; because
the Island is of a Triangular Form, whose three Promontories form three Points
or Capes.

TRISMEGISTUS.
See Mercurius.

TRITON,
the Son of Neptune and Amphitrite, or according to others, of Oceanus and
Tethys. The Poets made him to be the Trumpeter of Neptune, under the Form of a
Man down to his Navel, with Arms like a Dolphin's Tail, and his Fore-feet like
the Fore-feet of a Horse, and carrying a hollow Shell in his Hand which he put
in his Mouth; he was carried by gray Horses.

TRIUMPHALIS CURRUS.
See Triumphus.

As to the Chariots of the Gods, the Poets tell us, that that of Jupiter was
drawn by Horses and Eagles, of Neptune by Sea-horses; of Pluto by black ones;
of Mars by Horses; of the Sun by Horses vomiting Fire; of Bacchus by Lynxes and
Tigres; of Juno by Peacocks; of Thetis by Dolphins; of Venus by Swans; of Diana
by Deer; of Ceres by Dragons; of Cybele by Lions; of the Moon by Horses full of
Stars; of Aurora by Rose-coloured Horses, etc.

TRIUMPHATOR.
See Triumphus.

TRIUMPHUS,
a Triumph; 'twas doubtless the most magnificent Show the Romans had; there
were two sorts of it, the first which was the lesser, was simply called Ovatio,
whereas the greater was known only by that great and pompous Name of Triumph.
The Origin of these two Names is more intricate than the Knowledge thereof is
necessary; the Ovatio seems to be of Roman Original, if we regard Plutarch
herein, for the Name was given it because they only sacrificed white Sheep upon
this Occasion, whereas at the Triumph they offered white Oxen. The Etymology of
the greater Triumph is contained in its Name, which is Greek, and was given to
Bacchus, because he was the first that invented this way of rewarding Virtue by
these Festivals and public Magnificence: But there are more solid Reasons to
be given for the Differences between these two Triumphs; for the Ovation
consisted of very little Pomp: The Conqueror wore his usual Clothes, and walked
a Foot at the Head of his Troops, without any other Mark of his Success, than
the Acclamations of the People, some Myrtle-Crowns, and part of his Army to
march before him with Music playing, and they offered nothing but white Sheep
in Sacrifice to the Gods upon this Occasion: The Ovation was decreed to those
that had waged an ill-grounded War, or such as was not very honorable; and
those that fought against Pirates, Slaves or pitiful Enemies were rewarded
with this lesser Triumph, or the Ovatio; but the Triumph was allowed to those
who had performed Martial or Brave Actions: For when a Victory was won, the
Conqueror dispatched Couriers with Letters containing the Particulars of the
Fight, and the Success thereof: The Senate at first met in Bellona's Temple,
which stood without the City; Augustus afterward chose that of Mars for this
Occasion. The Senate being met, the General and Officers Letters were read, and
these Letters were wrapped up in Lawrel-Leaves; but when the Roman Army was
worsted, they made use of a Feather instead of a Laurel, to notify, that they
must be diligent. They presently sent to the Conqueror the Title of Imperator,
with Orders for his return, and to bring his victorious Troops back to Rome,
there to triumph. When he was come near Rome, the General and chief Officers
took an Oath without the City, that the Victory was true; after which they
appointed the Day of Triumph: The Senate went in a Body to meet the Conqueror
without the City-Gate, by which the Triumpher was to enter, and which was
called Porta Capena or Triumphalis: There after the Complements were over, the
Senate marched in order and accompanied the Conqueror to the Capitol: He was
^^ad in a Purple Robe full of Gold Stars, or embroidered Ciphers, which set
forth his glorious Actions: This Robe was called Toga picta, a painted Robe, or
Tunica palmata, and sometimes by the single Name of Trabea: His Shoes were a
kind of Buskins embroidered and beset with Pearls; upon his Head he wore a
Crown which at first was of Laurel but afterward a Golden one; in one Hand he
carried a Laurel branch, and in the other a Scepter or Truncheon, which was
made of Ivory, with an Eagle at top: Before he set out he made his Prayers in
these Words: Dii, nutu and Imperio quorum nata and aucta est res Romana, tandem
placati propitiatique servate. O ye Gods, under whose Protection and Conduct
the Republic of Rome had its Beginnings, and so great an Increase, be at
length pleased with it, and favorably protect it.

When this Prayer was over he went into a Triumphal Chariot, that was adorned
with Ivory and Gold Plates, and that they might continually intermix something
that was Warlike with a Ceremony that was purely Civil, they sprinkled Drops of
Blood upon the Gold of the Chariot, and even upon the Spectators; this Chariot
was usually drawn by two white Horses, but sometimes by extraordinary Animals,
as by Elephants, as Pompey's was when he triumphed over Africa; by Lions, as
Mark Antony's was; by Tigers, as Heliogabalus did: Aurelian made use of Deer,
Nero of Hermophrodite Mares, and Sesostris was drawn by the Kings whom he had
conquered: The Triumpher was alone in his Chariot, only he had his Children
before him, or at his Feet; for we read in Cicero, that Triumpher's Children
were mounted upon the Chariot-Horses; and Tiberius and Marcellus had the
Honor, one of them to ride upon the Left-Horse, and the other upon the Right,
that drew Augustus his Triumphant Chariot after the Battle of Actium. Pliny to
this Pomp of a Chariot adds a kind of a Deity called Fascinus, out of an
Opinion they had, that this God was very powerful against the Stings and
Perplexities of Envy. Most Authors say, that the public Executioner was behind
the Conqueror, to remind him from time to time that these Honors were
transitory, and would not secure him from the Severity of the Laws.

Those who went foremost of all at this Solemnity, were the Trumpeters, Fluters
and Hautboys, with Crowns on their Heads; then several Chariots, wherein were
Plans of the Cities which the Conqueror had taken, done in Relievo, and made of
several sorts of Things. Scipio's Triumph was adorned with a 137
Representations of Countries or Cities which he had reduced under the Power of
the Roman Empire; then came several Chariots laden with the Spoils of the
Enemy, their Horses, Arms, Riches, Tents, Machines, and generally all other
Warlike Pomp and Ensigns of Honor.

If they triumphed for a Naval Victory, they carried along the Masts of Ships,
Sail-yards, and the most considerable Things belonging to a Vessel: Lucullus
caused 110 of them to be carried in Pomp, and a Gold Statue of Mithridates six
Foot high, with a Shield, enriched with precious Stones. Pompey the Great at
his Triumph had Pharnaces his Statue that was made of Silver, another which he
had got made of himself, enriched with Pearl, 3 little Gold Idols, some Myrtle
ones, and 33 Crowns adorned with precious Stones: The Silver Coin taken from
the Enemy made part of the Solemnity, it was carried in Wagons, with a
Specification in writing, of the Sums contained therein. Scipio Africanus
brought 400000 Pound Weight of Silver Money from Carthage, and Gold Vessels to
the Weight of 200000 Pound. Paulus Aemilius took so great a Booty of Gold and
Silver in Macedonia, as was enough to defray the Charges of the Republic: All
these Wagons were followed by another, wherein was the Statue of Hercules
adorned with his Club and Lion's Skin: Next came the Kings, Princes and
Captains that had been vanquished, laden with Chains: It was not the least
illustrious part of Pompey's Triumph, to have Tigranes and Aristobulus to
attend it, who were powerful Kings in the East, the one of Armenia and the
other of Judea: The Captives were followed by Buffoons and Mimicks, who
insulted over them in their Misfortunes, with a thousand Buffooneries: Next to
them came the Officers of the victorious Troops, richly clad with Crowns on
their Heads: Lastly, The triumphant Chariot appeared, before which, as it
passed, they all along strewed Flowers, the Consort of Music played on in
Praise of the Triumpher, amidst the Acclamations of the People, who often
repeated these Words: Io triumpha, Io triumpha: The Senate came next after the
Chariot, the Senators being clad in white Robes, and were followed by those
Citizens who had been set at Liberty, or ransomed. Flaminius had a thousand
ransomed Persons to follow his Chariot, who had their Heads shaved, and on
which they wore a kind of a Bonner, to let People know that they were freed
from Slavery: The Sacrificers with their Officers closed up this numerous
Company, each of them being in his Ministerial Dress, with their Vessels, and
other Instruments appertaining to the Sacrifice, and bringing a white Ox along,
which was to be offered as the chief Victim. This whole Company of Conquerors
and Conquered proceeded in this Order through the Triumphal-Gate by the covered
Marketplace, and along the Via Sacra to the Capitol; where they offered the
Victims appointed for this End, and by a thousand Sacrifices gave Jupiter
Thanks for the good Success of the Republic.

In the mean time all the Temples of the City were open, and all the Altars
laden with Offerings and Incense; all the Streets were full of the People of
Rome and Strangers: They celebrated Games and Combats in the public Places,
and Rejoycings appeared everywhere; but what was most horrible and cruel
amidst so much Jollity, was the massacring of the Conquered, whom, when they
came to the End of the Marketplace, they carried back and lead into Prison,
where they were strangled; for 'twas a Point and Mystery of the Superstition of
these Great Men, not to dare to touch the Victim to be offered, before they had
taken a full Revenge on their Enemies. When the Victims were offered, the
Triumpher drew near unto the Altars, and prayed thus:

Most great and good Jupiter, and thou Queen Juno, with all the other Gods, who
guard this holy Place, I give you Thanks with all my Heart, that you have
vouchsafed to this very Day and Hour, to preserve and increase the Republic by
my means, I earnestly pray you to be always favorable unto it, and continually
to keep, aggrandize and protect it.

Gratias tibi, Jupiter optume, Maxume, tibique Junoni Reginae, and coeteris
hujus custodibus habitatoribusque Arcis Diis, lubens laetusque Ago; re Romana
in hanc diem and horam, per manus quod voluistis meas, servata been gestaque;
eandem and servate, ut facitis, fovete, protegite propitiati, supplex oro.

These Vows being put up aloud, the Conqueror made Jupiter a Present of a Crown
with the Spoils of the Enemy, especially those that were called opima spolia,
which the General himself had taken with his own Hand from the Enemy: There
were but Three, among so great a Number of Roman Conquerors, who took these
Spoils called opima spolia, and presented them to Jupiter Feretrius: The First
was Romulus who conquered Acron, King of the Ceninensians; the Second, Cossus,
that slew King Tolomnius; and Marcellus was the Third, after the Victory he won
from Viridomarus: When all these holy Duties were performed to the several
Deities, the Triumpher treated the People, as most Authors bear Witness, in the
Capitol under the Portico's, and sometimes in Hercules's his Temple. Alexander
ab Alexandro says, Caesar made a public Feast, wherein 22000 Tables were
spread and furnished with all imaginable Plenty, and all in good Order. The
Triumpher was allowed to wear his Triumphal Crowns and Robes in the public
Assemblies; they also erected Triumphal Arches, Statues, and all other
Monuments for him, whereby the Memory of his Victories and Triumph might be
perpetuated.

TROCHUS;
it was properly a Circle of Five or Six Feet in Diameter, adorned every where
on the Inside with Iron Rings; the Children rolled it along with an Iron Rod
that had a Wooden Handle to it: The Grecians called this Rod (...), and the
Romans Radius: There was Strength and Skill required to roll this Circle well,
and the Rings by the Noise they made gave the People Notice to give way and
retire.

TROPHONIUS,
had a Cave in Lebadia a Country of Boeotia, where he delivered Oracles; but he
died there of Hunger; an evil Genius possessed himself of this Cave, and there
also pronounced Oracles; he did so frighten those who came to consult him, by
horrible Apparitions, that they could never laugh after, whence came the
Proverb concerning mournful and melancholy Persons, that they had consulted the
Oracle of Trophonius. They showed a thousand apish Tricks as they entered into
his Cave, which they did, covered with a Linen Cloth, holding a Cake in one
Hand, as Lucian tells us in his Dialogue of the Dead.

TUBAL-CAIN,
the Son of Lamech, and one of Cain's Descendants, whom the Scripture makes to
be the Master and Father of Smiths, and all those that worked in Iron and
Steel: He was the Vulcan of the Pagans.

TULLUS HOSTILIUS,
Numa's Successor, and the third King of Rome, who made War upon the Albans,
which was ended by the Victory of the three Horatii over the three Curatii, he
died in the Fire that burnt his Palace, and was kindled by chance, or by his
Domestic Enemies. Some will have it, that he was killed with Thunder; the
Reason whereof Pliny says, was because Tullus had neglected some Ceremonies
instituted by Numa, and so for that Impiety was Thunderstruck by Numa.

TUNICA,
an under Garment formerly wore by the Ancients, both at Rome and the East: It
was put under the Yoga, and that worn by the Women was to be long and with
Sleeves; whereas the Men wore it before a little below the Knee, and behind as
low as the middle of the Leg; for to have it any longer was esteemed
effeminate, and shorter, looked like a Soldier.

TYCHE,
a Sea-Nymph, Daughter of Oceanus and Tethys: This was the Name of Fortune,
perhaps given it upon account of the Dangers and Hazards of the Seas, over
which she more particularly presides.

TYMPANA;
'twas a thin piece of Skin or Leather extended upon a Wooden or Iron Circle,
which was beat with the Hand. Some Authors say this Word comes from (...),
which in Greek signifies to strike: But Vossius in his Etymology of the Latin
Tongue, derives it from a Hebrew Word, that signifies a Drum, which is not ill
grounded, since the Invention of these Drums came from Syria, as Juvenal
observes,

Jam pridem Syrus in Tyberim defluxit Orontes,
Et linguam and mores and cum tibicine chordas
Obliquas, nec non gentilia tympana secum
Vexit.
They were much in use at the Dances and Feasts of Bacchus and Cybele, as
appears by these Verses of Carulius,

Cybeles Phrygiae ad nemori Deae,
Vbi cymbalum sonat, ubi tympana reboant.
Herodian speaking of Heliogabalus, says he often had a Frolic to make Persons
play upon Flutes, and beat Drums in his Presence, as if he were celebrating the
Bacchanalia.

TYPHON;
one of the Giants that fought against the Gods, and was buried alive under the
Mountains. Apollonius in his Argonauticon, says, that Typhon was defeated near
Mount Nyssa, and afterward thrown down Headlong into the Waters of the Lake
Serbonis, which is between Egypt and Palestine. Plutarch in the Life of Mark
Antony, tells us, the Egyptians said that the Vapors of the Lake Serbonis were
caused by the Breath of Typhon. Homer makes his Death to have happened in
Arimis, that is, according to Strabo, in Syria, which the Scriptures and
profane Authors call Aramea from Aram.

V.
U Is the 20th Letter in the Alphabet, and fifth Vowel: There is also a
Consonant V which is thus distinguished by Grammarians, V. V is often changed
into O, as in this Word volt put for vult. The V is also a Numeral Letter,
signifying five; and when it has a Tittle above it, five thousand.

VACUNA;
this Goddess was worshipped by Plough-men, and her Feast celebrated in Winter.

VADARI ALIQUEM;
it is a Law-Term, signifying to oblige a Person to give Security, that promises
he shall on a certain Day appear in Court: If he fails, his Surety has actionem
vadimonii deserti against him, i. e. an Action for leaving his Bail.

VATICANUS,
the Vatican, one of the small Hills of Rome, near the Tiber, adjoining to the
Janiculum, where the Pope's Palace is, it was thus called from the Responses
and Oracles, called in Latin Vaticinia, which the Romans received here,
according to Varro. There was also a Deity so named in the same Place, who was
believed to be the Author of the first Speech of Children, which was Va; from
whence comes the Word Vatican, and among the Latins Vagire, to cry like an
Infant.

VE-JOVIS,
a hurtful Deity, to whom the Romans erected Temples, and offered Sacrifices,
that he might do them no Mischief: He was pictured with a Bow and Arrow in his
Hand ready to let it fly.

VELABRUM;
was a Place full of Tradesmens Shops, and especially of Oil-men; it was
divided into two parts by the Fish-Market, and stood near to the Tuscan
Division.

VENILIA;
a Nymph, and the Mother of Faunus; she was also reputed to be Neptune's Wife,
otherwise called Salacia. Venilia, says Varro, is the Water that washes the
Shore, and Salacia, that which returns into the Bottom of the Sea.

VENTUS,
the Wind, is nothing else but a Flux of Air agitated by an unequal and violent
Motion; which is done, says Vitruvius, when the Heat working upon the Moisture,
by its Action produces a great Quantity of new Air, that violently drives on
the other: Those who were the Worshippers of the Wind in all likelihood
believed they worshipped the Air in the Agitation thereof; from whence it is
the Persians worshipped the Stars and Earth, Water, Fire and Winds. Herodotus
tells us, that the Grecians being in a Consternation, because of Xerxes his
formidable Army, that came to fall upon them, the Oracle of Delphos commanded
them to offer Sacrifice to the Winds, from whom they were to expect their
greatest Relief. Aeneas sacrificed to the Winds; Pecudem Zephyris felicibus
albam. Augustus erected a Temple for the Wind Circius of the Gauls, because
they were incommoded therewith, and had their Houses blowed down by it. The
Poets made Aeolus to be King of the Winds; and Servius says, they were Nine
Islands in the Sicilian Sea, of which Aeolus, according Varro, was King; from
whence they feigned he had the Winds under his Dominion, because he foretold
the Storms that should happen by observing the Vapors and Steams that arose
from those Islands, and especially from that called after Vulcan's Name: Vt
Varro dixit, Rex fuit infularum, ex quarum nebulis, and fumo Vulcaniae insulae,
praedicens ventura flabra ventorum, ab imperitis visus est ventos sua potestate
retinere. Pliny says, that Strongylus was one of those burnt and smoking
Islands; and that the Inhabitants from the Fumes thereof predicted what Winds
should follow three Days before; and that for this Reason they feigned Aeolus
was Master of the Winds: E cujus fumo, quinam flaturi sint venti in triduum
praedicere incolae traduntur: unde ventos Aeolo paruisse existimatum.
Nevertheless it is certain, the Worshipping of the Winds is ancienter than
Aeolus his Reign, whom they pretend to have lived in the Time of the Trojan
War. The Persians, who, according to Strabo and Herodotus, worshipped the
Winds, never heard of the King of these little Islands, and 'twas not to him
they addressed their Worship: As much may be said in respect to the Scythians, of
whom Lucian in his Toxaris, says, that they swore by the Wind and Sword, per
ventum and acinacem. When Solomon in his Proverbs, says, there were Men so mad
as to adore the Winds; he little thought of Aeolus in the Matter. All those
Eastern Idolaters worshipped the Winds before the Fable of Aeolus was invented:
And so we have Reason to believe, that as the Worshipping of the Winds as well
as that of other parts of Nature, passed from the East to the West, so the
Grecians, Sicilians, and Italians took occasion from the Nature of those
Islands, to make them to be the Kingdom of the Winds, because they often found
Whirl-winds, Vapors, Winds and Fire to proceed from thence.

Strabo relates unto us the Observations of Polybius upon the Isle of Lipara,
which is the greatest of Aeolus his Seven Islands, viz. that when the South
Wind blew, it was covered with so thick a Cloud, that those who were but a
little way off, could not see Sicily; but when the North Wind blew, the Island
sent forth purer Flames, and made a greater Noise and Concussion; and this gave
occasion to say, that the King of these Islands was King of the Winds. Hesiod
openly declares for the Doctrine of Physiology, when he gives us the Genealogy
of the Winds, and makes them to be the Children of Astraeus and Aurora; for
this is plainly to make those Winds to proceed from the Stars and Aurora, or
the Horizon, or rather from the Stars and Vapors that are always in the
Horizon in a very great quantity, in order to form Aurora and the Winds
therein. We know it is the Opinion of Naturalists and Astrologers that the Stars
have a great Influence in the Generation of the Winds: He says a little
farther, that except those three Winds that are useful to Mankind, all the rest
were the Children of Typhon, the famous Giant, whom victorious Jupiter
Thunderstruck, and buried under the Mountains, through which he groaned, sighed
and vomited up Flames, Winds and Tempests. This Poet therefore distinguishes
between two sorts of Winds, the one which are moderate and useful, the other
violent and dangerous; the first are the Children of the Stars and Aurora, and
the last those Winds which proceed from the Caverns of Mountains, or
Burning-Islands, from whence come Fires, Whirl-winds and Storms; and this gave
occasion to the Fiction, that they were Giants who breathed out these Winds
from those Mountains where they continually burned.

Pausanias says, there was no Deity at Megalopolis in Greece, more honored
than the Wind Boreas, for they had been powerfully assisted by him in the
Enterprise made upon them by the Lacedaemonians: They sacrificed a Horse with
Perfumes to the Winds, to the End that his Ashes might be dispersed abroad,
says Festus: Lacedaemonii in monte Taygeto equum Ventis immolant; ibidemque
adolent, ut eorum flatu cinis ejus per fines deferatur. And whereas Homer says,
that the Wind Boreas was transformed into a Horse, which covered very fine
Mares, that foaled twelve Colts, whose Lightness and Swiftness was so
wonderful, that they could run over the Blades of Corn without bending them,
and upon the Waves without sinking; there was no other reason for it, but that
People really believed, there were some Mares that conceived by the Wind.
Virgil tells that as a true Story concerning Zephyrus, which Homer relates of
Boreas for a Fable. Vossius also refers to the Winds the Fight of the Titans
with Jupiter, which he pretends to be no more than the War of the Winds in the
Air, for which he cites Hesiod, who places Gyges, Briareus and Cottus in the
Number of the Winds, who were also Titans.

The Winds according to some Men's Opinion, are no more than Four in Number,
viz. Solanus, which blows from the South-East; Auster from the South; Favonius
from the South-West; and Septentrio from the North. But those who have been
more curious Enquirers into the Nature of Winds, have made them to be Eight,
and especially Andronicus Cyrrbestes, who for this End built a Marble Tower at
Athens, of an Octogone Figure, which on every side had the Picture of one of
the Winds, over against that Quarter from which they were wont to blow; and at
the Top of the Tower which ended pyramidically, he placed a Brass Triton with a
Rod in his Hand; and the Machine was so contrived, that the Triton turning
about, and always being opposite to the Wind that blew, with its Rod showed in
what Corner it then was. The other Four Winds are Eurus, between Solanus and
Auster to the Winter-East; Africus between Auster and Favonius to the
Winter-West; Caurus or Corus between Favonius and Septentrio; and Aquilo
between Septentrio and Solanus: We call them South-East, South-West, North-West
and North-East.

VENUS,
the Goddess of Beauty, that was always accompanied by the Graces. Cicero, L.
3. de Not. Deor. shows there were Four several Venus's: The first, the Daughter
of Coelum; the second she, that sprung from the Foam of the Sea and Cupid's
Mother; the third, was Jupiter and Dione's Daughter, who was married to Vulcan,
and on whom Mars begot Anteros; the fourth Tyr, called Astarte, who was married
to Adonis. The first and fourth were in all likelihood the same as the Venus of
Assyria, which was called Urania or Coelestis, as being the Daughter of Heaven,
whose Worship passed from Assyria or Babylon into Syria. Sanchuniathon makes
Astarte to be the Daughter of Coelum, and Saturn's Wife, and the Mother of
Seven Daughters called Titanides. Lucian speaks of Venus that was worshipped at
Biblos in Phoenicia, and of Adonis with whom she was in Love, and whose Death
she bewailed after he had been killed by a wild Boar. Herodotus makes the
Temple of Venus Urania to be in the City of Ascalon in Phoenicia, which was the
Ancientest of all the Temples of this Goddess; the Temples of Venus in Cyprus,
and at Cythera or Cerigo were much in request; but they were built by the
Phoenicians according to the Model of that at Ascalon. The Worship of Venus
passed to Arabia; from whence it is that Herodotus himself says, the Arabians
worshipped but two Deities, viz. Dionysius and Urania: The Persians, in
Imitation of the Assyrians, did also worship Venus Urania, and called her
Mitra. There were the Cities of Paphos, Amathus, and Urania in the Isle of
Cyprus, and all these were famous for the Worship of Venus; and as 'twas but a
short Passage from Phoenicia to Cyprus, the Worship of this Goddess was easily
carried thither; and as Venus was transported thither by Sea, they feigned she
was produced of the Foam of the Sea; so Horace calls her Marina Venus. Tacitus
speaking of the Temple of Venus at Paphos, uses the following Words, that
clearly show that the Forming of Venus of the Foam of the Sea, was nothing else
but that she was brought thither by Sea: Fama recentior tradit, a Cinyra
sacratum Templum, Deamque ipsam conceptam mari huc appulsam. This Historian, L.
2. Hist. speaks also of that Temple in this manner: The Ancients, says he, made
King Aerias to be the Founder of it, although some were of Opinion, it was the
Name of the Goddess; but modern Authors will have the Temple to have been built
by Cinyra, when Venus coming by Sea landed in that Country; he adds, that he
sent for the Prophet Thamyrus into Cilicia, and agreed that their Descendants
should divide the Priesthood between them: But those of Thamyrus his Race did
afterward resign it to the King's Posterity, as a Point of Prerogative yielded
to the Royal Family, insomuch that no other were consulted there but the
Successors of Cinyra. All sorts of Victims were allowed of, provided they were
of the Male kind, but the He-goat was accounted the best; they shed none of the
Blood upon the Altar; for they offered nothing there but Prayers and pure Fire,
which no Rain could put out, though the same were open to the Air: The Goddess
was represented in the Form of a Globe, ending pyramidically, without any other
resemblance, and the Reason is not known.

Pausanias acknowledges that Venus of Cythera came also from Phoenicia: He
elsewhere describes her bearing Arms: Hesychius says as much, and in another
place speaks of a Temple of Venus, into which none but the Sacristan ever
entered, (and the same Person was forbid to marry) and a Virgin that exercised
the Priesthood here for one Year only. This Author takes notice of several
Places in Greece, where Venus Urania was worshipped, and wherein there was
nothing practiced like those Effeminacies and Impurities, which were attributed
to the Common Venus; since we find, besides the Name of Urania or Coelestis,
that her Priestesses were Virgins, and that she her self was represented armed.
Pausanias in another place distinguishes between Venus Urania, whose Statue was
made of Gold or Ivory by Phidias, and Venus Popularis, (...), that was made of
Brass; he has not forgot that place in Arcadia, where there were three Statues
set up for Venus, one for Coelestis, the other for Popularis, and the third
without any Surname, which distinguished it from the rest. Xenophon makes a
Distinction between Venus Coelestis and Popularis, and attributes to the first
a Love of Knowledge and Virtue, as he does to the other the Love of Corporeal
Pleasures. This Name of Venus Coelestis comes either from her being represented
upon a Lion's Back, and ascending up to Heaven, or from her being the Daughter
of Heaven; from whence the Greeks called her Urania, or because the ancient and
true Urania was very different from that which they called the Common one, and
inspired Men with nothing but pure and chaste Love, which raised up the Heart
to Heaven. Apuleius also in his Apology bears the same Testimony, wherein he
shows, that that Venus Coelestis, which is distinguished from the Common Venus,
allows us to love no other Beauty than that which can revive the Idea and Love
of Heavenly Beauties in our Souls. Plutarch speaks of Venus at Rome, surnamed
Libitina, in whose Temple they sold all things belonging to Burials: He
likewise adds, that those of Delphos, had also their Venus Sepulchralis, where
they conjured up the Dead by Magic Spells. Calvus the Poet calls Venus a God,
Pollentemque Deum Venerem, as well as Virgil, in Aen. 2. Discedo, ac ducente
Deo flammam inter and hosts Expedior.
Some Critics who have not perhaps made this Observation, would correct this
place, and put Dea instead of Deo, contrary to the Authority of the
Manuscripts. Levinus speaking of this Deity, says; having worshipped Venus,
whether Female or Male, which is the same as the Moon. Aristophanes calls her
(...) in the Neuter Gender, and Hesychius (...), as Salmatius has corrected it.
Theophrastus, says he, assures us, that Aphroditos or Venus is an
Hermophrodite; and that her Statue with a Beard on like a Man was to be seen in
the Island of Cyprus, near Amathusa. Venus Victrix was represented sometimes
carrying Victory in her Right Hand, and a Scepter in her Left, and leaning her
Arm upon a great Shield; and another time with a Murion or Steel-piece in her
Hand instead of Victory, and the Apple which Paris adjudged to her as the
Reward of her Beauty, which she got from Pallas and Juno: The Poets make her
Chariot to be drawn by Swans and two flying Cupids, They represented her like a
beautiful Goddess sitting in a Chariot drawn by two Swans and as many Doves,
crowned with Myrtle, and having a burning Torch in her Bosom. Pausanias also
speaks of a Statue of Venus made of Ivory and Gold by Phidias, with one Foot
upon a Tortoise, and likewise another of Venus, riding upon a He-Goat, and made
by Scopas; the Venus of Praxiteles at Cnidos was made of white Marble, and half
opened her Lips as if she smiled. Venus the Mother of Love, and the Goddess of
Pleasures would by no means comply to make Vulcan her Husband, but as he could
not compass his Design in Heaven, and that he was weary with her Coiness,
Jupiter advised him to give her some Poppy in her Drink, which put her unto
such a Love-fit, that without thinking any more of the Persons that so entirely
loved her, she took up with what fell in her Way, and make that sorry Smith her
Husband, Cum primum cupido Venus est deducta marito,
Hoc bibit; ex illo tempore nupta fuit.
But she reassumed her disdainful Carriage again when her Love-fit was over,
and she always lived at Variance with her wretched Cripple. Augustus Caesar
dedicated the Temple of Venus Genetrix to Julius Caesar, whose Statue was made
by Archesilaus.

VERBENA
Vervein; an Herb used by the Pagans at their Sacrifices, and which they
thought to have something that was Divine in it: The Romans in the Beginning of
the Year made a Present of this Herb to their Friends.

VERGILIAE,
Constellations whose Appearance denote the Approach of the Spring: They were
the Daughters of Atlas, according to the Poets, and by the Greeks were called
Pleiades, but the Romans named them Vergiliae.

VERITAS,
Truth, of whom the Ancients made a Deity and called her the Daughter of Saturn
and Time, and the Mother of Virtue; they painted her like a handsome and modest
Woman clad very plain, but shining with Splendour and Majesty.

VERTICORDIA,
a Surname given to Venus, who diverted the Minds of Men from impure and
unlawful Love.

VERTUMNUS,
a God of Change and Gardens; he was also an Emblem of the Year: This God was
woshipped under a Thousand Forms, for which reason Horace says, Vertumnis natus
iniquis, as if there were as many different Vertumnus's, as there were
different Forms by which this Deity was represented: He was in Love with
Pomona; the Greeks called him Proteus.

VERUS,
a Roman Emperor that reigned with Marcus Aurelius, and who by his Beard
affected to appear like a Philosopher, though he had no Inclination nor
Disposition to Learning: He was much addicted to the Vices of Drunkenness,
Gaming and Women: So that what was most remarkable in his Physiogmony was, that
he resembled the Portraitures made of the Satyrs by the Ancients, who were said
to be very lecherous. Authors say, he had a ruby and Copper Face by which they
readily concluded he loved Wine, which he drunk to that Excess, that at his
Return from Syria, he appointed an Apartment in his Palace, which he called
the Emperor's Tavern: He died of an Apoplexy at the Age of 42.

VESPATIAN,
a Roman Emperor that succeeded Vitellius, the Lineaments of this Emperor's
face, as Suetonius has described them, are very well expressed on his Medals; for
he had the Mien of a costive Person, he was a valiant and good-natured Prince,
and was guilty of no other Vice but Covetousness, which he showed by the Taxes
he laid upon his Subjects: In the mean time he was very liberal to poor
Senators, learned Men and ruined Cities: He was much addicted to Raillery and
continued it to his dying Day, for being upon the Point of Expiring, he said to
those that were about him, I perceive I begin to become a God, and thereby
ridiculed the Custom of the Romans deifying their Emperors after their Decease.

VESPER,
the Evening-Star,

VESPERUGO;
the Planet Venus when it appears in the Evening.

VESTA,
a Heathen Goddess; Lactantius relates the Words of Ennius or Euhemerus, who
makes Vesta to be the Wife of Vranus, the Father of Saturn, the first that
reigned in the World, and after having spoken of the Contest between Titan the
eldest Son of Vranus and Saturn the younger about the Kingdom, he says, that
their Mother Vesta advised Saturn not to ^^it the Sovereignty: This Genealogy
is very like unto that of Sanchuniathon, saving that he calls the Earth the
Wife of Vranus, which we know has been confounded with Vesta. Vesta passed from
Phoenicia into Greece, where Diodorus Siculus says, they made her to be the
Daughter of Saturn and Rhea, and the first Inventress of Architecture.
Nevertheless it is not to be doubted, but Vesta was everywhere else rather
taken for a Goddess of Nature, under whose Name they worshipped the Earth and
Fire, than an historical Goddess. Ovid says, that Vesta being the Daughter of
Saturn and Rhea, as well as Juno and Ceres, these last Two were married, but
Vesta continued a Virgin and barren, as the Fire is pure and barren: The same
Poet adds, that the perpetual Fire was the only Representation they had of
Vesta, the true Representation of Fire being not to be given; that formerly it
was a Custom to keep a Fire at the Entry of their Houses which from thence
retained the Name of Vestibulum.

VESTALES,
Vestal Virgins, either so called from Vesta the Foundress of them, or because
they were consecrated to the Service of the Goddess Vesta. They hold, that this
Order and the Ceremonies they used came from Troy, Aeneas having carried that
sacred Fire into Italy, which represented Vesta, with the Image of Pallas and
the Household Gods. Ascanius the Son of Aeneas, and the other Kings his
Successors highly honored the Vestal Virgins, because Rhea Silvia who was a
King's Granddaughter took upon her the solemn Profession of a Vestal.

Livy will have Numa to have been the Institutor of this Order at Rome and that
he built a Temple there for the Goddess Vesta, with a House for the Virgins
consecrated to her Service: The Divinity of Vesta was taken for the sacred Fire
that was kept in her Temple or for the Earth which conceals a Fire within it is
Bowels; and for this Reason that Temple was round as the Earth is, and the
sacred Fire kindled within it, to represent that which is hid in its Bowels:
They had no Representation of Vesta there, because the Fire has none.

Nec tu aliud Vestam quam vivam intellige flammam........
Ignis inextinctus templo celatur in illo,
Effigiem nullam Vesta nec ignis habent.
Numa instituted no more than Four Vestals, called in History Gegamia or
Gegania, Berenia, Camilia or Gamilia, and Tarpeia. Servius Tullus added two
more, if we believe Plutarch, and this made the Number Six, which continued
during the whole Roman Empire, according to the Testimony of Plutarch and
Dionysius of Hallicarnassus; nevertheless, St. Ambrose makes them to be Seven
and Alexander Neapolitanus Twenty, but without any good Authority for it.

They were to be Virgins, and for that Reason they were received into the Order
at the Age of Six Years, and their Parents were then to be living, and not of a
Servile Condition. The Papian Law required that upon the Death of a Vestal they
should take Twenty Virgins, whom before the People they conducted to the
Pointiff's Presence, who of the Twenty took one by Lot, and ordering her to
kneel, said these Words over her: Sacerdotalem Vestalem, quae sacra faciat,
quae jussi and Sacerdotalem Vestalem facere pro populo Romano Quiritibus, uti
quod optima lege fiat, ita te Amata capio. This Ceremony was called Captio
Virginis, and Capere Vestalem; they afterward shaved their Heads and hung the
Hair to a certain Tree, which the Greeks and Romans called Lotos, the
Lote-tree, as Pliny says; Antiquior illa lotos quae capillata dicitur, quoniam
virginum Vestalium ad eam capillus defertur. They assigned them a particular
habit, that consisted of a Head-dress called Infula, which sat close to their
Heads, and from whence hung some Hair-laces called Vittae; they wore another
white Vest uppermost with a Purple Border to it, they had a Surplice or Rochet
of white Linen, called Suparum linteum, and over that a great Purple Mantle
with a long Train to it, which they tucked up when they sacrificed.

They were consecrated to the Service of this Goddess for 30 Years, after which
time they were free to go out and be married; but if otherwise, they continued
in the House and without any other Business, than to be assistant only in point
of Advise to the other Vestals: Their chief Functions were to sacrifice to
Vesta, to keep the sacred Fire in her Temple and not suffer it to go out; but
if through their Neglect that Misfortune happened, they were whipped by the
Pontifex maximus, and the Fire was kindled again by the Help of Burning-glasses
and Sunbeams and no otherwise: This Order was very rich as well upon the
Account of the Allowances which the Kings and Emperors, and especially
Augustus, made them for their Maintenance, as also other Gifts and Legacies
left them by Will.

When they went abroad, there was an Usher with a Bundle of Rods walked before
them; they had the Privilege to be carried in a Chariot through the City and
as far as the Capitol, and if they happened to meet with the Consuls or some
great Magistrate, they turned aside, or else were obliged to kiss the Bundle of
Rods that were carried before them. Wills and the most secret Acts were usually
committed to their Custody,, as Julius Caesar did, according to Suetonius:
Testamentum factum ab eo depositumque apud sex virgins Vestales; and the
Articles of the Treaty made between the Trium-virs were likewise put into the
Hands of these Virgins, as Dio says. They had a particular Place assigned them
at the Games and Shows made in Rome; they were privileged to be buried in the
City, and they swore by no other than the Goddess Vesta.

When a Vestal was convicted of Unchastity, the Pontiff ordered her to be
brought before him, prohibited her to exercise her Functions, to go among the
other Vestals, and to make her Slaves free, for they were to be examined in
order to prove the Crime: When the Crime was proved, she was condemned to be
buried alive in a Pit dug for that purpo^e without Porta Collina in a Place
called Campus Sceleratus: Execution Day being come, the Pontiff degraded and
stripped her of her Habit, which she kissed keeping, a Valerius Flaceus says,
Vltima virgin is tum flens dedit oscula vittis.
She was carried upon a Bier or in a Litter enclosed on all Sides, and crossing
the great Place, when they came to the Place of Execution, they took the
Criminal out of the Litter, and then the Pontiff prayed to the Gods with his
Head covered, and afterward withdrew; which done, they made her go down into
the Pit, wherein they had put a lighted Lamp, a little Water and Milk, and then
covered the Pit with Earth, and so buried her alive. As for the Person that
deflowred a Vestal Virgin, he was whipped to Death, as Cato tells us, Vir qui
eam incestavisset, verberibus necaretur.

VESUVIUS or VESEVUS,
a Mountain in Campania near Naples, of a very fruitful Soil, yet from whose
Top proceed Flames of Fire. Pliny the younger says, that Plinius secundus being
desirous to find out the Cause thereof was swallowed up and stiffled by the
Flames.

VIAE,
Streets and Roads: They reckoned there were 424 Streets in Rome in all the
Divitions of the City, whereof there were but 31 that were considerable, which
all began at a gilt Pillar, for that reason called Milliarium auream, that was
set up at the Entrance into the great Place below the Temple of Saturn, and
lead to as many Gates and to made the like Number of great Roads, that passed
through all Italy. These great Streets were called Viae regiae, militares and
publicae, of which the three most famous were Appia, the Road of Appius, which
was made and pa^ed by him, Flaminia that of Flaminius: made by a Consul of that
Name, and reached from Porta Flamentana near Campus Martius as far as Rimini
upon the Adriatic Sea, and Via Aemilia, Aemilius his Road.

VICTORIA,
Victory, a Deity adored by the Ancients, and made by Varro to be the Daughter
of Coelum and Terra, for whom the Romans built a Temple during their War with
the Samnites in the Consulship of L. Posthumous and M. Attilius Regulus, and
dedicated to her a Temple of Jupiter Optimus, after the Overthrow at Cannae,
according to Livy: L. Sylla instituted Games in Honor of her. The Athenians
also built her Statue without Wings that so she might not fly away from their
City, in the same manner as the Lacedaemonians represented Mars with Chains,
that so he might continue with them, according to Pausanias. She was usually
represented like a young Goddess winged, and standing upon a Globe, with a
Laurel Crown in one Hand and a Palm in the other: Domitian represented her with
a Horn of Plenty, to intimate that Victory brought Plenty of all Things with
it. On the Reverse of the Silver Medal of L. Hostilius, Victory is represented
with a Caduceus, which was Mercurie's Rod of Peace, in one Hand and a Trophy of
the Enemies Spoils in the other. Victory is represented upon the Reverse of a
Gold Medal of Augustus, with her Feet upon a Globe, and extended Wings as if
she flew, a Laurel Crown in her Right Hand and a Labarum or Emperor's Banner in
the Left: She is also represented sitting upon the Spoils of the Enemy, with a
Trophy set before her, and carrying a Crown with these Words Victoria Augusti.

VINDICTA,
the Rod or Switch wherewith the Praetor touched a Slave's Head when he was
affranchised.

VIRBIUS,
surnamed Hippolytus, the Son of Theseus, whom Aesculapius at Diana's Request
raised from the Dead, and was surnamed so, as being born twice.

VIRGA,
the Rod of Moses, which, according to the Rabins, God made between the two
Vespers of the Sabbath, that is, on the Evening of the sixth Day of the
Creation of the World, and on which the Holy, Great and Glorious Name of God.
called Tetragrammaton was inscribed after a wonderful Manner; and therefore
it is said in the Zoar upon Exodus, that the Miracles were graven and the most
holy Name of God inscribed upon it. Galatinus writ a great deal concerning this
Rod, and he relates some Things remarkable out of a Jewish Book entitled Gale
resaia, i. e. Revelans arcana. It Is to be observed, according to the Sentiments
of the Jews, that this Rod by reason of the particular and divine Virtue it had
to work Miracles, was never given to any other but Moses; that Josuah himself,
though his Disciple and most worthy Successor, never made use of it, but only
of a Lance and Javelin: It Is true, when other sacred Things as Aaron's Rod, the
Pot of Manna, and Vessel of sacred Incense were laid up in the Ark by Josuah,
we could never learn what became of Moses his Rod; and we do not find either in
the holy Scriptures, or Books of the Rabbis any mention made of it: And
Abarbinel inferrs from Moses his going up to the Mount Abarim to die there,
that he took Gods Rod in his Hand, and that it was buried with the Body of that
Prophet in the same Grave, God being unwilling that any other Man should make
use of it after him; for as there never was a Man in Israel like unto Moses,
either in respect to the Height of Prophecy or Signs and Wonders done by him,
so no other but himself made use of that Rod for working all those Miracles: As
Moses was the Conductor of the People of God into the promised Land, the Pagans
also ascribe unto Mercury the Charge of conducting Souls into Hell: They
likewise endue him with a Rod twisted round with Serpents, called Caduceus, in
Imitation of Moses his Rod that was changed into a Serpent, and was so famous
amongst them, that whatever miraculous and strange Thing was performed by him,
it was attributed to that Rod. Virgil describes the Virtue of that Rod in his
Aeneids.

Tum virgam capit, hac animas ille evocat orca
Pallentes, alias sub tristia tartara mittit,
Dat somnos, adimitque, and lumina morte resignat:
Illa fretus agit ventos, and turbida tranat
Nubila:
He therefore used his Rod as well when he fetched Souls from Hell as when he
carried them thither: By the Help of this Rod he made the one sleep, and awaked
the other, and made whom he would to die: He expelled the Winds, and passed
through the Clouds.

VIRGILIUS,
Virgil, the Prince of the Latin Poets, born at Andes near the City of Mantua,
and named Publius Maro. The Romans admired him for the Excellency of his Works,
and honored him as much as the Emperor himself; and his Modesty acquired him
the Name of Parthenius: He has left us his Bucolicks, Four-Books of Georgicks,
and Twelve of the Aeneids, wherein he has imitated the Iliads and Odysses of
Homer: The Emperor Augustus hindered this last Piece to be burnt, as Virgil had
ordered it by his Will.

VIRTUS,
Virtue, a Goddess among the Romans, whose Temple was joined to that of Honor,
so that you must first pass through the Temple of Honor to it.

VISCERATIONES,
a Gift consisting of the Entrails of Animals conferred upon the People at the
burying of great Men in Rome.

VITA,
Life; Homer seems to allude to the long Lives of Men in the first Ages of the
World, when he says, that Nestor was cotemporary with the Men of the Two
preceding Ages, and having survived them, did also then live with those of the
third Age, and he told them, that the former People with whom he had conversed
were a great deal stronger than those born afterward; so that they were not
afraid to encounter wild Beasts: Hesiod gives us a complete Description of the
Terrestrial Happiness of those People that lived in the first Age; but he has
not given an Account of the Duration of their Lives, which he makes to end in a
sweet Sleep, Moriebantur ceu somno obruti; but he clearly intimates that this
Life must have been very long, when he says, that those of the succeeding Age,
who came far short of the other, were a Hundred Years in a State of Infancy: We
cannot truly determine how many Years an Age consisted of; by what is said
concerning Nestor that he lived Three, some believe an Age was Thirty Years,
others with more Reason take it to be an Hundred. Ovid was of this Opinion,
when he made Nestor say, Vixi annos bis centum, nuneteria vivitur atas.


The same Poet in another place seigned that Sybilla Cumaea was 700 Years old,
when Aeneas came to consult her, and that she was to live 300 Years longer,

Nam jam mihi secula septem
Acta vides; superest, numeros ut pulveris aquem,
Tercentum messes, tercentum musta videre.
It was a Request she had made and obtained, that she should live as many Years
as she held Grains of Sand in her Hand. We do not know from whence Ovid had
this Fable, but he allows her above 1000 Years to live. In the Argonauticon
attributed to Orpheus we have an Account given of a People called Macrobii that
comes near unto that of our Age of Innocence and Terrestrial Paradise: The
Length of their Lives from which they derive their Names is no less than 1000
Years,

Omnique exparte beatos
Macrobios, facilem qui vitam in longa trabentes
Secula, millenos implent feliciter annos.
Horace attributes the shortening of Men's Lives only to Prometheus his
stealing Fire from Heaven, and the Vengeance of God that has poured an Infinity
of Evil upon us,

Post ignem atherea domo
Subductum, macies, and nova febrium
Terris incubuit cohors:
Semotique prius tarda necessitas
Lethi corripuit gradum.
Silius Italicus tells us of an ancient King of Spain called Arganthonius who
lived 300 Years: Herodotus speaks of the Aethiopians of Africa who were called
Macrobii, and says, they commonly lived 120 Years, and 'twas believed the
Length of their Lives proceeded from the Water they drank, which was lighter
than Wood it self: Lucian gives the Title of Macrobii, that is, of Long livers,
to one of his Dialogues: He does not only make an Enumeration of particular
Persons, but also of Nations famous for their being long-lived; he says, it was
reported that some People in the Country of Seres, that is China, lived 300
Years.

Diodorus Siculus relates the Account given by the Egyptians of their Gods, or
rather Kings, some of whom had reigned 300 Years, and others 112, but it is
believed their Years were lunar, and no more than a Month: Others are of
Opinion that they confounded their History with Astronomy, and attributed to
their Kings the Names of the Stars, and the Length of their Revolutions, and so
that they are rather Astronomical Computations which they have made, than the
Dynasties and historical Successions of their Kings. Eusebius relates a Passage
out of Josephus, which shows, that profane Authors have in their Writings
acknowledged and bore Testimony to the Truth of the Length of Men's Lives in the
first Ages: Josephus says, that the first Men were permitted to live thus so
extraordinarily long, not only upon the Account of their Piety, but out of a
Necessity that the Earth should be peopled in a short time, and Arts invented,
especially Astronomy, which required the Observations of several Ages to make
it perfect. These Two Reasons discover the Falsity of their Opinion, who
thought that the Years which made up the first Men's long Lives, consisted of no
more than One Month or at the most Three; but the most convincing Proof of any
is, that the Year of the Deluge is so well circumstanciated in the Book of
Genesis, that the 12 Months and 365 Days are there expressed.

Neither would Moses in Five or Six Chapters successively have given such
different Significations to this Term Year: St. Augustine has very vigorously
pushed on this Argument concerning the Year of the Deluge. Lactantius tells us,
that Varro was so confident that Men in ancient Days lived even to be a Tousand
Years old, that in order to facilitate the Understanding of a Truth that was so
universally received, he instanced in the lunar Years that consisted of one
Month only, in which time the Moon ran through the Twelve Signs of the the Zodiac.

VITELLIUS,
a Roman Emperor that succeeded Otho: Johannes Baptista Porta in his Treatise
of Physiognomy, observes, he had an Owl's Face: His thick short Neck, reddish
Complexion and a great Belly, as Suetonius describes him, threatened him with an
Apoplexy, if a violent Death had not shortened his Life as well as his
continual Debaucheries: Of the most sumptuous Feasts, where with he was
treated, that which his Brother Lucius made for him is taken Notice of, where
there were 2000 Fishes and 7000 Fowls served to the Table: He made one Feast
wherein he was not so profuse, but more dainty, and wherein one Course
consisted of the Livers of a sort of rare Fishes called Seari, Pheasants and
Peacocks Brains, the Tongues of Phoenicopteri, which are very rare Birds, and
the Rows of Lamprey's: All these Dainties were brought from the Carpatbian Sea,
Straights of Gibraltar and other remote Parts of the World. In short, his whole
Reign was but one continued Debauch and Profuseness, which made Vibius Crispus
say, who had the good Fortune to fall sick at that Time, and so to avoid those
Excesses, that had it no been for his Illness he must infallibly have burst.
Vitellius was slain by the Soldiers who advanced Vespasian to the Throne, and
after he had been dragged through the Streets of Rome with a Rope about his
Neck and his Body run through in several Parts, he was with his Brother and Son
thrown into the Tiber, having reigned but Eight Months.

VITRUM;
Glass. The Invention of Glass is very ancient, and it is long ago since they
have made very fine Things of it, nevertheless, the Art of making Glass for
Windows did not come in use till a long time after, and the same may be looked
upon as an Invention of latter Ages: Indeed Marcus Scaurus in Pompey's Time
made part of the Scene of that stately Theater, which was built at Rome for the
People's Diversion, of Glass; but in the mean time they had then no Glass
Windows to their Houses, and if any great Men and of the richest sort had a
mind to have (...) (...) in their Houses, and to which the Light might come,
they closed up the Passage with Transparent Stones such as Agates, Alabaster,
and Marble finely polished; but when they came afterward to know the Use of
Glass for that Purpose, they used it instead of these sorts of Stones.

ULYSSES;
Prince of Ithaca, and the Son of Laertes and Anticlea; he had Penelope to
Wife, whom he loved so entirely, that to the end he might not leave her and not
be obliged to go to the Trojan War, he pretended himself mad, and tied his
Plough the wrong way to Two Animals of a different Kind, with which he
ploughed; but Palamedes making a Show as if he went about to kill his Son, or
rather laying him in the Furrow, that so the Coulter of the Plough might kill
him, as 'twas drawn along, Ulysses that knew the Danger stopped, and in so doing
discovered he was not really what he pretended to be: He was a very wise and
cunning Prince, and performed a great many brave Actions both in point of
Valor and Prudence at the Siege of Troy: After the taking of the City, he
embarked in order to return home; but he wandered up and down a long time
through Neptune's Hatred to him, that he might be revenged on him for the Death
of his Son Polyphemus. Homer in the ninth Book of his Odysses makes him begin
the Story of his Voyages and Misfortunes, saying, that Jupiter at his leaving
of Troy, cast him upon the Country of the Cicones, which he pillaged; but those
People getting together, slew several of his Men. He went afterward to the
Country of the Lotophagi, who gave him a very kind Reception; but after some of
his People had eaten of the Herb called Lotos, which was the Food of the
Natives, they wholly lost the Remembrance of, and Love they had for their
Country, insomuch that they were, obliged to carry them away by Force, and tie
them fast till they went aboard. From thence he went to the Isle of Cyclops,
where Polyphemus in Contempt of Jupiter and other Gods, who were the Protectors
of Hospitality, devoured two of his Companions; but Ulysses was revenged on him
by putting out his only Eye with a Firebrand, after he had made him drunk: He
landed at the Isle of Aeolus, King of the Winds, who presented him with a
Zephyrus put up in an He-goat's Skin: His Companions thinking it to be some hid
Gold, opened the Skin while Ulysses was asleep, and the Wind drove him back to
the Island from whence he came. Aeolus would not receive him a second time, and
this made him sail away and land in the Country of the Lestrigons; where near
unto a Fountain they found the Daughters of King Antiphates, who were come
thither to draw Water; the Cruelty of that King and People having forced them
to flee away hastily. Lastly. After they had lost Eleven of their Ships they
arrived at an Island where Circe was Queen, who was the Daughter of the Sun,
and a cunning Sorceress: She presently changed his Companions, whom he had sent
to view the Country, into Swine: Mercury prevented him from running the same
Danger, and gave him the Herb called Moly, as a sure Preservative against
Circe's Enchantments, and told him at the same time, that when Circe struck him
with her Rod, he should draw his Sword and threaten to kill her, till such time
as she made an Offer of her Friendship and Bed unto him, and swear by the great
Oath of the Gods, to do him no manner of hurt. Ulysses punctually followed
Mercury's Advice, and Circe restored his Companions to him in their former
Shape: She foretold him his Descent into Hell, and ordered what Sacrifice he
should first offer to Pluto, Proserpina, and the Prophet Tiresias. Circe also
foretold him the Accidents he ought to avoid, as the Sirens, and the Rocks
Scylla and Carybdis, which he had much ado to escape, by being tied to the Mast
of his Ship, and stopping his Ears. Scylla swallowed six of his Companions: He
landed in Sicily, which with her Flocks was consecrated to the Sun; but while
he was asleep, his Companions killed some of those Oxen: This Sacrilege was
revenged with a dreadful Tempest, which drove Ulysses and his Company to the
Isle of Ogygia, where the Nymph Calipso received and entertained him seven
Years, and promised to make him immortal, if he would consent to tarry with
her. But Jupiter deputed Mercury to go and command Calypso to let Ulysses
depart, who having been detained only by force, went on board: Neptune rose a
great Storm, and dashed his Ship to pieces, but Ino the Goddess of the Sea
saved him from Shipwreck, gave him a Scarf which could keep him from being
drowned, and Minerva sent a favorable Wind which carried him to the Country of
the Phaeaces to Alcinous, who sent him home to Ithaca. When he was come to his
Palace in the Habit of a poor Traveller, he was known by his Dogs; but the
Great Men of Ithaca who eat Ulysses his Bread, and courted his Wife, having
conspired the Death of his Son Telemachus, used Ulysses very scornfully.
Penelope entertained him without knowing him, then commanded his Feet to be
washed, and that he should be put to Bed: Old Euryclea in washing his Feet,
found he was Ulysses by the Scar of a Wound which he had received in Hunting a
wild Boar, but he would not allow her to discover him: Penelope having promised
to marry that Person who could bend Ulysses his Bow, all the Great Men
endeavored to do it in vain, but Ulysses himself did it, they being unworthy
of it: He afterward made himself known to his Son, and the Shepherd Eumaeus,
and by Minerva's Help killed all his Wife's Suitors with Arrows, beginning with
Antinous.

UMBILICUS,
the Middle of a Thing: The Navel is the Middle of a Man; Ad umbilicum ducere
opus, in Horace, signifies to finish a Thing; for the Romans writing their
Works upon Parchment, or the Barks of Trees long-ways, they rolled them up when
all was writ, and closed them with little Studs or Bosses made of Horn or
Ivory, in the Form of a Navel, to keep them tight.

VOLUMEN;
the winding and folding of a Serpent; it was likewise a Volume, or Book; for
the ancient Romans before Paper was invented, wrote at first upon Table-Books
covered over with Wax; and when they had put the finishing Stroke to their
Works, they neatly laid them long-ways upon Parchments, or Barks of Trees, and
afterward rolled them up; from whence Evolvere librum signifies to read a
Book, because the Volume must be unrolled to read it.

VOLUPIA,
the Goddess of Pleasure, to whom the Romans built a Temple, and represented
her like a young handsome Woman, prettaly dressed, and treading upon Virtue.

VOTA,
Vows made by the Romans every Year after the Calends of January for the
Eternity of their Empire, and Health of the Emperor and Citizens; and this was
called Nuncupare vota. We find by the Emperors Moneys that there were Vows
called Quinquennalia, Decennalia, Vicennalia, Tricennalia, and Quadricennalia:
The Magistrates ordered these Vows to be graven upon Brass Plates and Marble,
which denoted the Number of Years they prayed for, as 5, 10, 20, 30, and 40
Years: We find these Words on Maxentius and Decentius's Money, Votis
Quinquennalibus, multis Decennalibus. By the Medals of Antoninus Pius and
Marcus Aurelius, we find Vows made for twenty Years, Vota suscepta Vicennalia;
which are thus inscribed: VOT. When these Vows were accomplished, they erected
Altars, kindled Fires, and offered Sacrifices, and feasted in the Streets and
public Places.

URANIA,
which signifies as much as Caelestial, was one of the Nine Muses; she presided
over Astronomy.

URNA,
an Urn, was a Vase made of different Matter, and made use of to draw out of it
the Names of those who were first to engage at the public Plays, or to throw
in the Notes, and give their Votes in the Assemblies held at Rome and Courts of
Judicature; as also to keep the Ashes of Men's Bodies after they had been
burned, according to ancient Custom: The Ancients placed these Urns either
under the Stones on which their Epitaphs were cut, or under particular
Monuments, or else they kept them in their Houses. Trajan would have his Ashes
laid up in a Golden Urn, and put upon that noble Pillar of his that is still
standing. That of King Demetrius was also made of Gold, as Plutarch says; and
the Great Marcellus, who took Syracuse, had a Silver Vrn. Spartian says, the
Ashes of the Emperor Severus were carried to Rome in a Golden Urn: But Dio, who
is of better Authority, says, it was only made of Porphyry; and Herodian
assures us, it was Alabaster. Glass-Urns are a little more common. Marcus Varro
would have his Ashes put up in an Earthen Vessel, with Myrtle, Olive and Poplar
Leaves, being that which Pliny calls the Pythagorean Fashion, because they were
the meanest and most ordinary of any: Earthen Urns that were used by the Vulgar
were commonly larger, for as there was less Care taken to reduce them entirely
to Ashes, the Bones which were half burnt took up also more room, or else they
many times served for the Ashes of the whole Family, at leastwise, for those of
Husband and Wife, as we are informed by the first Verse of this Antique
Inscription:

Vrna brevis geminum quamvis tenet ista Cadaver. As to the Shape of the U^^s,
the Earthen ones were made very near like to our common Earthen Pots, saving
that they were taller and straighter about the Neck: There were several of them
whose Foot was sharp at the End, some that had Handles and others none: They
have no Fashion nor base Relievo, saving that there are some that have the
Figures of Men or Animals upon them.

But for those made of Brass or other Metals, as they were designed for
Persons of Quality; there were few of them which had not some sort of Sculpture
and base Relievo round them, as we find by several Authors who have given us
the Forms of them. There were some Egyptian Urns made of baked Earth, full of
Hieroglyphics and Mummy, which is remarkable enough, since the Egyptians being
accustomed to embalm the Bodies whole, the Urns were not big enough to hold
them. Among the greater Number of those that were to be seen at Rome, some were
round, others square, some great, others small, some again all over plain, and
others done in base Relievo: Some were to be met with that had Epitaphs on
them, while others bare only the Names of the Persons to whom they belonged;
but there were no other Characters upon some besides the two Letters D. M. or
the Name of the Potter only that made them upon the Handle, or at the Bottom.

The Ancients had a Way to preserve their Urns, and to hinder the Ashes from
mixing with the Earth; in the first place they often placed the Urn on the Top
of those small Square Pillars on which their Epitaphs were inscribed, and which
upon the account of the Shape of them we call Cippi or Grave-stones. They also
put them up in Stone or Marble Coffins: The following Inscriptions indicate
both the said Customs, Te lapis obtestor, leviter super ossa quiesce:
Et nostro cineri ne gravis esse velu.
In the next place, Persons of Quality had their Burying-Vaults, where they
laid up the Ashes of their Ancestors; and there was one like this formerly
found at Nismes, with a rich inlaid Pavement, with Niches round about in the
Wall, in each of which gilded Glass Urns full of Ashes were set in order. The
Urn also was of use to cast the Lots of Praeneste, and this is noted by Horace,
Divina mota anus Vrna; The Prtesiess having stirred the enchanted Vrn. Horace
in that place speaks of the Divination used by the Urn and Lots which was
practiced thus: They put a great many Letters and whole Words into an Urn,
which they stirred together, and when those Letters were well mixed, they
turned them; and that which Change effected in the place of those Letters, made
the Divination: This is that which they called the Lots of Praeneste, because
they were found in that place: This sort of Divination in Cicero's Time was
little regarded, there being none but the common People that made any account
of it: It had been much in vogue among the Grecians.

USTRINA, or USTRINUM;
the Place at Rome where they burnt the Bodies of the Dead: It was commonly
Campus Martius, or some other place in the Suburbs, and sometimes in the City
for Persons of Quality. The common People were burnt upon Mount Esquiline. For
this Purpose they erected a Heap of Wood, which they called a Pile, filled on
the inside with dry and combustible Matter, and with Cypress and Pine branches
without. They were not sparing of the rarest Perfumes upon this Occasion, which
they threw lavishly upon the Pile. Plutarch tells us, that they burnt 210
Handfuls at the Funeral Obsequies of Sylla the Dictator: But at the Funerals of
meaner Citizens they contented themselves with Pitch, as appears by this
Antique Inscription:

D. M. XXIIII. sed X. Ante Natus When the Wood-pile was thus ordered and made
ready, the Relations and Children of the Deceased helped to lay the Body upon
the Pile, whence that Latin Expression in Horace in one of his Satyrs, Omnes
composui, that is, I have buried all my Relations; then the Person who closed
the Eyes of the Deceased at his Departure, opened them that he might look up to
Heaven as the Place of his abode; those whose Business it was to burn the
Bodies, and were called Vstarii, finished the rest of the Ceremony, by adorning
the Deceased with rich Purple Tapistry, and conferring on him the Ensigns of
his Dignity. Then the next of Kin taking a Torch in his Hand, and turning his
Head aside, to intimate he did that Office with Regret, he set the Pile on Fire
at the mournful Sound of Trumpets and Hautboys: Then the Relations and Friends
of the Deceased offered Sacrifices, cut the Throats of Animals, and served the
Manes with several Messes to appease them, praying to the Winds to blow through
the Pile to set it more on Fire and consume it, according to the Custom of the
Grecians. When the Flame decreased and that the Body seemed to have been burnt,
the Relations gave their last Farewell to the Deceased in these Words; Salve
aeternum and vale aeternum, nos eo ordine, quo Natura dederit, te sequemur.

USURA CENTESIMIS,
Usury; Interest at One per Cent. They paid Interest by the Month, and not by
the Year, as we do; and so this implies the Hundredth Part of the Sum every
Month, and consequently Twelve per Cent. per Ann. This sort of Usury was looked
upon as exorbitant; and therefore the Law of the Twelve Tables, confirmed long
after by the Tribunes, regulated Usury to One per Cent. per Ann. and this was
called Vnciarium foenus, nay, and the same was regulated one Time at one Half
less. Tacitus, L. 5. Ann. speaks of Usurers thus; For, says he, they had
publicly acted contrary to the Law which Caesar had enacted for regulating the
Interest of Money and Matters relating to the Estates that were possessed in
Italy; and the Advantage of particular Persons made the Public Good to be
neglected: Usury doubtless is one of the oldest Evils of the Republic, and the
most usual Cause of Seditions, and that is the Reason why so many Laws have
been made to restrain it, even in a Time when Men's Manners were not so corrupt;
for first it was forbid by the Laws of the Twelve Tables to lend Money at an
higher Interest than the Eighth Denarius, whereas before, all kinds of
Interests were allowed of: Afterward it was at the Desire of the Tribunes
reduced to Sixteen Denarii, and some time after forbidden altogether: The
People afterward made several Orders for the Prevention of the Cheats
practiced in this Respect, but notwithstanding any Regulations that they could
make, the Covetousness of Men always found out new Ways to elude them.

VULCANUS,
Vulcan, whom they commonly make to be the Son of Juno, of whom she conceived
without the Help of Jupiter her Husband, she threw him down from Heaven, and he
fell into the Isle of Lemnos, where he had broke his Neck, says Lucian, had not
the Inhabitants of the Country received him in their Arms as he tumbled through
the Air, and prevented him from running the Fate of Astianax; however, this
could not prevent his having his Leg broke, which made him always go lame. The
same Lucian says in his Dialogue of the Gods, where he introduces Jupiter and
Vulcan speaking, that after the latter had cleft the others Head with an Ax,
there came an Amazon forth, who was Pallas, armed with a Lance and Shield, and
he as his Reward for so happily delivering him desired he might have her to
Wife: Jupiter agreed to it, but he could not persuade her to marry him, because
she was resolved to live a Virgin all her Lifetime: So he married Venus who
proved false to his Bed, prostituting her self to God Mars, which being
suspected by Vulcan he watched an Opportunity to surprise them, for which end
he beset his Bed with invisible Nets and then went to his Forge: The Gallant
laying hold on the Opportunity of the Husband's Absence went to enjoy his
Mistress, but the Sun discovered them and informed Vulcan of it, who took them
both in the Fact, and wrapped them up in his Nets. Then he called all the Gods
to be Witnesses of his Disgrace: They made him to be the Smith of the Gods, and
gave him the Islands of Lesbos and Lipara for his forging Places, in the
Company of the Cyclops. The Poets tell us, that Vulcan had once a Contest with
Neptune and Minerva about the Excellency of their Arts; Neptune as his
Masterpiece made a Bull, Minerva a House, and Vulcan, a Man; when they came
before Momus whom they chose for Judge, he blamed Vulcan because he had not
made a Window in the Man's Heart, to see if his Words agreed with his Thoughts.

So much concerning the Fable of Vulcan, now we come to the History, and so
Vulcan is found to be the first in the Dynasties of the Egyptian Kings, who
were Gods, as they have been transmitted down to us by Syncellus: He is also
called the Father of the Gods in the proud Inscriptions of the Kings of Egypt,
Et Vulcanus Deorum pater. Herodotus speaks of a magnificent Temple of Vulcan's,
whose Porch on the North-side was built by Moeris King of Egypt, and Ramsinitus
erected that to the West: It Is said, it was King Menes who built that stately
and magnificent Temple of Vulcan's at Thebes, from whom the Priefts reckoned
360 Kings in Egypt; he speaks in another Place of a Colossus of Vulcan's which
was 75 Foot high, and stood before his Temple. Sanchuniathon does also place
Vulcan among the Phoenician Gods, and calls him Chrysor and gives him a far
greater Extent of Power than that attributed to Vulcan by the Greeks: Diodorus
Siculus also assures us, the Egyptian Priests reckoned Vulcan among the Kings
of Egypt, and said, he was the first of them all; lastly, they attributed the
Invention of Fire to him, for a Thunderbolt happening to fall upon a Tree and
setting it on Fire, he brought more Wood to it, and so preserved the Use of
Fire. They attributed the Lightning to Vulcan, which gave Men occasion to say,
he made Jupiter's Thunderbolts, so they did those fiery Irruptions in
Mountains which vomit out Flames, because they supposed that the Cyclops or
Smiths wrought there according to Vulcan's Directions; or lastly, they
attributed to him the Fire made use of for all Arts and especially for
Smithing; for Vulcan being the Tubal-cain of the Pagans, he presided over all
those Arts that concerned the Working of Metals.

The Poets made Vulcan to be the Son of Juno alone, however, Homer gives him
also Jupiter for his Father: Now Jupiter who is the Celestial Fire might very
well give Being to the Terrestrial, and Juno who is the Air, might also all
alone work that Agitation in the Clouds, that forms Thunder. Lastly, if Juno be
the Earth, it is also not to be doubted but that she alone forces out of her
Bosom, those Fires which some Mountains send forth, and which they call
Vulcanoes: Servius says something like this: In Lemnum insulam decidit
Vulcanus, a Junone propter deformitatem dejectus, quam aerem esse constat, ex
quo fulmina procreantur. Ideo autem Vulcanus de femore Junonis fingitur natus,
quod fulmina de imo aere nascuntur. One might in my Opinion, says Father
Thomassin, from hence draw a Proof that could give some Weight to the
Physiological Meaning of Fables, and show that Fable upon some Occasions has
been invented only for the vailing of natural Truths, and thereby giving them a
new Grace; wherefore after they had made Juno to be the Sister and only Wife of
Jupiter, and Queen of all the World, why should she have no other Son but
Vulcan only; or when Vulcan is made to be her Son, why should he have such and
such Functions and Qualifications? But the Thunderbolts being, as it were,
Productions of the Air, which is Juno, or of the Air which is Jupiter, and of
Juno that is the Earth, the Fable must have been accommodated to the Nature of
those Things; and the Reason why they should say, that Vulcan at his Birth was
thrown down from Heaven to the Earth, and made a Cripple by the Fall, was
because the Thunder never falls directly: Servius adds, that the Reason why the
Poets say, that Vulcan fell in the Isle of Lesbos, was because it thundered
often in that Island: Lastly, the same Author says, that as to their Poets
Fiction in respect to Vulcan's marrying of Venus, 'twas because the getting of
Children proceeded from Heat only: And this is confirmed by St. Augustine, L.
7. de Civ. Dei. C. 16.

Now we are to speak of the Fable of Mars and Venus being taken in Adultery,
and wrapped up in invisible Nets by Vulcan, who at the Intercession of Neptune
set them free, according to Homer in his Odysses. Varro gives us the Etymology
of the Word Vulcan, ab ignis majori vi ac violentia Vulcanus dictus: The Greek
Name (...) comes from (...), succendi. Tzetzes will have it to have been the
Name of an Egyptian, that found out the Use of Fire in Noah's Time, and
afterward invented the Art of Smithing; the Greeks having attributed to him
what they had learned of the Egyptians. Bochart derives the Name of Vulcan from
the Hebrew Words Af esto, Pater ignis; and that with great likelihood of Truth,
since Vulcan is reckoned to be of the Number of those who made up the ancient
Dynasties of the Gods or Kings of Egypt: The Egyptians according to Elian
consecrated Lions to him: And Servius says, it was a Custom after the Gaining
of a Victory, to gather the Arms of the Enemy together, and to make a Sacrifice
of them to Vulcan in the Field of Battle.

X.
X Is a double Letter in the Latin Tongue, and the 21th in the Alphabet, being
equivalent to cs, as Ducs put for Ducs, whence ducis in the Genitive; and so it
is with gs, as Rex for Regs, whence comes Regis in the Genitive Case. The X is
sometime put with the C, as vicxit, junexit, and sometimes with the S, as
Cappadoxs. St. Isidore says, it was not in use before Augustus his Time; and
Victorinus affirms, Nigidius would never make use of it.

XAIPE,
a Greek Word used in Epitaphs, signifying as much as Salve, Good Morrow.

XANTHUS,
a River of Troy: Lucian in a Dialogue of the Sea-Gods introduces this River
speaking to the Sea thus:

Xanthus. Mother of Rivers, receive me into thy Bosom to quench the Flame that
devours me.


Sea. Poor Xanthus, who has abused thee in this manner,


Xant. Vulcan, because I defended the poor Trojans from the Fury of Achilles,
who slew them upon my Banks; for the Multitude of the dead Bodies having caused
me to overflow, I could not swallow them, wherewith Vulcan growing angry, he
vomited so many Flames upon me, as dried up all the Plants growing upon my
Banks, and killed all my Fish; and I had much ado to escape in the Condition
you see me.


Sea. But why would you meddle with Achilles?


Xant. Would you have me betray the People that revered me?


Sea. And would you on your part have Vulcan forsake the Son of a Goddess he is
in Love with?


XENIA,
Presents made by the Greeks to their Guests for the Renewal of Friendship and
a Token of Hospitality; for such of the Grecians as were rich and magnificent,
had Apartments to spare furnished with all Conveniences, wherein they received
those who came from afar to lodge with them: The Custom was, that when they had
treated them the first Day only, they afterward every Day sent them some
Presents of such Things as were brought them from the Country, as Pullets,
Eggs, Herbs and Fruits; and hence it was, that the Painters, who represented
those Things which every one sent to their Guests, called them Xenia, and that
we give the Name of Xenodochium to an Hospital that entertains Pilgrims and
Strangers.

(...), Best; it was also used in ancient Epitaphs, in respect to the Dead.

XYSTOS;
it was a large and spacious Portico among the Greeks, wherein the Wrestlers
practiced in Wintertime.

XYSTUS;
it signified among the Romans an open Walking-place, where People entertained
one another.

Y.
Y Is the 22th Letter in the Alphabet and the Sixth Vowel, used in Words
derived from the Greek; it is the Vpsilon of the Grecians, which is one of the
Three Vowels that they call common. We make use of the Letter Y very often in
the End of Words in the English Tongue, though we have lost the Sound of it and
pronounce it always like an I; and have also passed the same Pronunciation into
the Latin, which in some measure must be allowed of because of Custom, though
it would by no means be received into the Greek Tongue, where the Vpsilon
should always be pronounced like our Vowel V, according to the Opinion both of
ancient and modern Grammarians.

Z.
Z Is the 23d and last Letter in the Alphabet, and a double one among the
Latins, as wen as the Z of the Greeks: Its Pronunciation is much more soft than
the X, which makes Quintilian call it mollissimum and suavissimum:
Nevertheless, this Pronunciation was not always the same as it is this Day, to
which we allow it but Half that of an S. Moreover it had something in it of the
D, but such as sounded very smoothly as Mezentius was pronounced as if it had
been Medsentius, etc. The Z had also an Affinity with the G, as Capella says:
Z, said he, a Graecis venit, licet etiam ipsi primo G Graeca utebantur.

ZENOBIA,
Queen of Palmyra, and a Princess who perfectly understood the Oriental
Tongues, and the Greek and Latin in their Purity: Trebellius Poliio said, she
was the handsomest and bravest of Women: She made all the East tremble, beat
the Lieutenants of the Emperor Gallienus, and maintained a vigorous War against
the Romans, wherein the Emperor Aurelian after many Battles vanquished and
carried her in Triumph to Rome: In Consequence to that famous Victory Aurelian
built a Temple at Rome dedicated to the Sun, and enriched with the Spoils of
the Palmyrenians, and the Statues of the Sun and Bacchus, which were brought
from Palmyra thither, as Herodotus assures us.

ZEPHYRUS,
the Wind which blows from the Cardinal Point of the Horizon in the West. It Is
also called Favonius, and some confound it with Africus, which blows from the
Winter west because of the Nearness thereof. Virgil makes them sacrifice a
white Beast to the Wind Zephyrus. Pecudem Zephyris felicibus albam.
Hesiod makes him to be the Son of Astraea and Aurora: Astraeo vero Aurora
Ventis peperit violentos, celerem Zephyrum, Boreamque rapidum and Notum, in
amore cum Deo Dea congressa.

What Homer says by way of Fable concerning Boreas, Virgil relates as a true
Story of Zephyrus, in speaking concerning Mares.

Ore omnes versae in Zephyrum stant rapibus altis,
Exceptantque leves auras, and saepe sine ullis
Conjugiis vento gravidae.
Georg. L. 3. They turned up their Mouths to the West-wind and conceived by the
Power of it without a Stallion.

ZETES,
one of the Sons of the Wind Boreas and Nymph Orithya, whom he stole away from
Athens; he was engaged with the Argonauts in the Expedition to Colchos; and
being descended from King Phineus the Son of Agenor, who was persecuted by his
own Daughters the Harpies, he expelled them and pursued them as far as the
Isles of Strophades; he was afterward put to Death by Hercules, and changed
into a Wind that blew Eight Days before the rising of the Dog Star: Hyginus
says, he was buried, and that his Gravestone trembled when the Wind Boreas
blew.

ZETHUS,
the Son of Jupiter and Antiope, and the Brother of Amphion, whom he helped to
build the City of Thebes.

ZEUXIS,
an ancient Painter very famous in Antiquity; Tzetzes makes him to be a Native
of Ephesus, and Cicero, Pliny and Elian would have it, that he was born at
Heraclea near Crotonia in Italy: He flourished in the 29th Olympiad toward the
Year of Rome 355, and about 400 Years before our Savior's Nativity. Having
found the Art of Painting in the Intancy of its Luster, he raised it, from the
Beginning of the Glory Apollodorus had brought it, to great Perfection.
Quintilian says, it was he that found out the Way of ordering Lights and
Shadowings; Luminum umbrarumque rationem invenisse traditur
And it is agreed on all hands that he was excellent at Colors. Aristotle found
this Fault with his Painting, that Manners and Passions were not expressed
therein, however, Pliny witnesses quite the Contrary in respect to Penelope's
Picture, wherein, say, he, it seems as if Zeuxis had painted her Manners. He
got a great Estate, and once appeared very gay during the Celebration of the
Olympic Games, with his Cloak embroidered with Letters of Gold which formed
his own Name, says Pliny; and after he grew so rich, he would sell no more of
his Works, but gave them away, saying plainly, he did not know how to set a
Price upon them equal to their Value: Before he made People pay for the Sight
of them, and none were admitted to see his Helen without Money in hand, and
hence by way of Raillery the Picture was called Helen the Courtizan, Etian, L.
4. C. 22.

He scrupsed not to put those Three Verses of the Iliads under this Picture,
wherein Homer says, that good King Priamus and the venerable Senators of his
Council agreed, that the Grecians and Trojans were not to be blamed for
exposing themselves for so long a Time to so many Evils for the Love of Helen,
whose Beauty was equal to that of the Goddesses: Val. Max. L. 3. C. 7. We
cannot well say whether this Helen of Zeuxis was the same as that at Rome in
Pliny's Time, or that which he made for the People of Crotona to be set up in
Juno's Temple. Valerius Maximus says, Marsyas bound painted by Zeuxis was to be
seen in the Temple of Concord.

It will not be impertinent in this Place to take Notice of what Zeuxis
required of the Inhabitants of Crotona for this Picture, they had got him to
come thither by the Power of Money, that they might be furnished with a good
Quantity of Pictures by his Hand, wherewith to adorn that emple; and when he
told them, he had Thoughts of painting Helen, they were very well satisfied,
because they knew his Talent lay in painting of Women. He afterward asked them
what fine young Women they had in their City, and they brought him to the Place
where their Boys performed their Exercises, and he had all the Convenience
imaginable to discern whether they were handsome, for they were naked; and as
he appeared much satisfied therewith, they gave him to understand by that, that
they had handsome Girls in the City, since those Boys whom he most admired had
Sisters: He then desired he might see the prettielt of them, and the Council of
the City having ordered all of them to assemble in one Place, that Zeuxis might
take his Choice, he pitched upon Five of them and taking what was most
beautiful from each of them, he made the Picture of Helen by that. Cicero and
Pliny tell us all this. Inspexerit eorum nudas virgins, and quinque elegerit,
ut quod in quaque laudatissimum esset pictura redderet. Pliny will have it,
that he wrought for the Agrigentines, and not for the Crotonians, and he does
not say whose Picture it was: We find he does in a manner tell the same Story
as Cicero. We must not forget that Zeuxis having disputed with Parrhasius which
of them was the best Painter, Zeuxis lost it: the Story is this; Zeuxis had
painted some Grapes so well, that the Birds alighted upon them to peck them:
Parrhasius painted a Curtain so ingenuously, that Zeuxis taking it for a real
Curtain which hid his Antagonist's Work, he very confidently desired that
Curtain might be quickly drawn, that so he might see what Parrhasius had done,
but coming to know his mistake, he acknowledged he was outdone, since he had
deceived none but Birds, but Parrhasius had deceived the Masters even of the
Art it self: Another time he painted a Boy carrying Grapes; the Birds flew also
to that Picture, which made him angry, and ingenuously confess, his Work was
not complete enough, seeing if he had drawn the Boy as well as he did the
Grapes, the Birds would have been afraid of him: It Is said, he rubbed out the
Grapes, and that he reserved nothing but the Figure wherein he had the least
Success. Sen. Controv. 5. L. 5. The best Picture made by this Painter was an
Hercules in a Cradle, who killed the Snakes in his frightened Mother's
Presence, but he valued his Champion more than any of the rest, under which he
put a Verse that afterward became famous. It Is said, that having painted an old
Woman, the Sight of that Picture put him into such a Fit of Laughter that he
died with it. It Is Verrius Flaccus who relates this, with these Two Verses that
allude to this Accident.

Nam quid modi facturus risu denique,
Ni pictor fieri vult, qui risu mortuus est.
We have the Description of a Picture of Zeuxis in Lucian, that deserves
Commendation.

ZODIACUS,
the Zodiac, an imaginary Circle in the Heavens containing the Twelve Signs or
Constellations, which the Sun runs through in a Year's Space; it is interfected
into Two equal Parts by the Equator, one of which contains the Six Northern
Signs toward the Artick Pole, and the other the Six Southern Signs toward the
Antartick: It Is called the Zodiac, that is, Life-bearer, by reason of the
Figure of the Animals in it that represent the Twelve Signs, viz. Aries, Taurus
and Gemini, for the Spring; Cancer, Leo and Virgo, for Summer; Libra, Scorpio
and Sagittarius, for Autumn; Capricornus, Aquarius and Pisces, for Winter: In
Verse thus.

Sunt Aries, Taurus, Gemini; Cancer, Lec, Virgo;
Libraque, Scorpius, Arcitenens; Caper, Amphora, Pisces.
ZONAE,
the Zones, are the Five Circles which divide the World and Sphere into Five
Parts; one is called the Torrid Zone, because of its great Heat, Two more
temperate, and the other Two Frigid Zones. Virg. in L. 1. Georg. gives a
Description of these Zones, as Ovid does also, L. 1. Met. Those Five Circles
have obtained this Name because the Word Zona in Latin signifies a Girdle. The
Torrid Zone is under the Equator, included between the Two Tropicks; the Two
Temperate Zones lie between the Tropicks and Polar Circles, and the Frigid
Zones reach from the Polar Circles to the Poles. The Ancients thought the
Torrid Zone was altogether uninhabitable, but now all the World know the
Contrary, and that it is rendered very temperate by an Intermixture of Heat in
the Daytime, and of Coolness in the Night: They also find it very cold there
in the Months of June, July and August; as to the Frigid Zones we could never
yet sail beyond 75 Degrees: In the mean time the Lapland History informs us,
that the Heat is sometimes so great there, that they cannot let their bare Feet
rest a Minute upon a Stone, without burning them.

ZOROASTER,
whom Pliny makes to be so much ancienter than Moses, is believed by Clemens in
his Recognitions to be Cham, and to have been worshipped for a Deity: Justine
says positively, that Zoroaster was King of the Bactrians, and the Inventor of
Magic. Rex Bactrianorum Zoroaster, qui primus dicitur arts magieas invenisse:
It was the same Zoroaster against whom Ninus made War: Suidas also places.
Zoroaster in Media or Persia, and makes him to be the Chief of the Magi and
Magicians: Several Authors make Zoroaster to have lived more lately, and place
him no higher than the Time of Darius Histaspes; but it is like they might
confound several Zoroasters in one, and that this being a common Name to
several Magi, they attributed something of what appertained to the firs^t to
the others that came after.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by John Nicholson, at the King's- Arms, in
Little-Britain; where may be had all sorts of School-Books, and most
Chymical-Books.
THE Characters or Manners of the Age. By Mons. de la Bruyere, with the
Characters of Theophrastus. Translated from the Greek. The Second Edition
corrected and enlarged, with a Key in the Margent. Printed for J. Bullord; and
sold by J. Nicholson, and Tho. Newborough.

Index Villaris, or an Alphabetical Register of all Cities, Market Towns,
Parishes, Villages, the Hundred, Lath, Wapentake, or other Division of each
County. The Valuations of the Livings, with the Seats of the Nobility and
Gentry; and a List of the Lords to this Time. Folio. Price 16 s.

The whole Comical Works of Mons. Scarron. Containing his Comical Romance.
Complete in Three Parts. All his Novels and Histories. His Letters, Characters,
etc. Translated by Mr. Tho. Brown, Mr. Savage, and others. Illustrated with
Cutts. In Octavo. Price 6 s.

The whole Works of the Reverend Divine Dr. Isaac Barrow, in Three Vol. Folio.
Price 2l. 10 s.

The History of the Old and New Testament; with a large Historical Chronology.
Illustrated with Two Hundred and Forty large Cutts and Five Maps: Printed upon
Royal Paper. Folio. Price 3l. 10 s.

The History of the Old and New Testament, etc. Illustrated with Two Hundred
and Forty Cutts and Maps. Quarto. 15 s.

The History of the Buccaniers of America, from their first Original down to
this Time Written in several Languages, and now collected into one Volume.
Illustrated with Twenty Six Copper Cutts. Price 6 s.

A Complete History of Europe, or a View of the Affairs thereof, Civil and
Military, from the Treaty of Nimeguen to this present Time, intermixed with
above One Hundred Original Papers, as Declarations, Letters, Memoirs, etc.
Octavo. Price 6 s.

The newest and best French Grammar. Written for the Use of his Highness the
Duke of Gloncester. By Mr. Boyer, Author of the Royal Dictionary. The Second
Edition. Price 2 s.

The Gazetteer or Newsman's Interpreter, being a Geographical Index of all the
considerable Cities, Patriarchships, Bishoprics, Universities, Dukedoms,
Earldoms, and such like: Imperial and Hans Towns, Ports, Forts, Castles, etc.
in Europe, showing in what Kingdoms, Provinces and Counties they are; what
Prince they are now subject to; upon or high what Rivers, Bays, Seas,
Mountains, etc. they stand; their Distances in English Miles, with their
Longitude and Latitude, according to the best approved Maps. The Fourth Edition
enlarged.

A most complete Compendium of Geography, General and Special, describing all
the Empires, Kingdoms and Dominions in the whole World. The Fifth Edition
corrected. Price 1 s. 6 d. Both written by Lawrence Echard, M. A.

Mr. William Oughtred's Key of the Mathematics. Newly translated from the best
Edition, with Notes rendering it easy and intelligible to the less skilful
Reader; absolutely necessary for all Gangers, Surveyors, Gunners, Military
Officers, Mariners, etc. Recommended by Mr. Halley, Fellow of the Royal
Society. Price 2 s. 6 d.

Tullii Orationes Selectae in usum Delphini. In Octavo.

SCHOOL-BOOKS sold by Tho. Newborough, at the Golden-Ball, in St. Paul' s
Churchyard.
POvidii Nasonis Fastorum, Libri VI. Cum notis selectissimis Variorum accurante
C. Schrevelio. Octavo.

C. Julii Caesaris quae extant Interpretatione and notis Illustravit Joannes
Godvinus, Professor Regis in usum Delphini juxta Editionem Parisiensem. Octavo.

Phoedri Fabulae. Interpretatione and notis illustravit Petrus Danet, in usum
serenissimi Delphini. Octavo.

Novum Jesu Christi Testamentum a Sebastiano Castalione Latin reditum in usum
Scholarum. Editio Novissima prioribus long immaculatior. Octavo.

Mythologia Esopica in qua continentur Esopi Fabulae, Graeco Latinae. 298.
Secundum Editionem Gabrielis Bractii omnium antiquissimam cum variis
Lectionibus in usum Scholae Etonensis. Octavo.

Electa ex Ovidio Tibullo and Propertio usui Scholae Etonensis. Octavo.

Decerpta ex Ovidio, Tibullo, Propertio and Pedone ad Scholarum Grammaticarum
usus. Editio secunda. Octavo.

Phraseologia Generalis; or, a Full, Large and General Phrase-Book,
comprehending whatsoever is necessary and useful in all other Phraseological
Books (hitherto published) and methodically digested for the more speedy and
prosperous Progress of Students in their Humanity Studies. By William
Robertsom, A. M. Octavo.

Idiomatologia Anglo-Latina, sive Dictionarium Idiomaticum Anglo-Latinum: in
quo Phrases tam Latinae quam Anglicanae Linguae sibi mutuo respondentes, sub
certis quibusdam Capitibus secundum Alphabeti ordinem e regione collocantur. In
usum tam Peregrinorum, qui Sermonem nostrum Anglicanum, quam Nostratium, qui
Latinum Idioma callere student. Sexta Editio. Cui accessit istiusmodi Phrasium
and Idiomatum additio in Utraque Lingua ad minus trium Millium. Opera, Studio,
and Industria Gulielmi Walker, S. T. B. Octavo.

Some Improvements to the Art of Teaching, especially in the first grounding of
a young Scholar in Grammar-Learning, being a short, sure and easy way to bring
a Scholar to Variety and Excellency in writing Latin. Written for the Help and
Ease of all Ushers of Schools, and for the Use and Profit of all young
Scholars. By William Walker, B. D.

L. Annoi Senecae Philosophi Sententiae Morales praecipuae: Ex omnibus ejus,
quae extant, operibus diligenter excerptae: In certa capita, seu locos communes
summa cura digestae: In modum brevium orationum variis argumentis ac rationibus
amplificatae; exemplis preclaris, summam prudentiam, summamque utilitatem large
in lectorem fundentibus, ex ipso Authore totidem verbis illustratae: Omni
Christiano homine, tam seen quam juvene dignissimae. Nunc primum in usum
Scholarum accommodatae. Studio and Opera Georgii Sylvani Pannonii Medici.
Editio Secunda.

Xenophon de lyri Institutione Libri duo juxta Exemplar Etonense cum Latina
Interpretatione Johannis Leunclavii, Gr. and Lat. Octavo.

Eachard's, Kennet's, Potter's, Codwin's and Brown's Roman and Greek
Antiquities.


