DIVERSE REASONS AGAINST Lightening the Coin of this Nation AS BEING The Great
Remedy proposed by the Bankers and Jews, to obstruct the Melting down the Coin
aforesaid, and other Inconveniences complained of in the Petition of the
Working Goldsmiths to the Honorable HOUSE OF COMMONS.
THE Liberty of Exporting Silver out of this Nation having produced Effects
quite contrary to the first Design of it, and being improved to a National
Grievance, to satisfy the covetous Desires of some Men: We may with good
reason suspect, that the Lightening of our Coin being proposed by them, as a
Remedy, will produce Effects of as different a Nature as the Liberty it self
has done. Which will be best understood by considering the Conveniences
proposed by Lightening of our Coin. Which Conveniences are conceived to be
these three;

First, That thereby Encouragement will be given for bringing in greater
Quantities of Silver into this Kingdom.

Secondly, That when it is brought in, it will consequently be brought to the
Tower to be Coined. And

Thirdly, That it will be preserved by this Means from being melted down and
destroyed.

These being the Imaginary Conveniences of Lightening our Coin, we shall
consider them severally. And

First, as to that of Encouraging greater Quantities to be brought in.

When the Petition was before the Honorable Committee to be considered. The
Lightening our Coin was proposed, against which some Objections being made, as
not Practicable, or that great Inconveniences would ensue upon it: A Member of
the Committee willing to promote it, urged this as a Precedent. viz. That in a
certain King's Reign, Sterling Silver was not worth above thirty five Shillings
the Pound-Weight here in England, and so consequently in the Neighboring
Nations; but it becoming afterward more scarce, each of them, to encourage the
Importation of Silver, Lightened their Coin, by which means the Price of
Sterling Silver was raised to three pounds two Shillings the Pound-Weight, and
has continued so for some Ages. Which being urged as a Precedent for Lightening
our Coin, shows likewise, that the Neighboring Nations must follow our
Precedent, and do the like.

It is well known, that all the considerable Quantities of Silver that are
brought into this Kingdom, and the Neighboring Countries are brought from
Spain, that being the Fountain. Should Spain by our Precedent lighten their
Coin proportionably, then all the Conveniences that we can propose will be
utterly lost; for Silver being the Product of the Spanish Territories, all the
Advantage which we ^ropose to our selves, will accrue to them, and greater
Quantities of our Manufactures must be carried there to procure lesser
Quantities of Silver. That they will follow our Precedent, may very reasonably
be concluded, since the Advanges by doing it will be to them in reality, what
we propose to our selves only from a mistaken Notion. As to the

Second Convenience proposed, we willingly grant it, if the former were not
deceitful. And therefore shall proceed to consider the

Third Convenience, which is the Preserving it, when Coined.

In order to which we shall observe, That according to the Standard of England,
the real Value of Silver is but five Shillings per Ounce, viz. eleven Ounces,
two Penny-Weights of Fine Silver, and eighteen Penny-Weights of Allay added to
it, make up the Pound Weight Troy. Now although this be the Standard, yet to
encourage the Importation of Silver, and the bringing it to the Mint to be
Coined, the Charge of Coining is defrayed by the King, and our Crown-Pieces are
Coined to want two pence in weight of one Ounce. From whence it may be
observed, that the Merchants who do Import Silver, have already the
Encouragement of two pence per Ounce profit above what our Standard is declared
to be, and upon this Encouragement the Mint-Books will testify, that all the
considerable Quantities of Silver are imported, by its being brought there to
be Coined.

What then is the Reason why this Encouragement upon which Silver is Imported,
and brought to the Mint to be Coined, does not preserve it when it is Coined?
We answer,

The Reason is plainly this, That our Merchants being allowed to export Foreign
Coin, or Bullion, at the time of Exportation the Silver is generally raised two
pence per Ounce above what it will make at the Mint, which occasions the
melting down of our Coin into the Form of Bullion for them to export, And
supposing our Crown-Pieces for the future to be Coined four pence in Weight
lighter than our Standard is declared to be, no doubt but our Merchants, who do
export Silver now, would then, to have their Occasions supplied, be willing to
give a penny or two pence an Ounce above the Rate of the Mint, and consequently
there will still be the same Encouragement for melting the Coin then, as is now.

To consider the Circumstances of those Men by whom the Lightening our Coin is
proposed, and the particular Interests that may accrue to them by it, and
likewise that these their particular Interests, are public Injuries to the
N^tion, it may reasonably be thought, that the National Good is little regarded
by them; and this their Project is not intended to remedy the Abuses, but to
circumvent the Petitioners, many of them having four or five thousand Ounces of
Plate by them, wrought up for Sale, which stands them in but five shillings and
two pence per Ounce, besides Fashion, which, when our Coin is Lightened, they
will then sell for five shillings and four pence per Ounce, which will be two
pence per Ounce profit to them, and great part of the Treasure of this Nation,
going through their Hands, the Price of Silver being raised proportionable to
what our Coin is Lightened, it will certainly follow, that all the Mileld and
Heavy Moneys that is yet remaining, will in a little time be melted down, and
sent away as Foreign Silver; and those that do it will then have the
Encouragement of double profit. And a few years will manifest this to be Truth,
that although the Coin of this Nation has much decreased of late years, and much
Plate has been melted down, and most of the Silver Imported into this Kingdom
has been sent away, and so the Subjects deprived of the Use and Benefit of it,
all these Evils being occasioned, by a Necessity the Merchants are under, to
Export Silver, and their raising the Price at the time of Exportation, above
the Value at the Mint, the Lightening our Coin will prove altogether a
deceitful Remedy* and the Effects of it will occasion Silver to be sold as
commonly at five shillings and six pence per Ounce, as it is now at five
shillings and four pence per Ounce; and consequently this their Project will
advance their Profit in several Respects, but not Remedy the Abuses Complained
of.


