Advertisement.
THE following Papers were Written in the Year 1689, but the further Endeavors
to take off the then Imposition on Sugars being forborne, they were laid by and
Neglected, till upon showing them lately to a Person of Quality, who was
pleased to Approve the Notions therein communicated, 'twas thought the
Publication thereof might be Serviceable at this time. But the Reader must have
Regard to the Time when they were Written, and Allow for such Alterations as
have Happened since.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Duties on Merchandise, More Particularly of that on SUGARS,
Occasionally Offered, In ANSWER to a PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, The GROANS of the
PLANTATIONS, etc. EXPOSING The Weakness of the said Pamphlet, and plainly
Demonstrating, That the Taking off the Imposition on Sugars would not be One
Farthing Advantage to the Plantations, and yet take away Yearly a great Sum
from Their Majesty's present Revenue. ALSO, Showing how the last Imposition on
Sugars did truly affect that Trade, and how the same might yet be Advanced, to
the greater Benefit both of this Kingdom and the Plantations. Also, How certain
Regulations might be made, for the better Accommodating the Duties on
Merchandise, both to the Advantage of Trade and the Revenue.

By a Merchant.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1695.

An ANSWER to a Pamphlet, Entitled, The Groans of the Plantations, etc.
MEeting with a Gentleman a little before the late Recess of the Parliament,
who told me that a certain Pamphlet called, The Groans of the Plantations, etc.
had obtained on diverse Parliament Men, insomuch that there seemed to be some
Inclination to take off the late Imposition on Sugars; I thought it might be
worth my while to see what might be offered on that Subject, so contrary to the
Notions I had entertained thereof.

But truly when I came to read it over, I found so little weight of Argument in
it, that it appeared to me scarcely worth Observation; yet considering that the
noise such an Outcry, obtaining on Persons not rightly understanding Trade,
might perhaps produce some Result prejudicial to Their Majesty's and the
Nations present Interest; for every one must allow this to be a very ill Time
to take off any Part of the settled Revenue that may be born, when the
Parliaments have difficulty enough to find ways of raising Money suitable to
the Exigencies of the present Times.

I say, on that Consideration, I thought I might do some Service to the
Public, by showing the Invalidity and Nothingness of that Pamphlet; but
perhaps more, by taking this Occasion, to suggest to the Government a Method
for the Regulating the Customs, by which both Their Majesty's Interest, and the
Public Good may be more Advanced.

To come on then to my Business, I shall first Address my self to the Author,
to tell him, that being altogether unknown to me, I must confess in the first
Design of this Answer, I had taken the Liberty to be somewhat Satirical upon
him, where occasion was administered: But being since informed that he is a
Person of Quality and Worth, I have retrenched that, and am resolved to carry
my self with all the Deference and Respect toward him that the Matter will
bear; yet I must needs say that I think it a great Oversight in a Person of his
Character, to expose himself so much in Matters wherein he is so short of
having a right Understanding, almost the whole Body of his Discourse being
subject to Exception and Contradiction: so that it seems to me as if he had
received those Notions, and been imposed upon by some disingenious Person, of
whom he might have too great an Opinion. But as I have undertaken to write an
Answer, I cannot well excuse (and therefore I must beg his Pardon for this
once) to tell the World, that the whole Piece is Composed principally of
falacious Arguments, untrue Suggestions, unfair Reasoning, drawing erroneous
Consequences from false Premises; and in short, a halling in by the Head and
Shoulders of all the Arguments that could be thought on, and forcing them True
or False, Right or Wrong, to stand for his Purpose.

Yet I will allow that the Gentleman has a great deal of Reason on his side,
when he Complains against the last Imposition on Sugars, as a matter which
(though 'twas through the Mismanagement) proved a great Loss and Injury to the
Plantations; and I will not doubt but that himself may have been a Sufferer
thereby; and yet though Losers may have leave to speak, they ought however to
speak Reason and Truth, and not strain Matters so much beyond the Staple. I
think he had little Reason to Complain so much against the first Duties on
Sugars; but since he lays so great a Stress upon it, I must be obliged to trace
him in that Argument.

He begins then to tell us, that the Duty of 18 d. per Hundred on Sugars, was
in a higher Proportion than others, and above the common Poundage; (but I
wonder the Gentleman should forget that Muscovado Sugars were sold for above 30
s. per Hundred in those Days) to this he adds the Four and half per Hundred
(which he cannot deny, but was given by an Act of their own Council, though he
suggests that 'twas extorted from them) to make up 2 s. per Hundred to be the
Duty which Sugars must pay at Home and Abroad: And he tells us that it is the
Poor Planters do bear the whole Burden of these Duties, and that it appears to
be as a Land Tax of 2 s. in the Pound lying upon the Planter.

But then he tells ye that this is not a true Reckoning, and proceeds to make
it out, that these Sugars will yield of clear Profit, at most, but 6 s. per
Hundred, and then the Duties draw 2 s. out of 6, and are as a Land Tax of a
Noble in the Pound.

Nay he says farther, That if the Sugars yield but 22 s. the Duty Swallows up
the whole Profit; and if it yields but 20 s. the Planter Pays the whole Duty
out of his Pocket, and so must live by the Loss; but he lays down as a Truth,
that the Profit of a Muscovado Hundred is 5 s. for, says he, the Cask, Freight,
and other Charge of Transportation, comes to 10 s. and 10 s. it costs the
Planter, and it must be sold for 25 s. which is a full Price to clear 5 s. for
a Muscovado Hundred.

I wonder that this Gentleman should no better understand the Management of
that Trade; for every one that has been acquainted with the Importing Sugars,
knows that the common Price of ordinary Muscovado Sugars has for many Years
been 10 s. per hundred, (sometimes lower) but so much it cost the Merchant, not
the Planter, as he does unfairly insinuate; and it is true what he says, that
the Charge of Importation (in which the Duties and also loss of Weight was
included) has usually been computed at 10 s. more; and yet if such Sugars
would reach 20 s. per Hundred in England (finer Sugar that cost more, yielding
more proportionably) the Merchant was not wont to complain, because he valued
his Profit on the Sale of his Goods sent out: But herein lies the Falacy, that
the Planter must be thought the Merchant, where there is little or no Gains; but
he does not so much as mention him in his Returns from England, from whence the
Profit arises; neither will he tell ye (though it be True) that in this way of
Trade, when the Planter turns Merchant, he saves 12 to 15 s. per Hundred of
what the English Merchant must pay to his Factor there for Commissions and
other Perquisits.

But the Price he talks of of 25 s. per Hundred for Muscovado's, not improved
by Straining, Sundrying, or the like, has not been heard of late years (unless
in time of War, or some extraordinary Emergency) I think it very absurd then,
for the Gentleman to say, that at the Price of 20 s. per Hundred in England,
the Planter loses all; and to Suggest that the Planter cannot get a Groat a Day
for his Negro's (not Reckoning for his Land, Chargeable Buildings, etc. says
he) by Selling Sugar at 10 s. per Hundred, when it is evident, that at that
Price (and sometimes lower) as fair Improvements have been made, and as good
Estates raised by the Planters in those Plantations, as by any other Business
attempted in our Age.

But all this while he lays not the right Saddle on the right Horse, for
supposing the Duties on Sugars had proved a loss to the Merchant Importer, yet
he does not make it appear how this does affect the Planter: for though he
seems to impose upon us that absurd Notion, That all Impositions laid upon
Commodities, are paid by those that Breed or Raise the same, and not by the
Expenders; yet it is his Misfortune to have chosen one of the worst Instances in
the World to prove that Argument by; for it is but of late Years that any other
way of Buying and Selling was used in those Islands but for Sugar, all their
Accounts being computed by Pounds of Sugar, and the Law of the Country,
allowing all Debts to be paid in that Specie.

Now to make good this Assertion, the Gentleman ought to prove, that after the
laying these Duties, the Planters were forced in paying their Debts to the
Merchant (for in those days the Planters were deeply in Debt) to give them 900
l. of Sugar where they contracted the Debt but for 600 l. or that a hundred of
Sugar, which before might be valued at 9 s. could never after be valued at
above 6 s. there being indeed no other way to make it appear that these Duties
did affect the Planter. But in this Matter, the Negative will be readily
proved, by all Persons that have been acquainted with the Trade to those
Islands, who well know that the Planter was not in the least affected by those
Duties, but paid his Debts in Sugar, and the Merchant paid the Duties at Home
and Abroad.

The next thing I come to take Notice of, is, That the Gentleman does very
falaciously conceal the Merchant in all his Argument, and through the whole
Thread of his Discourse, puts the Trade of Exporting and Importing on the
Planter, which, I should think, ought to be considered as the proper Business
of the Merchant: and what he talks of the Restraining the Exporting the
Commodities of the Plantations to the other Colonies, or to the Streights,
without paying the English Duties, does more nearly concern the Merchant than
it does them; for their Sugars are still taken off at as high a price as Europe
can vend them.

But let me tell him, that as Old England has the care of Protecting and
Supporting all her Colonies, she has a great deal of reason, to make such
Regulations as may keep the Power of Governing the Trade in her self, and
reserve such a proportionable Advantage therefrom, that may make the preserving
those Plantations not burdensome to her: which we see practiced by all other
People who have planted Colonies abroad; which yet England carries with such a
hand, as not to streighten or oppress them, but so as that the Trade may be
managed with moderate Advantage on all hands. And we see there is no shortness
in Supplying them with all the Necessaries they want, and taking from them all
the Product of their Growth; neither does it appear that the Trade between them
and the Northern Colonies is at all lessened, they being constantly supplied
from thence with great quantities of Provisions.

What he says of their desiring liberty in case of Ships being lost after the
Duty paid, of Shipping off the same quantity again Custom-Free, as they do in
England; though it be reason, yet it does not at all concern the Planter, who
is paid for them before they are Shipped, unless he turn Merchant, and send them
for England on his own Account; when yet, as he himself says, most of them are
in Debt, and if that be true, 'twould better become such to pay their Debts at
home, than to Merchandise on the Stocks of their Creditors.

Indeed what he mentions of the Management of the Guinea Trade, seems to me to
be the first Grievance that he instances, which properly affects the Planter;
but as he proposes the laying a Tax on Negro's sold, as a better way to support
the Forts and Garrisons in Africa, than the erecting a Monopoly: as that Tax
must have been considerable enough to answer the end; so I doubt if it had been
so managed, this Gentleman would now have complained against it as a burden as
heavy upon them as any of the rest. But what he tells of the undue practices
and severities of the Government there, in Seizing and Condemning the
Interlopers, no doubt is a great Grievance, but still it lies chiefly on the
Merchant, not the Planter: But to say the truth, this Gentleman appears really
to be much a better Advocate for the Merchant, only he will not distinguish him
from the Planter.

He comes next to the main Point of laying the last Imposition on Sugar, and in
that I do heartily agree with him, that it had a fatal Influence on the
Plantations for a time; but yet the Parliament had no intent thereby to have
burdened them, neither had it proved so in its consequence* but through an
Oversight in that Act; and not in the least through any of those Reasons
alleged by him; which is sufficiently evidenced in that the Tobacco and the
other Commodities rose immediately proportionable to the Impost laid upon them,
and Sugar only drugg'd: Whereas, if his Arguments were valid, the same
consequence must have attended those other Commodities.

The real cause then why the Sugars did not Advance was this: We had of late
Years fallen into a considerable Trade of sending Refined Sugars to several
Markets abroad; but after the Commencement of this Act, that Trade wholly
ceased; by which means our Sugar-bakers having greater Stocks upon their Hands
than the Inland Trade could take off for some considerable time, did stop their
Hands from Buying, which made the Sugars at Market so great a Drug, and gave
the Buyers the opportunity to beat down the price, which naturally falls out on
any Commodity, when there is more at Market than the Trade will readily expend;
and the Necessitated Merchant is forced to beg Chapmen, and must sell his
Commodity for what he can get.

Yet the Consequence of this proved the most fatal to those Merchants who had
Debts owing them in the Islands where the Accounts run to pay in Sugar, which
being Imported after this Imposition, did scarcely clear them the one half of
their usual Returns, there being some men that lost above 500 l. Sterling of
their proper Estate by that means, which certainly was too great a hardship to
be put on Private Men by the improvidence of a Public Act, and ought to have
been Redressed as soon as seen; but my Authors Notion is right in that, That
those were not times to procure a Redress of Grievances.

We do acknowledge that this did reach to squeez the Planter likewise, their
Sugars then coming to fall in the Islands, for the Merchant could not keep up
the Price abroad, when the Loss would have been so great in bringing them home.

But that which the Parliament designed for a Kindness to the Trade, was
through an Oversight, the cause of all this Inconvenience: for, as they ordered
all this Additional Duty to be paid back at Transportation of Raw Sugars, and
did not allow any thing to be drawn back on the Shipping off of Sugars Refined
in England; by this it came to pass, that as the Dutch did before Vye with us
in Foreign Markets, so now having the Advantage of drawing back all this new
Impost of 2 s. 4 d. per Hundred (which our Refiners must pay, and have nothing
allowed them at Shipping off) they had now the Advantage of our Refiners, by no
less than Seven Shillings Eight Pence Halfpenny upon every Hundred of Refined
Sugar, so that now we could no more stand in Competition with them in that
Trade.

To give a plain Demonstration whereof, the Reader must first be acquainted,
That Two hundred and a half of Muscovado or Raw Sugar, is usually allowed to
make One hundred of Refined: Now the Dutchman, drawing back upon his Carrying
away our Raw Sugars to Refine them at Home, the one half of the Old Duty which
is 9 d. and the whole New Duty which is 2 s. 4 d. this makes 7 s. 8 d. * upon
Two hundred and an half of Raw, which, as I have said before, produces but One
Hundred of Refined; and our Refiners having no Allowance made on the Shipping
off their Refined Sugar, they consequently lost that Trade, became Over-stockt
for the Inland Expense, the price of Sugars were beat down, the Merchant
reduced to great Loss, and no body the better for it but the Dutch. And this
was the True Cause by which the Impost on Sugars came to affect the Plantations.

And yet for all this, there was no reason to cry out, The Plantations are
Ruined. We pay yearly in Duties more than the Rents of our Lands. We are wholly
stripped of our Lands and Free-holds, and made worse than Pack-Tenants. Many that
had good Estates Four Years ago, are now worth nothing, and in a starving
Condition. 'Twere a Mercy to take away our Lives rather than leave them to us
with so much Bitterness. It Is our hard Lot to Live deprived of the Comforts of
Life. With Abundance of the like kind of Exclamations.

I think the Gentleman has in this so much Outrun the Constable, that I may
modestly desire him to tell us, Whether the People do Live there still, or
what is become of them? Whether they are all in Goals for Debt, or have starved
in the Streets? Have thy sold their Plantations to pay Debts, or their Servants
to buy Food and Clothing? They might then be said to be deprived of the
Comforts of Life, and to be reduced to a State of Bitterness. But contrary to
this; as perhaps no People in the World have been more remarkable for a
Luxuriant way of Living, so it may be more proper to ask, Whether they have, in
any measure, retrenched those Extravagant Excesses that were wont to abound
amongst them, or have yet learned what Providence and Good Husbandry is? But as
we have yet heard nothing less, so we have no reason to believe that things
have been quite so bad with them, as this Gentleman has studied to represent.

But if this should be taken as too great a Reflection on the Planters, it
could not well be avoided, because the Gentleman has endeavored to represent
them as a poor, starved, undone People, when the contrary is so evident to all
that are acquainted with the manner of Living in those Parts. Besides those
that are Sober and Discreet among them, (of which doubtless there are many)
will not blame me for a gentle Reproof of Vice, where there is so much Reason
and Truth. Moreover, it may not be an unseasonable Occasion to put those
Gentlemen in mind, that as they have had the Opportunity of those vast
Improvements, to raise to themselves, by their own Industry, Estates of 500,
some 1000, 2000 l. Sterling per Annum; so it is a Wonder that Sugars should
continue to hold up their price so well, when by the Settlement of so many
other Plantations, there has been so great an Increase of that Commodity;
which (and not Impositions) will probably be the means whereby the price of
their Sugars must come in time to be lowered: it would therefore very well
become them, to exercise a greater Care to save and lay up against such a time;
as many Prudent Men among them have done, whom (notwithstanding the great
Discouragements this Gentleman would persuade us they have all along layn
under) we have seen to bring very considerable Estates to England. But I offer
not this out of Envy or Emulation (for I heartily wish them all the Prosperity
and Encouragement they can reasonably desire) but merely to excite them to
affect a more Frugal and Provident way of Living.

I come now to Remark his Talking so much of the Hardship put upon them, in
laying so high a Duty on White Sugars, and telling us that others can Live by
Making Plain Sugar, they must Live by the Improved: And herein lies his
Ingenuity in making his Discourse relate more particularly to Barbados, (as he
says in his Title Page) for no other of our Plantations do any thing
considerable in Refining Sugars: But this let me tell him, that howsoever it
may be their Interest to make White Sugars, I Am sure it is our Interest to keep
such a Balance upon them, that they shall not too much Undersel our Refiners in
England, and that they could very considerably, when those Sugars paid but 5 s.
per Hundred Duty.

Let us then state the Account between the Barbados and the English Refiner,
that we may see on whose side the Balance then lay: To take the usual way of
computing Two hundred and an half of Raw Sugar to make One hundred of Refined
(which I doubt not but will hold to their first and second Clayds, one with the
other) this costs us in England 3 s. 9 d. for the Duty; next, if the Freight of
his costs him but 3 s. our Two hundred and an half costs us 7 s. 6 d. that is 4
s. 6 d. more than his; then he loses nothing by Weight, but we may very well
allow 18 d. per Hundred for our Loss by the Running of the Sugar and Loss of
Weight; Lastly, in the Charge of Cask and other Expenses, he saves at least 2
s. per Hundred, all which makes up 11 s. 9 d. that was then saved in Refining
One hundred of Refined Sugar in Barbados, by Anticipating so much Charge that
must be contracted upon it before it comes into the Sugar-bakers Hands here,
which wants but 3 d. to make up the 12 s. which the last Additional Duty
reduced them to pay.

At that time then they could afford their Fine Sugars in England about 7 s.
and ship them for Foreign Markets about 9 s. 6 d. per Hundred cheaper than our
English Refiners, which certainly gave them too great an Advantage, and did too
much Discourage our Home Trade. And now since this last Impost of 7 s. more on
Whites, and 2 s. 4 d. on Brown, they had 5 s. 10 d. per Hundred at the home
Market, and 15 s. per Hundred on shipping off, more Advantage than our
Refiners. All which being considered, How imprudent is it in this Gentleman, to
make so great a Complaint of Oppression, in a Matter wherein they were so much
favored beyond the Traders of England, and which (if it should so continue)
they might improve to their great Advantage?

The Gentleman proceeds to tell us, That they can make a shift sometimes to put
off their Fine Sugars at some little Profit; but their course Clayds is quite
beaten out of the Pit, they cannot sell it in England but at Loss; they are
therefore forced to send it Abroad, etc. I must confess 'twas unreasonable to
lay the same Duty upon that as on the Whitest; yet, as I have made it appear,
they had Advantage enough upon the Whitest to make Amends for that. But then I
must needs blame him for being very Disingenious in Advancing Three palpable
Untruths in the same Paragraph: First, in saying, They must buy new Cask at
Re-shipping their Clayds, which no body does: Next he says, That together with
the other Charges of new Freight, Shipping and Un-shipping, etc. puts them upon
unequal Terms with the Sellers of other Nations, who are suffered to come
directly to those Markets; when it is known that the Portuguez, French and
Dutch, as well as we, are obliged to bring their Sugars home, before they can
carry them to other Markets: The Third is, He says they meet with new Duties
and Impositions in Foreign Markets; and yet there is no such thing known as any
New Imposition laid on Sugars in any Place whether we Trade: and for Company, I
may here add a Fourth Mistake, though he offers it in another Place; where in
setting forth the Hardship of their being obliged to send their Sugars first to
England, he says, The whole Trade of Sugars to the Streights (to say nothing of
other Places) is lost both to us and to the English Nation; but it is certain
that we have sent many Hundreds of Tuns of Raw Sugars to the Streights since
that Day, though we never could attain to a current settled Trade that way,
because the Portuguez Vye with us, and underdo us therein; and its pity this
Gentleman had not Conversed with some Person that understood better, before he
had presumed to Publish these Mistakes to the World.

But here again, I will take the Occasion to ask him, How many Planters he has
known to send these course Clayds to England, and order them to be Re-shipt for
Foreign Parts on their own Accounts? I am sure, as many such as he can
instance, ought to lose the Name of Planters in that Case, and be accounted
Merchants with a witness. But this Gentleman seems very unwilling to allow any
thing of the Merchant to be concerned in the Sugar-Trade.

But I have yet better News to tell those that have a concern for the
Plantations, than this Gentleman would let them know; for though this
Alteration of the Trade, and damming up the Current of Sale for a while, did
cause a considerable Fall upon Sugars, and thereby Pinched the Merchant first,
and the Planter after, for the first Year or two; yet when the Dutch came to
find their Advantages in the Trade, they fetched our Raw Sugars away fast
enough; and when we found so quick a Trade, we had the Opportunity by degrees
to raise them again; and accordingly we sent as briskly to the West Indies,
where, by the same Consequence that they fell there, because they first fell in
England; so now as they first rise in England, they came to rise again in the
Plantations, and the Trade is come again into its old Course (as to Raw Sugars)
and for above a Twelve month past, has been more profitable than it had been
for several years before; in which time 'twas miserably beaten down on the
Merchant, and the Planters were esteemed to have the greatest Advantage of the
Trade, oftentimes Buying what Goods we brought them, and Selling us their
Product even at their own Prices, the Trade of the Islands being so much
over-done in Favor of the Planter.

Now then it appears, that this Gentleman is come too late with his Groans,
when others have forgotten the Pain; for now the Trade is so well reverted in
their Favor, that the Planters sell their Sugars for as much as they did
before the Imposition; which Demonstration of Experience, even in that very
Subject which he had undertaken for his Argument, does sufficiently discover,
that the Gentleman had no right Notion of these Matters; and this plain Fact,
That Sugars are actually risen in the Plantations, notwithstanding the
continuance of the Imposition, does contradict all his Arguments, and show that
the Planter is not at this day injured by the Duties laid on Sugars. The only
Injury that remains is to us at home, by Losing the Trade of Exporting Sugars
Refined in England.

I cannot omit taking Notice, how this Gentleman undertakes to Caress the
Seamen, which methinks looks a little too much like Wheedle, when he tells
them, That their Navigation is Safe and Healthy; As the Ships come Safe, so the
Men come Sound. Pray was there never any such thing as a Hurricane at
Barbados, in which some few Ships have been lost? Or is there no Biting of the
Worm there? Was there never any Seamen sick of Calentures, Belly-achs, Agues,
or sometimes more Contagious Distempers in those Parts? But it did the Seamens
Hearts good to think of a Plantation Voyage, where they might be merry among
their Friends, and be sure of a kind Reception; while the Planters had it, they
thought nothing too good for them, etc. and yet for all this, I never heard
that the Seamen were so fond of these Voyages, that they would take a Farthing
less Wages than to other Places; for they always counted the rolling of Buts of
Sugar of above a Tun Weight, to be as hard work as any they should meet with
elsewhere; neither did I ever hear them boast of the extraordinary Kindness of
the Planters to them, (whatever they might show to their Commanders) or that
they could be entertained there gratis; but on the contrary, I think they say,
That a Bitt, (which is 7 d. 1/^) or half a Bitt, is the least Coin that will
pass there in a public House; and that they can eat and drink as well for a
Groat in many other Places, as they can there for a Shilling. Well, but now
this beloved Navigation is gone, and by Destroying the Plantations, the
Navigation to them must be destroyed likewise, or at least made good for
nothing; We are so Pinched our selves, that we are forced to Pinch all that we
are concerned with; We cannot now afford the Seamen that liberal Freight we did
formerly. This is all over Robert for Richard; for what is the Freight to the
Seamen? Is not their Wages the same, whether the Freight be Dear or Cheap? But
I think he is more besides the Matter yet, when he talks of their Liberality,
and how willing they are to do Reason to their good Friends the Seamen, and
give them a fair and full Price; when we know, that they have brought their
Tunnage to be the heaviest in the World, and have always been wont to beat down
the Prices of Freight, perhaps the lowest of any Commerce: But where is the
Navigation gone? How is it destroyed? Have there ever since been a want of
Ships to bring off the Sugar? Have not Ships frequented the Plantations, and
Freights been as good since as before? which all that know the Trade will
allow. But, he says, There was no Cause so visible for the Desertion of the
English Seamen in the late Reign, as the spoiling that Navigation, which was
most Dear to them: A Reason, which certainly no Man else ever thought on, and
sure, I think, too weak to take with any one besides this Gentleman.

I have Commented the larger upon this, again to show that this Gentleman has
not a fair way of Reasoning, but that he does from diverse Suggestions, Untrue
in themselves, form Conclusions altogether False.

But as the Gentleman has, in the First Part of the Pamphlet, endeavored to
persuade us, that the Plantations are Ruined by Taxes, which no body can
believe; so in the Latter Part he takes a great deal of Pains to Prove what no
Understanding Man will deny, viz. that the Plantations are not a Detriment, but
an Advantage to England; and in that I Will never contend with him no more than
for his Smiting at those People, who did in the Late Kings Reign, make it their
whole Study and Endeavors, Right or Wrong, to Advance the Kings Revenue; and
even Pick the Traders Pocket to put into his; Straining and Wresting the Laws
in the Kings Favor, which ought to be Construed most favorably for the
Merchant: By which means the Traders were extremely Oppressed and Discouraged,
contrary to the true Interest both of King and Kingdom. But as we ought always
to have in Remembrance the Goodness and Mercy of God, for the Wonderful
Deliverance he has Wrought for us; so it is our indispensible Obligation, to
Love, Honor and Obey that Happy Instrument, by whose Means we are freed, not
only from those, but far greater Oppressions, and the daily Apprehensions of
approaching Ruin.

But now let us consider the Consequence of what this Gentleman aims at, which
is to have the Plantations eased, (as he calls it) by taking off the Duties on
Sugars; (doubtless he means all the Duties, for he represents the First as
insupportable) and I doubt we shall herein find this Gentleman guilty of the
same Principles he has Condemned in others, That they care not how heavy
Burdens they lay upon others, so they could shift it off themselves. For if we
may take his own Account, that 7 or 800 Sail of Ships are Employed yearly in
the Plantation Trade; if only 700, bring one with another but 50 Tuns of Sugar,
it makes 35000 Tuns: But we'll be so Modest to Account but 30000 Tuns, the Duty
whereof in the Islands at 6 d. per Hundred (as he makes it) is 7500 l. of this
30000 Tuns Imported, we'll allow 10000 Tun to be Shipped out again, and that then
Pays but 9 d. per Hundred Duty, which makes another Sum of 7500 l. But the
other 20000 Tuns (allowing nothing for Whites) at the present Duty of 3 s. 10
d. per Hundred, Amounts to 76666 l. 13 s. 4 d. so here we have near (we might
venture, all things considered, to make it quite) 100000 l. per Annum of Their
Majesty's Revenue, which, by this Gentleman's good Will, should be quite taken
off; but in what Manner else to Raise this Money, as we don't well Know, so, I
believe, he does as little Care, if he can but be eased (as he thinks) of
Bearing a Part on it himself.

But now I Will show him how this great Loss to the Revenue would not yet ease
the Planter One Farthing: In order to which, I Will take a Maxim of his own
(though indeed it overthrows his own Argument) which I Will Allow as a great
Truth, viz. That it is only Plenty or Scarcity (which is really according to the
demand of a Commodity) is that which Rules the Market; and Commodities of
constant Use and Necessity will and do Rise in spite of the greatest
Impositions that were ever laid on them, while they continue in good Demand:
And 'twas the Plenty or Glut of Sugars occasioned, not by the Imposition, but
by an Accident resulting therefrom, (as I have already shown) that was the
Cause of the Fall of Sugars at that time: And I Challenge any Man to show me
any other Instance of a Commodities not Rising according to the Impost laid on
it.

And notwithstanding this Gentleman's Suggestion, That the Mystery of laying
this Load on them ( viz. the Plantations) was, because if 'twere laid on
Foreigners, they would carry or send their Commodities to other Places; whereas, if
he understood Trade, he would know, that we use to fetch the Commodities we
want from Foreigners our selves, and expect not to have our Markets supplied by
them. But I pray him to inquire, whether the French did send their Silks,
Linens, Wines and Brandies, when they were so highly Imposted, (the last
especially, no less than 8 l. per Tun added, which was half its cost in France)
but it is known the French did not sell any of these Goods a Farthing cheaper;
and they were kept up till the Approaching War, as high as ever, the Merchants
Importing them all along, as freely as before the Imposition, and Selling them
as currantly with the Proportionable Advance; and there was nothing, besides
Sugar, but even sold the brisker. Yet if it should be Objected that Tobacco
came to fall in Price, and the Merchants lost considerably by it; I Answer,
That Tobacco did at first Rise answerable to the Tax, and it fell afterward no
worse than it was before, for the Trade was over-done, and Men had several
times offered to give their Tobacco for the Freight: But it must be
Acknowledged that that Commodity was strained too high.

However, if we should Allow, that the laying an Imposition on a Commodity,
might at the first put it under some Discouragement; yet it is but the
struggling with the Alteration, for the first Year or two that makes the
Difficulty: For if it be a Commodity of Consumption, its Demand will Continue,
and the Trade must and will Revert, and Establish it self in the same Course it
was before; so that this Difficulty will come to be lost: as it appears in the
present Case of Sugars, which now bears this last Duty as current as it did the
former.

But now after the Trade is come to bear it, if this Imposition, or the whole
Duties (as he desires) should come to be taken off this Commodity, will not all
Men expect that it will immediately Fall proportionably? It is not so long
since the Temporary Impost on Wines fell away in King Charles the Seconds time,
but that we can very well remember, that the Price of Wines did Fall
answerably; and when the same came again to be laid on, in the beginning of the
late King James, they equally Rose again: And yet all this while, neither the
Frenchman nor the Spaniard, did Advance or Fall the Price of their Wines at any
of these Alterations. Nor is there a Jot of Reason to imagine that the Planter
will be able to Advance One Farthing on the Price of Sugars, if the Duties were
wholly taken off. What then would be the Consequence of such a piece of
Business? Why truly Their Majesty's must lose a great Branch of the Revenue;
all the Merchants and Traders having Sugar on their Hands, must lose
prodigiously by the Fall; the Planters get nothing; only the Expenders should
have their Sugars a Farthing or a Halfpenny per Pound Cheaper, and so this
Gentleman should have the Honor to Ease those that will neither thank him, nor
think on him.

And now, having, as I think, said enough to Convince any Reasonable Person,
that this Gentleman is very much in the Wrong in the whole Design of his
Argument, I am willing to have done with him; it not being my Design to Remark
and Expose every thing that is subject to just Reflection in that Pamphlet;
which I shall therefore pass over, and shall take this Occasion to impart some
Sentiments in Relation to the Imposing of Duties, and how they affect Trade;
that if they were thoroughly considered by the Government, might perhaps produce
more Equal and Prudent Regulations in those Matters for the future, and render
them less Burdensome to Trade, and more Advantageous both to Their Majesty's
and the Kingdom.

In order to which I will endeavor to show, that these Two Notions, which are
commonly received and held by many People, are, with respect to us, but Vulgar
Errors, viz. That Duties and Impositions laid on Commodities, are not born by
the Expenders, but revert upon the Producers, by making the Product fall on
their Hands: And that the laying higher Duties on our Commodities, than is done
in some other Countries, is a Prejudice, and Injury to our Trade.

For the first then I offer this Argument, That if those Impositions we lay
upon Foreign Commodities, do not lessen their Importation, Expense, or Demand
here, their Prices also Advancing proportionably, then the Imposition does not
affect the Productors, but the Expenders: But we find that those Merchandises
Imported, are not lessened in their Importation, Expense, or Demand, and have
not failed to reach a proportionable Advance; therefore it is plain, that such
Impositions lie wholly on the Expenders, and do not affect the Productors.

And if what I have said before may not be thought sufficient to back my
Argument, I shall offer some farther Instances, which, I think, may be enough
to Convince any Reasonable Man of the certainty thereof; and I would ask my
Author, (or any other Person that may be of his Mind) Whether, upon second
Thoughts, he can be of the Opinion, That if the Plantations should think fit to
lay a Duty on all Provisions, Apparel, etc. Imported to them; that the Breeders
or Producers would be forced to bear the Tax, or whether it would not be more
likely to fall upon the Planters, if they could not be Furnished from within
themselves: And in like manner, if the Government of England should lay a
higher Duty on Beer, Cheese, Butter, Iron-Ware, Hats, Shoes, Stockings, Silks,
Stuffs, Linens, or any other things with which they could not be Supplied from
elsewhere, can it be supposed, but that the Planter that Expends it, must pay
it every Groat: Or if it were in the power of the Plantations to lay a Duty of
5 per Cent. on their Sugars there, who doubts but the Expenders in England must
pay it, if they could not have it Cheaper from other Places: But we have
another Instance well known to every Body in our own Country, and that is the
Excise on Beer and Ale, which has been several times laid on, and fallen off;
and yet the Price of Barley not at all influenced thereby, although we see
plainly that a Short or Fruitful Crop, or a Plentiful Cider Year, makes it to
Rise or Fall considerably which again proves, that nothing but Plenty or
Scarcity, according to the Demand, makes Commodities Advance or Lower.

But as there is no general Rule without Exception, so I must in this
distinguish between laying a Tolerable Imposition that Trade may bear, (which
is as much as concerns our former Discourse) and Stretching it so high, that it
Amounts to a sort of Prohibition; which yet has scarcely ever happened, but
upon such Commodities (principally Manufacturies) which may be supplied within
our own Country. As for Instance, If our Government were inclined to Promote
and Encourage a Manufactury of Canvas and Dowlas in this Kingdom, the only way
to do it, would be, to lay so high a Duty on French Linens, that the
Manufacturers at Home could afford to Sell them Cheaper than they could be
rendered from Abroad. And 'twas the Defect of this, that Spoiled the Linen
Manufactury that was finely going on here in the time of the last Prohibition
with France: For when the Trade came to Open, the French Undersold them so
much, that the Undertakers were Ruined; whereas, if the Prohibition had
Strictly continued, till our People had turned their Hands, and were well
Settled in that way of Work, the Manufactury would have been Established to the
Great Advantage of this Kingdom.

Which Method of Encouraging Native Manufacturies, the French King had so well
Observed, that about Two Years since, he laid such Intolerable Duties on all
the Manufacturies that were brought into his Kingdom, that it did even reach to
a Prohibition, to our great Prejudice, and their Advantage; and this I take the
Occasion to offer here, as a Matter Worthy the Observation of the Government.

I next come to show, That it is an Error, to think that the laying Tolerable
Duties on Commodities Imported into this Kingdom, is a Prejudice to our Trade;
for they that draw this Observation from the Dutch, (who must be allowed to be
a People that Study the Interest and Promotion of Trade the most of any) and
because they lay very small Duties on their Importations, do from hence
conclude, that 'twould be our Interest to Imitate them therein, do not consider
the different Circumstances of either Country, by which they would perceive
their Interests in that respect to be quite different.

For the Dutch possessing the Mouths of the great Rivers, the Rhine and the
Maes, become thereby the Empory to a vast Continent, and should they Impose
high Duties, the Charge of After-carriage, and Tolls, through so many
Territories the Commodities must pass, would render them so Extravagantly Dear,
as would hinder the Expense, and Destroy the Importation. But they have yet a
more Powerful Reason to Restrain them, and that is, because Hamburgh, Bremen,
and other Neighboring Places, who have Communication with the same Continent,
would then be Able to Undersel and Rob them of their Trade.

But now we stand quite on another Bottom, for being an stand, we are sure to
Spend all (except what is Transported again, and so draws back of the Customs)
within our own Government, where none can Vye with us in Trade; so that our
Commodities Imported, may well bear a pretty smart, constant Duty; always
observing to Rate Superfluities highest, and things of Necessity, and what
respects our Manufacture, more Moderate.

But the great Inconvenience lies in this, That our Parliament (in which it is
our Misfortune that there are too few that understand Trade) upon any
Extraordinary Occasion to Raise Moneys, have commonly been too ready to save
their Lands, and lay new Impositions on Merchandise; which being done without
that true Discerning, and Scrutinying into the Consequences and Influence it
may have on Trade, causes great Irregularities, Baulks and Discouragements, and
always brings great Loss and Damage to the Public, as has been sufficiently
Demonstrated in the Case of Sugars. Whereas it would be the true Interest of
our Government, to Raise as great a Revenue by constant Taxes, such as Excise,
Customs, etc. as the Nation might well bear without Grievance; and upon
extraordinary Occasions, to supply it by Land and Poll-Taxes. And whereas the
Laying of Imposts, is an Extraordinary Advantage and Profit, to all that have
the good Hap to have Quantities of those Goods by them, and an Unreasonable
Loss to those that shall have them Remaining on their Hands at the expiration
of the Imposts, this Irregularity will be prevented, when the Duties of Goods
come to be Ascertained: And that being once settled, Trade will run Current,
and not feel them, neither will Occasion be administered for any to complain and
vent their Discontents like this Gentleman.

It is then humbly offered, That a new Book of Rates should be Composed, in
which all Additional Duties, Imposts, etc. should be laid by, and all
Commodities exactly and carefully Rated, according to what, in the Judgment of
Understanding Men, the Trade would bear; and this to remain as a Standard for
the Custom of Merchandise, and never any more temporary Imposts to be thought
on.

And as there is Reason to lower the Customs on some Commodities Imported, and
also that our Woollen Manufacturies should pay little or no Duties out, because
other Nations having in this last Age much Vyed with us in that Trade, we ought
to render them as Cheap in Foreign Markets as possible; yet there are many
Commodities that will admit of a considerable Advance, and some that will bear
a less Deduction at Shipping off; by which the Value of the Customs will in the
whole be highly Improved. Also such Commodities which are now Prohibited, as
Westphalia Hams, Gloves, etc. might be laden with a high Duty, which would as
well answer the End, as the present Prohibition; for those things are now
brought in by the by, and Pay no Duty at all.

And although (as I have already shown) the Laying of temporary Impositions is
very Injurious and Detrimental; yet I think there cannot be an easier way of
Tax upon a People, than that of Customs, because it lies for the most part on
Superfluities, and it is in every Man's Power to ease himself of the Charge as he
pleases. And as our Nation is fallen into so great an Expense of Spice, Fruit,
Wines, Brandy, Sugar, Tobacco, Silk, and many other things, which we see are
wont to Rise and Fall very Considerably, and yet the Expense and Demand
Continue, there is no doubt of their Bearing Duties; for it is an Infallible
Rule to me, That a small Advance of Duty, cannot baulk those Commodities that
are capable of so great Advances in Price so that I cannot see how our Trade
can be hereby in the least Lessened or Injured.

However there ought to be certain Able and Understanding Merchants concerned
in the Composing the said New Rates, for that there are diverse things will
occur, that ought not to be done at Adventures, but with a great deal of
Scrutiny and Discretion, that no such Errors may be Committed, as was in the
forementioned Imposition on Sugars, by which we beat our selves out of the
Trade of Transporting Refined Sugars.

And now, since that Commodity has given occasion to this Discourse, I shall
here take the Opportunity to offer my Opinion, how the same may be yet Advanced
to a higher Duty, and yet Trade not Injured thereby; Suppose then there were 5
s. per Hundred Duty set on Raw Sugars, which is but half a Farthing per Pound
more than it now Pays, and comes to a Farthing and Quarter more per Pound in
Refined, Can any one think that the Good Woman will put a Scruple the less in
her Apple-Pyes, for so inconsiderable an Advance? Nay, we know that when Sugar
has Risen One Penny per Pound, all the odds is, that they content themselves to
take Sugar 1 d. per Pound Courser than what they used before; and so they lay
out the same Money still, and the Commodity continues its Vent; but this is to
be understood of the Meaner People, for the Rich never stick at Price for what
they want.

But then to order the Business on Transportation of White Sugars, there ought
to be 7 or 8 s. per Hundred Deducted at shipping of Single Refined, and for
courser Sorts less, according to the Value; and because this takes from the
Revenue what was not before; as there is now but 9 d. per Hundred Remains for
Raw Sugars shipped out, (the rest being drawn back) let there now be 18 d. per
Hundred left, that is but 3 s. 6 d. of the 5 s. Paid back at Transportation,
and I am sure that 9 d. per Hundred will not frighten the Dutch from fetching over
Raw Sugars, when it is common for that Trade to continue, when Sugars Rise 3 or
4 s. per Hundred; and by this means Their Majesty's will have the 8 d. per
Hundred sure, even of all that is Transported; which, considering the small
Quantities of White, in Proportion to the Raw Sugars usually shipped off, will
sufficiently Compensate the Deduction, and then the 14 d. per Hundred added to
the Duty of White spent in England, will, according to the former Computation,
bring in upwards of 23000 l. per Annum to Their Majesty's, the English
Sugar-Bakers will be encouraged, and 'twill be the ready way for the Planter to
find a brisker Trade for his Sugars: For if we can be able to Vye with other
Nations with our Refined Sugars in Foreign Markets, it must needs encourage our
Plantations, because it makes more room for the Vent of their Productions; but
then White Sugars Imported ought to Pay at least 14 s. per Hundred, to make it
equal with Whites Refined at Home, (Courser Sorts Paying less, according to
their Value) and to draw back at shipping off no more than ours.

I Will only give one Hint more of what might be done in the Tobacco Trade, which
now, paying 5d. per Pound Duty, makes it so hard for Men of small Stocks to
raise Money to pay it, that many are obliged to Sell it on Board, the Buyer to
discharge the Duties, to their great disadvantage, and beating down the Price
of the Commodity; however, it having strugled so many years with this high
Duty, and it being a Commodity that the Tax is not perceiveable in the Expense,
I believe it might now bear 4 d. per Pound constant Duty. But then, as before,
it kept only d. per Pound on Transportation, we might now keep 1 d. per Pound;
for I have observed, that the high Duties at Home, and great Gluts of Tobacco,
has had this Advantage, that the Merchant being forced to seek Abroad for
Markets for his Tobacco, they have by its Cheapness, so forced a Trade, that in
Spain especially, they are mightily fallen into the use of our Tobacco, finding
it much Cheaper than what they can Import themselves. And indeed, ours is much
the Cheapest of any brought into Europe. And if we should keep a Penny per Pound
of the Duty here, 'twould yet come Cheaper to them than what they could be
supplied from any other Parts, and I am sure 'twould add considerably to the
Revenue.

The greatest inconvenience in Laying high Duties on Commodities is, That it
pinches on the Merchants, whose Stocks are not great, to Advance so much Money,
and streighten themselves, when they make no Improvement thereof; The Provision
that is now made, to ease them in this Case, by giving Bond, is yet a greater
Inconvenience to them; for that, besides the difficulty to some of getting good
Security, those that Pay Ready Money, have so great Abatements, that they can
afford to Under-sell them; for which there might yet be an Accommodation
provided, which would be no real Detriment to Their Majesty's, and make even
higher Duties become easier to the Merchant, and this by a means commonly
practiced abroad; which is, all Merchandises are brought directly from Landing
to the Kings Warehouses, where the Merchant may let them lie, till he brings
his Chapman to buy them, or can conveniently raise Money to pay the Duty: To
suit this then to our Practice, Let all the Cellars and Warehouses near the
Customhouse Keys, and Places where they lie Contiguous and with greatest
Convenience, be taken up for Their Majesty's; and let all Merchandise, of which
the Duty is not discharged, be carried directly to those Cellars or Warehouses,
that are most proper for each Species, and there laid in Ranges, every Man's
Goods by it self, and fair room left to rummage, or turn in or out, (suffering
any Merchant, that desires it, to have a particular Cellar to himself) where
the Goods shall lie, under the Custody of the Warehouse-Keeper, till the
Merchant shall pay the Duty: But he shall have liberty at all seasonable Hours
for himself, Servants or Coopers, to look over, and take any needful Care of
his Goods, by Hooping or otherwise, or to show them to Chapmen. To which end,
there shall always attend a Competent Number of Servants at the
Warehouse-Keepers Office, to carry and bring back the Keys, and to see that
none of the Goods are Imbezled or taken way. There shall also be Watchmen
appointed to walk by Night, for prevention, in case of Thieves or Fire, as well
for Their Majesty's as the Merchants Security. For all which there shall be
certain Reasonable Rates and Allowances adjusted, proportionable to the Charge
of Cellarage in the respective Ports, and Their Majesty's to be at no Charge.

If it shall be Objected, That by this Method, Their Majesty's will not have so
much Ready Money paid them as before, it is Answered, If it be so, the
Inconvenience can only be at first; for, after the first Stop, 'twill come into
a Circulation, and the Money will be paid in Monthly as fast as 'twas before;
besides, Their Majesty's Security in this, is better than where they give Bond,
which sometimes Fails, and oftentimes lies long before paid. And to Encourage
the Merchants to pay their Money under this Method, he that pays Ready Money at
Landing, shall have an Abatement of Seven and half per Hundred, he that carries
it to the Warehouse, shall have 5 per Hundred Abatement, if he pay within
Seven Months; but he that lets his Goods lie longer than Seven Months, shall
have no Abatement. And if any Goods shall remain in the Cellars Twelve Months,
the Officers shall Sell them by Inch of Candle, Pay Their Majesty's Duty and
Charge, and Return the Overplus to the Proprietor. This also will prevent the
Disparity of Abatements among the Merchants, and thereby Favor the lesser
Traders.

And forasmuch as there is a great deal of Trouble to the Officers, and
oftentimes Hardship and Injury to the Merchants, in the making Allowances for
Damnified Goods, which now is given only at the Discretion of Their Majesty's
Officers; it would be Reasonable, that the Merchants should in every Port
Annually choose Two understanding Tradesmen of the Place, to be Judges of
Damage; who should be Sworn to do Justice, according to the best of their
Judgment, between Their Majesty's and the Merchant; and these shall Examine and
View over all Goods that are Damaged, and shall Agree upon what Allowances they
think Reasonable apart by themselves, and no Officer or Merchant be permitted
to speak to them till they have done, and what they Award shall be Allowed by
the Officers. And to the Intent they may not be Swayed or Biased to either
Interest, they shall not only be paid the one half by Their Majesty's, the
other half by the Merchant; (according to certain Rates to be Agreed upon for
all sorts of Goods) but as the Merchant may Reject them in the next Years
Choice, if they seem Partial in Their Majesty's Favor; so the Collector of the
Port shall have Power, if he finds them Unreasonable in the Allowances to the
Merchant, to Except against those Persons at the next Years Election; and then
they shall never be Capable of that Office again. And in case of any Goods that
may pay by Value, the Merchant shall Value his Goods himself, and the Officer
or any other Person standing by, shall have Liberty to take them at that Price,
with the Addition of 15 per Hundred more to the Merchant.

It would also be Advantageous both to Their Majesty's and the Merchant, that
there should be made more Severe Laws against any Defrauding of the Duties, or
Running of Goods, as they call it: For those few Persons that follow that kind
of Trade, and have Success in it, cannot only Afford to Sell Cheaper, but are
forced to do so, because they are Obliged to Disperse it as soon as possible;
and the Buyers will take the Advantage, whereby the Fair Traders are very much
Injured in the Vent of their Goods, and in the Markets being beaten down. And
indeed it is the Interest of every Legal Trader, to Endeavor the Discovering
those Unfair Practices, and to give them all the Discouragement possibly they
can.

There may many more things be thought on for the general Encouragement of
Trade, without Respect to Private Interest, but this may suffice for this
present Essay; my Design herein being chiefly to Excite the Ingenious Traders
to consult their own Fair Advantages in these Matters, and take the Occasion of
so happy a Conjuncture, wherein they have a Government, which will be ready to
Indulge them in any Reasonable Conveniences for the Encouragement of Trade. And
there is no doubt, but that if it were Prudently Solicited, they might Obtain
a Committee to be Constituted for the Consulting and well Governing the Affairs
of Trade, a thing which has, of late, been much talked on; but if 'twere once
Gained, would certainly be the best Means that ever was thought on, to Promote
and Advance the Trade of this Nation.

To conclude then, As I have taken now the liberty to Publish these Notions of
mine, I cannot doubt but it will appear to all Ingenious Men, to be done with
that Impartial Freedom, that I have not leaned to any particular Interest,
(which, I am sure, was what I intended;) and as I shall not value the Censures
of Partial Men, who may think I have trodden too hard on the Toes of their
particular Interests; so I freely submit my self to the Judgment of all Candid
and Ingenious Merchants. And if any thing I have offered shall not be
Consentanious to their Reason; as they have the same Liberty of Publishing
their Objections, I shall only beg them to do it with the same Candor and
Clearness, which I have endeavored: By which kind of Dissertation, the Reason
and Truth of things may become more Evident, in order to the Promoting such
Methods, as may most Conduce to the Public Good, by which I shall Attain my

END.
POSTSCRIPT.
THE Author of the foregoing Papers hopes, that it will sufficiently appear,
That he has not designed to recommend any thing that may really bring a
Burden upon Trade, or the Plantations; but that, as it has been Proposed in
this present Parliament, to lay a farther Duty on Sugars, if they shall think
fit so to do, regard may be had to such Regulations as is therein Proposed. By
which Means, he humbly conceives, that such an Advance of the Duty will not at
all affect the Merchant, nor the Planter, but be wholly paid by the Expenders.
However, considering that the Loss of many Ships Employed in that Trade this
Year, and the Damage done by the late Hurricane, has caused the Price of
Sugars to be extravagantly high at the present; it may be reasonable, that if a
higher Duty be laid upon it, the same may not be made to Commence till the
First of April, 1696. when the next Crop may be expected.

Note, That as the present Duty on Sugars is but 18 d* the Raising it to 5 s.
will Increase the Revenue 70000 l. per Annum, according to the Computation of
20000 Tuns Yearly Imported for the National Expense.


