DISCOURSES UPON THE Modern Affairs OF EUROPE, Tending to prove, that the
Illustrious FRENCH MONARCHY may be reduced to terms of greater moderation.

Di Dendri, di senno, e di Feed,
C'n'e manco che non Creed.
There is commonly less Money, less Wisdom, and less good Faith than men do
account upon.

Verulam. Et digiti pedum, partim sunt e^ ferro, and partim ex ^ato^ quia
exparte regnum futurum est ^urum, and ex ^arte foturum est fragile,

Dan. 2.42. Printed in the Year, 1680.

The PUBLISHER to the READER.
THE Author of these Discourses I know not. But the same coming to my hands,
beyond any expectation of mine, I thought I was bound to give the Public
(whose mark is upon them) credi^ (...) the same. And because it is one
essential property of a good Merchant to pay well, I also thought my self
obliged to render the effects of so good a hit, into the common Bank, where
they are due. It is true, there are some things in them, which seem not so fit
for public view; but those things concerning the Author and not me, who have a
stock only going in the public Company, and am no private Trader; I pass those
considerations over, seeing good things (as the Philosopher long since
observed) the more common, the better they are. And he that cannot speak within
doors, may sometimes take liberty to speak without doors, especially when those
within doors seem to forget the most material points. Something I would also
say of the Discourse it self; but because it is a Proverb as old as Apelles
himself its Author, That the Shoemaker must not go above his Last: I will pray
in aid of my Lord Bacon, and desire him to be of Counsel for me. And first, for
the method and manner of handling, thus he speaks, Advan. of L^^^^ing.
The form of writing which best agrees with so variable and universal an
argument (as is the handling of Negotiations and scattered Occasions) that
would be of all other the fittest which Machiavil made choice of, for the
handling of m^^i^rs of Policy and Government; namely, by Observations and
Discourses, as they ^erm them; upon History and Examples. For knowledge drawn
freshly, and, as it were in our view, out of Particulars, knows the way best to
Particulars again; and it has much the greater life for Pract^se, when the
Discourse or Disceptation attends upon the Example, than when the Example
attends upon the Disceptation: for here not only order but substance is
respected. And as to the matter, who would not but be in a passion, to see the
world undone by insufficient Counselors? or, to speak in our own Dialect, so
many good Ships lost, as it were, in the very mouth of the Haven, through
unskilful Pilots? And to see fighting Armies neglected, and impertinent things
relied on? Let him therefore speak to these two things. To the first. The
speech of Themisto^les, taken to himself, was indeed somewhat uncivil and
haughty; but if it had been applied to others, and at large, certainly it may
seem to comprehend in it a wise Observation and a grave Censure, Desired at a
Feast to touch a Lute, he said, he could not Fiddle, but yet he could make a
small Town a great City These words drawn to a politic sense do excellently
express and distinguish two differing abilities, in those that deal in business
of Estate. For if a true Survey be taken of all Counselors and Statesmen that
ever were, and others promoted to public charge, there will be found (though
very rarely) those which can make a small State great, and yet cannot Fiddle:
as on the other side there will be found a great many, that are very cunning
upon the Cittern or Lute, (that is in Court-Trifles) but yet are so far from
being able to make a small State Great, as their gift lies another way, to
bring a (...) and Flourishing Estate to Ruin and Decay. To the se^^nd thus.
Walled Towns, stored Arcenals and Armories, goodly races of Horse, Chariots of
War, Elephants, Ordinance, Artillery, and the like; all this is but a Sheep in
a Lions skin, except the breed and disposition of the People be stout and
Warlike. Nay number it self in Armies imports not much, where the people is of
a faint and weak courage* For, as Virgil says, It never troubles a Wolf, how
many the Sheep are. And a little after, A man may rightly make a judgment, and
set it down for a sure and certain truth, that the principal point of all other
which respects the Greatness of any Kingdom or State, is to have a RACE of
Military men.

Farewell.
DISCOURSES, etc.
Chap. I.
THe great thing which has disturbed the Peace of Europe, filled it with blood
and slaughters, and shaken the dismembered Kingdoms and States thereof, has been
the huge design of the Universal Monarchy; a design which (by a kind of
Fascination) has possessed the Genius of the Spanish and French Monarchies,
which therefore, in their turns, have been dangerous to all Europe. But the
French have made nearer approaches to the Throne of such extended Empire then
the Spaniards. Let us then look upon the means and advantages, the most
Christian King has, to pursue so vast a design, as if he would plow up the
Air) To the end our minds may be stirred up, (if any thing will stir them: to
raise up those Banks, which (under that Providence, to which, nothing is so
high, to be above it; nothing so low, to be beneath it; nothing so large, but
is bounded; nor, nothing so confused, but is ordered by it.) will circumscribe
such wild and boundless ambition, within its own limits.

And for our incouragment, let us by the way, hear the judgment of that
excellent Man, Sr. Walter Raliegh, in the case of the Spanish Monarchy, which
then was, what France now is, to the rest of Europe. His words are these. Since
the fall of the Roman Empire (omitting that of the Germains, which had neither
greatness nor continuance) there has been no State fearful in the East, but
that of the Turk; nor in the West any Prince that has spread his Wings far over
his nest, but the Spaniard; who since the time that Ferdinand expelled the
Moors out of Granada, have made many attempts to make themselves Masters of
all Europe. And it is true, that by the treasures of both Indies, and by the
many Kingdoms which they possess in Europe, they are at this day the most
powerful. But as the Turk is now counterpoised by the Persian, so instead of so
many, millions as have been spent by the English, French, and Neatherlands in a
defensive War, and in diversions against, them, it is easy to demonstrate,
that with the charge of two hundred thousand pound; continued but for two
years or three at the most, they may not only be persuaded to live in peace,
but all their swelling and overflowing streams, may be brought back into their
natural Channels and old Banks. But to go on.

France then is come to the greatest perfection in respect of Domestic Empire
it is capable of. For 1. whereas heretofore the body of that Kingdom was not
entire, but subject to several great Barons, who were able not only to
expostulate, but to contend with the King, the are all brought now to a
dependence on the Crown, and become most obsequious to it. And besides, many of
the richest and most potent of them are of the blood Royal; so that upon the
failer of those who are before them, they, or their posterity may succed to
the Crown, which keeps them firm to it. 2. All those mighty members into which
that Kingdom was formerly divided, are now annexed to the Crown: So that for
largeness of Territory, and compacted and united strength, it is become the most
formidable Kingdom in all Europe. And as by the former of these, they have
secured themselves against all intestine Wars, which many times through the
interests and feuds of those Barons, shook the whole Frame of that Kingdom; So,
by the latter, they have fenced themselves against all Foreign invasion. For
heretofore all the neighboring Princes were ready upon every occasion to
invade the Kingdom of France, The Dukes of Burgundy, Britannie, Guienne or
Flanders, being always tempting them thereunto, and giving them access,
passage, and reception. By this means England made two Conquests of France, and
at other times forced them to buy Peace of them, and pay* them tribute. But now
whosoever would invade that Kingdom, shall not only want these for their
confederates to invite and assist them, but shall have them for their enemies.
Thus far Machiavel has observed for substance. 3. By abrogating the Convention
of Estates, that King has spoiled the people of that power and share in
Government, which they have originally had in all the mixed Monarchies of
Europe, and made himself absolute even in the point of raising money, which is
the blood that fills the veins of that mighty Body. By this means he has
changed the constitution of that Kingdom, from mixed to absolute Monarchy for
the kind of it; which is the Form that inables a Prince to do most mischief bot
at home and abroad. 4. Buth that which is the Crown of this perfection, and may
be the strongest stay of it, is the Naval force now added to the other
strengths of that powerful Monarchy, wherein it now equals, if it be not an
overballance to, either England or Holland. For this is a maxim; That the power
of a Prince whose Dominions border on the Sea, cannot be perfect without a
force in Shipping able to command the Sea. Wherefore in my opinion (which
nevertheless is exceeding weak) one of the greatest mischiefs this War has
produced, is, That it has given occasion to France to become mighty in Naval
power. And that mischief can never better be demonstrated then by this
consideration: That there was never before any example upon Earth of a
Triumvirate of mighty Nations in a vicinity of neighborhood one to another,
and bordering upon the same Seas, equally powerful in Naval strength. The
consequence of which must of necessity in time to com, be, a perpetual
emulation and jealousy, greater, by how much either an Union or division of
three is more perfect then of any other number. Whereby it must necessarily com
to pass, either that some two of the three shall alternatly, or by turns fight
against the third; Or that two of the three shall agree to extinguish the power
of the third, that themselves may remain in indifferent terms, without jealousy
one of another. It is now long since France wanted but one of three things to
help them to drive on that huge design of ambition for the universal Monarchy,
which has so long swelled their hearts. To bring Holland under a kind of feudal
protection of that Crown, by which means they might serve themselves of their
Ships and Seamen: Or to make themselves masters of the Spanish Netherlands: Or
lastly to grow great in Naval strength at home. For France has been dangerous
enough to the rest of Europe, whilst they were in a manner without shipping:
Insomuch that those two things were observed of them in the time of Queen
Elizabeth; That France could never abstain from War for above two or three
years together; And that they could never be poor. 5. and lastly, To all these
may be added the new Conquests and acquisitions of the French. But nevertheles
it may be doubted, whether that Monarchy has received any real accession of
strength by those Conquests, in case it should com to feel the shock of a
powerful and vigorous Enemy. It is true indeed (what Machiavel has said) That
the Conquests of Common, wealths that are ill Governed, and contrary to the
Model of the "Romans, do conduce more to the ruin, then advancement of their
affairs. But when we shall a little penetrate (what he elsewhere says) That
when we have observed the Histories of former times, we shall find, that
Commonwealths had generally but three ways of enlarging their Empire. One is
that which was observed by the Tuscans of old, who entered into a League of
Confederacy with several other Commonwealths, with condition of equality, that
no particular should have any degree or authority above the rest, and that
comprehension should be lest for all their new Conquests to com in, not much
unlike the practice of the Switzers and the Hollanders of late, and the
Achaians and Aetolians of old. Another way of extending your Empire, is, by
associating with several Cities, but so, as that the dignity of the Command,
the seat of the Empire, and the honor of the enterprise may remain with you,
which was the way observed by the Romans, and it was peculiar to them; no other
people has observed it, and certainly no better is to be found. The third is
the way of the Spartans, and Athenians, who entertained no Confederates, but
whatever Territories they conquered, they annexed them to their own. Which way
is undoubtedly the worst of the three, as appeared by the two said Republics,
who were ruined upon no other account, but because they had grasped more
Dominion then they were able to hold. I say, these things distinctly
considered, and the last way being that which the French practice in their
Conquests, it makes the doubt yet greater.

From that of the State, if we descend to the consideration of the person of
the King, it gives us these two momentuous Observations. 1. It shows us how
necessary a thing it is for a Prince that would either defend or enlarge his
State, to excel in practical Wisdom, which consists in application, conduct and
pursuit. For by that means he shall always be served of wise and excellent
men. For it ever was, and ever will be true; as the Prince himself is, so are
his Counsel, and those that are about him. A weak Prince will never endure wise
men; nor can wise men ever be safe under an inadvertent Prince. And it gives
him mighty advantages over the Princes and States that are about him;
especially if their administrations be slow, weak, and remiss. And it is
commonly seen when a great man rises in the World, either that he is alone, or
that the magnificence of his actions swallow up the weaker efforts of others,
as the Sea does the Rivers. And secondly, That when a wise and Martial Prince
rises, and is succeeded by one or two Princes of equal condition to himself,
without a pusillanimous interposed, they may do very great things in the world;
since the succession of two such Princes alone, Philip, and Alexander, in the
Kingdom of Macedon was sufficient to Conquer the World. I conclude therefore,
That if the present King of France should be succeeded by a Prince of equal
Virtue to himself, they would swallow up the greatest part of Europe. But
because the great things of a Monarchy begin and end with one or a few Princes;
and it is rarely seen, that three sufficient Princes immediately succeed one
another, without some effeminate or ill-consulted Prince between, I am of
opinion, that Monarchy will sink with its own weight.

Now having taken a view of the force and strength of this Monarchy, and the
sufficiency of her present King, let us next consider what their next attempts
are like to be. In general they will do these two things, What they begun by
War, they will pursue in Peace: for they had no other design in making Peace,
than to disarm their Enemies, break their Confederation, and hinder England,
from coming into it, that they might insult over the world, by a Peace more
tyrannical than the War of a Gallant Enemy. And then when the injured World can
bear their insolences no longer, out of the elements of this Peace they will
raise up a new War. For that Prince that would make great Conquests, must make
short Wars, and renew them often. Holland they will not attaqne, at least not
this year, for two important reasons. Because Flanders lies between that and
France. And besides, they will go as softly as they can, till toward the
latter end of the Summer, for fear of awaking them out of that sleep, their
wasted Spirits, and trading Humor have cast them into. And England their
stomachs do not serve them to meddle with. For though it be true that whosoever
he be, that shall attempt to set up an Universal Monarchy in Europe, will first
or last find England the strongest bar in the way; I say England, which is not
only the strongest, but now the only strong Kingdom that is in Europe, next to
France. And therefore Philip II. of Spain, after al his vain attempts and
pursuit, turned himself upon England; in which though he miscarried, yet he
maintained a long War in Ireland. Yet the French will think to serve themselves
of the supine negligence of England, and still hope that they may have
Prorogations therefore their money, till they have ^ate^ up the rest of Europe,
as they eat bread. And besides, they wi^^ (...) a better way to distress
England, and more effectual than by any point blanck attaque which they can
make upon it, as we shall see anon: Lastly, there is yet one very important
reason, and that is, they are afraid of England; and truly, if God had not
placed in man the irascible affection of fear, he would be much a wilder
creature than he is. But lest the truth of this should be doubted; it will not
be amiss to call a Foreign Witness, and that is Machiavel, whose own words are;
The French are in great fear of the English, for the great inroads and
devastations which they have made anciently in that Kingdom; insomuch that
among the common people the name of English is terrible to this day: But he
adds, There was not then the same reason for it. it is true, there are not so
strong reasons why they should fear us so much now, as they did formerly, our
advantages which we had over that Kingdom being most of them soft, and that
Monarchy come to its full strength, and the greatest perfection it is ever like
to see. And yet there be very strong reasons why they should yet fear us, and
if they do not apprehend them, it is no bodies fault but our own. And I say,
that both the Spanish and French Monarchies inherit such a remembrance of the
English as the Romans did of Hannibal. Nay, I think it may be truly affirmed,
That France is more afraid of the Parliament of England (that is, the King and
the Estates of Parliament, for they are all comprehended under the word
Parliament) than of any one, if not of all the Princes and States of Europe.

But if France will do neither of these, what is it then that they will do? I
answer, We must not take our measures by those reports they cause to be given
out up and down the world, to cast a mist before the eyes of their
Neighbour-Princes and States as Jugglers do; nor when they seem to look far
abroad must we regard it; but consider by the exact Rules of Prudence, what is
sit for them to do, and what we our selves would do, were we in their case. I
say then, that the greatest and wisest thing which France can do next, is to
make himself master of the residue of the Spanish Netherlands, and particularly
to seize upon Ostend and Newport. And when he has don that, to turn his whole
force upon the Empire, not omitting in the mean time to attempt all that he
can do there, as well to amuze and divert them, as to open his way to the
complete Conquest of that branch of the miserable house of Austria.

To demonstrate this, I know no better way, then a little to consider, and
discourse upon the consequences of this, with respect unto England and Holland.
For England. If the French be permitted to become masters of the Spanish
Netherlands, and to possess Ostend and Niewport, then England will not only not
have a footing on the Main, but all the Seacoast opposite to the whole body of
it will be in the hands of the French, always Enemies to England in Interest
and Humor. And if he pleases to look over the Sea, he may seize upon Ireland
when he pleases, which will always lie open to him, and where he will find
Papists enough to entertain and join with him. And let it be remembered, that
Ireland is in a manner already cut off from England by the Irish Act. And what
would England then be, but an Island hemmed in by the Sea, and their Enemy its
master, and shut out of the world? By this means they will be precluded from
sending any succors to the rescue or relief of those Provinces. And by this
means also it must necessarily come to pass (which is worst of all) that
England must lose both the Dominion of the Sea, and their Trade; and in time
will not be able either to build or sail Ships out of their own Ports, without
the License of France, And so will be in a fair way to become a Feudal Province
of France. And thus we see England may be distressed without warring directly
upon it. It is the greatest blemish in the Reign of Henry the Seventh,
(celebrated in our Histories for one of the wisest of all our Princes) that he
suffered Britany to be lost, and annexed to the Crown of France; a soul spot in
so beautiful a Picture, as he is taken by the Pencil of my Lord Bacon. And the
more I think of these things, the more I am confirmed, that we shall stir up
the just indignation of those that are to come after us, against our memories;
and it will be the wonder of succeeding Generations, that so great a King as
the King of England; in a War that had for its ends an Universal Monarchy for
the most Christian King, and the subversion of the Protestant Religion and
Interest; The one as foolish and impossible to be effected, as the other is
full of monstrous and detestable impiety toward God, And to which ends our
Enemies have been traveling through a Sea of Blood, and all those crooked ways
the first attempter against God, beat out to those that travel with Pride,
Ambition, and Impiety: I say, that such a King, in such a War, and such a Peace
as followed it, should sit still, and suffer himself to be (as it were)
besieged in his own Kingdom, whilst he suffered France, not only to grow to an
overbalance to England in Naval force, but to plant himself all along on the
opposite shore of the main Continent, and in the mean time to suffer the
greatest part of Europe to be consumed with the flames of an unjust War, and be
sacrificed to the ambition of France. An aggravation greater, by how much
England has been famous for holding and casting the Balance of Europe, and
protection of the Protestant Religion. Since therefore it is a royal virtue in
Kings, not only to avoid Flatterrers as a Pest, but to encourage some body to
tell them the truth roundly, still preserving the dignity of their persons, and
the majesty of their state; I think a man cannot do better than to bring things
home to them: for if Princes would but a little reflect, and look back upon the
times past, where they might see the beauty that is upon the memory of good
Princes, and the deformity of that of the bad, they would see the excellency of
plain dealing, and the odiousness of pernicious flattery.

For Holland. It will be enough to say, That if they suffer the Spanish
Netherlands to be lost, France will not only claim, by a Title prior to theirs,
all the Conquests and Dominions of this State in Flanders and Brabant, but may
set up the Title of the House of Burgundy to the whole Seventeen Provinces: and
finally, that they will have a very bad Neighbor.

I conclude therefore, That it is the interest of England and Holland, by all
means, not only to preserve the rest of the Spanish Netherlands from falling
into the hands of France, but to make him vomit up what he has already
swallowed of them. For besides what I have already said, If France once becomes
master of those Provinces, Holland and the rest of the Provinces of the League
will become an easy and cheap prey to him, which concerns England not a little
in point of Interest. And to keep those Netherlands in the hands of Spain, is,
(I think) more the advantage of England and Holland, than it is of Spain it
self. For of Spain we are secure, because he is weak, at that distance, and
neither will, nor can incroach upon his Neighbors: and so we preserve the
greatest Bank of security to both, against the Inundations of France.

To conclude this part. For the most Christian King, we are no doubt to look
upon him as the minister of Gods indignation, howbeit he means not so, but
has done all these things in pride and cruelty, and attributed their success to
his strength and wisdom: For the power both of Satan and wicked Kings is from
God, but the will and malice is their own. Therefore the French King has made
use of all these powers and advantages to do evil; evil I say, than which the
most merciless Tyrants, and destroyers of the earth (whom God has said he will
destroy) have not in any the most barbarous age of the world, committed
greater, or more crying to the righteous God for vengeance. And a Prince
affected with so vast and wild ambition, is to be looked on as an enemy to
mankind, as a proud attempter to destroy the bounds which God has set. And
therefore if so excellent hope, that God will stop the way against our enemies,
if we return to him; if the preservation of the true Religion; the liberties of
our Countries; the great interests of mankind; or whatsoever other excellent
consideration we can propose to our minds will move us, let us behave our
selves like men, and do some great thing worthy our remembrance.

And this brings me to the second part of my discourse. In the first we have
seen the mischiefs, let us now consider of the remedies.

Now because there is no separate Kingdom or State in Europe sufficicient to
balance the weighty Body of the French Monarchy, nor any of their strengths in
disjunction, competent to be opposed against so formidable force; therefore
there must be a new fond of Power and Interest raised up, sufficient to keep
the balance of Europe from being called back into a Chaos, out of which the
French may form an Universal Monarchy, according to the Idea they have
conceived thereof.

And this can by no means better be done than by England and the United
Provinces, entering into a new League, for the mutual and reciprocal defense of
themselves, and their Confederates, that shall be admitted into such League,
and for preservation and defense of the Spanish Netherlands; and for
restraining the further growth and increase of the French Monarchy, and
hindering their encroachments upon the rest of Europe. The excellency of which
League will appear by this; That the ends of it are in a manner common to all
Europe: For though the preservation of the Protestant Religion be most the
concernment of England and Holland, yet the special and immediate end of the
preservation of Flanders, and the general end of holding the Balance of Europe
is Universal.

Upon occasion of the beginning of the War between the Latins and the Romans,
Machiavil has delivered this Rule; That in all Consultations, it is best to
come immediately to the point in question, and bring things to a result,
without too tedious a hesitation and suspense. And the reason of this is
founded upon diverse observations which he gathers out of several parts of the
Roman Story: as, That weak Commonwealths are generally irresolute, and
ill-advised, as taking their measures more from necessity than election: That
it is the property of weak States to do every thing amiss, rnd never to do well
but in spite of their teeths; for there is no such thing as prudence amongst
them: That weak and irresolute States, do seldom take good Counsels, unless
they be forced; for their weakness suffers them not to deliberate, where any
thing is doubtful; and if that doubt be not removed by a violent necessity,
they never come to a resolution, but are always in suspense: And that it is a
fault peculiar to all weak and improvident Princes and Governments to be slow
and tedious, as well as uncertain in their Counsels, which is as dangerous as
the other. With diverse more of the like nature. Wherefore thete may seem to be
but one thing that may perplex us, and that is, Whether this course may sort to
the nature of the times and our circumstances? Touching this point the same
Author gives this Rule, That the occasion of every man's good or bad fortune
consists in his correspondence and accommodation with the times. The wary
course that Fabius took against Hannibal was good, because the times and the
condition of the Romans suited to it: But had the same course been holden on
when Scipio undertook the War, Hannibal might have staid in Italy; but the
times being changed, they also altered the method of the War. And it is
certainly true, That to every purpose there is a time and a judgment, therefore
the misery of man is great upon him, because the time is hard to be discerned:
for, if the time be missed, things cannot succeed: for man knows not his
time. If a man chooses a wrong time, he may labor and travel, not only in vain
as to the issues designed, but may bring forth his own destruction; for the
universal influence and concourse of the first Providence is wanting. But when
we shall seriously consider, that there is no other way left; that the French
King will neither be quiet himself, nor let any body else alone; and that we
must either throw up the Cudgels, and let him domineer as he pleases, or do
something that may either deter him from attempting further, or if he does, may
show him there is as good iron in the world as any he has in France. I say,
things being thus, I can foresee no objection of weight against the
proposition. That State that will defend it self, must be in a condition to
offend its enemies. And so long as this State shall give occasion to France to
apprehend that they are afraid of him, he will use them as Dogs.

Therefore since this is like to be a League of as great importance as has been
made in the world a good while, to render the same secure to the parties; to
add majesty and grandeur to it; to render it more sacred; and to give it weight
and reputation in the world; it will be necessary, that the same be approved,
ratified, and confirmed both by the Parliament of England, and the General
Estates of the Seven Provinces, in an extraordinary Assembly. I confess the
thing is both very extraordinary and magnificent, and will make the times
famous. But the arguments that enforce the necessity thereof are irrefragible;
the demonstration whereof I shall leave this whole discourse, and the dignity
and weight of the matters themselves, to give evidence unto: and shall say no
more in this place, Than that there is nothing that Princes and States may more
justly value themselves upon, than Faith and Sincerity, in their Leagues, and
Treaties, and Negotiations with other Princes and States: and insincerity or
Stare-hypocrisie less becomes the majesty of State, than it does private
persons in moral and civil actions.

But before we go any further, it will be but necessary to answer an Objection
that may be made on the part of England, and that is, That to confirm a League
by the Parliament, will weaken the Kings Prerogative. To which I answer 1. Ad
hominem; That which has been don in the time of former Kings, and those the
greatest and wisest of our Princes, and did not lessen their Prerogative; may
be don again without weakening the Prerogative of the present King. But this
thing has been often don in former Parliaments, as our Rolls of Parliament,
Records, Law Books and Histories show. But I shall content my self to name two
or three of the most Principal, as sufficient.

A League and Alliance was made between King Henry 5. his Heirs and
Successors, and Sigismond King of the Romans his Heirs and Successors Kings of
the Romans, and was confirmed by Act of Parliament. Coke Inst, pars 4.156. Rot.
Parl. 4. H. 5. No. 14.

That illustrious Peace, 9. H. 5. made between Charles the 6. of France, and
the said Henry 5. of England (who was the very Alexander of the Kings of
England for magnificence) by which the King of England had confirmed to him the
Regency of the Kingdom of France during the life of Charles, and the succession
of the Crown after his death, was ratified by the three Estates of France, and
sworn to by the King of England in Parliament, and by the same Parliament
ratified.

And 11. Henry 7. the same case happened again. The three States of the Kingdom
joined with the King in the ratification of a Peace with France in the same
manner. This King was a Prince of great wisdom and sufficiency (as I said
before); He invaded France with a Royal Army, made them buy a Peace of him, and
pay him Tribute, which continued yet in the times of Henry 8. his Son;
nevertheless he ratified a Peace by the Parliament. So you see two Kings, one
the greatest Conqueror, as the other was the greatest Politician of the Kings
of England, ratifying their Leagues (which nevertheless they purchased with
their own swords) by Parliaments.

And so sacred were our Leagues and Truces held to be in those times, that 2.
H. 5. c. 6. It was enacted by Parliament, That the breaking of Truces should be
High Treason in the subjects of England.

But 2. I answer ad Rem; It is said the Kings Prerogative is to make War and
Peace. If the King then make a League, and the Parliament confirm that League,
it is so far from lessening that it confirms that Authority.

That there must be a New League, and that it must have not only more, but
larger dimensions, then the present League in being, is evident: Because the
House of Commons in the late long Parliament voted, That the League offensive
and defensive, between his Majesty and this State, is not according to their
Advices given to his Majesty, nor pursuant to the ends by them proposed. Which
vote has blasted the present League: And if you should call twenty Parliaments,
they would all be of the same opinion.

And because all humane Providence is short-sighted, there may be a provisional
clause added; That where the ordinary provisions and remedies of this League
shall fall short or disproportionate, the Parliament shall be called to
deliberate of supplemental complements of provisions, that may be adequate to
the force that shall attacq the League; which will yet add both strength and
reputation to it.

But not to enter into Commonplace discourses, I will insist upon but one
thing more in this place, and it is this: There is a Rule which Machiavel has
observed, That the best and most secure way to repress the insolence of an
ambitious and powerful State, is to preclude and stop up those ways by which
he would come to his greatness: and that there is not a better or more secure
way to suppress the insolence, or cross-bite the designs of such, then to take
the same ways to prevent, which he takes to advance them. Now then, I think it
would be of great advantage to this League (as every body may easily apprehend)
to put Ostend and Neuport into the hands of England. And if Spain will suffer
themselves to hear reason, and be persuaded to do it, I am without all doubts,
a way may be found how they may do it with infallible security to themselves,
of having the said places restored to them, so that their end may be obtained,
and their hazard prevented.

Having now spoken to that part of the Parliaments confirmation, I shall
discourse, and that very briefly, the other part of the ratification by the
General Estates; and the more willingly, because I think it may import this
State in a double respect. And I have conceived it thus. The prescien^e,
predetermination and concourse of God, none denies, tho all have not conceived
of them in the same modus. But the Politician has said, That it is a certain
truth, that the things of this world are determined, and a set time appointed
for their duration; but those run throw the whole course which is assigned them
by their Stars, who keep their body in such Order, that it may not alter at
all, or if it does, it is for the better. And the way to preserve such Bodies (
mixed bodies, he speaks of, as Commonwealths) is renovation: for no mere bodies
are of long duration, unless they be often renewed; and the way be renew them
is to reduce them to their first principles; and they are reduced partly by
external accident, and partly by internal prudence. Those alterations are
therefore salutiferous, which reduce them toward their principles. But my
design is not to enter into the commonplace of renovation, therefore I go on.
And since it is in the nature of all things to decline, and tend to
depravation; It is the wisdom of Governments to look often back to their first
constitutions, which are the very Formalis Ratio, and Fundamental Laws of their
Governments. Therefore let the General Estates of the seven Provinces be
summoned to meet in the great Zael in the Hage, to these two general ends. 1.
To renew their Common-League among themselves, which will have these two
admirable effects: First to cure their internal disease, and especially that
kind of Politic Paralysis of the two Provinces of Groeningen and Friesland,
which tends to mutulation. Secondly to restore a kind of new life and vigor to
their Government. No Government can live, that has not extraordinary remedies
to have recource to in extraordinary cases: Rome had its Dictators, which kept
it in health; and England has its Parliament, without which its Government
could not stand. For this cause has our Parliaments so often renewed our Magna
Charta; near forty times. And 2. to ratify this League with England: For as
the first defends them against internal diseases; So this against external
Force; the two discases of which all Governments die. And this will also give
reputation abroad to the States thus recreated and fenced. And if there be any
other Argument necessary to enforce the proposition, it may be drawn from the
nature of the Government it self. There are in Story and Politiks, but three
Divisions of Commonwealths. First, They are either Single, as Athens,
Lacedemons, etc. Or by Leagues, as the Achaians, Aetolians, Switz, and the
States. Secondly they are divided, into such as are for preservation, as
Lacedemon and Venice; or for increase, as Athens and Rome. Or thirdly, Into
Equal and unequal in Libration. This is a a Government of a League, and for
preservation only, and very unequal; which whosoever shall thoroughly penetrate,
shall find cause to apprehend the weight of this proposition: for such another
War would shake the States in pieces. And there are but one of three ways for
them; War; Submission to France; or a League with England.

And if there were time, I think a man should not fear to want either matter
or words, to set home the Argument. They are now but newly delivered from the
most dangerous Crisis that ever their State passed under since its first
formation; wherein they have labored under, not only very dangerous domestic
Convulsions, but the powerful assaults of Foreign force. And therefore what
Physician that is not a Mountebank, would not prescribe some potent restorative
in such case?

I have now but two things to do, to finish this second part of my discourse.
The one is to set down some the just praises of the English Nation, to the end
these people may be moved to rely upon their friendship with the greater
confidence. And I would have don it elabouratly, but that my discourse has
already drawn it self out to so great a length. The other is, The admirable
effect that will be produced by oposeing the English courage to the French
fierceness. Let us then but run them over.

The English have always been sincere in their Leagues, Alliances, and
Treaties. I know presently what will be cast in our teeth, and that is the
infamous breach of the Triple League. But as he shall always be very far from
making a true judgment, that shall determine upon one or a few single actions;
so nothing can be more injurious then to impeach the Faith of a gallant Nation,
for that which no body have regreted more then themselves. The Philosopher has
said, that actions denominate not the subject to be such. And it is true in
Divinity, That a man is not to be judged by a few, or many single actions; but
by the course and tenor of his life. I say then, that the excellent virtue of
faithfulness, has been the general tenor of the English in all times. Let not
so foul an indignity therefore be charged on them; but let the crime lie at
the doors of those few men who were the Authors and Counselors of it. And in
the mean time I will comfort my self with this hope, that when the Sanction of
our Parliament shall come to be put upon this League, his Majesty and the
whole Nation with him, will be restored to the good opinion of all whose
interest it is not to believe lies. And let me say this, that I have not found
in Story any nation to be preferred to them for the above mentioned excellent
quality; wherein I may affirm that they have exceeded the Romans themselves:
For the Romans passionatly affecting an Universal Soveraigntie and Dominion,
were not seldom constrained shamefully to prevaricate, to make strained
constructions of their Leagues, to violate their Faith, and to pass over all
whatsoever respects of honor, to travel to the ends of their ambition. Whereas
the English never can have any interest to propogate their Empire upon the body
of Europe beyond those bounds, which God by nature (his instrument) prescribed
to them: The most they pretend to is, to be Arbiters between the Princes and
States of Europe, as we may see in the example of Henry 8. who living in an
active time, when three such great spirited Princes met, as himself, Charles V.
and Frances I. of France, might have made his own markets; yet sought no more
than to keep the Balance equal between those two. England then, in Peace, has
been famous for the excellent virtue of loyalty and faithfulness: and in all
times for keeping close to that righteous Maxim of holding the Balance of
Europe steady a Maxim they took up above six hundred years ago. In War they
have been renowned for their courage, redoubted strength, and great
achievements. In a word, in War they have been just, as well as valiant; in
Peace kind, and in both sincere. And for the profession of the true Religion
(without which all other things are either nothing, or as good as nothing) they
have been celebrated above all the Nations of Europe. It began there early, and
continued in the worst of times: and since the Reformation, her Divines has
been the most learned and pious of the Christian world; as all Foreign Divines
will be ready to testify. These methinks should be powerful encouragements to
this State to join with England. England, in whom the public virtue of true
meaning, is inherent: from whom both in Peace and War we may expect not only
Justice, but even generous goodness (to allude to the most ancient distinction
of the Jews:) and who against all other Nations are zealous against Popery.

But that it may appear we do not lay our stress upon general and rhetorical
discourses, there are other considerations of a more particular nature, which
must not be passed over. England has been the principal instrument of saving
this State twice from destruction; once in the Infancy of their Commonwealth,
in the time of Queen Elizabeth, against the Spaniard; and now again in the late
War, from the French. Again, nothing can secure this State for the future,
against the mischiefs impending from France, but the friendship of England. And
that England, in conjunction with this State, is able to balance the French
Monarchy, I shall thus demonstrate. France is larger than England, but England
will always afford more Soldiers than France, I mean Foot: and the strength of
all Armies consists in the Infantry. The reasons of this are these two. 1. The
division of the people. In France, and generally in all other Countries, there
are but two divisions of the people, the Nobless and the Peasants; but in
England we have three. 1. The Nobless, that is the Nobility and Gentry,
competent to furnish a sufficient Cavalry. 2. The Yeomanry, or middle sort of
people, which make up the great Body of the Kingdom, and who are sufficient to
furnish the greatest and strongest Infantry of any Kingdom or State in the
Christian world. And 3. the inferior sort or Servants; I mean such as work for
day-wages, which are very inconsiderable in number to the Yeomanry. The
division of the people is one of the principal foundations of Empire: and the
division of the people in England, being the best and most perfect of any other
in all Europe, it must necessarily follow, that England is capable to endure
stronger shocks than any other Kingdom or State, founded upon the same balance
of Government, and is the most perfect Government of its kind in Europe. 2. In
England, the People, that is, the inferior Gentry and Yeomanry are an
overbalance, both to the King, Nobility, and Church, which is a defect in
Monarchy, and tends to the generation of a Commonwealth. In France and Spain,
the King and the Nobility have destroyed the People; but in England the King
and the People have destroyed the Nobility. I say then the strength of the
Kingdom of England is in the inferior Gentry and Yeomanry, and these exceeding
all other Kingdoms in number, strength, and courage, it must needs follow if
the business should come to be tried, where blows must decide, that England
would be found an over-match even to France it self, if Demonstration be
Demonstration. But the cause and occasion how these two things come to be so,
that is, why the Nobility of England are so depressed, and the people become so
formidable; as you may see they are, if you look but upon the House of Lords,
and the House of Commons, in our present Parliaments. I say, the cause is,
those popular Statutes of Population, against retainers of the Nobility, and
for Alienations of their Lands, made by Henry 7. (the Romulus of the English
Kings) which shows the unwariness of that politic King, who in seeking to cure
that dangerous flaw in the Government, of the Nobilities being an over-match to
the Prince, made a far greater, of making the Commons formidable: for the one
strikes only at a King they dislike, the other at the Throne it self; although
it be true those effects came not to manifest themselves, till above one
hundred years after his death. Therefore a wise Prince indeed he was, but not
long-sighted.

To the second. The French have beaten and baffled the greatest part of the
Christian world without fighting, and have oppressed them at their own charge.
But if ever they should come to deal with an Enemy that would force them to
fight, they would show themselves to be Frenchmen, that is, would suffer
themselves to be persuaded to submit to more reasonable terms.

If you look upon the carriage of this whole War, you may presently see, that
the wisest thing which the French thought they could do, was ever to avoid
fighting, supposing surely, that therein they imitated the wisdom of Fabius
Maximus. But this is most certain (as the discourses upon Livy proves) That a
General who desires to keep the Field, cannot avoid fighting when the Enemy
presses, and makes it his business to engage him. For in such case there are
but one of three ways. The first is the way of Fabius, of standing upon your
guard, and keeping your Army in places of Advantage, and this is laudable and
good, when your Army is so strong that the Enemy dares not attaque you, as it
was in the case of Fabius and Hannibal: for if Hannibal had advanced, Fabius
would have kept his ground and engaged him. The second way to avoid fighting,
if your Enemy will needs attaque you, is flying, and fight or fly you must.
Philip of Macedon being invaded by the Romans, resolved not to come to a
Battle; and to avoid it, he took the way of Fabius, encamped his Army upon the
top of a Mountain, and entrenched himself so strongly, that he believed the
Romans durst not have ventured to come at him. But alas, the Romans were
another kind of Enemy, they not only adventured, but removed him from his
Mountain, and forced him to fly with the greatest part of his Army; and had it
not been for the unpassableness of the Country which hindered the pursuit, the
Macedonians had all been cut off. The French were strongly encamped at St.
Dennis, and did not at all believe that the Prince of Orange would attaque
them, and yet for all their confidence, they could find no other remedy than to
betake themselves to their heels. And this was the greatest and most famous
action of the whole War. The third way to avoid fighting, is to shut your self
up in some strong Town, which is the most pernicious way of all, as making your
ruin inevitable. Therefore (as Machiavel says) to keep the Field, and avoid
fighting, is to be done no way so securely as by keeping fifty miles off, and
sending out store of Spies and Scouts that may give you notice of the Enemies
approach, and opportunity to retreat.

Nor is it necessary to do all this, that your Army should be very numerous.
The Romans and the Greeks always carried on their Wars with a few men,
depending more upon their great order and the excellence of their Discipline,
than great numbers; but the Eastern and Western Nations did all by their
multitudes. Alexander conquered the world with 30000. men. Pyrrhus was wont to
say that with 15000. men he would go through the world. And yet Pyrrhus fought
against the Romans, and beat them in two Battles, and was in the judgment of
Hannibal himself, one of the greatest Captains of the world. The ordinary Roman
Army consisted of about 24000. men, and if they were at any time overpressed
with numbers, they exceeded not 50000. with which number at one time they
opposed 200000. Gauls, or, if you will, call them Frenchmen.

There are two Nations whose genius resembles that of the ancient Romans, the
Germans and the English, who are descended from them. But there are these two
differences between them: The Germans you shall never bring up to make a point
blank attaque in the mouth of Cannons, in such fashion as the English; nor
again after a rout shall you hardly make them rally, as you may the English.
From all these things I make this conclusion, That if the French renew the War
again, the best way will be to oppose them with an Army of English, and by all
means to force them to fight continually, till the Field be too hot for them,
and when they can keep that no longer, their Towns will be of little service to
them. The English have fought many Battles with the French, and always beaten
them; and yet the French have exceeded them much in numbers: as in the
memorable Battle of Poictiers, where the English were but about 8000. and the
French were 60000.

And thus I come to the third and last part of my Discourse, the office whereof
is to dispose into method, such arguments as will be necessary to be used to
the several parties, that is to say, the King, Parliament, and this State, to
draw them on to such a League: and they are as follows.

To the King.
1. It will serve to conciliate, and beget a better understanding between him
and the Parliament, and to remove some part of that jealousy which the people
travail with of the Kings administration, and which will never leave burning
till it burn to the Foundations of the Throne if not prevented. And if it
attains not the end of introducing other cooperative acts of concord, it will
at least avert the hastening on of greater evils. There be some of those things
which the Parliament would have, which the King would consent to, upon
condition he might not be pressed in the rest, as the case of the Duke of York,
etc. Therefore let them begin with some popular great thing that may involve
the interests and affections of all.

2. As to that point of the confirmation by the Parliament, I have showed the
presidents of former times.

3. The Ratifi^ation here by the General Estates will be equipolent to the
Ratification in England by the Parliament, which saves the Kings honor. For
thus the parties rather conspire in one, how to render this League illustrious
and great, than on their respective parts to be forced to any thing.

To the Parliament.
1. Let it move from themselves, that is, let some of those in the House of
Commons, who are of unquestionable reputation for Wisdom, Honesty and
Integrity, be engaged; let them engage others; and let them communicate their
Counsels with my Lord Shaftsbury and that Party in the House of Lords. Then let
the Scheme and Project be proposed in the House of Commons, then the Commons
seek the Lords concurrence; and then let it be offered to the King, as the
advice of the whole Kingdom; for every man is there in person, or by
representation.

2. This will shut up those avenues, those back doors, by which the French have
had accesses to our Councils, and have influenced them. And consequently will
render the sitting of Parliaments more calm and secure, when that mighty trade
of theirs, of buying Prorogations shall be spoiled, and their Factors rendered
less malignant.

3. This is an infallible argument, As the end of a thing is, so is the thing.
The two general ends of this League are; To preserve the Protestant Religion;
and to preserve and restore the Balance of Europe, by lessening the power of
France. And those are the two greatest ends in Christendom; therefore that
thing that has those for its ends is the greatest thing: and the minds of
gallant men are exceedingly moved with great things, and strongly carried to
the pursuit of them.

To this State.
1. The first argument is prudential. Prudence is that virtue, by which, when
several things are offered, we are directed which to choose, and which to
refuse; what to do, and what not to do. Holland then must eiaher make a League
with France, or with England, or remain Neuter.

To make a League with France is utterly imprudent, for these two reasons.

1. Because France aiming at and designing an Universal Monarchy, would only
secure himself of them, till their own turn come, that is, till he has
swallowed up the Spanish Netherlands and Germany, when he would turn his Force
upon them.

2. By such means they would lose the best and surest friend they have had from
their Foundation of their State, and that is England. And where a State is not
sufficient by its own proper force, in respect of the weakness of the same, or
the mightiness of its Neighbors, to defend it self, it must of necessity rely
some where else for protection.

To remain in a neutral condition cannot be. For so, instead of making one
friend, they would make three enemies. And in case France should renew the war
upon them, England would be won, upon such terms as France would offer, either
to join with them, or to stand still, and see Holland ruined. Besides how
impolitic a thing neutrality is, any man may see that will consider the
observations made there on. Match. Prince cap. 21.

It remains then, and I know nothing else that remains, To make a League with
England. For that will have one of two effects. Either France will be wholly
deterred from attempting upon their State; or if he does they will be able with
the assistance of England to defend themselves. This is the first Argument.

2. The authority and reputation of the Proposers; It is a League proposed by
the Parliament of England, to be entered into with the King and Kingdom of
England. The Parliament represents the whole people of England, and commands
both the parts and persons of a great, rich and valiant nation, from whom
neither money nor soldiers will be wanting to beat down the power of that
proud and insulting nation of France. But these people here are afraid of
France, why then, let them make a league with those of whom France it self is
afraid. And withal let them remember this League is to be made with a People,
from whom they have received the greatest benefits, as I have showed before.
And this argument alone will beat down the most, if not all the objections that
would arise against such a League, proposed in any other manner.

3. The great reputation and security such a League will give to this State,
which will cover them as with wings of Protection against France, and whosoever
else would prey upon them.

If I have not expressed these things so as I would, I have done it so well as
I can in a short time. And so submitting it with all decent humility, to the
grave Considerations of those excellent personages whom it may most concern, I
leave it to its Fate.

Hague. May 24. 80.
FINIS.

