Consultum Sanitatis, A DIRECTORY to HEALTH, Displayed in several CHOICE
MEDECINES For the Cure of The Rageing Gout, The tormenting Stone, The panting
Asthma, The sense destroying Epilepsie and Convulsion fits, and fits of the
Mother, the killing Surfeits and Feavors, the lingering Agues, and all other (by
some reputed in curable) distempers where the power of the disease has not
conquered the strength of Nature.

Made and Composed by the long Study Practice and Experience of Roger Dixon
Master in Surgery.

^ad now at the Request of some Friends by him published for the general good.

LONDON Printed in the year, 1663.

TO THE Ingenious Reader.
Readers,
AFTER a long time not only of study, but also practice and experience of the
many excellent preparations here mentioned; I was at last induced to publish
them; though I have often resolved the Contrary; but at last being unwilling to
let them dye; and finding daily, ^^ny Emperical Trumperies beagged on, abroad;
I was induced to publish this small Treatise; That the world may have the
experience of truths published in Print as well as they have too often woeful
experience of the Sophistications of Ignorant cracks I do not write this out of
any ostentation but refer the proof hereof to the Judgment of those Who shall
make experiment, in the mean time, I shall desire all parties to suspend their
censure; and put it to the Test: before they vent any prejudicate opinion or
rashly pass sentence either good or bad, on either the Author or Medecines;
and let the Medecines themselves be Judges on my part; I intend not this to
make an Absoloms Pillar; like him that is Suitor ultra Crepidam; but have kept
my self within the bounds of Art, whereof I am a member; and shall be ready and
wiling to render to the judicious, an account thereof, for the ignorant, or the
detracting Momus or Zoilus; they may keep their money and their diseases too;
for the sober Judicious they shall at any time when desired have in what is
convenient the ready assistance of

Reader Your real Friend ROGER DIXON.
Water Lane near the Custom House. March 10. 1662.
The several kinds of Medicines I shall here treat of, are ranked under these
general heads.
I. SOl triumphans, being the Horizantall Gold of Van Helmont or the
Diaphoretick of Paracelsus. II. A pill for the certain cure of such who have
gotten any wounds, hurts or distempers by their over much valor in the wars of
Venus. III. A general purge, neatly purging all humors in the body, being very
good in the beginning of Fevers, and all cases where purging is requisite:
having been approved of and commended by Learned Physicians. IIII. A Pill for
the Convulsion, and fits of the Mother, and vapors thence arising, a certain
and approved Remedy. V. A Balsamic pill, being the Essential virtue of
vegetables truly corrected and rightly prepared. VI. A powder for all sorts of
Agues, especially the Quartain it cures infallibly. VII. Sal mundi, a
super-excellent medicine, never before made or published by any, nor is to be
found in any Doctors study, Apothecaries shop, or Chemists Laberatory. VIII. A
powder for the Green Sickness: a safe and speedy cure for that distemper. IX. A
plaster for Corns in the feet, toes, or else where, which presently gives
ease, dissolves and presently takes them away.


Of every one of these in order I shall give you a particular description of
their virtues and use, and referr you to the places where they shall be always
in readiness provided for you, with directions to use them; and the reasonable
rates at which every one may be afforded.

And first of the Sol triumphans, or Horizontall Gold.

This transcendent and admirable medicine (wherewith) Paracelsus and
Van-Helmont, whose fame for the many wonderful cures they wrought hereby, has
made them immortal:) has so many eximious virtues as are too tedious to
express; as for the Gout, it is a certain and sure remedy, so that all those
that languish thereby, may by the use hereof have present ease and perfect cure.

It takes away all accidents which remains in the bodies of those that have
taken any Mercury or Mercuriall medicine, which casts so many into Consumptions
by the Mercury remaining in their bodies.

It will stop any Flux caused by the taking of Mercury, be it never so high:
and cure the Patient, as I have often experienced, it is of singular efficacy
in the Dropsy, Jaundies, Epilepsie, and all Cronick distempers, as appears by
Van-Helmont, who says he never found it to fail him in any case whatsoever,
mightily commending it in Fevers, and almost every disease else, as you may
read at large in his book lately translated: to which for further satisfaction
I refer the Reader.

II.
The second medicine before mentioned is a pill for the diseases venerial; be
it of what nature soever; this pill will effect the cure without any other
medicine or diet drink.

It will take away all pains or aches of the bones; Nodes, Swellings, and all
sores in any part, or Ulcers only taking this pill: and washing the sores or
Ulcers with Allum-water or any such ordinary thing, as a little Plantain-water
with Alum in it, or the ^ike.

But if there be a Gonorrhea, with the disease, this pill takes off the
malignity of the distemper: but such other applications must be administered for
the cure, as to the stopping of the Running of the Reins is propper. This pill
far exceeds Hughs his powder, which is sold at three pound ten shillings a
dose, and this you may have for five shillings a pill which is a Dose of
greater value then his.

III.
The third medicine in order, is the purging Powder, or the general purge,
which neatly purges all humors, and is of excellent use in the beginning of
Fevers, and in all other cases where purging is requisite.

The Dose is the quantity, sealed up in one of the papers, exposed publicly to
sale for a reasonable ordinary body: to weak people give two thirds of this
Dose; and to children one third part of this Dose; it is or excellent use for
children, to kill the Worms; it may be taken in the pap of an apple, or in a
little Sirrup in a spoon, or in any Conserve, with a little honey, or in a
spoonful or two of Wine, taking after it either broth or posset drink, as in
the taking of other Physic; It is grateful to the taste, excellently taking
away, and carrying off peccant humors, exceeding all other purges whatsoever.
If you vomit, put a pretty quantity of Salt into a dish of Broth and drink it,
and it works only downward.

IV.
In the fourth place, according to the method before laid down, follows to be
described a medicine (nulli secunda) which is to be taken in the form of a pill
for the benefit of all such as labor under, or are afflicted with that sad
distemper called Convulsion fits, or the fits of the Mother; and all Vapors,
Winds, and Griefs thence arising, or proceeding therefrom; It would take up a
whole volumn to set forth at large what I could by experience say of this
distemper; and make large Legend to insert therein the number of those who had
the happiness to meet with a Restorer of their health; and constitution by the
use of this Medicine by my Administration; but briefly let me tell you, all
such as labor and languish under this bad and grievous affliction.

Let them take of these Pills one at a time, at any time when you find your
selves beginning to be grieved with this infirmity; before the strength of the
fit seizes upon you; for which purpose it is always good to have a quantity
about you that are subject to this grief, that you may take one at any time
when you find your self oppressed, and by a little continuance of taking it
you will find a certain cure; never returning again, unless by some
extraordinary accident, fright, or grief, it happen to return, and then it may
be soon discussed. And some I have cured many years ago by this very medicine
which have never been troubled with it more; and some by the first taking
hereof have been cured, and had but one fit in a quarter of a year after,
though before have been constantly afflicted with violent fits, once, if not
twice every day.

V.
5. In the next place, I present to your view a Sovereign Medicine called a
Balsannike-Pill, being the essential virtue of vegetables truly corrected and
rightly prepared by me after long study and great pains and diligence, which
has these approved effects following, far exceeding any thing of this nature
hitherto published, as have certa^^nly experienced.

Whereas many die for want of a certain help which God has provided for them,
by violent Coughs which destroy the body,

This Pill alone being taken as here is prescribed in all Coughs, be they of
what nature soever, it is a perfect and speedy Remedy.

The like effects it has upon those who are troubled with shortness or
difficulty of breathing, and all Asthmatical and Ptisicall humors.

It is a great preserver of nature, so that in Consumptions, whereof so many
languish and perish and fill the Churchyards, may by the timely use here of be
restored, and healthfully preserved in their places and callings.

All pains, aches, stitches, and winds, arising from the Hypochondriacks, or
the like, it eases and takes away.

It has a singular operation in all obstruction of the Liver, Spleen,
Myseraicks and treters; as well as in stoppings and obstructions of the Lungs,
it opens, removes, and clenses.

For children laboring with or inclined to the Rickets it is a perfect Cure.

It prevents the stone both in the Kidneies and Bladder, and gives ease in the
violent pains of the same,

It very much abates r^ging pains of the Gout; they who frequently use it, will
find a certain benefit by it.

In Epilepsies and Convulsion fits it has rare effects.

This sovereign balsamic Pill is constantly prepared by me Roger Dixon, and to
be had always at my house in water-Lane, and at Mr. Turners in
Christopher-Alley in St. Martins-le-grand, who makes the Dentifrices for the
teeth; the price is three Pills a Shilling, a Medicine cheap and good. The dose
is one Pill at a time, to ordinary bodies; to very strong bodies two pills, or
one and a half, to weak children half a pill: those that cannot swallow a pill,
may dissolve it in a spoonful or two of wine, or a little Mace-Ale, but it has
no evil taste, therefore no curious pallat may fear the taking of it.

But particularly those that are troubled with the Cough or any of the
distempers before mentioned, let them take one of these pills at night going to
bed, for a man or woman of any reasonable strength, either swallow it or
dissolve it, and take it as before is directed, and after the same manner, let
persons weaker or stronger take the dose before prescribed accordingly.

For the Rickets, dissolve one of these pills in a quarter of a pint of wine,
and give a child half a spoonful at a time four times a day.

The operation of this Balsamic pill is specifical, not making the body sick,
nor troubling the stomach, but carries away the peccant humors by gentle
breathing, sweates and urine.

VI.
The next Medicine which here we do intend to treat of, in order to the method
before promised in this our intended publication, is,

A specifical powder prepared effectual to take away, and remedy that so
Epidemical and languishing, lingering distemper called the Ague, which has
various kinds and operations, especially the Quartane; Ague; which has so long
reigned under the Title of Medicorum Scandalae, this powder infallibly cures.

The direction how to use this powder for the Ague is as follows viz.

For men or women troubled with Agues, take half one of these papers of powder
and put it into half a paint of Sack, and take hereof two spoonfuls in the
morning, and four at night, and the same dose the next day, on the two
intermitting days, if it be in a Quartane Ague; and on the day the fit comes,
take the rest of the paper of powder an hour before the coming of the fit; and
after it, drink a good draught of posset drink, wherein a handful of green
Lavender, and as much Cinquefoile have been boiled; and then let the Patient
cover himself to sweat; and about half an hour after let him drink another
draught of the same posset drink, and so continue him till the could fit is
over: Then if he comes to have any hot burning fit afterward and be very
thirsty, give him a draught of fair water wherein you have first boiled a crust
of bread, and a few raisins of the sun stoned, adding to it so much of our Sal
mundi here prescribed, as will give it a pleasant sharp taste; which will to
admiration quench his thirst, and abate the great desire to drink, and prevent
those evil accidents which usually attend all Quartane Agues viz. Jaundies and
Scurvy, the like medicine being no where else to be found.

For Tertian and Quotidian Agues, take the same quantity night and morning in
wine as before; and before the coming of the fit, drink the posset drink before
without any powder, using the same salt and Julip to abate and take away the
Fever and the drought occasioned thereby, as in the Quartane.

This medicene being thus observed, and made use of, and continued a little
time, pecially in the Quartane Ague, which otherwise will be subject to return
again; people may be free from those long continuing masters the Agues, which
some have called evil Spirits: And because we have here necessarily spoke of
some use of our Sal Mundi: the description of that follows in the seventh
place, together with its various uses, and further superexcellent virtues.

VII.
Sal Mundi; by this and many more Titles it may well be called: whosoever makes
experience of it, will soon confess, it being a superexcellent Medicine,
transcending all those things hitherto published, or known to the world, never
before found, neither is there any thing of so pure a nature to be had in any
Doctors library, study, or Apothecaries Shop, or Chemists Laboratory.

It has these following; and many more infallible effects, and singular
virtues.

As first in all manner of Fevers, a dose taken in any convenient Liquor,
abates their heat and Malignancy and is a great Resister of putrefaction. The
poor who have not the benefit of Apothecaries Iuleps, may make themselves a
pleasant and profitable one for Fevers and great droughts, by taking fait
water and boil therein a crust of bread, and a few Raisins, stoned and in a
draught thereof take a dose of this Salt.

It mightily quenches thirst, and abates the drought of the throat, being taken
in fair water, wherein a Crust of bread and a few raisins have been boiled, as
is said before; it takes away the heat of the Stomach and and that more
dangerous then is imagined distemper called heart-burning.

The Plenrisy it perfectly cures, and the Countrymans harvest Surfeit, whereby
many strong men are suddenly snatched away in the flower of their days. It is
good to dissolve the stone in the bladder, the use of it being continued a
little time.

For the Scurvie theri is nothing more excellent, and to preserve or purify
the drink or water at Sea which Seamen drink; by the use of this they will be
preserved from those diseases they are by long voyages and bad drink subjected
unto, which would soon be verified by practice if Chirurgions knew it well, but
none of them ever yet knew of it; but now I advise both them and all persons
else that go to Sea never to be unprovided of it; for a better yet they never
carried with them, and this will not decay, but may be kept a long time, for
its use and virtue never fails.

If any Physician will try or taste it, if reason will convince him, he will
soon conclude that this is not published only for the help of the ignorant, but
will deserve the practice of the most learned.

The Dose is half the quantity contained in one of the papers exposed to
public sale, which may be taken at any time in any convenient Liquor once or
twice a day; but in the Pleurisy and Fevers, take the same quantity in the
Julip of fair water above mentioned, or in other proper and convenient Julips
or Sirrups as often as is required. They are sold at twelve shillings a paper.

VIII.
The next to be spoken of in order to our first prescription, is a powder for
the cure of that faint and feeble distemper in young Maids called the Green
sickness; which is an evil Malady, if not timely prevented. This medicine is a
certain and effectual cure; The way to take it is thus, viz.

Take as much of this Powder as will lie on a groat or sixpence every morning
in a spoonful of Wormwood wine, or Wormwood beer, drinking a small draught of
the same drink after it, and walk after it an hour; and then take some
Water-grewell made strong with Penny-royall boiled in it for the patients
breakfast: use this a few days together, and if one paper of this powder effect
not the cure, be sure continue taking of it, and another paper will do it, for
it is never known to fail; it has also a grateful scent and taste.

Those that love not Wormwood drink, may take it in a glass of Sack or Rhenish
wine; whosoever uses it, after three or four days taking hereof, will walk with
pleasure; it will soon bring them to a good color and a good stomach.

Lastly, having now provided remedies for all diseases and afflictions of the
body, that you way walk with ease; I have also prepared a cure for that painful
excrementious humors, called Corns in the Feet or Toes, or elsewhere.

For a cure for this Malady, I have an excellent plaster, which is thus to be
applied.

Cut away the hardness of the Corn, then apply to the place as much of this
plaster as will cover it, and renew it once in three or four days, it will
soon give ease, and take away the Corn in a short time, being constantly
applied.

If any person desire further satisfaction in any thing herein, if they please
to come to me at my house in Water-lane near the Custom-house, or to Mr.
Turners at his house near St. Christophers-Alley in St. Martins-le-grand, they
shall be further resolved.

The Sol Triumphans or Horizantal Gold only excepted, that I keep only at my
own house.

The price of the other is as follows. 1. The Pill for the Venerial distempers
(at five shillings the pil, which is one Dose, which is to be taken every third
day) intermitting two days. 2. The purging powder is one shilling a paper,
sealed up, which is one Dose for ordinary persons, weaker persons, two thirds,
and for Children one third part of the Dose.


The pill for Convulsion fits, and fits of the Mother, are sealed up three
together for one shilling, one at a time is a Dose, as before is directed.

The Balsamic pill, are sold three for a shilling, also one is a Dose, every
night to be taken, or when you go to bed, drinking a little Sack after it, if
you have it; otherwise a little warm Ale.

The Ague is likewise twelve pence a paper; though its virtue and operation far
exceeds that which is called the Jesuits powder which is sold at ten shillings
a Dose.

Sal-mundi is also afforded at one shilling the paper.

The Green Sickness powder is at two shillings sixpence a paper, every paper
containing half an ounce, which is many Doses.

The plaster for the Corns at twelve-pence a plaster.

From my house in Water lane 1 March 1663. Roger Dixon.

These medicines before, mentioned, an always ready prepared to be had at my
house in Water-lane near the Custom house.

At the house of Mr. Turner, Author of the Dentifrices for the Teeth: in St.
Christophers Alley in St. Martyns-le-grand, at Mr. Nathaniel Brooks his shop at
the Angel in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange, and at Mrs. Stamps Bookseller in
West minster hall, at the Shop of Rachard Dixon Barber in Queen street. And by
Mr. Fountain, Tooth-drawer near the Maypole in the Strand; at Mr. Maynards
shop, Goldsmith, at the Blew Bell in Southwark at St. Margarets-hill. Thomas
Webb at Mr Tallies a Plaisterer in the little Minoxies, at Adam Hares near
Lime-house over against the Green dragon Tavern in Ratcliff, with directions
for the use, at all which places this Book is also to be had.

Mr. Turners excellent Dentifrices for cleansing the Teeth, sweetning the
Breath, and preventing the Toothache, are sold at the shop of Mr. Rooks at the
sign of the Holy Lamb and Ink-bottle at the East end of St. Paul's Church, at
Mr. Sowrebys near the Turnstile going out of Lincoln's Inn fields to Newmarket,
and at the Authors own house in St. Christophers Alley in St. Martins-le-grand:
with directions printed for the use of them. They are sold at such other places
as the said Authors Bill makes mention of.

As also the true Symapathetical powder, curing all green wounds, etc. sold by
Mr. Nathaniel Brook only at the Angel in Cornhill.


