A DISCOVERY Of the SOCIETY In relation to their POLITICS. Written Originally,
BY A Well-wisher to the JESVITS.

To the READER.
We are by a Divine Authority assured, that there are those in the world, who
who like the deaf Adder, out of pure obstinacy, will not hear the voice of the
Charmer, and that there is a generation of men that hate to be reformed. Thence
is it, that accordingly experience is so pregnant to show, that, of all the
people, these look on the least discovery of their enormities, as the most
heinous injury can be done them; making so little advantage either of the
charming Admonitions of Friends, or the consorious Reproaches of Adversaries,
that they think it the greatest shame that may be to retract, and choose rather
to betray their exasperation, then express any desires of amendment. That the
ensuing Piece was written long since, and that by a Person not much an enemy to
the Jesuits, are things not to be dissembled, as being remarkable from several
passages of it: but to give a^ an account of the present revivall of it, is
what cannot be done without a certain regret, and compassion. That Religious
men, such as had by solemn Vows abjured not only the enjoyments of this world,
but also all commerce with it, as to what concerns the management of the
affairs thereof, should be guilty of so great miscarriages, argues such a
grievance, and dereliction of the Spirit, that, according to their
Justification, they should be guided by, as cannot without horror fall into the
reflection of a good man. But to find them so wedded to mischievous practices,
as that, though they were long since laid at their doors, there should still
be a necessity to bring them upon the stage, and that merely because former
remonstrances proved fruitless and ineffectuall, it certainly speaks not an
indifference, or backwardness, but a hatred of reformation. And yet thus does
the case stand with the Society, whose courses gave eccasion of the present
DISCOVERY.

A DISCOVERY Of the SOCIETY In relation to their POLITICS, etc.
UPon the first Institution of the Society and religious Order of the Jesuits,
it was generally looked upon as a Tree planted in the Vineyard of Christ, where
of the fruits should be an Antidote against the poison of Heresy, and whose
blossoms should be no other then those of Christian and Religious works, for
the edification of, and reduction of those souls that otherwise were likely to
stray. And such no doubt it was intended by the Founder thereof, Ignatius, and
such, it is to be thought, continued while it was cultivated by those first
Fathers, from whose Piety, and austerity, as it derived vigor and life, so did
it sorce the esteem and veneration of all. This glorious Tree spread it self
into two Branches, one of Love toward God, the other toward their Neighbor.
So that considering the smalness of its roots, it is almost incredible, what
abundance of fruit it brought forth, in the excellent education of children,
the saving of souls, and the propagation of Christian and Catholic Faith.

But the indefatigable Enemy of Mankind, the Devil, who is exasperated at all
manner of good, and whatsoever has the least tendency to reformation,
discovered his earnestness and subtilty to destroy this glorious tree, and with
it all the fruitful advantages the world expected to reap thereby; taking
occasion even from the greatness it self of this Religious Order, and from that
admirable improvement which it had made in so small a space of time, to pervert
the first Institution thereof, with artifices, sycophancy and insinuation.
Instead of these two branches of Charity toward God and man, now utterly dried
up, he has engrafted two others, one of self love, the other a spirit minding
only the advantages of this World. Which how great a prejudice it has proved
to the Christian Religion in all parts of the world, if that be the design of
the present DISCOVERY to demonstrate. Wherein, I speak it in the presence of
the All-seeing. I shall not advance any thing out of passion or interest, but
that whatever is done, proceeds from an innocent zeal to the public good, and
a tenderness to the welfare of the Society it self, as also to the end, that
Princes being acquainted with their artifices, may, for the benefit of the
people they govern, by timely remedies, prevent and clude them.

It is therefore to be noted, that the Society of the Jesuits spreading and
enlarging it self more and more by their undertaking the education of Children
(a design no doubt acceptable to all Cities and Kingdoms) they accordingly,
upon their first Institution so far ingratiated themselves with Princes, that
in a few years they diffos'd themselves so far as other Orders had done in many
Centuries.

This unexpected arrival to Greatness, which ever works a strange alteration
in men's minds and humors, raised in the Successors of Ignatius such a high
opinion of, and love to their own Society, that vaingloriously hence concluding
themselves more beneficial to the Church of God, and such as had made a far
greater progress into the business of Reformation then all other orders, they
thought it their main concernment to endeavor it is further growth and
enlargement, that is, (to give it you in their own words) to promote the Cause
of Christ, the advantages of his Church, and to improve the Patrimony of Jesus.

And here can I not but wish my self the subtilty of Aristotle, and the
eloquence of the Roman Orator to discover and express the miraculous ways
whereby they effect their design (a thing that by reason of its novelty seems
incredible) and daily enlarge the jurisdiction of their Society. But I shall
think it sufficient to glance only at some few things, leaving it to other men's
judgments to make what glosses they shall think fit thereupon, and to
conceive an Idea of those men suitable thereto. The ensuing heads therefore I
desire the Reader to take for the ground of his discourse.

The Fathers of the Society finding that their teaching, preaching,
administration of the Sacraments, and other religious and Monastical exercises
contributed not so much as was expected to the raising of them to the
greatness they aspired to, were forced to think of other ways to effect their
design. For though (as is said) they were entertained at the beginning with all
kindness by many people, yet in process of time they perceived that, through
dissatisfaction, or some other occasion, those that had honored them bebefore
withdrew their affection from them; wherefore fearing their growth should
determine in their infancy, they found out two other ways to keep up, and to
enlarge the greatness of their Order.

One was, by calumnies and crafty insinuations to raise in the minds of
Princes, and consequently as many others as they could, a base opinion of all
other Religious Institutions, making them despicable by discoveting their
impersections, and like subtle Politicians, building up their own greatness
upon the ruins of others. By this means got they our of the hands of the
lawful Possessors, many Monasteries, Abbeys and other Spiritual revenues,
depriving those Religious men that formerly enjoyed them, both of them, and all
that belonged thereto.

Another was, their pragmaticall engaging themselves in Affairs of State,
thrusting themselves into the interests and concernments of Christian Princes.
To bring this to effect, they have as subtle and artificious a device as any
the world was yet acquainted withal; into which, as it is hard to penetrate,
so is it almost impossible to make a sull discovery thereof.

Rome is the constant residence of the chief of the Society, commonly known by
the name of General, or Pather General, to whom all the rest render exact
obedience. Besides him, there are for the most part resident in the same place
certain persons chosen from among the other Fathers, who from the Assistance
they always give Him, are called his ASSISTANTS. Of this quality there is one
at least as a Representative of every Nation, who, from the Nation he
represents, takes his name. Hence, one is styled the Assistant of France,
another of Spain, a third of Italy, a fourth of England, a fifth of Austria,
and so of all Provinces and Kingdoms. Their main business is, to give the F.
General an account of all Occurrences of State in those Provinces and Kingdoms
whereof they are the respective Assistants. This they perform by the means of
their Correspondents, who, upon that design, have their residences in the
principal Cities of the Provinces and Kingdom; where they are. And these are
perpetually shuffling up and down to inform themselves of the State, quality,
nature, inclination and intentions of Princes, and take advantage of all
opportunities to advertise the Assistants of such accidents as they have
discovered. These no sooner receive them, but they disburthen themselves of all
into the bosom of the Father General, who thereupon calling his Assistants to
Council, they do as it were anatomise the whole world, comparing and
ballancing the interests, concernments and designs of all Christian Princes.
Here they consult of all fresh intelligence received from their Correspondents,
and curiously examining and conferring them together, it is at last resolved,
that the affairs of such a Prince shall be promoted, the designs of another
opposed as they shall conceive most for their interest and advantage. And as it
is possible, that the stander by may better see the result of a Plot, then the
Gamester employed in it; so is it likely, that the Fathers of the Society
taking as it were a general view of the interests of all Princes, are the
better able to observe the circumstances of place and time, and effectually
advance the Affairs of that Prince who is likely to prove the greatest favourer
of them.

It is certainly a thing evil in it self and insuppertable, that a sort of men
devoted to a Religious life, should so much inter meddle with matters of State,
it being their duty to provide for the welfare of souls, as such as had to that
end taken leave of the concernments of the world. But it is to be considered,
that the Fathers of the Society, are, as to this point, more entangled then
those who have the management thereof, and for many pernicious consequences
arising thereby, this procedure of theirs will be found most mischievous, and
consequently such as requires a speedy and effectual remedy.

For, in the first place, the Jesuits are Confessors to the greatest part of
the Nobility in all States and Kingdoms that acknowledge a submission to the
Church of Rome. Nay, that they might be the more ready to entertain these, and
none but these they make no small difficulty to admit ordinary persons to their
Confessionaries, aiming rather at an Empire over the Consciences of Princes,
themselves. By this means do they craftily dive into the designs, resolutions
and inclinations as well of Sovereigns as of Subjects, whereof they immediately
inform the Father General or his Assistants at Rome. Now to perceive and be
satisfied what prejudice this must needs be to Princes, and what rubbes may be
laid in their way when they imagine their affairs in a fair and secure
posture, a man needs no extraordinary measure of understanding.

Secondly, since secrecy is a proper and inseparable accident which so attends
the safety of a State, that without it treacheries, circumventions, and so
ruin must needs follow, it is not to be admired Princes should be so secure
against those who discover their secrets, punishing them as the most dangerous
of their enemies. And whereas on the other side, the understanding of another
Princes designs makes a man the more circumspect, and more able to judge of his
own condition, it is accordingly ordinary with them to be at vast charges in
the maintenance of Ambassadors and Intelligencers; and yet are many times
deceived in the account they receive from them.

But the Jesuits, that is, their father- General, and his Assistants making
their advantages as well of Confessions and Consultations, whereof their
Corespondents residing in all the chief Cities of the Christian world, give
them an account, as by the means of some other their Adherents, (of whom we
shall have something to say hereafter, are most faithfully and punctually
informed of all determinations concluded even in the most secret Counsels.
Insomuch, that they have a more particular knowledge of the power, possessions,
expenses and designs of Princes then the Princes themselves have, and this
without any other charge then that of the carriage of their Letters; which yet
in Rome alone (as I have it from the relation of the Persons employed about
those affairs) amounts to seventy, eighty, nay, sometimes a hundred Crowns of
Gold to one Courrier or Messenger.

Coming then by this means to know exactly the Affairs of all Princes, they do
not only do ill offices between them, but wound their reputation with their own
subjects, depressing or advancing their concernments at their pleasure. And
that they can with the less difficulty do, for that by the same way of
Confessions and Consultations they serpent-like glide into the very secrets of
the peoples souls, knowing who stand well affected to their Prince, who
dissatisfied and exasperated. So that by these relations which they have of
State Affairs they may easily sow discord among Princes, raise thousands of
jealousies, and by their insight into the Subject's affections, raise
commotions and tumults, making the person of the Prince contemptible.

From all which there can be no less inferred, then that there is not any
thing may prove more dangerous to the State, then that a Prince should discover
himself by Consession or otherwise, or that he should permit any of his
Confidents, Favorites, Secretaries, Counselors, or others his chief Ministers
should make their Confessions to persons that are perpetually sifting matters
of State, and making their advantages thereof to insinuate into the favor of
Princes. For there are men of other Religious Orders, comparable for life and
Learning to any among the Jesuits, who may with the more safety be employed,
out of consitation that they attend nothing more then the cultivation of souls,
and the Government of their monasteries.

Thirdly, which is a greater discovery then has been made yet, the world is to
take notice, that there are four sorts or degrees of Jesuits. The first degree
is composed of a number of secular persons of both sexes, that are taken or
admitted to be of the Society, living accordingly under a certain obedience,
which themselves call an implicit Obedience. These are guided in all their
actions by the advice of the Jesuits, resigning themselves in all things
absolutely to their conduct. Those that are admitted to this degree, are for
the most part Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, rich Widows, wealthy Citizens, and
Merchants; which like a Plantation in the Indies, bring in to the Jesuits a
very vast revenue of Gold and Silver. Of this kind are those Women, who in
Italy, are called Chettine, who are by the subtle persuasions of the Jesuits
induced to forsake the world, when in the mean time they take a care to
disburthen them of their Jewels, apparel, and ornaments, household stoffe, and
in a word, if there be any thing, of their estates of great value.

The second degree consists of men alone, and that cheequer'd as well with
Priests as Laywen, yet such as live wholly after a secular way, being not
obliged to a regular life. These are a sort of people who by the mediation and
recommendations of the Jesuits, c^eep into Pensions, Abbeys, Benefices and
other revenues; but they vow to put on the habit of the Society, when ever it
shall please the Father General to require it of them, for which reason they
are called Jesuits in Voto; and of the labors of these men, the Jesuits make
no small advantages in order to the erection, and settlement of their Monarchy.
For they maintain in all Kingdoms and Provinces in all Princes Courts and
Palaces of Great-men such of this degree (...) they know how to make use of; as
shall be further discovered in the seventh point of this discourse.

The third sort of Jesuits are these who are resident in Monasteries. These are
either Priests, Clerks or Converts, who may at the pleasure of the Father
General. be dispensed with, as to any thing relating to their Prosession,
though of themselves they have no power to leave it. And these being such as
have no Office of importance in the Community, do for the most part simply obey
in any thing they are put upon by the Superiors.

The fourth sort is that of Politic Jesuits, to whom is committed the
management of the Affairs of Religion, and the regulation of the Society. And
these are they, who being tempted by the Devil with the same temptation, that
Christ had in the Gospel, viz. All these things will I give thee, have taken
the Tempter at his word. Upon which account it is, that they so much endeavor
to reduce their Society to an absolute Monarchy, and to place the head thereof
at Rome, the center where all the principal affairs of the Christian world
meet. There constantly resideth the grand Monarch of these Politicians (their
Father General) with a great number of others of the same Institution, who
having received information from their Spies of all such weighty and important
businesses as are to be canvass'd in the Court of Rome, they presently call a
Council, and having in the first place taken order to secure their own
interests, every one in particular makes it his business to go their circuit
through the Courts of Cardinals, Prelates and Ambassadors. Their business
with these is cunningly to shist their discourse to something relating to the
business then in hand, or shortly to come upon the stage, representing it to
them after what manner they please, so disguising it, as (...) m^st for their
interest, so far as if need be, to sh^^ black in stead of white. And whereas
the first represent ^ons of a business made by men pretending to sincerity and
the strictness of a Religious life cannot but make the more remarkable in
pression in the mind of him that they are addressed to, the consequence is, that
Affairs of very great importance treated by the Ambassadors of Princes, and
other grave persons, in the Court of Rome, have not carried on with the
success expested by the Princes therein concerned merely through the
sycophancy of the Jesuits, who by their adulterate relations had so shuffled
things, that there was but little credit left for what might be alleged by the
Ambassadors and other Agents employed therein.

The same tricks they play the Prelates of Rome, they also put upon other
Princes, either by themselves, or by the means of their Pensionary Jesuits, out
of Rome. So that it may well be concluded, that the greatest part of what is
done all over the Christian world, passes through the hands of the Jesuits; and
those only take effect, against which they make no opposition. Stupendous and
inexpressible are the artifices and insinuations they make use of in this kind,
which though it is impossible for me to decypher, yet may it not happily be so
obscure to those Princes, who shall seriously observe the slight Character I
have here given of them. For if they do, they presently reflect on the things
that are past, and as they must needs be more and more convinced of the truth
of my discourse, the more they call to mind with what Art things have been
handled, so will it still further them in the discovery of what seemed so
strange and mavelous to them. Nay, not content with this close artifice,
whereby they insensibly thrust themselves into the Affairs of the world, out
of a confidence that it is the only means to attain that Monarchical
Superintendency at which they aim, they were so insolent as to petition Pope
Gregory XIII. "That for the time to come he would publicly countenance their
Project. And thence taking occasion to commend it to him under pretense of the
public good of the Church, they required that he would command all his Legates
and Apostolical Nuncio's to take to them every one for his Companion and
confident, some Jesuit, by whose Counsel he should be governed in all his
actions.

Fourthly, by these crafty insinuations, and their infight into Affairs of
public concernment, the most eminent among the Jesuits have gained the love of
many Princes, as well Temporal as Spiritual, whom they have the confidence to
persuade that they have said and done many things for their advantage; and this
proceeding of theirs is the Damme of two very considerable inconveniences. The
first is, that, abusing the favor and friendship which the Princes had for
them, they have made no difficulty to disgust many private, though otherwise
rich and Noble Families, usurping the wealth of Widows, though with the
exposing of their Retinue and Relations to extreme misery: enticing, to embrace
their Institution, and to frequent their Schools, persons of the noblest and
most hopeful Inclination, who yet if they proved unfit for the employments
they designed them for, were under some pretense or other dismissed the
Society, which though it parted from their persons, yet could not be got to
part with their Estates. And while they did thus, they absolutely excluded the
poor from their Schools, forgetting quite the pious provisions for such of
their Founder Ignatius, and the intentions of those patrons of theirs, who
endowed them with large Revenues, not that they should mind only their own
conveniences, but be serviceable to the Christian Commonwealth

The Second Inconvenience is, that these Jesuits omit no occasion whereby they
would make the world sensible of the familiarity and influence which they have
over Princes, making the people, by their crafty representations of it, look
thereon as through a magnifying glass, to the end they may ingratiate
themselves with their Ministers, and so bring things about, that all that stand
in need of favor may make their applications to them. Thus they stick not to
make their braggs, that it is in their power to make Cardinals, Nuncio's,
Governors of Places and other officers of the public. Nay, some of them have
roundly stood upon it, that their General could do more then the Pope himself
Others have added that it is better to be of that Order which makes Cardinals,
then to be a Cardinal. These, and such like expressions of their insupportable
insolence are obvious to all that converse with them.

Fifthly, having thus laid the foundation of their interloping into State
astaires, the first thing they build upon it, is a pretense of power to raise
or ruin whom they please. And indeed making Religion a mere stalking horse to
their own Reputation, they many times effect their designs. But when they
recommend any man to the Prince in order to advancement, they never make choice
of the most fit and deserving, but rather, if any such appear, oppose him,
especially if he be one they know to be no favourer of them. So that they make
it their design to prefer those that are likely to countenance their
interest, never minding his good affection to the Prince or his capacity to go
through the Employment he is advanced to: whereof the consequences are, to the
Prince, Exasperation at his being eluded, to the people disgust and
insurrections.

Sixthly, as the Master of a Galley, when he finds the wind fair for his
voyage, with once whistling, makes the slaves handle their Oars, and set the
Vessel to her full speed: so when in the Assemblyes and consultations (which
these Fathers continually hold by their General and his Assistants at Rome) it
is concluded, that it makes for their advantage, that such a person should be
promoted to dignity, the Father-Generall signifies so much to those that reside
elsewhere, and all those immeditely join together, and with united forces bring
him to the honor intended him. Which having gotten, he were an insufferable
example of Ingratitude, if he should not afterward endeavor to serve the
Jesuits, with a zale suitable to that of theirs, when they advanced him. And
hence indeed does it proceed that such a man, nay, many such men (for it is not
to be imagined the dependants on the Jesuits of this kind are few)
acknowledging themselves more obliged to the Jesuits then to their Prince, for
the honor and greatness they are raised to, do accordingly serve the Jesuits
with far greater affection then they do the Prince himself. Thus are their
Princes fooled and deluded by them, when imagining they have got a trusty
servant, they have only made way for a Spy of the Jesuits, who only make their
advantages of him, to the great prejudice of the Prince that advanced him.

There are many examples might be brought to confirm the present discourse; but
indeed it needs not; daily experience, and the general report are sufficient
attestations of the truth delivered. To avoid tediousness therefore, I shall
conclude this point, saying, that this happily is the cause why the Jesuits are
wont to call their way of Religion, A Grand Monarchy; as if they governed all
Princes and their Ministers at their pleasure. Nor is it long since, that one
of the chief among them, being to treat publicly with an Illustrious Prince in
the name of the Society, began with these words full of arrogance, and grounded
upon a conceit of their Monarchy; Our Society has always maintained good
Intelligence with your Grace, etc.

Seventhly, those Fathers make a great stir to let the world know, that all
those that are any way in the favor of their Prince, were sometimes Creatures
of theirs, and are obliged for their advancement to them. Hence it must follow,
that they have a greater command of the subjects affections then the Prince
himself, upon whom this must needs bring great inconvenieniences. For it is in
the first place an affront to the public Interest, that a sort of Religious
Persons, that pretend to have abjured all commerce with the things of this
world, yet so ambitious and politic, should have such an influence over
Ministers of State, that when ever it pleases them, they can cause Treasons and
insurrections. Secondly, it is dangerous, since that by the mediation of the
Ministers their Adherents, they induce into the Princes service for Counselors
or Secretaries some of the Jesuits in Voto, of whom mention is made before, and
these again persuade the Prince to take some Jesuit for his Confessor, or
Chaplain. Thus do they all combine together to serve as Intelligencers to the
Father General, to whom they give an exact account of all the transactions of
the most secret Counsels. Whence it comes, that many times we see designs
prevented, and secrets of the greatest importance discovered, and yet things
are carried so cunningly, that no man can fa^^en on the true Author, but it
commonly happens, that the greatest suspicion lies on those that are most
innocent.

Eighthly, It Is a common observation, that Subjects are naturally much given to
imitate and comply with the inclinations of their Prince. In like manner those,
who give obedience to their Father General, perceiving that his thoughts are
wholly taken up with matters of State, as endeavoring by that means to improve
and enrich their Society, do also apply themselves that way; and thereupon
making use of their Relations and friends, would penetrate into the very hearts
of Princes, so to discover their most secret designs, only to betray them to
the Assistants at Rome, or the Father General; out of a confidence, by that
means, to get into their favor and be advanced into some employment, which
otherwise they could never have expected. For among them, none are ever
preferred to any Office of consequence and trust, but only those whom they have
observed most inclined to advance their Society to that height of Greatness
whereto they aspire, and consequently none but such as are known to be able and
expert in the management of State affairs.

Ninthly, as from diverse Flowers and Herbs, by the means of an Alembick, a man
may extract such an ointment as shall have the Virtue to heal a mortal wound;
and as from several blossoms Bees draw that which afterwords becomes honey: so
these Jesuits, from the infallible account which they have of all Princes
affairs, and of all the emergencies of every State, do by the power of their
discourse, extract from them what makes for their own advantage, which is in
some measure a remedy for their insatiable avarice and ambition. And they are
excellent Masters in a certain Art, unknown to others, whereby they effect
their designs equally from other men's either good or ill; but more often from
their misfortunes then happiness.

Nor is it unusual with them to ensnare the unwary Prince into whose secrets
they have dived, proposing to him, that they have in their hands the only
excellent means to make him master of his desires. But when by these pretenses
they have made their advantages of him, if it do but come into their
imagination that the spreading greatness of that Prince may one day prove
prejudicial to them, they do, as Lawyers in their causes, prolong the success
of the business what lies in their power; till at last with strange juggling,
and an imperceptible kind of Legerdemaine they utterly ruin those designs to
which they had given birth.

The Ligue of France treated and concluded by them, they not long after basely
renounced all meddling with, when they saw things prosper on the Kings side: and
England, so often promised by them to the Spaniards, yet in such manner
performed, so confirms the present discourse, that there needs no further proof.

Tenthly, from what has been already alleged, it necessarily follows, that
the Jesuits have no sincere affection toward any Prince whatsoever, either
temporal or spiritual, but only comply with them so far as stands with
their own convenience and advantage.

Nay, it may be yet further inferred, that no Prince, much less any Prelates
of an inferior degree can make any effectual use of them, because they seem,
at the same time to be equally affected to all, complying with the French as if
they were French, with the Spaniards as if they were Spaniards, and so with all
others, as the occasion requires; from all which the only rule of their
Chemistry is, to exact their own profit and accommodation. They never regard
the prejudice of one more then another, and thence it comes that those
enterprises, wherein they have intermedled, have seldom succeeded well,
because they are no further embarked therein then their own interest advises
them. And as to this particular, the artifices they use are notorious; some of
them pretending great inclinations for the prosperity of France, others of
Spain, others of the Empire, and others of some other Princes of whom they
desire to be favored.

And if any of these Princes be desirous to make use of some Jesuit, whom he
imagines to be very much his Friend, he immediately acquaints the F. General
by Letter with the business which he has to treat, and expects his Answer,
together with order what he shall do, and suitably to the commands he receives,
he proceeds in his affair. Never regarding whether that Order of the General
be conformable to the intention of the Prince, who has entrusted him with the
management of that business. But so the Society be served and complied with,
he matters not what disservice it may be to the Prince.

To this may be added, that the Jesuits understanding the several interests of
all Princes, and being acquainted with all things daily treated in secret
Councels, those who pretend an inclination for France propound to the King and
his principal Ministers certain Memorialls of State and important
considerations sent to them from their politic Fathers at Rome. On the other
side those who pretend to hold with the Crown of Spain, do just the same with
them, and so with the rest. From which carriage of theirs arises this
mischief, that it causes such distrusts in the hearts of Christian Princes,
that they cannot credit one the other; which is a great hindrance to the
public peace, and the universal welfare of Christendom. Besides, this
diffidence of theirs is that which makes it so difficult a thing to conclude a
league against the common enemy, and the precious enjoyments of peace to be of
so little value among Princes.

Furthermore, with these circumventing devices, though they have so opened the
eyes of the world, and so sharpened men's wits in matter of State that they are
notorious to all, yet, even at this very day, to the great prejudice of the
Church, they are wholly taken up with matters of policy, and balance all their
actions according to their worldly and selfish concernments.

But that these Jesuiticall Mysteries and Stratagems may be made yet more
manifest, I cannot here conceal the means whereby they inveigle Princes to
their party. There are some years now past, since one of these Fathers, called
Father Parsons, the Assistant of England, wrote a book against the succession
of the King of Scotland to the crown of England; And another Father of the same
Society called Crittonius, with some others, in a Book which they wrote,
defended the Title of the King of Scotland, opposing the opinion of Father
Parsons, and pretending to be at difference among themselves. But the truth,
was, that all was cunningly contrived and carried on by the command of their
Father General, only out of this design, that whosoever should succeed in the
Kingdom of England, they might have an excellent argument to work in him a
great good opinion of their Society, and so as much as may be make their
advantages of him.

What more pertinent example can we desire to show that Princes and their
interests are the objects of all Jesuiticall actions and determinations, and
consequently, to make good their own assertion, That their Society is a grand
Monarchy?

Again, that this truth may also be made manifest. That the Jesuits regard not
whether they please or displease any Prince when their own commedity lies at
the stake; though the experience of infinite things past make it as clear as
the Sun, yet the particular instance I shall now add will make it somewhat the
more conspicuous.

There is not any person in the world whom they are more bound to serve, or
indeed, for whom they themselves pretend greater submission, then the Bishop of
Rome, were it not for other particular reasons, but out of a consideration only
of the solemn vow they make to obey him. Yet when Pius Quintus would have
brought in something of reformation amongst these Fathers, by reducing them to
a performance of their duty in the Quire, they submissively refused to obey
him, as conceiving it a notorious prejudice to their Society to be reduced to
any thing suitable to the practice of other Monks. And for those few among
them that conscientiously did comply with the Popes pleasure, they were ever
afterward called by way of derision Quintini, and made so contemptible that
never any of them could be admitted to the least preferment among them.

After the same manner did they oppose glorious S Charles. Archbishop of
Millaine, when in the quality of Legate a latere to his Holiness, he
endeavored to reduce them to Religious discipline.

But to what end do I mention these, when they think it a scorn to submit to
the sacred Canons themselves, but contrary to the provisions made therein make
merchandise of Jewels, Rubies, and Diamends which they trade to the Indies for.
Nor is that opinion altogether groundless, that the greatest part of the
precious stones sold in Venice belong to the Jesuits; since the report took its
first rise from their own Agents and Brokers whom they employed in the sale of
them.

But that they are no faithful Servants to the Bishop of Rome, what ever they
pretend, I need only the acknowledgement of those Fathers who for no mean
default were called by process to Rome. I neither can, nor would, if I could,
name them; nor am I much inclined to wade any farther into this business,
partly to avoid the bringing of any Prince upon the stage that might take
offense at my discourse (it being my desire to please all, and not to disoblige
any) and partly that it might not be said I were guilty of an humor to inveigh
against the Jesuits; my purpose only having been to give a short and plain
account of their courses and customs.

For as it many times happens, that we see a person afflicted with some
grievous infirmity, betraying the extremity of his sufferings by such
lamentations and cries as reach heaven it self; and it is apparent to every one
that the man suffers no small torment, yet there is not any able to discern the
original cause of his indisposition: So the world is full of complaints
against the Jesuits, some for being persecuted by them, others for being
treacherously served by them, yet the mischief still remains among us. Nor is
the cause thereof easily discovered, though it is conceived it does not proceed
from any thing so much as from that prodigious and indeterminate desire which
they have still to increase their power. This is the apple of their eye, which
if it be but ever so little touched, they make no difficulty to disgust any man
whatsoever, to circumvent and overreach Princes, to oppress the poor, to force
Widows out of their estates, to ruin whole Nations, nay many times by their
interloping into affairs of public concernment to raise jealousies and
dissatisfactions among Christian Magistrates.

Now as there would happen a great inconvenience, if that part which according
to the design of Nature was last formed as an instrument to serve the rest
that for their precedence are the more noble, and should attract unto it self
all the purest blood and vital spirits, for it were the way to bring the whole
to destruction. So is it no less inconvenient, that the Jesuits, an
Institution lately graffed into the body of the Church to be isntrumental, as
they then selves pretend, in the conversion of Heretics, and the reduction of
Sinners into the ways of Repentance, should grasp into their power, and presume
upon the management of all the most weighty and important affairs of Prelates
and Princes, drawing from them the very life and spirits of their interests, to
make their own advantages thereof. From this source springs all public and
private disturbances, many are depressed, who, were their worth considered,
should be exalted, many advanced who were more deservedly trod under foot, with
thousands of other inconveniences consequent thereto.

Many reasons might be produced, drawn from experience it self, to make it
apparent what an insatiable ambition the Jesuits have to increase still more
and more in greatness. It shall therefore suffice to make it appear out of
the words of Father Parsons, one of the Society, as they may be found in a book
of his which he writ in English, entitled, The Reformation of England. Having
in the first place blamed Cardinal Pool, and then taken notice of many defects
and imperfections in the Council of Trent, he concludes, That when England
should return to the Roman Catholic faith, He would reduce it to the form
and state of the Primitive Church, making common all Ecclesiastical Goods, and
assigning the oversight thereof, unto seven Savii, or wise men who should be
Jesuits and were to make distribution of the same as they should think
convenient. He further thinks it fit, under a grievous penalty, to forbid all
Religious persons of what Order soever to return into England without their
License, resolving that none should be entertained there, but those that were
to be maintained by Alms.

But, as it often falls out that Self-love so blinds the wifest man that he
betrays his imprudence to all the world, so is that a most ridiculous passage
which the same Father adds in the place before cited, When England (says he)
shall once be reduced to the true Faith, it will not be convenient that the
Popes (at least for five years space) should expect any advantage from the
Ecclesiastical Benefices of this Kingdom; but remit all into the hands of
those seven Savii, who should dispose of them as they conceived best for the
good of the Church. This being his design, that, the first five years being
past, by some other invention (whereof they are very full) they would get the
same privilege confirmed to them for five more, and so onward, till they had
utterly excluded his Holiness from having any thing to do in England.

Now what more lively representation can there be made of the avarice and
ambition of the Jesuits together with the desire they have to erect an absolute
Monarchy? Who sees not with what slights they endeavor to promote their own
Interest, not caring who are made happy, who unhappy, so their concernments be
secured. What should I say more of them? Did they not, in the time of Gregory
the thirteenth, make it there request that they might be invested of all the
Parish-Churches in Rome? that they might there lay the foundations of their
Monarchy? and what they could not get in Rome, have they not at length obtained
in England, where not long since they have chosen an Archpriest, one of the
Jesuits in Voto, who instead of protecting the Clergy, like a ravenous wolf
persecutes all such Priests as have no dependence on the Jesuits worrying them
even to exasperation and despair, and depriving them (under a great penalty) of
mutual communication. To which may be added their forcing the English Clergy
to become Jesuits in Voto, not admitting any one into their Colleges, who has
not made some engagement to be a Jesuit. So that when that Kingdom shall
return to the ancient Faith, it will give a fair beginning to an absolute
Jesuiticall Monerchy, when all the Ecclesiastical Revenues, all the Abbeyes,
Benefices, Bishopticks, Arch-Priestships and other dignities shall be
altogether at the disposal of the Jesuits.

There are many other things I might have insisted on, as the pretentions they
make concerning other men's estates; as also how jealous they are of their
welfare, and desirous of their prosperity. What a sly way is that they have to
infinuate into the favor of Princes, by persuading them that their Subjects
are more inclined to the Society in matters of devotion, then to any other
Order or Religious Institution; and what must needs be consequent thereto, that
they, of all men, are the most sit and able to make them well affected toward
their Prince. Such obvious things as these, I leave to every man's particular
observation; and with four brief considerations conclude the present discourse.

First, that men of such turbulent spirits, and such reaching designs must
withal be Lovers of Novelty, ever searching for it, ever begetting it;
because, without some new raised motions, it were impossible they should attain
their ends. Whence it is to be inferred, that the Jesuits cannot be helpful to
any Prince that either loves Peace or endeavors the preservation of his own
estate, since they are more likely to prove the occasions of much distraction
and disturbance, nay to endanger the loss of his estate, if he favor not
their party, or be not in some things guided by their advice.

Secondly, be it taken into serious consideration, if these men, who though
they have not yet any temporal jurisdiction, are able by their flickling and
bandying to occasion so great and prodigious disturbances in the world, what
can we imagine they would not do, if it should happen that one of them were
created Pope? No question but he would in the first place, fill up the
Consistory with Jesuits, and by that means perpetuate the Papacy in the
Society. And then making advantage of their insight and interest in State
affairs, and having the arm and power of the Pope they would be in a capacity
to endanger the estates of many Princes, especially those that are their
Neighbors and Confiners.

Thirdly, one of them being once gotten in the chair, it would be the design of
that Pope (if he could by any means effect it) to give the Society possession
of some place of impertance or temporal jurisdiction, by the advantages
whereof they would in process of time make way for thousands of other
designs, which they could never compass, but with the prejudice of other
Princes.

Fourthly, when the Consistory shall be once entirely Jesuited, the whole
Patrimony of Christ would be at their disposal; whereof this would be the
consequence, that as one in a dropfie, the more he drinks, the more thirsty he
is, so their Ambition, increasing proportionably to their greatness, would
occasion a world of tumult and trouble. Now, since there is nothing more
subject to change then matters of State, it would be the aim of these Fathers,
with all their power and policy, to alter the course of affairs, that they
might at length introduce the form and project of their own Government, and by
that means absolutely immonarchize themselves. It has been long in their heads
to cajoll into the Society the son of some Sovereign Prince, who should be
drawn in to make an absolute resignation of his estate and Dominions to them.
And this they had long since effected, if some others taking strict notice of
their design, had not prevented them. But had they once made that step, no
doubt, but the next would have been to become Patrones of the State
Ecclesiastical; and being a sort of people very subtle and much inclined to
plots, they would afterward have found thousands of ways how to enlarge it.
Thus would they not have omitted any thing to put their projects in execution;
and if nothing else would have done it, the very jealousies which they would
have raised in the minds of their neighbor Princes would have turned not a
little to their advantage.

From all that has been said, it seems to follow as a thing most necessary,
that for the preservation of the public peace, the tranquillity of all States,
the advantage of the Church, and the general good of the whole world, Paul the
fifth, together with other Princes should set bounds and limits to this
Society, whose desires are so extremely inordinate, lest happily that come to
pass which was anciently effected by the Dauidi (whose courses the Jesuits
seem to imitate) who were not destroyed till the time of Claudius the Emperor.

And if ever I am commanded to write my opinion concerning an opportune remedy
for the reformation of these Fathers, without any prejudice or disparagement to
them, nay to their very great advantage (as wishing them rather Monarchs of
Souls, which are the riches of Christ, then of the World or the enjoyments
thereof, that are nothing but vileness and dung) I shall be ready to do it
with charity, and according to the best of my skill, as it shall please God to
enable me.

FINIS.

