A DISCOURSE OF TOLERATION: With some OBSERVATIONS UPON The late Act OF
PARLIAMENT.

Printed in the Year 1691.

Advertisement.
IT will appear upon the perusal of the following Discourse, that the Author of
it, attending only to what he conceived to be the Sense of the Act for
Toleration, and not having recourse to the exact Words thereof, has a little
mistaken that Statute. For he says, That all those are excluded from the
benefit of this Toleration, who do not believe the Doctrine of the Trinity, as
it is believed and taught in the Church of England.

Now the Clauses in the Act concerning this matter, are in Page 309, and Page
317.

In the former, it is provided that Persons in Holy Orders, or pretending to
Holy Orders, Preachers, or Teachers in Dissenting Congregations, shall be free
from the Penalties of the Act for restraining Non-conformists from inhabiting
in Corporations, and of the Act of Uniformity; Upon condition only of their
taking the Oaths, and declaring their approbation of and subscribing to the
Articles of Religion mentioned in a Statute made 13th Eliz. (viz. the 39
Articles,) except the 34th, 35th, and 36th, and some words of the 20th.

In the other Clause, it is enacled that the benefit of the Act shall not extend
to any Person that shall deny, in his Preaching or Writing, the Doctrine of the
Blessed Trinity, as it is declared in the aforesaid Articles of Religion.

So that none but public Preachers, etc. are comprehended in these
Restrictions. All that are not so, may believe what they please concerning the
Trinity, without being excluded from the benefit of this Act. And so indeed may
Preachers too: Only they must not teach publicly any thing contrary to those
Articles, which they are to subscribe, and declare their Approbation (not
Belief) of.

A learned Prelate of our Church, (Dr. Jer. Tailor,) in excuse for the many
Divines of our Church, (who though they incline to the Arminian Opinions,
touching Free Will and Predestination, yet subscribe to the 39 Articles, which
manifestly favor the contrary Doctrine, viz. that of Calvin, which is embraced
by most sorts of Dissenters) in some of his Writings, tells us, That those
Articles were never designed as Declarations of Truths necessary to be
believed; but as Articles only of Peace; which no Subscriber should oppose or
preach against. And that this is not only the Sense of one Doctor, but indeed
the general Sense of all the Church of England, especially in the matter of the
Trinity, appears by her admitting, us to both the Sacraments, without requiring
any Declaration of our Belief in that point, so as it is explained in the Creed
called Athanasius's, or in the 39 Articles.

Now just what those Articles are by this Doctor looked upon to be, in respect
to the Clergy of the Church of England; such by this Act are they (and
particularly the Doctrine of the Trinity, as it is explained in them) made to
the Dissenting Ministers; Articles, I mean of Peace, and no more.

Thus it appears indeed that the Act does not (as this Writer says) exclude all
Persons from the benefit of this Toleration who believe not the Trinity, as
it is taught in the Church of England. But nevertheless it must be confessed that
all his Reasonings hold good against the Act, upon account of the restraint it
lies upon Ministers in their preaching.

For if in a speculative point, where all Parties pretend to have Scripture,
Authority, and Reason on their side, the Teachers of all Persuasions are
obliged to subscribe to the Decisions and Explications of one only Party, and
not to teach or preach (though both themselves and their Congregations may
believe) things contrary thereunto; there seems still sufficient reason for
this Writers Assertion, That this Act of Toleration is not comprenensive
enough; And that it not being built upon the true Principle, ( viz. That
Liberty of Conscience is a Natural Right, and that therefore Conscience ought
not in any wise to be forced) its Foundation is too narrow to support it, and
it cannot last long.

A Discourse of Toleration, etc.
THE Gospel was at first planted and propagated by mild and gentle Methods. Our
Savior did not send out his Disciples armed with Swords or Spears, or any
other Instruments of War. Their Weapons were wholly Spiritual: Charity and
Humility, Kindness and Condescension, were the Arms which the first Preachers
of Christianity made use of to conquer the World, and bring it into Subjection
to Christ. By these means was the Christian Religion spread over the World: And
it overcame all Opposition, by the irresistible force of Truth only. And though
the forward Zeal of after-Ages has prompted them to call in the Foreign
assistance of Force and Power, yet Experience shows, That their Endeavors have
very rarely been Crowned with Success; which we need not wonder at, because it
is very Natural that Religion should be preserved by the same means by which it
was at first produced.

For my part, I am so far from envying the Dissenters the Liberty they now
enjoy, or being angry with the Parliament for passing the late Act in their
Favor, that I think they have done us of the Church of England a Kindness in
it, as well as the Dissenters. Since now we no longer lie under any Obligation
of troubling or disquieting our Neighbors for Matters of Religion. This Act
cannot but calm all Minds that are truly disposed to Peace, and still those
peevish Animosities which were occasioned by the Miscarriages of some few weak,
or passionate, or interessed men, whose overhasty Zeal carried them beyond the
true Rules of Conduct. We all now know who it was set those weak men a-work,
and made Tools of them, to do a business which they they never dreamed of. But
now they have seen their Error, and repented. And we hope, that the good Nature
of the Dissenters will not Father a persecuting Spirit upon our whole Church,
by reason of the Mistakes of some few unthinking men in it.

But methinks I could have wished that the Act had been more Comprehensive. For
I fear, that it being built upon too narrow a Foundation, it cannot last long:
Since by this Act several Persons are still liable to the Lash of the Law, upon
the account of their bare Opinion in matters of Religion. For upon the same
grounds that these are excepted, succeeding Parliaments may think fit to except
others whom they judge to hold Opinions equally false and dangerous, and so
more and more by degrees, till at length the whole Toleration dwindles into
nothing. For if it be once allowed, That some persons may justly be punished
for Mistakes in Judgment, in such things as have no relation to Civil Affairs,
it will be very difficult to assign any good Reason why others should be wholly
exempted from the Penalties of the Law, and not be punished for holding false
Opinions, provided the Government shall at any time so think fit.

It seems a strange Paradox, that men should contend for Liberty of Conscience,
as a Natural Right, and yet not be willing to allow all men this Privilege; as
if Nature were so far a Step-Dame to some of her Children, as to deny them a
Title to the Common Rights of Humanity.

I must confess, That ever since I came to consider things, I have been of
Opinion, That Conscience ought not to be forced; and that no man was justly
punishable for differing in his Judgment (in any Point whatever) from the
Established Religion. For the Confirmation of which Opinion, I humbly propose
these following Considerations.

1. It is not in our own power to believe as we please. If upon mistaken
Grounds, I believe that to be true, which is really false; yet still I so
believe, and cannot but believe, till I am convinced of my Error. But after a
clear and full Conviction, I throw aside my former Opinion, and cannot possibly
(though I would) believe it. For as Plato well observes, Every Soul is
unwillingly deprived of Truth. And it is beyond the power of a Man to resist
Truth, when it once plainly shows its self unto him.

Since therefore our Errors are not voluntary, we ought not to be punished for
them. For what we cannot help, is at least excusable, if not justifiable. And
all Error intrudes it self against a Man's Will; and therefore is not
punishable. For it is unjust to punish where there is no Fault; and it is to
Fault for a man not to do what it is impossible for him to do.

Nor does Force make any Alteration in the Case. It may indeed make us
dissemble, and play the Hypocrites, and cause us to profess that we believe
what we really do not believe: But it cannot change our Minds. For we shall
still (so long as our Judgment is not convinced) retain the same Sentiments we
had before. Therefore Men should be reasoned, and not forced into a right Faith.

2. Though an Erroneous Faith be supposed to be never so dangerous and
destructive to the Soul that entertains it, yet it injures no body but him that
has it. If my Neighbor embraces Heretical Opinions, the hurt is only to
himself. It neither hinders my Salvation, nor is it any prejudice to my
Temporal Affairs. Indeed, if false Opinions did any way violate the Rights of
others, then there might be some Color for prosecuting the Authors of them;
even tho they could not help what they did, and so consequently were guilty of
no Crime. For Self-preservation is an unalterable Law of Nature, which warrants
every one to defend his own Right. Thus we commonly destroy Vermin, Birds and
Beasts of Prey, because they injure us; though we know (at the same time) that
they only act according to their Natures, and are not Criminal in so doing.

But here some may urge, That difference in Opinions gives birth to Faction and
Sedition, and often ends in Rebellion; it fills all places with Disorder and
Confusion, and is inconsistent with the Quiet and Happiness of Society.

Now if it could be proved, That such dismal Consequences would naturally and
necessarily flow from a Toleration, then I confess, That every man that loved
his Country, ought to oppose it. It would be a great happiness, if Mankind
were united in one Faith, and we all thought and spoke the same things: But
this is a blessing rather to be wished than hoped for. Men's apprehensions of
things being so various, it is morally impossible, that we should not differ in
Opinion.

But however, Force is not the best, nor only, way of preserving Peace. For if
men would but be prevailed upon to lay aside prejudice and passion, and bear
with one another; if they would be so rational, as not to suffer their Love and
Kindness to be lessened by a difference in Opinion; if every one had Liberty to
enjoy his own Opinion, and thought it his duty to permit others to do the like;
we should never have any the least occasion to quarrel or contend about
Religion. If this mild and peaceable Doctrine were once heartily embraced, and
generally entertained, it would soon stifle all Heats and Animosities, and
restore that Love and Charity, which by the Gospel we are obliged to practice,
even toward our Enemies and Persecutors, much more toward our Friends and
Brethren, though in some Points their Opinions are different from ours. And
then, though we were not united in Opinion, yet if we were in Love, that very
Love would compose our differences, and settle a firm and undisturbed Peace
among us.

And that this is not a mere Notional Chimaera, which has been entertained only
by some few Bookish men, who were never versed in the World, and so understand
little or nothing of the Temper and Inclinations of Mankind; but that it is a
thing really practicable, is evident from the Experience of above 4000 years;
during which time, the Heathen World, though divided into as many Opinions as
we now are (and some of them about matters of the highest Consequence in
Religion) did nevertheless enjoy a constant and uninterrupted Peace, being
never troubled with any Wars, Feuds or Disturbances, upon the account of their
differences in Religion.

If it be asserted, That later Ages have afforded Instances of a quite contrary
Nature, and that our Disputes about Religion, have not only banished all Love
and Kindness from among us, but have oftentimes involved us in Blood: I answer,
That it is not the difference in Opinions, but the refusing to give Liberty to
those who dissent from us, that has been the chief occasion of those Miseries
and Calamities that have befallen us. Oppression unites the several Sects, and
causes them to join as one, that they may regain their lost Liberty. This
occasions a continual struggling betwixt them and the Established Church. And
from hence all the Wars and Bustles that have happened in the Christian World,
upon the account of Religion, have had their Rise. If therefore a full and
impartial Toleration were once settled, all occasion of difference would
immediately cease; and the Dissenters having no just cause of Discontent, would
be no longer dangerous Subjects. But if any prevailing Party, moved by
Ambition, and encouraged by the considence of their great Numbers, should
attempt any thing against the Government, it is probable that many sober and
peaceable Men even of their own Party would oppose them; since they would now
want the most plausible pretense of drawing them in. But, to be sure, Interest
would oblige all other Dissenters to stand by the Government, and to guard and
support it; because they know that under it they shall enjoy the freedom of
their Religion, and that they need not fear the severity of the Laws, so long
as they neither injure their Neighbors, nor offend against the Civil Peace.
Hence it appears that it is the interest of Governors to indulge Dissenters,
since that will make them to sit more safe and secure.

A Toleration likewise would very much conduce to the preservation of the
established Church. For this would cause the several Sects to watch and have an
Eye upon one another. Every Party would fear another's being uppermost. Because
if that should ever happen, they could not easily hope for so kind and
charitable dealing, as they had formerly received from those they had
dispossessed, who had given them Liberty.

3. Though some Men pretend that it is out of Charity to their Souls, that they
force Dissenters into the Church, Jest by dying in an erroneous Opinion they
should perish eternally, yet is this pretense vain and groundless. For we all
know that it is not the making profession of the true Religion, nor the outward
Conformity to its worship, that will save us. It Is the Mind that God chiefly
regards; and what ever we do, if we do it not in the sincerity of our Heart, it
is nothing worth.

4. Truth oftentimes lies so much in the dark, that it is very difficult to
find it out; And Error carries oftentimes along with it such a fair appearance
of Truth, that it does not only impose upon the weak and careless, but does
also sometimes deceive the wise and diligent Enquirer. Since then there is so
great hazard of our being betrayed into Errors, (and that upon probable
grounds,) methinks good nature should incline us to make poor mistaken Souls,
objects of our pity rather than anger.

Besides, since no Person is ever the more infallible for being invested in the
Supreme Power, it is not impossible but that the Rulers and Magistrates
themselves (not being able to see through the thick Mists wherewith Truth is
veiled) may instead of their supposed Jum embrace a Cloud; And the seeming
Truth they so earnestly contend for, may possibly be Error hid under a fair
disguise. This, methinks, should cause Magistrates to be very cautious how they
punish Men for their opinion in Religion; lest while they fancy themselves to
be rooting out Error, they should indeed oppose the Truth. This we know was St
Paul's own Case, who out of his great zeal to the glory of God persecuted the
true Religion, and cruelly murdered the best and most faithful of the Servants
of God. And if we examine the Opinions of the present Rulers of the World, we
shall find amongst them more Patrons of Error, than Defenders of the true
Faith; which may convince us of the Reasonableness of our Saviors Rule, viz.
To let the Tares grow until the Harvest, lest we root up also the Wheat with
them.

Lastly. We are not only by Scripture enjoined to try all things, but our
Church likewise encourages us to examine things our selves, and to make use of
our own judgments in the choice of our Religion. Now it seems a little hard to
put us upon searching and judging for our selves, and yet to force us to comply
with the former determinations of other Men. This were to punish us for
following that Rule, which she her self has recommended to us.

Having thus laid down some of those Reasons which induced me to adhere to the
Opinion abovementioned, I shall proceed to the Exceptitions in the Act; and
consider what there is in the Opinions, there mentioned, that renders those
that hold them unfit to be tolerated. And,

1. All those are excluded from the benefit of this Toleration who do not
believe the Doctrine of the Trinity, as it is believed and taught in the Church
of England. Concerning which, I observe that this Doctrine has no relation at
all to Civil Affairs. And therefore all who are punished for their mistakes in
this point, are punished for their bare Opinion only in Religigion: and for an
Opinion which is not in the least prejudicial to the State; And therefore they
may properly be said to suffer for Conscience sake.

It cannot be proved that That Arch-Heretick Socinius himself, or any of his
followers, ever endangered the public Peace, or were worse Subjects than other
men. And consequently they may as safely be permitted to enjoy the freedom of
their Religion as any other Dissenters whatsoever.

Besides, if we seriously consider this Doctrine, we shall find it clogged with
so many and so great difficulties, that an honest and sincere Soul may easily
be mistaken. If we examine the Scripture proofs, we shall find no clear and
express Declaration, that there is a Trinity of Persons in one and the same
Divine, Essence, in all that Sacred Volume: but that it is proved by
Consequences and Deductions, and those oftentimes so far fetched, that they may
possibly be overseen by a diligent searcher. And on the other hand, John 14.28.
and some other places, seem so favorable to the Socinian Hypothesis, that if
there were no other places of Scripture relating to those points besides those,
we should be apt to interpret them in the same sense as our Adversaries do. And
though in this Controversy we multiply Scripture quotations, yet so many of them
are by the most learned Men of our own side, confessed to be unconcluding, that
perhaps some may from thence be encouraged to suspect the rest.

If from Scripture we pass to Reason, that rather discourages, than any ways
supports or defends the Orthodox Opinion. The Arguments which are urged from
thence are confessed to be such as we can give no clear solution to. And it is
no wonder that our weak understandings are puzzelled in the Contemplation of so
sublime a Mystery. Nor is it any disparagement to our Cause that we refuse to
make Reason a Judge in a Case she has so very little knowledge of. It Is not a
sufficient Argument to overthrow our Doctrine, that we cannot solve all the
difficulties that are started about a matter which is of so high a nature, that
it is above humane understanding. We confess it to be too great for us to
fathom. For it would be rashness and inadvertency, if not madness, for a finite
Being to propose to it self the Comprehension of Infinity. But as for the
Socinians (who believe the Objections to be utterly unanswerable, and think
that it may be proved that the Doctrine of the Trinity implies a
Contradiction,) They lie under a strong temptation of being of an Opiinon
contrary to us, and to interpret such places of Scripture as relate to this
Doctrine in a different sense from what we usually give of them. For it is a
Maxim generally allowed by Protestants, that what can be clearly proved to be
contrary to Reason is impossible to be true; and therefore ought upon no
account whatever to be received. And though we know that no such thing can be
proved of the Doctrine of the Trinity, yet there are such seeming appearances,
as may probably misguide an honest and wellmeaning Man.

If we are willing to be guided by the Authority of the Fathers, we shall find
that those who are most ancient, and lived in the first Ages of Christianity,
are claimed both by the Socinians and us, and both sides equally pretend to
quote them as Favorers of the Opinion which each Party holds. And the truth
is, they have delivered themselves in such ambiguous and obscure Terms about
this question, that it is a hard matter to un-riddle what their true Sentiments
were concerning it. For they (as St. Jerome observes, Apol. 2. Adv. Ruff. p.
223.) before the Southern Devil Arrius arose at Alexandria, innocenter quaedam,
and minus caute locuti sunt. And therefore a very learned Man, who is at
present in an eminent station in our Church, might upon good grounds justify
what he has declared in private, that this is the hardest Controversy we have
to manage.

The Consideration of which should, methinks, be sufficient to bespeak the
Candor of all charitable persons, in the behalf of those unfortunate Souls, who
are unwillingly involved in this Error, since they have such difficulties to
encounter with, as are almost insuperable.

Such Thoughts as these might prevail with Salvian to entertain so favorable
an Opinion of the Arrians, that though he sufficiently disliked their Heresy,
yet because they firmly believed themselves to be in the right, he refused to
condemn rhem; and conceived more hopes of such men's Salvation, than of the most
Orthodox Christians, who lead ill Lives; and he gives his Opinion of them in
these mild Terms, How they shall be punished for it, in the Day of Judgment,
none can know but the Judge. Nay, a very Learned Man of our Church, (Dr.
Crakenthorp) goes further, and excuses all such from Herefie, who profess
Arrianism in the simplicity and sincerity of their hearts, and are willing to
forsake it, upon manifestation that the Scriptures teach the contrary; and he
compares their Case to St. Cyprian's professing Re-baptization, and Irenaeus
the Millenary Heresy, p. 109. Vigilius dormitans.

Dr. Hammond urges this Principle higher still; for thus he argues: Sure he
that makes right Reason the Judge of his very Principles, must needs be so
rational and ingenuous, that he can never be an Heretic, though he say the
very things that Heretics do. (Infallibility of the Church of Rome, p. 51.)

If it be objected to the Socinians, That they are Atheists, and deny the True
God; and Idolaters, in worshipping a Creature instead of God, I reply:

The Charge of Atheism is so ill-grounded and extravagant, that it needs no
Answer. For how is it possible, that they should deny the True God, who own the
same God that the Scriptures declare unto us, and whom all Christians adore?
The difference between the Socinian and the Orthodox, is not about, which is
the True God (for they both worship the same), but about the Manner of his
Subsistence, whether this God does subsist in but One Person, or in Three? Now
if every Mistake about the Nature of God, be a Denial of him, I fear there are
but few who confess the True God. But if not, then we may allow the Socinians
to hold the True God, seeing they acknowledge him to be God, who is Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; tho they differ about the Mode of his Being, and deny that
he is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

If it be urged, That this is no slight and trivial Error, but of pernicious
consequence, highly derogating from the Honor of the Second and Third Person;
I answer, That several other Dissenters profess Opinions as blasphemous as
this, and as dishonorable to the whole Godhead, as this is to the Two Last
Persons; and yet these are tolerated. As for Instance; The Doctrine of Absolute
Reprobation, is utterly inconsistent with the Wisdom and Goodness of God. Now
certainly they who rob the Deity of these Two Glorious Attributes, make a more
disadvantageous Representation of him to Mankind, than either the Arrians or
Socinians do. If it be alleged in behalf of these Persons, That it was their
great Zeal for the Glory of God, and their desire to extol his Power, as
absolute Sovereign of Mankind, that first drew them into this Error; Why then
may not those who deny the Trinity, make use of the like plea? For it is well
known, that this Heresy first sprung from the great Antipathy which some men
bore to the Heathen Idolatry, who for fear they should admit of a Rival into
God's Throne, as a Partner with him in his Divine Empire, unhappily denied the
Trinity.

To the charge of Idolatry I shall oppose nothing: (for I do not pretend to be
the Socinians Advocate) But if from thence it be inferred, That they ought not
to be Tolerated, I deny the Consequence. For if we once grant, That the
Magistrate may force men from a false Religion, by the Penalties of the Law, we
shall never know where to stop; because the same Reasons which justify the
rooting out of Idolatry, will soon be made use of for the suppressing all such
Errors as shall be judged hurtful and dangerous to men's Souls, till at length
all men shall be forced to conform to that Rule of Faith which the Supreme
Magistrate esteems to be the only true one.

Besides, That power which we allow the Supreme Magistrate to pull down and
destroy an Idolatrous Church, may in another time and place be made use of to
the subversion of the true one. As for Example, in the Case before us: We are
as much Idolaters in the Opinion of the Socinians, as they are in ours; and
consequently where the power is in their hands, they will be as much obliged to
destroy us, as we ure bound, now the Magistrate is on our side, to root out
them. For every one supposes himself to be in the right. So that instead of the
Legacy of Peace which our Savior left to his Disciples, if we give way to
these persecuting Principles, we shall intail upon the World a perpetual War.
And those barbarous and inhumane Tortures, for the Exercise of which we have a
just Aversion to the French King, will in time gain sa general approbation, and
be universally practiced.

But suppose, for Argument's sake, that these Heretics, upon the account of
the greatness of their Error deserve to be excluded from all Favor, yet is the
Exception in the Act 100 large; since it shuts some from the benefit of the
Act, whom it expressly names, as persons sit to be Tolerated, viz. the Quakers.
For it appears from their Writings, as well as private Discourses, That many,
if not most of them, are Heterodox, as to this Point of the Trinity, and
consequently cannot, with a safe Conscience, subscribe the Test required of
them; which perhaps may cause some of them to look upon this Act as a Mockery
of them, and an Abuse; since (though all the Acts against them are actually
repealed, yet) if they should be Indicted upon any of these Statutes, they have
no right to this Plea, unless they first subscribe a Declaration, which they in
their Consciences judge to be false.

The Followers of Origin are likewise incapable of receiving any benefit from
this Act. For though Origin held every One of the Three Hypostases to be truly
and properly God, yet his Opinion is something different from what is at
present professed by the Church of England. Now if any one who delighted in the
Writings of this Pious and Judicious Father, should by degrees be drawn in, to
approve of the Origenian Hypothesis concerning this Point, surely so small an
Error in such a nice question would not render him unworthy of that Kindness
which we willingly bestow on those who openly maintain Tenants of a far more
mischievous Nature.

I might likewise instance in such as adhere to the Opinions of the Eastern
Church, since our Divines are generally very favorable to these. Dr. Stilling
fleet (now Bishop of Worcester) in his Vindication of his Answer to the King's
Papers, pleads in their behalf, p. 23. Is it not (says he) a very hard case,
these should be excluded the Catholic Church, and consequently from Salvation,
for not rightly understanding the subtilties of the distinction betwixt Nature
and Person; as whether Subsistence can be separated from individual Nature; or
whether an Hypostatical Union does imply that the individual Nature does lose
its own Subsistence. I appeal to the Conscience of any good Christian, whether
he thinks that Christ and his Apostles did ever make the knowledge of these
things necessary to Salvation, which the subtillest of their Schoolmen are
never able to explain to the Capacities of the far greatest part of mankind.
Now if any of this Opinion amongst us should urge this Argument for a
Toleration, I cannot think it would lose much of its strength.

Add to this, that it looks a little severe, when we have given so general a
Liberty, to tie Men up so strictly in the most nice and difficult point;
concerning which Dr Falkn^r owns that the Athanasian Creed gives some
explications which are not so necessary to be understood and believed by the
meanest Capacities. Lib. Ecc. c. 4.. 4. p. 146.

Moreover, by this Act most of the Dissenters are obliged to subscribe to they
know not what. For to understand thoroughly the Doctrine of our Church in this
point, they must be versed not only in our Articles, Common Prayer Book, and
Book of Homilies, but even in the first four General Councils; since we profess
to believe what ever they have determined. And Ibelieve there are but few (even
of their Teachers) will pretend to be mightily acquainted with them.

As for the Papists, though they are not included in this Toleration, yet I
cannot plead so much on their behalf, because both their Doctrines and
Practices are prejudicial to the public Peace. However, I cannot but wish that
we had rather excluded them the benefit of the Toleration upon the account of
such of their Principles as undermine the very Foundation of Government, (such
as these, That the Pope has power to depose Heretical Kings, or that Faith is
not to be kept with Heretics) Then upon account of their believing
Transubstantiation; which is a mere religious Doctrine, and the believing of
which one way or the other, injures no Man's private Right, nor any ways
disturbs the public Peace.

But if we must have something about this absurd Doctrine, let it be this; That
every Person who is tolerated shall declare that no one ought to be punished
for holding either side of the question. And I verily believe if the Papists
were secure of enjoying the freedom of their Religion here, disclaiming only
such Doctrines as are inconsistent with the Government, they would not be so
violently bent to King James's Interest, as to hazard the utter ruin of
themselves and Families for his sake.

I pray God to incline our Minds to mild and moderate Councils. For as the
Bishop of Rochester says in the conclusion of his second Letter to the Lord
Dorset, -- To calm Men's Minds for the future, to settle Affairs in a secure and
lasting Peace, most certainly a gentle, generous, charitable Temper is the best.

FINIS.

