THE Dissenter Unmasked: BEING SOME REFLECTIONS UPON THE BEHAVIOR OF THE
DISSENTERS TOWARD THE Church of England, IN THE Last Reign to this Present
Time.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, MDCXCI.

The Dissenter Unmasked; being some Reflections upon the Behavior of our
Dissenters toward the Church of England, etc.
I HAD forborne Publishing such a Paper as this, at a time when People ought to
expect something that might rather lessen, and not make our unhappy Breaches
wider, had not the consideration of the scandalous Carriage which our
Dissenters has lately showed toward the Church of England, roused my Pen; and,
by giving me a sufficient insight into the meaning of these Persons, let me
see, that they are so far from desiring a Union (whatsoever pretenses they may
feign,) that I really believe they dread nothing more, except a compulsion of
Tender Consciences, and an apprehension of never getting the Reins into their
own hands: But to proceed to my Title, let us look back upon their Behavior in
the late King's Reign.

One of the first Acts, we all know, which King James put out, was that which
gave toleration to the Dissenters in matters of Religion, and which took off
those Fines that the former Law had laid upon them for their Riotous and
Seditious Meetings. This was so great a Favor to that discontented Party that
they were at a loss how to demonstrate their Joy and Gratitude: Bonfires are
ordered to be made in every Street, and the Elders largely contribute for so
Pious a Thanksgiving. Sunday is very slow in coming, or else their Impatience
for the opportunity of Blessing God for their their restored Liberty, makes 'em
think it so. At last it came, and Hugh Peters's Successor at Covent Garden,
thanks God that he had lived to see that glorious Day, (and perhaps would have
repeated the Nunc Dimittis, had not the Papishes used it in the Common Prayer)
a Day of Joy and Thanksgiving, a Day of Jubilee, and a Day of Humiliation for
their deliverance out of Captivity, a Day which brought them out of the Land of
Egypt, out of the House of Bondage; a Day when Soul-saving, Heart-comforting
Grace might be again graciously Taught and Delivered to the
before-trampled-under-foot Saints of the living God: Nor were his Brethren less
fervent in their long-winded Thanksgivings for their safe Deliverance from the
Long-Nails of the Whore of Babylon.

Since then they are arrived to that happiness which their Preachers called the
greatest upon Earth, let us take a view of their Behavior in it. Will they be
so Elevated with this Freedom, and so ungrateful to their Benefactor, not to
return due acknowledgments to him, to a Man who had given them the greatest
happiness they could be possessed of? No, this would argue an unchristian
Temper; and therefore those who were never True to any King, resolve now to
turn Loyal and Faithful Subjects. And now, from all Counties in England flock
Addresses, so long and fast, that we could scarce enjoy the benefit of any
Foreign News, unless the Printer had used Shorthand Characters; so little
difference was there between their Prayers in the Pulpit, and their Addresses
in the Gazette.

The Church of England was very much surpised at this act, and began, by
judiciously sifting the whole Matter, to perceive the Mask which covered the
Designs of that King: And though several hinted their Sentiments of it to some
of the Dissenters, yet they slighted it, and like grateful People, replied,
they would stand and fall with him, for that the Lord had now gave them a King
who loved and favored the Godly. And when one said, That the end of this
Toleration was but to introduce Popery (being spoke in a Coffee-House, my self
being by) a Dissenter replied, That it was equal to him if the Romish-Hydra
came in, so the English-Dragon were put down. How! Is this the Voice of a
Presbyterian? The Voice of a Reformer of the Ancient, True, and most pure
Religion? a Miracle, and seems as fabulous as Hugh Peters's Stories.

They told some of the Members of the Church of England, That the Lord now had
taken the Sword out of the hands of Saul, and put it into the hands of David.
They behaved themselves at last with that insupportable Pride and Sauciness,
that in the Out-Countries they feared not to tell the Clergy, they would pay
them no Tithes. And in Leichestershire a Minister going to a Dissenter's House
to number his Pigs, in order for the receiving his Tyth as in such cases, the
Farmer seeing him, pointing him out to the Servants, See there, said he, there
goes an authorized Thief to Steal one of my Pigs: And, by his Instigation, his
Men, from behind Carts and Dunghils privately sent such a shower of Clods, that
the Minister was glad to fly out of the Yard to avoid a worse consequence.

After this the Jesuits broach their Principles, and the most Learned of them
Challenge the Protestant Divines to a Pen-Battle. Who must be these
Protestants? It Is a contradiction for the Church of England to Write against
the Papists, because you know they were always Branded with the Title of
Papists. Well, there remains nothing then to do, but for the Presbyterians to
show their Learning and aversion for Popery, which they always so much
exclaimed against. What! not a hand move? Not one Dissenter boldly vindicate
the Protestant Cause? What! must Papists Write against Papists? Must the
Babylonish Church of England, engage against the Babylonish Church of Rome?
Sure, a House divided against it self falls: Yes, the Church of England must
stand and bear the shock, or else the Protestant Cause must go hang: And yet
these Men will have Us to be Papishes.

At last King James's Designs began to be visible, the Universities (the source
from whence the chiefest Pillars of our Religion flow) are the first that must
suffer, that the Head being taken away, the Members may be less capable to
Resist. Well, how do our Dissenters behave themselves now? If they will not
lend a helping hand to save a sinking Reformed Church, a Church that just
before had bore up with so much Bravery against the Enemy of all Protestants,
sure they will pity it: No, they said openly, That the Angels had poured out
their Viols of Wrath upon the Dragon and his Followers; That the Adulterers,
Whoremongers, and Tythegatherers, were to be punished for afflicting the
beloved of God.

At length the Seven Bishops are sent to the Tower, for not complying with a
thing which they could not reconcile to their Consciences: Sure the Dissenters
will take their Parts in This, because they themselves are such great Sticklers
in point of Conscience: No, they have a Clue to disintangle themselves from
this Labyrinth: They said this proceeded not from any part of a Religious
Conscience, but that they refused to read the Declaration, in order to the
taking off the Penal Laws and Tests, merely because it would deprive them of
the Power of Persecuting the Lambs of God.

But now the Prince of Orange Lands, and we shall see whether there is any
Trust to be confided in such sort of Cattle. There is a great consternation
over all England. King James had been very. Tyrannical over the Church of
England, and therefore doubted of their Loyalty to him; but he had been kind,
nay a Father to the Dissenters, and therefore ought to expect assistance from
them, as they had Religiously protested in their Addresses. What! not a Man
among our grateful Dissenters, neither Personally, nor from the Press
nor-Pulpit, take the part of a King who had delivered them out of Captivity,
who brought them out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage. What!
will those Godly People forsake their Benefactor now he most needs the effects
of their Promises? Will none of them lend their assistance to a Man who had
freed them from the Long-Nails of the Whore of Babylon? What! the Lambs of God!
the very Emblem of our Savior, absolutely Pure and Innocent, and yet promise
what they hardly ever meant, or at least never did perform! To reflect upon it
would make the most Brazen Blush; but our Dissenters Foreheads are hardened a
degree above Steel it self, or else they could not reflect upon those large
Promises, and the Nonperformance of them without a Guilt which would be as
evident in their Countenances, and as lasting as Cain's Mark. I remember once I
saw a Dissenter turning over the Gazetts, in the last Reign, and (Monstrum
horrendum!) his Face kept it is accustomed Color, without the least sign of a
Confusion, which in any but a Phanatick would have bespoke a matter as strange
as that of Pryn, Bastwick, and Burton, who fell together by the Ears when they
had No Ears.

Nor is their Carriage toward the Church of England less notorious in This
Reign than in the Last. They are so daringly Impudent, as to say, they don't
question, but the Lawn Sleeves and the long Gown will make them as good a
Bonfire in Smithfield, as did the Goods of the Spanish Ambassador in the
Strand. It was but the other day, that a Worthy and Learned Man heard some of
this Crew, in a Coffee-House near the Temple, say, They questioned not but the
Fast for King Charles's Martyrdom would be put down. Good God! To what
Impudence are these Perjured Time-servers arrived? I wonder they did not
Petition in the last Reign (to gratify King James) that the Thanksgiving for
the Fifth of November might be rac'd out of the Calendar. They told a good
Member of the Church of England, That they hoped the Lord would put the Sword
into Their hands, and then the measure which We measured to Them, might be
measured to Us again. How! is this the nature of the Lamb? Is it Revenge and
Pride that entitles us to that sacret Epithet of Holy Lambs and Followers of
the Living GOD? Sure these Men are little better than Atheists, when they seem
to cast so little regard to the Almighty, as to appropriate to themselves the
very same Name and Title which is given to the Supreme Being; and yet at that
very time, design never to perform the thing they promise, and are hatching
Revenge and Malice against their Enemies. The Church of England is now looked
upon by these Men as the mere dross of the Primitive Religion, and ought to be
cast away; that the Members of it are defiled with the Sins of the Dragon, and
that the Bottomless Pit will receive them at the end. What is this but
depriving God of his Mercy, and taking away one of the greatest Attributes of
the Deity, by condemning their Fellow Christians to the Bottomless Pit? But to
insist no more upon their barbarous and unchristian Expressions, let us take a
survey of their Behavior only. I am not going to Vindicate the Bishop of Ely;
but is it not a horrid Shame that that Learned Man should be exposed by every
saucy Pamphleteer? and that with all the scurrilous and opprobrious Titles that
Hell can invent and they publish: And not only Him, but, for his sake, the
whole Church must be villify'd by this Rabble of Writers, whose Style is as
nausceous as their Sense, and both as inconsistent as the Covent Garden
Sermons. Is it not a wretched Shame that a Fellow who Styles himself the O -- r
should have the Impudence to call upon the Reverend Bishops to clear
themselves? as though it was not below the Dignity and Eminency of those
Learned Prelates, to be at the beck of a saucy Scribler that Writes for Bread,
and who, I believe, values Religion just as much as his Brethren, when it will
consist with his Interest to continue it. I know they think they have already
their Foot in the Stirrup, and that they shall speedily mount the Saddle; but I
have reason to bel^^^^ His present Majesty's Prudence is too great to repose
any (...) in such unfaithful Perjured People, who never were True (...) their
own Interest* I know they carry a very fair outside to King (...) but if we
scan their Principles we shall have reason to think they love him no more than
the great Turk. For if they love a King, as King, then they love Monarchy, but
they hate Monarchy, therefore cannot love a King.

I shall conclude this Paper with this Expression, That if His Majesty (whom
God long preserve in the Throne of England) should rely upon these People, upon
the account of any Love they pretend to Him, He will be found to have trusted
to a broken Reed, if ever He should have occasion to try Them: And that though
too many of our Church of England have been Wheedled away from valuing this
present Government with as great a Veneration as is really due to it, yet I
don't question but there are above an hundred for one, who will be True to It;
if so, there will not be much need of depending upon a People whose very Hearts
seem to be compounded with those Two Ingredients of Malice and Falsehood: From
whose Principles Libera nos, etc.

FINIS.

