A DISCOVERY OF THEISME.

TOGETHER, With such Philosophical and Mathematical Observations, as are
Consonant thereunto: Delivered in a more refined Manner then hitherto Written,
against Atheism, and Profaneness.

-- Deum namque ire per omnes
Terrarum tractusque maris caelumque profundum.
Virgil. By a Person of Quality.

London, Printed for Charles Broom, at the Gun, at the West End of St. Paul's.
School.

THE THEIST, TO THE READER.
WHosoever shall peruse the Ensuing Treatise, will, I doubt not, to his
Satisfaction, perceive that there is delivered in a more Excellent and refined
manner such Tenants as are genuinely appropriated to the sublime Devotion of
the Soul by the definition of Theisme; and this performed in diverse undeniable
Instances and Proofs, that have not been the Subject of any precedent Pen. For
tho it be granted that diverse have Written on the Subject of Theisme, yet the
Method they have used in Publishing the Substance, in their Opinions, of that
Persuasion, has been rather in the Nature of a Commonplace, in every of their
Writings, then duly Exhibiting the manifest perspicuity of that Doctrine as it
is evident to the best Eye of Humane Understanding.

And thus they would seem to apprehend that the Theist does rather supersically
Ruminate on the Notion and Being of a God, (tho visibly conveyed to the
Intellect by the sublime Conduct of Providence together with the many wonderful
Existencies and Beings of things apparently discerned in the Compass of the
Universe,) then pertinently adore the Deity in all those considerations: As if
miraculous Objects did not necessitate the Reverence and Devotion of the Humane
Soul, unless there be an Inadvertency and Negligence by not Emphatically
regarding the Conviction displayed by the Almighty to every reasonable
Comprehension.

He must be endu'd with a very Insipid Sense, that beholds a miraculous
Structure without acknowledging an extraordinary Operator: And much more of a
dim discernment, if by the Fabric of the Universe he did not conclude its
Contexture devinely Admirable: All which is so generally granted, that it has
the validity of a proverbial Truth, on all sides, rather then the least
Admittance of Dispute or Quere: But with this difference, that whereas others
deduce, on the same account, their belief from words, which they consider as
Dictates from above, the Theist derives his from the Works of the Omnipotent;
so that there cannot be any Essential misunderstanding, in that Particular,
betwixt him, and any of his Opposers.

If some Professions of Faith undertake to define the Essence of the Deity more
positively then is Consistent with his Creed: (As they endeavor hy
Sophisticate Terms or Words of Art to exert the Infinite Proprieties and Being
of the Omnipotent, which cannot be applicable to the Humane Understanding as it
is conversant with Objects of Sense, or things of a Corporeal Nature.)

Notwithstanding the Theist does not deny, but in the Soul of Man there may be,
in some respects, a very sublime Idea of an unlimitted Capacity or extent, as
from the most spiritual part of Thought it has a momentary Progression: And
this is experimentally certain whenever the Imagination shall by an Instant
Thought conceive a Geometrical Lime extended farther then all quantative
Limitation in any kind: Much like that of Euclid, where he defines an Infinite
line Incommensurably reaching beyond all figurative Height, or Length; of which
more at large in that part of this Treatise that relates to the Orbs above.

Wherefore, if the Doctors of the Schools mean no other, by the Definition of
the Deity, however worded by them, then the most supereminent Attributes of an
Infinite Being, in all Capacities, there is no occasion for controverting that
Point betwixt the Theist and them. Nor ought they to forget, where it is
Written, that God delivered himself to Moses by no other Epithet then I am,
what I am; which does not only pose, but check Mortality that would undertake
to explicate the Divine Essence, beyond what is possible, to be comprehended by
Mankind: Which the precedent expression of I am, what I am, so stupendously
transcending the utmost reach of Humane Sense, does undeniably assure us. But
of this sublime Notion, more fully in the subsequent Treatise.

Next to the Being of a Deity, there ought to be a reverend acknowledgement of
the miraculous Import and Munificence in the Conduct of Divine Providence,
which in the Judgment of the Theist, is conspicuously discernable in the Whole,
and every Part of the Universe; and so very apparent, that it does by its
constant Visibility avert the considerate Man from having his Understanding
diversely perplexed, or envelop'd by the obscurity of Traditional or Related
Miracles, of which he can have no sensible prospect: As may be compendiously
perceived by perusing this Book; where not only the actual Wonders of
Providence are treated more applicably Intelligible, then has as yet been
observed in the Writtings of others. But also some things of high concern, or
not before discovered, no less manifestly proved by Mathematical certainty: Yet
so performed, that it is made sensibly demonstrative to any Reader who is not
experienced in that Science. Some there are that Ignorantly enough undertake to
accuse Theisme, as if it opposs'd all Reveall'd Worship: Notwithstanding that
the External Convictions of Providence are inseparable from his Belief; but
this Reflection, as the Theist apprehends, does proceed from such who contend
more for the Credit of the Intricacy of their Doctrines, or Metaphysical
Distinctions, then the open Motives of Faith, that ought to Illuminate their
Conceptsons: From whence it is very Remarkable, that Men Bigoted by Imaginary
Notions, or accustomed to a careless and sloathful Regard of the manifest
Convictions exposs'd by the Almighty in the Wonders of his Works, do live, as
if they diseern'd not, or were surfeited with the continual Blessings that
Providence, the great Leiutenant of the Deity, bestows, as Comforts to their
Souls and Bodies, by Day and Night upon them.

Others there are, tho agreeing with the Theist in their Acknowledging and
Worshipping of a sole Deity: Yet are severely Embittered against him, because he
does not tack to his Belief such a Catalogue of Articles of Faith, as each of
them profess annexed to their Creed.

In Answer to which, the Theist desires them to Consider, that they are so far
from accomodating, betwixt themselves their different Manner of Worships,
together with diverse essential Particulars by which they depart farther from
one another then they can pretend to do from the Doctrine of Theisme: As is
clearly preceptible in the Jew, Mehometan, and other perverse Beliefs: Yet all
of them Concenter with the Theist in the Adoration of one sole God: Which
enough does manifest that the Belief of one God is the most demonstrative
Article of their several Persuasions: As also that their Dissentments,
Enmities, and violent Oppositions, in Reference to the uncertainties of other
of their Tenants, even to the Subvertimg of Civil Repose, and Government, may
be Recorded amongst the highest Calamities of Mankind.

But on these sad Accounts, so notoriously known, the Theist is more modest
then to Insert his Recriminations.

And thus in Brief, are here presented, by way of Preface, such Sentiments of
the Theist as preparatively Conduce to the facilitating of the Readers
Apprehension of the ensuing Work: Which is chiefly designed against the absurd
Impieties of Atheism, with a due Reflection on such that disregard, in Soul,
the Miracles of the Almighty as so many Innumerable Blessings, throughout the
Universe conveyed, for the benefit of Mankind.

To Conclude, the Reader is desired to take Notice, that there is nothing
Intended, in this Treatise, whereby to Lessen in any kind, the Excellencies of
Christian Religion, but rather an Acknowledgment of its Divine Perfections, as
may be evidently perceived in the Close of the ensuing Book.

A DISCOVERY Of the most Refined NOTIONS and PRINCIPLES Of the THEIST. As they
Essentially Relate to that PERSUASION.
THE Religion of the Theist, as the Word may be derived from Greek, Consists in
the sole belief of one God, with all other Attributes of miraculous Being,
Providence, and Conduct, that can be assigned to Omnipotency. In which general
Article of Divine Belief, the Theist fully concenters with the most Universal
Religions of the World: But in the motives to Divine Worship, he considerably
differs from many of them, which may be thus explained: The Theist derives his
Adoration of a Deity, from the Being and miraculous Order of the Universe in
the Existency of the World above, and below, with whatsoever is contained
therein, which summed compleats the Proposition of God demonstrated by the
wonders of his Works, which he believes ought undeniably to oblige the^ Holy
reverence of the Soul as the most visible convictions of his Creed: Or no other
then so many Divine Proposals in the miraculous operations and consistency of
the World sensibly apprehended by the admirable conduct of the Almighty. If he
beholds the miraculous Revolution above, together with the rising and setting
of the Sun to day, he thinks it no less stupendous if he perceives his
Glorious Ascent to morrow: And thus he fits his belief to the Volume of Divine
Faith comprehended in the Worlds universal Continuance and Being, as so many
Evidences of the Deity conveyed by Incomprehensible Causes and Effects. In
which submission of the Soul, he cannot but separate his Holy contemplation and
reverence from other Credentials of Worship that are written, or disperss'd by
the Hand of Man, as he that has an open assurance, need not unclose a Book to
search for more; because a writing however credibly asserting the Truth of
Miracles past, which celebrate particular Worships, cannot as he Judges, be so
present with his Understanding, or his Immediate Conviction, as what is
perpetual to his Apprehension, in the miraculous Constitution, Preservation,
and Providential management of the Universal World, with the innumerable
Objects of Admiration contained in it, that does, as it were, disclose to the
Eye the bosom of Omnipotence; in which the devout preception of Man may
discern dateless Miracles no less Ancient in Being then the total World;
because always evident in it. Whereas contrarily, in the Judgment of the
Theist, other Religious Persuasions want not only the like continual manifest
Convictions; but according to the known Date of their Records, must acknowledge
that there was, for ought they can demonstratively allege to the contrary,
innumerable Years that preceeded the Revelations they assert: From whence may
be concluded that there was unaccountable Revolutions of Time when they neither
had Being or Belief. And therefore no Objection, against the Theist, if he
rejects Tenants that include a Modern Date; or not so Infinitely uncomputable
by Time, as his own: It being impossible to evidence any Conviction of the Soul
more Ancient than the World, and the Miracles it contains. Not but the Divine
Power could have ordained, if suitable to his Decree, one or more subsequent
Worlds as amply wonderful as this we behold; there being no limitation to the
Omnipotent, if pleased to bestow any miraculous Method in order to our Sense
and Conviction: But then this must have been perpetually evident from the time
it had Beginning, as clearly as is discernable any other Object of Divine
Admiration and Reverence within the compass of the Universe. On which
considerations, the Theist conceives himself obliged to disent from diverse
miraculous Tenants delivered by the Pens of men, because not genuinely
discernable in the vast Volume of the World, without any intermission of
Wonders, and Providence consonant to their Divine conveyance. It being a
Solescisme, in his opinion, that men should recede from the day light of Faith,
to search for Invisible Conviction. And consequently Inferrs, that since there
are no apparent Miracles, but what are contained in the Universe of Heaven and
Earth, he ought to prove from thence the devotion of his Faith. On which
account he amply receives the assurance of Divine demonstration by the Eye of
his Intellect: Leaving other Creeds to argue, from transcriptions of spiritual
Revelations, their Systems of belief; or from whence they severally Infer, as
they rationally gather, that the Holy Precepts, of one or other, are to be
embraced by them. Whereas, the greatest part of religious Persuasion are rather
the Effects of Custom and Education, then visible Conviction of any faculty of
the Humane Soul.

Insomuch, that the Theist affirms, that a Man born blind, may be as
Intelligibly persuaded of the Doctrine of Theisme, together with the devotion
annexed to it, as if he had a plenary sight and prospect of all the Wonders
within the Compass of the Universe. It not being to be doubted that such a
person, tho without Eyes to discern, might by his Reason, or Sense of Feeling,
not only conclude that he lives, but that he is also sustained by a
providential Goodness and Power, as certainly as he feels within, or without
out him; the Effects of Heat or Cold, as also nourished by Food, neither of
which could be produced or caused by himself; And therefore must concede that
he Subsists by the dispensation of an Existence more excellent then his own;
and consequently obliged to give thanks devoutly on his knees for the Blessings
he receives, tho without Eyes to behold the particulars of Heaven and Earth,
from whence they proceed.

On the contrary, should this unseeing Man be required to adhere to any
religious Proposal, that presented no other contexture to his Sense, then a
story told of suppernatural Deeds and Revelation, which concentered with no
Rational Proprietic of his Being and Nature: He would doubtless Annex his
belief to the Doctrine of Theisme, with whatsoever, by undeniable consequence
from it, might complete his Devotion. These discussions, as being but
previously Inserted in order to farther expand the Fonds on which the Theist
erects his Tenants; It will be necessary to consider these three Particulars.

The First, As to the Being of the Universe. The Second, Tending to the Cause
and Manner of its Productiony, as also its wonderful Conduct, Order, and
Preservation, with some Opinions of the Learned The Third, Including the
Religion of the Theist, and the manner of Holy Adoration redounding from thence.
As to the First Particular.
THE Theist does not concern his Imagination with the trite contests that both
amuse and weary Men's understandings, by their Impossible determinations, as
they are Debated in Schools; where some undertake to determine that, by the
Efficacy of the Divine Will, the World had an original Creation from nothing:
Or as others Assert, from matter that had a precedent Existency, and afterward
disposed by Omnipotency into the Figure we now behold. Neither of which
opinions the Theist allows to be his: It being more perspicuous, in his
Judgment, to believe that the Universe, with all it contains, is admirable,
then to define by what Method, or Means its wonderful Structure was produced.
But however it came to pass, 'twas certainly accomplished, without pains, by
whatsoever was the manner of the operation, because in every thing it
comprehends there is an easiness of Order and Being; otherwise there could be
no one Individual, of any kind, but might be destructive to another, and the
Cause perish with the Effect, which would tend to a period of Providence.

Fox tho it be apparent that Bodies of Life, whether Animals, or Vegetables,
are subject to alteration and Death as any of them corupt in order to the
Generation of others, yet nothing is absolutely destroyed, but rather varied as
a continual supplement to more productions; so that the Cause remains entire,
however it effects Alteration.

Examples are obvious, in many Particulars, of which, these are ocularly
Illustrious; the Sun, Moon and Stars, are influential Causes of innumerable
Alterations of Bodies beneath 'em, yet have no change in themselves, as they
Operate on other things. And thus it is very manifest that the vast Bulk of the
Universe subsists by open providential Causes, and their Effects, which by a
Series of humane Thought, ascend until the Imagination, to wonder leaves 'em,
as being not within its Capacity to proceed higher: And therefore, according to
the poetical, Allusion of Homer's Chain of Divine Providence, stupendiously
Comits the Scals of its Causes, as fixed at the foot of Jupiters Chair.

If the total complexe of the Universe, does admirably convict us that it has
an unconceivable Structure and Being, the Author of its Existency must impose
on the Soul a more sublime Admiration, which by the Theist is readily devoted
to Divine Omnipotency.

There is no ordinary Understanding that may not Signally perceive the
providential Results in Causes and Effects, of a deified Power; but not with
the same possibility discern the Station or Essence of the wonderful Author.

Notwithstanding, it is obviously apparent, that there are diversities of
Elementary Operations and Subsistencies appertaining to the Earth, on which we
tread, that, as to the Causes from whence they proceed, are as far remote from
our Conceptions as any Influenced from the supreamest Orb of Heaven: Which
experience fully assures, it being not more obscure to our Intellects, why some
parts of Earth should enclose diverse Materials, Mines of Diamonds, Gold,
Silver, Minerals, Streams, and watery Depths, when in others are found Quarries
of Stone, and Impenetrable Rocks.

Nor less clouded will be our Imagination, should we search on Mountains tops,
and then discover the Head of a Spring, that by secret descending supplies
perpetually the Current of a mighty River: Would not a Man think that it were
as Impossible to think the Cause of this wondrous Scource, as by Reason to
conceive why the Bosom of the Earth should nourish the different Materials
already mentioned. Yet duly considered, the Uses for which they are ordained*
the course Stone or Peeble differs not in Value from the purest Diamond, as
being more frequent for usage, tho not, in opinion, of the same price: So
variously has Providence provided for our Ornaments and conveniences of Life.
Could the Universe be compair'd with any Conception of the Humane Mind; it were
possible to Imagine a World as prodigiously wonderful, in Whole and in Parts,
as this we visibly behold; but that were to extend thought beyond what is
actually Miraculous, and therefore no less Absurd then Impossible; because we
could think of nothing but would have some material Resemblance, to what was
observed before, within the Compass of the World we Inhabit: On which Ground it
may be concluded that there can be no Miracle to Sense, either great or small,
other then what is locally Encompassed by the Circumference of Heaven and Earth.

Should a Man endeavor, by any Ecstasy of Thought, to contemplate the Being of
Deity, his Imagination could extend no farther then the usual Course of
providential Operations: And should he attempt to explain the Divine Essence,
he could not separate his thought from Apprehending the Corporeal Shape and
Likeness of some Object he had before observed. Wherefore, it is a presumption
in words, if delivered by them, that God can be otherwise understood then by
his admired Providence and Works.

Nor is it possible to Attribute other Definition to Omnipotency; for tho God
may be understood to have the utmost Perfection of spiritual Existency, and
what is more, demonstratively such by operations of a spiritual Nature, or
equivalent to it, as shall be evidently proved in the next Particular of this
Treatise: Notwithstanding, it seems Impossible to word the Definition of a
Spirit, because nothing can be delivered by Speech but must be the Object of
one, or more, of the Senses, and no Man will averr that he can either see or
feel a Spirit: It being unconceivable that a Corporeal Eye or Sense whatsoever,
should perceive any thing that has not bodily parts; otherwise then it may be
exerted in some equivalent Capacity, as already expressed.

But before the first Grand Particular, of this Treatise, receives a period:
The Theist would be understood that where he mentions the miraculous Sructure
and Continuance of the total Universe, he does not Annex a more Ineffable
Wonder to the Whole then he does to every individual Part, whether of Annimal
or Vegetable Subsistency. A Miracle is as absolute in Epitomy as in the utmost
extent of Breadth, Depth, and Height: Insomuch, that every particular thing
appertaining to Earth, above and below its Surface, are no less stupendous
then the vastness of its Circumference and Bulk.

If asked why the Earth is adorned with Flowers of a various Color and
Beauty, and but the Grass and Leaves of Trees greenly flourishing: The most
intellegent Man can give no perfect reason, no more then if required to prove
why any one Stone appears of a comlier Figure and Complexion than another. If
farther demanded how Rivers and Seas are supplied with numberless Streams that
are maintained and increased: He must profess his Ignorance, because unknown to
him, both the manner of the Operation and Materials by which they were
originally produced. If interogated why Air is thiner then Earth or Water, or
why Stars are brighter then Trees, or not observed to augment by growth like
them, he must for the same Reason, answer as ignorantly as he did to any of the
precedent Questions.

To conclude, had it pleased Omnipotency to have bestowed rational
Understanding to every Species of Being, and Life in the Regions of Air and
Earth together, with whatsoever has a liquid Existence in the Streams and
Oceans of the Universe: The Fish, Beast, and Plant, would no less admire the
diversities of their Nature's Proprieties, and Shapes, then those of Man and
Woman, or how all of them Subsist and Increase in their several kinds. Neither
could Mankind less stupendiously wonder how any of those were produced, then by
what means the first Man and Woman had a primitive Life: In which
consideration, the humane Intellect is no less posed by the Miracle of its own
Composure and Being, then it is by contemplating how the vast Sructure of the
World, with its sum of Wonders, was completed as it is now beheld.

Which prefectly demonstrates that there is neither magis, or minus, in the
miraculous Act whereby was produced the total Universe, or any Individial thing
that is contained by its Icommensurable Compass.

From whence the Theist concludes that Omnipotency may be Emphatically defined
by the Miracles of its Works, since by no other Definition, or Sylogisme, which
the Schools provide, it can be so visibly apprehended.

And it were vain to Imagine that the Divine Power, too Infinite to be
comprehended by any System of words, should be by that Method, no less
convictive, to the Eye of Thought, then it is by ocular demonstration of Things
manifestly Admirable: Wherefore Mankind ought to acknowledge, with the highest
Reverence of the Soul, that the Essence of Omnipotency, Imcomprehensible by
accents of Speech, may be equivalently explained in the superlative Wonders of
the World, and the Works it contains. Which in sum, is the Doctrine of the
Theist, as it relates to a Divine Power and Being,

But as to the Sphere or Residence of the Almighty; which by the Tenants of
some is Imagined to be above the Supreamest of the Celestial Orbs, the Theist
does not undertake to define; which were no less absurd then to attribute to
an Infinite a circurnscrib'd Being.

The Geometrician certainly proves, that nothing can be said to have place;
other then what is contained by proportional Lines within the Compass of some
Figure: Whereby he demonstrates, that whatsoever is alleged to proportion,
must consequently be allowed Parts, as in the Dimention of Alineal superficies,
in any kind, or solids, as the Cube, Globe, Cone, Parabola, or the like: The
most excellent of which cannot comprehend the Figure of Deity, which if without
Body, there is no possibility of its resemblance to any Corporeal Thing or
Measure: Wherefore the denomination of Heaven, tho Immensly supposed beyond the
highest of Stars that shine to wonder above us, is too narrow a Station for the
Prefence-Chamber of the Deity: Because the nominating of Place does imply the
circumscription of material Parts; and no Man can be so Ignorant as to suppose
that there is any such thing as a bodily Infinite, or that any local quantity
may be Incomensurably acknowledged.

Notwithstanding it must be granted that the opinion of Holy Persons, tho not
strictly to be proved, in appropriating to the sublimest height the mansion of
Omnipotency, is allowable, because devout contemplation the farther it ascends
upward has a more remote, or ineffable Excellency, as being exalted above
Things of more familiar observance, tho not less Admirable; as has been
precedently observed, then consists in the speculation of any heigher objects
of thought that impresseth on the Understanding, Reverential acknowledgment of
a Supreme Power that by its munificence supports the Fabric of the Universe,
and all it contains: Wherefore, in Reverence to discernless or unknown Being, a
place unknown, as the most suitable Epithet, may be termed the select Seat of
the Almighty. The Nature of Men having more dread, however, unperceptible of
what they conceive they ought stupendiously to believe then if it were present
to their Understandings: Insomuch that could the humane Eye surpass its usual
prospect of the Sun and Stars, and next make a visible discovery of a Heaven
far more Glorious then any of the shining Sphere already discerned, the
wonderful Objects might, in short time, be as regardlesly perceived as any of
the sublime Illuminations observed before.

So heedless is Man of things that require his perfect Admiration.

But as to the denomination of Heaven, as a sublime some where, rather then
place of the Blessed, as the Schools define, with the beautifical Vision of the
Almighty, as also the perpetual Felicity of pious Immortality: It Is a passible
Opinion in the Judgment of the Theist, and may not be Incongruously derived
from experimental Observation; as by the Eye the Imagination ascends by
comparing the different Magnitudes, Heights, and Splendors of the Moon, Sun,
Planets, and Stars; by which gradual Contemplation, or as it were step, by
step, is apprehended a more Divine and sublime Being of the Deity.

The great Philosopher Aristotle, was not dissentaneous to this Notion, when he
defined the Celestial appearances, so termed here instead of Bodies, for
Reasons that will soon follow, by the Name of a fifth Essence, as an
extraordinary refin'dness Incident to their Being and Natures, Invariable in
their Grandeur and Figures without the least signification or tendency to
Elementary Composition or Change, as so many particular Emblems of Eternity, by
whose admired Illuminations the humane Soul might be guided to the transcendent
acknowledgment of a more Illustrious and Divine Existence.

But enough has been said relating to the first Branch of this Treatise, and
the Being of a God.

The Second Particular, tending to the Cause and Manner of the Worlds
production: As also its wonderful Conduct, Order, and Preservation; with some
Opinions of the Learned therein.
IT has been evidently explained, by the precedent Discussions, that the
Universe, withal its surrounds, is displayed as ocularly miraculous: And
therefore incumbent on humane Sense to be a diligent Admirer of all its
Objects. The neglect of which cannot be enough Reproved, since it proceeds from
sloathful Imprudence, or Inadvertency of Men, in being not more propensly
diligent in devoting the Duty of their admiratirations as fully as the Wonders
of Providence are obvious to their sight Insomuch, that a tale told of any
extraordinary Fact, if but supposed miraculous, shall more assure their
Imaginations, then what may be Admirably beheld in the open Face of the
Universe, every minute of Life Or that familiar Convictions, because familiar,
should be less regarded then stupendous Relations without ocular or sensible
Assurance: Whereas the wonderful continuance of Objects, and such are those
which are perspicuously numerous, and within the Compass of the World, ought to
Induce our most constant, and solemn Admiration as so many testimonials of an
Omnipotent Author. Not that the Theist would occasion, by Assertions of this
Nature, such perplexities in the Soul as are observed in Men that would
undertake to discover Causes and Effects far obscured by the Vail of
Providence; or by what methods of Omnipotency the Universe had Original
Beginning. The most general belief of Men, however differing in other Tenants,
either as they are Jews, Christians, or Mahomitans, Is, that the total World
together with all it circumscribs above and below, was by the Will and Dictate
of the Almighty created from nothing* And that Incorporeal Substances, defined
by the Schools: Angels and Spirits had a concometant production within the
compass of six Days, as the Scripture affirms, with Elementary Bodies of
innumerable Kinds according to the diversities of their Scituations, Shapes,
and manner of Subsistence.

But here it must be understood, that it cannot be properly Imagined how an
Infinite Being and Operator should be said to effect, in any degrees of Time,
whatsoever was produced by Omnipotent Power; because every Act that may be
computed or numbered in Time, howsoever swift its Accelaration presupposes
Motion and Comensurable Parts, which were too heavily attributed to the Method
and Deeds of the Almighty. Wherefore the expressions may rather pass for a
manner of speaking whereby Holy Writ would more familiarly captivate humane
Understanding, which cannot apprehend or think of any Object or Existency, in
any consideration, that is not, more or less, within the Verge of Time as it is
judged by the Understanding. So that where the Text enumerat's Days in which
the Universe was completed; it is not meant as if God had set a task upon
himself, to be finished in any Journals of time, because the Effect of his
Eternal Determination could have no temporary Epithet; and therefore the words
of the Writer whereby to deliver, for the benefit of humane Capacity, the
Infinite Decree and Operations of the Omnipotent, as temporarily produced; must
be so intended, because impossible to be apprehended in any other dialect, and
Man the Reader.

Another Opinion the Theist observes, and much affected by modern Authors;
which is, that there was a material World in Being before it had the Date of
Creation from the Pen of Moses: Affirming, according to the noted Maxim, that
of nothing, nothing could be made; and this original Matter, tho by them
supposs'd Corporeal, had no perfect composition till disposs'd by Providence
into such bodily Proportions and Forms as are manifest in the supreamer and
lower Regions of the Universe. In this Chaos of Matter, in consequence to their
System of the Worlds Production, must undeniably be granted a capacitative
Being of Incorporeal Substances, as well as those that appertained, as they
Affirm, to the bulk of Matter, and by the same process received a future
perfection: By which Conception of theirs they seem, absurdly to complicate
Eternity of Matter, and Substances of all Kinds, whether Corporeal of
Spiritual; until all of them were subsequently completed by Divine
Ordination: but this Imagination tends not only to Assert a double Eternity, by
allowing a perpetual Existency to Matter, as well as to the Being of an
Omnipotent Power, but also by affirming that all thnigs were previously
disposs'd, from something, either Corporeal or Spiritual, that was Incedent to
their precedent Capacities; by which they annex a temporary Operation to the
Works of the Almighty. So that, in effect, they allow, instead of Creation, no
other then a providential Alteration and Refinement of bodily Parts, no less
then Substances, that were to be exalted to spiritual Perfection. From which
modalities, or manner of precedent and future Subsistences, they derive their
Tenants relating to the Being of Angels, Spirits, of all degrees, with every
thing that has Being in the Visible and Invisible parts of the World.

And as their most Emphatical Argument, in reverence to humane Original, they
plead the Text of Scripture, where it is said, That God formed Man out of Clay,
as precedent Matter.

But this excludes not the Creation of that Clay so wonderfully Impressed by
the Almighty as to complete the Figure of Humanity; unless they annex
perpetuity to Matter, which were to double Eternity, by assigning that Infinite
Attribute no less to Matter then God: An absurdity condemned by the Doctrine of
the Theist, as already Instanced; who rather beholds the Universe as the Object
of his Admiration, then undertakes to assert by any Method, that he can
contemplate, the Manner of its wonderful Existence; as not possible, in his
Judgment, to conceive how any thing had precedent Being that is not manifest in
a present Cause. Insomuch that he doubts not to affirm that had Man been
capable of apprehending how the World, with all the particulars it contains,
was produced, there had not been wanted the Inscriptions of Providence, on
whatsoever has Being, within its Circumference, whereby Mankind might have
legibly discerned how its total and Parts had the complete Structures, and
Subsistences that are visible to the Eye.

But since the whole with its wonderful Particulars are within the Complex of a
mighty Round more amazingly vast then can be Intelligently penetrated by humane
Sense, or the height of its Diameter measured by any Scale of Thoughts that can
Ascend to the utmost Point of its supreme Cause: By the munifence of the
Omnipotent we are in some sort familiarly acquainted with miraculous Objects
tho not with their miraculous Author: And notwithstanding that spiritual
Essences together with their admired Proprieties, are not so readily defined,
or the manner of their Existence and Operations, as Corporeal Beings, however
wonderful, that actually Employ the Sense as they sympathize in bodily
Temperaments, Parts, or Proportions, with those of Mankind: Yet even of these
we may have such real apprehensions as admirably Approximate the, otherwise,
remote speculation or their Order, Conduct, and Nature. Let the Example be
taken from the Sun, and Stars, which the Theist rather denominates spiritual
Appearances, or equivalently such, then any other definition, given of them, by
the greatest Philosopher; and he may be well allowed that liberty if he proves
them equivalent in their refined Illuminations, Beings, and Motions, to such
stupendous Excellencies that can be no otherwise comprehended then as they are
effecatiously spiritual.

The Grand Philosopher Aristotle, (as before quoted,) by the accuteness of his
Intellect, gives the Definition of quintessential Perfection to the Celestial
Luminaries, which signifies a Fifth different Essence from any thing that had
any Ingredients of the Four Elements. But had he as accurately considered their
wonderful Motions and Celerity, as they consummate their Revolutions, he might
have allowed them the Epithites of spiritual Equivalents, in every respect.

The best Account that the most celebrated Astronomers can give of the Suns
diurnal Progress, is that he exceeds fifteen Millions of English Miles in the
four and twenty Hours; and consequently, that in one Minute of Time his
expedition is somewhat more then eleven Thousand a Hundred and eleven Miles of
the same Account: Which incomprehensible swiftness seems liker to vanishing
then apparent Motion. It being Impossible for any thing that has bodily
Composition to move with that Celirity, because whatsoever has Corporeal Parts
must take up space, and therefore move by slower Degrees and Computations then
in the Example given of the Suns acceleration: Nor is there any Individual
Motion, within the Circle of the Universe, below the Orbs above, that has any
competent Similitude to their admirable Movements. The hasty Currents of the
Ocean, or wings of the loudest Winds are slow, in their utmost Expiditions, and
so are the most sudden flashes of Lightning; if compared with one moments
Journey of the Celestial Spheres,

And what is of higher Admiration, were it so decreed by Providence, it is as
possible for the Sun to finish his diurnal Revolution in the same Minute of
Time, that the Astronomers allot to the Miles above mentioned, as for a
Thought, that is spirited by the Soul, to Imagine, in a moment, a Methematical
Line extended from the East point to the West of the Horrizon.

And thus may the wondrous Acceleration of the Sun be no less prespicuously
contemplated, then, in a Instant, may be perceived any Ray of his arrive to the
Eye.

But should any solid Body, whether little or great, be supposed to move, with
the swiftest Imagination, from any one Point of the Compass to another; its
dimensions of Length, Breadth, and Height, both in a Phisophical and
Mathematical Sense, would have local removes, or transition from place to place
by such parts of Time as can have no comparative Proportion to the Instance
already given, of the Suns momentary Celerity, then it is possible to parallel
the start of a Thought to the measures of bodily Motion.

From whence it follows, that if the diurnal Revolution of the Sun is in every
particle of Time, miraculous; a more then ordinary definition ought to be
allowed to his Revolution and Essence. No one visible Radiation of the Sun but
resembles, as the learned in Optics deliver, a Geometrical Line: But because
no such Line can be the Object of Sight, but as it seems to have Corporal
Breadth: It has thesefore pleased Divine Providence so comfortably to
Illuminate the World, that every Beam transmitted by the Sun, is visible with
his Figure, tho his Essence be not more understood, by any definitive Term,
then the Miracle of his Light and Motion.

On which ground, the Theist conceives it very significant to attribute,
instead of other denomination, the Equivalency of spiritual appearances to the
Sun and Stars, as suitable to undeniable Proprieties in them, whereby is
apprehended that spiritual Existencies may be seen, tho not understood; yet by
their Visibility directed, as the shining guides of Providence, to Imagine more
excellent Beings in the Supreme Palace of the Almighty.

Next to the Immense progressions of the Stars and planitary Orbs that complete
the Twenty-four hourly Periods of the Day: The Theist fully admites the sudain
diversity of their Longitudes, Latitudes, Excentricities, Oppositions
Conjunctions, direct, or Retrograde, together with their various Heights and
Distances from the Center of the Earths superficies: To demonstrate all which,
would require a large Astronomical System.

Wherefore the Theist annexeth to the diurnal, his additional Wonder to what
may be usually inferred from observation of the Suns Annual Motion, by which
the vast Orb of Light, and the Worlds miraculous Eye, beholds its Brightness
forward and backward removed, swifter then can be Instanced by Thought, yet
with no contradiction to Time; tho without the Suns contradictory Motion
neithcr the hours of the Day or Year could be numbered: If by his glorious
diurnal progress he sums Millions of Degrees forward, he moves, in the same
Compass of Time, somewhat less then one Degree backward toward the gradual
finishing of thc Ecliptic Year: In which, as so many periodical Blessings of
Providence, the Elementary Round of the Universe has preservation, as also the
Life, Growth, and Subsistence of its Innumerable Individuals. From whence the
Theist has reiterated assurance that the Sun and Stars, as to their undefinable
Essence and Motion, may be termed, (as before Inserted,) spiritual Equivalents;
since no Corporeal Movement can possibly perform, in all its Parts, too
contrary Motions in the same Instant of Time.

But whatsoever may be said to have a spiritual Operation, cannot be
circumscribed by place, or in the Phrase of the Schools, have the Epithet of
prius and posterius in Motion; wherefore the Miracle, not otherwise to be
worded, may be, in some kind compared to the expansion, this way, and that way,
of a Thought, or as one may conceive, as precedently mentioned, a Geometrical
Line extended, to any distance, forward and backward by the swiftness of
Imagination. And whosoever would oppose the definition here given, as it
relates to motional Beings above, the Theist leaves him, to the Inquisition of
his Brain, to find a better.

In the mean while, it is very manifest, that by no Speculation of theirs they
can give any nominal Definition, whereby they might significantly extricate the
difficulties, they are under, by endeavoring to compute the wonderful Motions
above otherwise then as they allow Corporeal Substances to the Sun and Stars:
Which tho miraculously appearing Effectually such, because otherwise Men and
Creatures could not have the benefit of their Illuminations, Heat, and
Influence: Yet, (for the Reasons already given,) the Theist affirms that as in
their Motions, and Operations, they are virtually spiritual, or which is all
one with the Denomination, (before ^sserted,) of spiritual Equivalents:
Notwithstanding, that for the advantage of humane perception and Commodities of
Life, they seem to be corporeally discernable. And no Man can affirm that the
Omnipotent disposer of the Universe, with all its appurtenances, could not, by
miraculous Benevolence, conferr bodily appearance on Existencies that,
considered in themselves, were distitute of Visible Beings.

But since the Motions of the Celestial Orbs must evidently relate to their
Manner of Existence and Essence, the Theist undertakes to demonstrate the
Assertion from the most Erudite and accurate Astronomical Systems.

Let the Copernican Hypothesis, because in this Age, of greatest Repute, be
made the Example; by which it is alleged, as the most facile proof, that the
Sun stands as the looker on, in his Sphere, whilst the Earth performs the
diurnal and annual Revolution, which Ptolomy, and Tycho, with other learned
Observators, Attributed to the Sun: Tho it be well known that Copernicus
derived his Hypothesis, from Ancient Pythagoras, who, Imagined the Earth to be
a Planet betwixt Mars and Venus, and some of his Successors.

Notwithstanding, it must be granted that the Ingenuity of Copernicus added
some Refinement to the Tenent of the Earths Motion: Yet rather taken up by him,
as he apprehended it more aptly Coherent with Astronomical computations then
really his belief: As appears by the Dedication of his Works to an Eminent
Cardinal.

The Figure described by the Earth, in her diurnal and annual Revolution, was
circular, according to Copernicus: And herein, except in his Hypothesis, he
differed neither from Ptolomy or Tycho, as they determined to the Sun and Stars
circular Motions, but Kepler, who lived after the latest of these, appropriated
to the Earth an Elipsical Revolution, whence he Implied that the Earth is of
the Shape of an Elipsis: Which if true of the Earths Figure, the same might be
allowed to be described by her Motion; because no Corporeal Substance can move,
but it must necessarily assimulate its outward Form and Proportion: So if a
Roler be turned on the Ground it will Impress, if there discernable, its
figurative Representation; besides abundance of Examples that might be given to
the same purpose.

But as for the Incommensurable boundary of the Universe, it is doubtless
circular because the most perfect of Figures: In which there is no point of its
Beginning or End, if considered in its self; and therefore by its admirable
Propriety more suitably circumscribed the World with all the Wonders
comprehended in it.

How the Earth, if supposs'd to move can, in its total Complex, be properly
termed either Globolousy round, as Copernicus Systematically allowed, or a
Conical solid, in the Form of an Elipsis, as most of the late Copernicans
Imagine; Is far from being Corobarated by any sensible Demonstration? But
rather, on the contrary, occularly confuted by viewing of the different
Scituations in the Earth of Hills, Mountains, Valleys, Rocks, Woods, Seas,
Rivers, and the like: Which cannot, apparently be circumscribed by any Figure
that can be named Geometrically Regular.

And if granted, that the Earth does move, in any method they delineate, they
produce no proof that it visibly does so: Instead of which they undertake to
suppose that it may have the Motion they assign to it, instead of the Sun, and
not be seen to move, according to the noted Verfe in Virgil.

-- Provehimur portu, terasque urbesque Recedunt. Yet this is their firmed
Argument whereby they would persuade opinon, that the Eye is not so certain, in
beholding the rising and setting of the Orbs above, as their Doctrine.

The main Allegation by which they seem not only to warrant the Earths Motion,
in all Capacities, Instead of the Sun; but also to deny diurnal Revolution,
both to the fixed Stars and Planets, as they only appropriate to the Motion of
the Earth, the twenty four Hours that terminate the natural Day; is, that if
diurnal Circulation he granted to the supreme Sphere of Stars, they must
expedite, according to Astronomical computation, 643000 German Miles in a
Moment, or two Seconds of an Hour: As also that the Planet Saturn next to them,
in the vastness of his Orb and Height, must Revolve 909 of those Miles by the
same Measure and Compass of Time. All which may be granted, tho confessedly
wonderful, if allowed to the Stars, as before described, Motion and Essence
equivalently spiritual, that like the transition of a momentary Thought,
spirited by the Soul, may surpass any distance, or measure of Miles that can be
computed, as has been precedently Instanced, and would tend to unnecessary
Repetition if again mentioned.

Wherefore, should any Inspecter of this Treatise shock at the Epithet of
spiritual Equivalency attributed to the admirable Expedition of the Celestial
Luminaries; he ought to consider that Words devised, where the Subject treated
on is not in it self exactly Intelligible, may have the requisits of a
Definition, if thereby probably opened to the understanding, of whatsoever had
been more obscure without it.

Nor can the Importancy of the Authors supposition, on this sublime Account, be
farther taxable then Astronomical Phenomenas Ancient or Modern, if with die
likeness of proof, Invented by them, they compute, in order to reduce within
the Compass of Imaginary Rules, what had else been too boundless for humane
Science.

It Is not to be doubted that the Copernicans will be opposers of the manner of
the System, delivered here relating to the Essence and Motions of the Stars of
every Denomination, by reason that the grossly conceive that they are of a
Corporeal Nature as well as the Earth, which they have Elevated into the room
of a Planet betwixt the Sphere of Mars and Venus, according to the Tenants of
Pythagoras, (as before observed:) For which they give no better account then
that the Body of the Earth, reputed by Astronomers, at least, a Hundred and
sixty six times lesser then the appearing dimensions of the Sun, may sooner
Revolve a eleven Thousand one Hundred and eleven of our Miles in a Minute, then
the Greater Body, as they call it, of the Sun: The hard to apprehend how either
of them, in a Corporeal Sense, can expedite that Celerity in the same Portion
of Time: For the Earth however diminutive, if compared with the Sun, yet as to
common Understanding, and the Measure that is allowed its Compass, it seems too
big in any Figure, to Answer the Tenants of the Copernicans by the swiftness of
its Progression in a temporary Period so very small. And as they cannot but
acknowledge the Movement wonderful, whether allotted to the Sun or Earth, so it
may be undeniably a-like, in either of them; if proceeding from a miraculous
Cause.

Nor does it appear, if granted the Theorem of the Earths Motion, that either
Copernicus, or the most diligent of his Astronomical Successors, have by any
exactness in their Computations, exceeded such as have been performed by the
Ptolomaick or or Tyconique Method; the latter of which persons stands at this
Day, more renowned for his accurate Observations, than any, that can be for any
other pretended, if compared with his.

But because Demonstration is a surer proof then tan be deduced from the
greatest Probability of Argument: Let it be granted that the Sun as well as the
Earth, has bodily Parts, according to the Copernican Sense, and Hypothesis; as
also that the Sun is the Center of of the Earth: Or that the Earth, as others
affirm, is the Center of the Sun: And let both of them in Figure, be
acknowledged Circular.

By the Diagram, here annexed, 'will be manifest, that if both of them be
supposs'd at once to move, suitable to the Systems, here mentioned, of both
Parties, 'twill be evident that in any Period of Time they will equally finish
one Revolution.

Wherefore in this Diagram, let A, B, M, C, D, Represent the diurnal Orb of the
Sun; And let E, F, G, H, be the supposs'd diurnal Orb of the Earth, and S be
the common Center of both their Orbs; 'Twill be found by certain Proportion,
that in the same Compass of Time, however vast the space that the Earth can be
Imagined to move from F, to N, in the same Time the much greater Orb of, the
Sun may Revolve from B to M.

the Sun's orbit

The Demonstration in Words are thus.

In Parallel Circles, as the Semidiameter of one, is to the Semidiameter of the
other, so is sine, versed sine, subtense of one Circle, to the right sine,
versed sine, subtense of the other: According to the 11 Prop. of the 7 Book of
Euclid, and confirmed by the 4 of the 6, for as S F: F P S B: B K: the
Triangles S P F and S K B are Equiangled, the Angle a S common to both, and
right Angled at P and K, and therefore the third equal in both, as also the
sides proportional: The same is demonstrable of either of the other Triangles.

To make all which evident to Sense, let a small Thread be fastened or held in
the Center S; and move the other end of it from B to M, it shall as soon come
to the greater space B M, as to the lesser F N, which was to be proved; and the
same may be Affirmed of F G, in in the Triangle S, F, G, or of B C, in the
greatest Triangle S, B, C. Wherefore the Sun may as soon Revolve from B, to M,
as the Earth can from F, to N, if both be granted to move, at once by the same
Cause: And what can be applied to both, if supposs'd to be moved togteher,
ought to be separately allowed the Sun as more suitable to occular Evidence.

Wherefore the Theist concluds, this second Head of this Treatise, with
demonstrative assurance that the Copernicans are no less Confuted as they would
Imagine that the Earth moves, Instead of the Sun, then they, or any other
opposers must be, if controdictory to any of his former Principles rationally
asserted.

The Third Particular explicating the Faith of the Theist, and his Manner of
Adoration, redounding from thence.
IT IS not doubted by the Theist that it has been enough proved in the beginning
of this Treatise, that the open Cause and Effects of Divine Providence sensibly
beheld in the ordained Constitution of the Universe, and all its Parts, as ^o
many undeniable publications that ought to Convict the Reverence of the humane
Soul, in Reference to the Worship of Omnipotency; could by no other means then
by micaculous Order and visible Deeds, be so familiarly communicated to the
preception of Mankind; all which has been precedently Explained.

And whosoever denies that holy Belief, may not, in that Method, be
perspicuously exerted, must have recourse to such Relations of Divine Worship
as cannot, in their Nature, exceed moral Certainties, or the Effects of Custom
and Educ^tion; which, in their utmost extent, have less assurance the^ is
evident in the Proof of any one Proposition of the Elements of Euclide: And
'twer^ absurd to imagine that a Man should be more able to explain the
Properties of a Line, or superficies, then to Demonstrate how he comes by that
main Article, of his Creed, the belief of one God.

Wherefore the Theist, as an Infallible Motive to the duty of his Faith, has
superlative assurance conspieuously asserted in the miraculous Conduct, Facts,
and Munificence of the Almighty, without the help of Man as his subordinate
Tutor; otherwise then as it is Imcumbent on the more assiduous discernments of
some to remind others of the pious tegard they ought to have to Works of the
Almighty, so manifest to every Eye.

Whereas, other persuasions, together with their undiscernable motives, or
suppositious Doctrins, conveyed, and imposed by the Interested diversities of
humane Allowance, make their obscure Entrance into the Soul of the believer,
and by their fermented oppositions instigate polemick Disputes with such
dreadful Animosities as patronise War and Destruction, whereby they may justly
be deemed, instead of Religions, the Incendiaries of violence and blood: Which
sanguine Impieties, or destroying of Lives on the account of contested or
uncertain Tenants; are wholly avoided by the Principles of the Theist, no less
Impossible to be opposed then if Men should deny the Being of the miraculous
World they Inhabit, or the Gifts of Providence which they have Eyes to behold.

But the Theist is not desirous farther to enlarge or apply, what might be said
on this occasion, least he should provoke Men of words, or such that with more
Passion then Sense, would be his wrangling opposers.

If he Affirms that the Universe is the mediate Object of his devotion to the
Omnipotent; he does not therefore conclude that the World was produced or Man
in it, as if any glory, by either, or both, could be added to God, who is
Eternally glorified in himself; and not at all by constituting, in a direct
Interpretation, the species of Mankind, so wickedly tempered and composed in
Body and Mind; and with that generality too, that the Rolls of the Impious are
numberless, in every consideration, if compared with the few good: Insomuch,
that some have attributed the production of Man to an accidental aberration of
Nature, in the Course of her Works; or her Ambition, by that Enormity, to raise
humane. Individuals that should be wickedly predominant over themselves and the
rest of her Creatures: Wherefore they conclude that Mankind had as corrupt a
beginning as it is continued in too many notorious Examples of Life and Death:
As also that they could not be Creatures allowed by the Almighty to present him
with the Address of their praise or Prayer.

To which the Theist Replys, that it cannot be denied that the vast Troops of
the Wicked abundantly over-number the Good; Notwithstanding, their facinourous
Deeds abolish not the rational Capacities they have to amend, or to be informed
by the discreet Integrity of the better principled few: So that it is either for
want of diligent Instructors, or as they are not encouraged, as they ought to
be, in applying their assiduity to impress Divine Moralities; whereby
multitudes might be rendered more propitiously devout; and therefore not merely
the natural Inclinations and Tempers of Men that causes their aversness from
Piety and Obedience.

And till Rulers of People are less blemished by their Principles and Actions,
and more advantageous Examples of eminent Goodness to such they govern, there
will be but small progress toward a general Redress: By reason that where Men
can be beneficially countenanced in being bad, they will seldom Improve, by
their worldly loss, to the benefit of their Souls.

In fine, should a Man, according to the last Instance, think himself beholding
to his blind expression of Nature for all; or what is more, be so ungratiously
thoughtless as in no manner of notion to be thankfully accountable for his
Being, or the benefits of Life enjoyed by him: It Is very probable that such a
person, if mentioned to him, that it must be some beneign Cause that had given
him his Intellectual faculties above other Animals, and likewise capacities of
Mind to subjugate them, in diverse kinds, for his use and subsistence, would
acknowledge, by some Denomination or Method, that he ought to give thanks, as
well as pray that the Commodities of Life might be continued to him here, tho
he believed nothing of a future World: And therefore detestable
Inconsiderateness in such as appear neither Proselites to Reason, or Religion.

Others there are, and of accute perception, that want no diligence in
observing the Divine Conduct and Order diffuss'd throughout the Universe and
all its Particulars: Who notwithstanding their utmost endeavor, are at a
stand, because they Judge that they cannot discern in the open face of
Providence other then the universality of temporary living and dying, with
their appurtenancies, as they relate to every Individual of Life: And therefore
conclude that Mortality is the total end of Mankind; there being nothing, as
they conceive, in any method of Providence, that gives any assurance of
surviving after Death, or apparent Being of Immortality.

But Men, of this genius, whilst they employ the inquisitive subtilities of
their Brain below themselves, omit the Judgment they might receive from their
Eyes in taking their prospect upwards; by which they might visibly apprehend
that the Skies are adorned with numberless Stars, that by no humane observation
had ever any alteration, or periods Incident to dissolution: And therefore so
many admirable Emblems of the Immortality that has Being in them; as by the
Essential proprieties of their Nature, Figure, Continuance, and Motion, is very
manifest; and it has been pertinently proved, in the second Particular of this
Treatise, that a Thought of the Mind can resemble, by sudden expedition, the
swiftest Acceleration of a Star: And may not therefore the Soul of Man, from
whence such Thought proceeds, be as Immortal as the brightest of the Orbs above.

And thus may be encouraged the sublime Hope that Mankind ought to have of
endless Life and Perfection; since by the Dispensation of the Almighty there is
Immortality beheld in the Luminaries of Day and Night: And why the humane Soul
should not be granted as capable of Everlasting subsistence is not to be
disproved?

Too many there are, that by their infamous Conversation and Lives are so far
from meriting a mention in the refined List of Immortality, as they deserve not
to enjoy the common benefits of worldly Life: Whilst in Soul they possess so
uncomfortable a Being, that by Reason of their Impieties, it is their utmost
wish that Mortality may be their Period. Wherefore they Judge that it is no
Interest to their Lives to pray, unless their supplications might be admitted,
whereby they would be exempted from Death, and continued as bad as they are;
and so they are here left to themselves, till they think fit to be better.

And now to conclude with the Method of the Theist's Devotion, to which he
conceives he has so many palpable motives from the bounties of the Almighty to
the Life he possesses, and whatsoever tends to his comfort in Body and Mind,
that he were guilty, of a sloathful Impiety, should he not acknowledge his
thankfulness with his daily Bread; and the more, because frequently bestowed by
the mercies of providence.

As to his manner of Prayer, the Theist affirms it inseparably annexed to the
Entireness of his Belief and Method of Devotion; which he conceives cannot have
a more refined Evidence, than that it perfectly avoids all disputable
Commixture or Impurity from any Notions of Erronius Faith or their Parcels of
Belief complicated, or intermixed with the diffused Creeds of some others:
Wherefore he considers his Persuasion as an infallible Purity, or refined
Nature of Belief, absolutely concommitant with the Worship of one God, palpably
Revealed in the stupendous Being of his Works, and the Conduct of Providence
visible in them; on which account, it is impossible to add, to so many
Superlative Convictions of the Soul, any particular Article of Faith, that is
less manifest than the Miracles of Omnipotency perspicuously dispersed
throughout the total Fabric of the Universe, as it comprehends the Wonders
beheld above and below.

And as Divine Admiration must necessarily produce Reverence from the humane
Soul; it is no less undeniably consequent, that an Eternal Conviction, by actual
Wonders, is a Motive above all others, whereby is Effected the Piety of
Devotion confirmed by the barefaced Miracles of the World, and its Universal
Providence: On which Basis, by the acknowledgment of the Theist, does consist
the common Place of his Religion, as has been precedently Instanced.

If other Devotions have enlarged their Creeds beyond open Miracles, or as they
were, in Effect, so many providential Proposals of Worship Universally Evident
from the time that Mankind had Being in the World, the Progression of such
Beliefs could have no other Rise then as they were supposed to be Revealed to
particular Persons: And were more or less valued, by Men that duly considered
the original Start, or Comencement of different Persuasions, as the Authors, or
first Propagaters of them, were renowned for extraordinary Prudence, Moralities
of Life, and holy Conversation: Or signally Celebrated for miraculous Deeds
conceived to be produced by them; and consequently, by Education and Custom
descended, so reputed, to Posterity.

Inumerable Examples might be given, of this kind, from undoubted Stories of
Ages past; but none more remarkably Ancient, or of longer continuance then the
gross, or horrible Impiety, that Worshipped the Almighty in the Persons of Men;
or, like to an Arithmetical Fraction of, divided Godship by conceiving it
Infused into humane Body.

And thus did not a few of the Ancients who attributed to heroic Persons, and
famous Founders of pious Institutions and Precepts, the Titles of Demygods: Not
as they believed them such, but as their Signal Examples, and Sacred
Ordinations, could not have sufficient Reputation without a sublime Epithet:
And the more pardonable in those Authors, because no better means was known to
them whereby Mankind might be endued to Holy Obedience and the Sacred Duty that
appertain to civil Society and Government.

But as the Intention might be, in some respects, pardonable, the Consequence
was highly pernicious to the Devotion and Peace of Men; as one fellow or other,
in several Ages of the World presumed to be Inspired with Celestial Dictates:
Or for more supreme Confirmation of his Doctrine attributed Divinity to
himself; when he observed that Men were credulous enough to believe him.

But these could signify no other: then so many contrived Impostorages, and
were by degrees, accordingly discovered, as may be observed from Stories, with
which the Theist does, in no kind, intermix Christianity; notwithstanding it
has not that dateless Evidence, as to that Denomination, with his own: It being
undeniable that the Belief of one God was a Primitive Motive that had its
Original with the Being of the World, and therefore precedent to all subsequent
Worships.

But since the Profession of Christianity was delivered by the Preaching and
Writings of Holy Persons, who by the simplicity of their Lives and Conversation
could have no such Indirect Ends and Interests that might derogate from the
assurance, conceived by them, of whatsoever they Attested: The Theist does, no
ways, detract from the Goodness of their Doctrine; and the rather because it
has an agreeable excellency with the manifest Text of Devine Providence.

For it is a Devine Christian Moral, unparalled by other Persuasions, that
good Deeds are to be done, for the sake of Good, notwithstanding the
unworthiness of the Receiver: So by the Conduct of Providence its Munificence
is visibly diffused to all Stations of Mankind, however desertlesly perceived
and enjoyed by them.

The Consideration of which, together with the pious Examples, Resignations in
Spirit, and contempt of worldly advantages, Eminent in, not a few, Christian
Professors, raises no small desire, in the Theist, that he might Associate
with them in saying Almighty and most merciful Father: And consequently that in
his Judgment, next to the Belief of one God, Christian Profession ought to be
Embraced before any other in the World.

And thus you have a Summary of the most pertinent Science, and Tenants
applicable to the Doctrine of Theisme, not hitherto devulg'd, as also its
Tendency to the Improvement of Holy Religion and Practice.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
THE main Intention of this Treatise has, like the Figure of Janus, two Faces:
By the one, of which, the Reader may take a backward prospect of such profane
Superstitions and Worships as were frequent in the Traditions and Writings of
the Ancients; some of which are particularly mentioned in this Book: Together
with others, better known, then readily numbered; yet so displayed that their
Errors and Absurdities are totally rendered Inconsistent with the superlative
Conviction which the Providence of the Almighty has visibly conveyed to Humane
Understanding.

But such has been the gross Neglect, or Supidity in Men, that they have
perversely applied the Devotion of their Souls, rather to the artful
Insinuations of Counterfeit Tenants, then to the sincere and palpable
acknowledgment that there is Deity from what every common Eye may discern in
the vast Theater of his Works that contains Innumerable Scenes of manifest
Wonders that could have no other Author then one Omnipotent.

The other signal Part, if not the most useful, was so to introduce Atheism on
the public Stage, that it might have a reproachful and full defeat from the
Demonstration of a God, by the Doctrine of the Theist; no less prospicuously
discernable then that Mankind, with whatsoever is besides in the Compass of the
Universe, are, by Divine appointment, under a miraculous Conduct.

Notwithstanding however powerful those Motives, the Atheist to cover his
supine disregard of all such conspicuous and sublime Evidences that ought to be
undeniably Attributed to the Ordination, Management, and Power of a deified
Author, seems to acquiesce in what he terms Nature; and to which obscure
Denomination he endeavors to annex the total sum of his Infidelity, by urging
that whatsoever has Being above, or below, have an ordinary and natural
Subsistency from the Method of Causes and Effects.

Tho he cannot deny that, by so affirming, he is enforced to grant that this
Empress of the Universe, which he calls Nature, is not Intellegible by any
rational Definition of the Word, or any Proprieties he Attributes to her;
because it is not possible for him to give any original Account either of the
Natural Being of Man, Animal, or Vegetable: Or when the Sun and Stars began
first to shine, for Universal Benefit; no more then he is certainly able to
tell what a Clock 'twas before he was born.

Too many there are that, if but Entertained with Tales of Magic, Witchcraft,
or the devices and feats of a Jugler, tho a despicable Imposter, will not only
incline to believe them, but heartily wish they might behold such Imaginary
Facts performed, which but related they deem supernatural Wonders.

But were the same Persons Interogated, whether, by any of their Senses, they
as easily were charmed by the miraculous Constitution of the Universe and all
it Circumscribs, it is to be doubted that not a few of them would with the
common Atheist reply, that although diverse Existencies and Operations, in the
World they behold, appear stupendiously wonderful, yet, as they consider them
as things of Course, they could not Judge them so extraordinary as the Miracles
they had heard of, but for ought they could prove, were never performed; which
Imbecillities, in humane Comprehension, proceed from no other Fond then want of
Judicious Consideration, or not being pertinently Instructed by Superiors.

Should it be demanded, by the Reader, why Texts of Holy Scripture, or
Arguments from Venerable Writers have not been more frequently Cited then are
to be found in the precedent Book; the Answer, that can most properly be given,
is, that the Authors design was barely to Convict the Atheist, by proofs
Inserted, whereby the open Evidence of Theisme, in the Belief of one God,
without other Divine Testimonial, or Article of Faith, might be ascertained to
the clearest Eye of the Intellect: Not but all necessary Texts, of Holy Writ,
are thereby effectually Implied, as is no less perspicuously discernable from
the demonstrative Parts of this Treatise, then if pronounced with the Psalmist.
That the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy
Work.

Nor can the Atheist, if not obdurately such, be by any other process so
readily Convicted: As he that may probably extend his Faith to the Belief of an
Infinite Power and Being, from Actual and Visible Miracles that could be
produced no otherwise then by an Omnipotent Author, Will not so easily devote
his Assent to the most celebrated Authority of any Writing, however Divine it
ought to be understood.

It Is reported of the Philosopher Aristotle, tho far different in Opinion from
the obstinacy of the Ancient, or Modern Atheist, that he having perused the
Books of Moses, his Judgment of them was that they had in them the voice of
God, tho otherwise nothing was proved by them: But had that great Man of
Science thoroughly considered what might have been affirmed suitable to what is
sufficiently Demonstrated in this Work; he would have at least declared for the
Doctrine of Theisme.

But such is the inveterate Impudence and Odium that too many, in our days,
have against Holy Belief, of whatsoever Denomination, that it is their Luxury
to cabal for Atheism and Profaneness, as they mingle those Impieties with
their Wine and Mirth; by which they would ascribe to themselves the Title of
Wits, however wickedly Principled, or so foolishly Impious that they resist the
Dictates of Sense: As if they had Resolvedly confined their Souls to such a
narrowness of Conception that the broadest Miracles of Divine Providence were
not to operate on their understandings.

But it is hoped, if they shall please, with any reasonable discretion, to
Inspect the Substance of this Book, that there Infidility, together with their
Debaucheries of Life, will be so far Reformed as that they will approve
themselves better Subjects, in their Duties to Heaven and Earth, then hitherto
they have been.


