A DISPUTATION: PROVING, That it is not convenient to grant UNTO MINISTERS
SECULAR JURISDICTION; And to make them Lords and Statesmen IN PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXIX.

It is not expedient to grant unto Clergymen secular Jurisdiction.
1. I Do not undertake to prove that it is simply unlawful: And the worthy and
judicious Bishop Davenant does grant and assert, Determ. quest. 11.
That the Law of Prudence and Equity it self does forbid Kings to burden
Clergymen with it, so far as it will let and avocate them from their
spriritual office and function.

2. It will be demanded who must be Judge what is, and what is not expedient?
To which the forenamed Davenant makes answer, That is to be accounted expedient
which a Wise Man shall so judge and determine: whereunto I assent. He
afterward adds, That which a wise and religious Prince shall so determine.
Neither do I dissent in this, provided it be soundly understood: For that which
a wise and religious Prince shall judge to be expedient, if it be so indeed,
all wise men will, at least they ought so to think; for sound wisdom is the
same in all: But it is too possible for the most wise and prudent Prince to
enjoin things not good and expedient. King David thought it most prudent to
number the people, who was a most wise Prince; but in that his wisdom failed
him. Joab, his General, that was much inferior to David in goodness and
heavenly wisdom, thought it very imprudent: and the event proved Joab to be the
wiser man in that.

3. Some things are more evidently, other things are less evidently expedient:
The Scales may hang so even and equilibrious, that a wise comparing judgment
can scarce tell whether is the heavier end, and whether part has the stronger
reasons: and the Scales may be so odd and unequal, so much solid reason may be
said for the one side, and so little for the other, that to a wise comparing
judgment the case is not doubtful to decide. Now I shall manifest, that it is
evidently inexpedient to grant secular jurisdiction to Ministers and Glergymen,
that is, That the same person be a Minister, Bishop or Pastor of Souls, and a
Magistrate or ^o^^lve Judge, one that hears the Sword, Romans 13.4.

4. Arg. 1. Jesus Christ did not see it meet to exercise any such power while
he was upon earth; being moved to be a kind of worldly. Judge between two
Brethren, he refused, saying, Who made me a Judge or a divider over you? Determ.
quaest. 4.
Luke 12.14. As if he should say, (says Davenant upon the words) Neither by
divine nor by humane Ordination do I exercise Judiciary power over private
persons, much less over Kings: By which argument the same Davenant goes about
to prove the nullity of the Popes power in Temporals. Now if his argument be of
force against the Bishop of Rome, I see not but it is of equal force against
worldly Jurisdiction in all Bishops and Pastors whatsoever. Now if Christ saw
it not meet for him to exercise worldly Jurisdiction, methinks all Bishops and
Pastors of Souls, who have their office and calling particularly from him,
should see it meet to learn of him and imitate him herein, and Princes
themselves should not think it expedient to burden Ministers with that, which
Christ himself refused and put from him as either unlawful in it self, or
inexpedient: Mat. 11.29, Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me.

5. Arg. 2. The Apostles and the successors of the Apostles, the Bishops and
Pastors of the Churches for the space of three hundred years unto the time of
Constantine, had no Temporal Jurisdiction, nor did exercise any. And those are
counted the best and purest times of the Church. If we may not make the
Apostles of Christ, and their immediate successors the Bishops and Pastors of
the Churches for the first three hundred years, our pattern, what shall we make
our pattern, and by what law and rule shall we determine what is, and what is
not expedient? Can we better govern our selves and the Churches than they? Have
we more wisdom to invent and find out ways of good governing the Church than
they had? Have we more holiness and goodness, and faithfulness to God, our
selves, our calling, and the Church, than had they? If the Church did well and
best subsist, when it had no Magistrates but what were Pagan, Infidel, and
Jewish, many of whom were great Persecutors, all of them de^^^^ of the
Christian name; will it not well and better subsist, if better can be, where
Magistrates are Christian, and desenders of the Faith, if Bishops and Pastors
contenting themselves with no more but the Episcopal and Pastoral office, and
refusing all worldly Jurisdiction, shall wisely and faithfully behave
themselves in their office, as those first and most ancient Bishops and Pastors
of the Churches did?

6. Unto this the worthy Davenant makes answer, That those ^^nes and ours are
not alike. Those times were exceeding (...) and good, ours be exceeding bad.
There needed no secular authority in Pastors then, there was so much holiness
and piety, the Word and Discipline were abundantly enough; but now the
Christian World is so exceeding corrupt and degenerate, that unless Ministers
be armed with Secular Jurisdiction, their authority will be despised, and the
Discipline which God has appointed to be in his Church, will be scorned as
base and contemptible, rather than be reverenced for any good it will do; Non
tam usui esset, quam ludibrio, those are his very words. Davenant is the man
whom I do highly esteem, and so do all that be wise and knowing in the things
of God: but in this Davenant has fallen much below himself; and the feebleness
of his reasoning does much confirm me in my judgment and persuasion, that the
cause which he oppugneth, and which I do here defend, is too strong to be
overthrown.

7. His answer is partly not true, not to say it is directly and flatly false:
For let any impartial man make a due estimate of things, and compare the
Pastors and Churches under the Apostles (I except the persons of the Apostles
themselves) and during their abode upon earth, and their successors the Pastors
and Churches immediately following to the time of Constantine, I say compare
these with the Pastors and Churches of our times, and it will be found that
there is no such inequality as he suggests. Bradford and Philpot, and Rogers,
and Cranmer, and Latimer, and Ridley, and Hooper, and Bilney, and Sanders, and
other of the English Martyrs were worthy and famous Martyrs of Christ, as well
as were those first and most ancient Martyrs. And Grindal, and Jewel, and
Usher, and Davenant, and Gataker, and Vines, and Hildesham, and Preston, and
Sibbs, and Dod, and Joseph Allen, and many more of our own and foreign Divines
were able to vye with the ancient Bishops and Pastors of the Churches, such as
died not Martyrs. And the private Christians, and Families, and Congregations
of our times, are not much inferior to those ancient ones both Greek and
Latin, and even to those we have mention of in the New Testament, namely the
seven Churches of Asia, those of Galatia, and Judea, that at Corinth and others.

8. Admit it were true, which questionless is not: I should rather think that
the way to reduce an unreformed Church and people from heresy and unholiness,
to foundness in the faith and holiness, is for Pastors to content themselves
with the work of Pastors, and give themselves wholly to it, and suffer no lets.
Will the Sword convert souls, or awe men's consciences? would it likely do more
good if a Minister should come into the Pulpit with a Sword in one hand, and a
Bible in the other? The Sword is not appointed of God for the conversion of
Souls; the office of the Magistrate is to make way for the work and office of
the Minister. It is the sword of the Spirit which is the Word of God, which
must cut in pieces men's lusts, and breed in them sound faith, holiness, and
reformation, and not the sword of the Magistrate. Let the Magistrate do or not
do his duty, let him be Pagan or Persecutor, and let the people be more loofe
and unreformed than they are, let but Pastors and Ministers do their duty well,
and we shall soon see that Gods Word and Discipline is of the same force now
that ever it has been; otherwise there is a change in God, and his promise
fails, and Satan is stronger now than he has been, and Christ and the Holy
Ghost are much weaker. Read and consider well these Scriptures, [ Mat. 28.18,
19, 20. 1 Pet. 3.13. Mich. 2.7. Isa 45.19. Isa. 49 4, 5. 1 Cor. 15.58. Psalm.
84.11. 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. 2 Cor. 4.1, 2. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6.] to name no more, and
let but Ministers be wise and faithful, and try if it be not the best and
speediest way to reform what is amiss in the Church, contenting themselves with
no more but their own office, and leaving all force and secular authority to
the Magistrate.

9. If we be the same that the ancient Pastors were, be sure God and Gods Word
will be the same; we cannot do Gods part, nor the Magistrates part, nor the
peoples part, we can only do our own part; which we may do if we will; do our
own part, and be sure God will be with us and do his. What hinders but Pastors
may be as wise and holy as they have been of old? If we be not, it is our own
fault. The more corrupt the times are, the more need Pastors have to bestir
themselves, and to double their diligence, and lay out themselves more
vigorously, to be more Exemplary, to abound in the work of God, to be
mortified, to lose no time, to suffer no let. To make them Magistrates, were to
let them, and take away much of their time, and rather hinder and distract,
than further them. If the Pastors office he as much as they can wisely and
faithfully do, would it further them in their work to have another effice and
work added to them? Ministers of the Gospel are not so fit as others to be
worldly coercive Judges and Secular Magistrates. For their office is purely
Pastoral, and is to have no terror in, but the terror of Gods Word, and
spiritual denunciations, that the people may have no temptations to withdraw
their love and esteem from their Pastors. A Thief at the Bar had rather have a
Minister than the Judge to reprove him, though both should pronounce the same
truth, and hit upon the same words, and have equal wisdom and integrity. For
properly Magistrates are for outward terror to evil doers, and for outward
desence and protection to them that do well, Romans 1^.3. 1 Pet. 2.14. But
Ministers are to be gentle to souls, even as a nurse cherishes her children,
and to exhort and comfort, and charge every one as a father does his children,
1 These. 2.7, 11. But if parents and nurses, and tender mothers should rule
their children by the sword too, that would not add to their office, nor
further their work.

10. Arg. 3. If it be so as Davenant says, that unless Ministers be armed with
Secular Jurisdiction, their office and authority in the Church, and the Lords
Word and Discipline as administered by them, will be despised and trod upon;
then necessarily all Ministers should be mad. Magistrates, and Princes are too
blame if they do not put the sword into all their hands, and make every
Minister throughout the Nation a Justice of Peace, or a Sheriff, or a Judge, by
giving him power to imprison, and lay fines and penalties upon offenders, and
to use coercive means. And then the Scriptures themselves, even the wisdom of
God will be found faulty, if he have ordained and appointed no such thing in
all the Bible, as I no where find that he has done. And by the same reason
Magistrates may say they also must be Ministers, and there will be a confusion
of offices, and the bounds and banks of order in Church and Commonwealth will
be thrown down; and if order be not oblerved, good government cannot be. For
good government is nothing but the observance of right order; when Magistrates
do the duty of Magistrates, and meddle with no more but what comes within the
compass of their office, that is right order, and it breeds peace, 1 Cor. 14.33
40. And when Ministers and Pastors do their duty, and what properly pertains to
their office, meddling with no more, this also is right order, and the way of
true and good government in the Church, and produces peace. But if you leave
this way and order, you err. And where your error may stop, and what mischiefs
and inconveniences it may produce, who is able to declare? For there is no
safety but by keeping in Gods way, and close walking by his rules Vno absurdo
dato seq^untur mill, is as true in Practicals as in Doctrinals.

11. A 4. Either Christian faithful Magistrates are a help and defense to Gods
Church, and to Ministers in their calling and office, or they are not. If they
are, then methinks if the Church and Ministers did well when they wanted such
helps, they should rather do better, at least they should do as well, or not be
much worse, when they have such helps. But to say they cannot do at all, or
that Ministers and their Discipline, and Ministration barely without Secular
Jurisdiction added to them, will be of no use, but rather a scorn and mockery
under Christian Magistrates, is stark shame and reproach to all such Ministers,
and they should rather be cast out of the Church as intolerable, and as dung
and dead unsavory salt, than be made Magistrates. What should they do
Magistrates that are not able by all they can do to preserve themselves from
sordid ignominy and contempt? or if not this, it is an intolerable shame to
all, excepting Ministers, both Magistrates and people, that they should be so
extremely wicked and graceless, neither fearing God, nor regarding men, as to
despise and scorn all the wise and holy, and faithful Pastors in the Church
that are but mere Pastors. According to this opinion one of these two
wickednesses and absurdities will follow; either that all the Pastors in the
Church that are but mere Pastors, are shamefully wicked and intolerable, and
most unworthy to be Pastors; or that all besides in the Church that are no
Pastors, Princes, Rulers and people are extremely wicked, even scorners and
contemners of Gods Ministers, Worship, Word, Discipline and holy institutions.

If Christian Magistrates and such as be faithful, be not a help and defense to
Gods Church and Ministers in their office, then it is a contradiction to desire
their office as an help and expedient to the Church, and that Ministers might
be armed with the authority of a Magistrate too. And then it is no blessing but
rather a curse to have faithful Kings, Princes and Magistrates; and then we
should not pray for them; and then it were all one to have Persecutors as
Protectors, Julian as Constantine, Nero, Dioclesian, Queen Mary, and bloody
Popes and Tyrants, as Theodosius, Josias, Queen Elizabeth, and wise, and just,
and faithful Governors.

12. Arg. 5. Either you would have Pastors and their authority in the Church
reverenced, or you would not. If you would have them reverenced, what must it
be for? you would have the same man to be a Pastor and a Magistrate, and so to
be reverenced. Very good; if then the same man as Pastor be base and vile,
worthy of no reverence, how shall we do to reverence the same man as
Magistrate? shall we say that the same man is worthy and unworthy, vile and
honorable, faithful and unfaithful? will you say that he has two souls, or
two consciences, one as a Pastor, and so he is a worthless wretch, to be
contemned of all; and the other as a Magistrate, and so he is honorable, and
to be had in esteem by all? If the same man as Pastor be damned, what shall
become of the same man as Magistrate? If Pastors be worthy men, all men will
reverence and esteem them; at least God will, and all that be taught and
instructed of God. Even an Herod will reverence a John Baptist. Wisdom and
Holiness will be reverenced in all; and folly, and vice, and w^ckedness, will
be reverenced in none. But especially wisdom and holiness will be reverenced in
Pastors; and vice, and folly, and hypocrisy, and unfaithfulness, will be
thought not so odious and unsavory in any, as in Pastors and Bishops. For it
is of them especially that God says, Them that honor me, I will honor; and
they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30 If a Minister be
truly worthy and honorable, he shall be honored. All right esteeming men, if
there be any that fear God, and make conscience of his commands, will
reverence, and esteem him very highly in love for his works sake, 1 These 5.12,
13. But if he be but the mere name and outside of a Bishop, if he be a Bonner,
a hater and persecutor of good men, foolish, wicked, ambitious, slothful,
worldly, self-seeking, contentious, heretical, ignorant, scandalous and
unfaithful, nothing that you can do will uphold his reputation: make him a Lord
or Prince in Parliament, heap all the dignities and honors that be among men
upon him, make him the greatest men for office in the Kingdom, next to the King
himself, his vices and corruptions will shame him before the world; no covers
formalities, and worldly eminencies and additaments, will be able to hide the
spots and deformitie^ of his soul, and win him reputation with any but Fools,
Flatterers and Knaves. For it is righteousness, and it only, which exalts a
nation or person; but sin is a reproach to any person or people, Prove. 14.34.

If you would not have Ministers and their authority in the Church reverenced
and esteemed, then you contradict your selves, who would have Ministers to have
worldly jurisdiction, as a means to procure them reverence and esteem in the
Church: and then it is no sin not to esteem those that be worthy of esteem; and
then Judas and Peter be a-like worthy, and we are to be as thankful for, and
rejoice in an Arrius as an Athanasius, a Bonner as a Bradford, an Antichristian
murdering wicked Pope, as a Peter and Paul, and the most holy Pastor and Bishop
upon earth.

13. Arg. 6. In defense of Ministers being made Magistrates, sundry instances
out of the Old Testament be urged, which be of Gods ordaining. As we read of
Melchisedeck King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God; and of Eli and
Samuel, who were both Priests and Judges in Israel. The answering and clearing
of this will make for the advantage of the truth, and therefore I put it in the
number of my Arguments. These instances may be of some weight to make one think
that the thing in it self is not simply, universally, and absolutely unlawful.
But what if I shall say, that these be case^ extraordinary, and will not
warrant an ordinary and general practice? That Melchisedeck was a person
extraordinary, a special and singular Type of Christ, is clear from Psalm 110.4.
Heb. 5.10. Heb. 7 17. Cuneus de republica Judaeor, to my remembrance, holds him
to be Christ himself: but that is thought to be an error by most. Certain it
is, he was a great man, great I mean in the sight of God as well as great
before men; For he blessed Abraham [the Father of the faithful] and without
contradiction, says the Apostle, the less is blessed of the better, Heb 7.6, 7.
Moreover in those times the Church was much confined to Families; and the Head
of the Family was both Priest and Governor of the Family. Job sanctified his
Sons, and offered burnt-offerings for them, Job 1.5. Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
were Priests, and Parents, and Magistrates in their Families, and over their
Households: For if a murder had been done in any of their families, they were
bound by Gods Law, Genesis 9.6, to execute vengeance upon the murderer.

And as for Eli and Samuel, they were both Priests and Judges: Now Judges in
those times were a peculiar and extraordinary sort of Magistrates and
Commonwealth Governors raised up by God himself, and sometimes there was none.
His Office was neither elective nor successive; when he died, his Office died
with him. When the order of Kings was instituted and took place in Saul and
David, the government by Judges ceased. Now to argue from these extraordinary
and rare cases, to an ordinary practice, I suppose will not hold.

Besides, those times and ours do very much differ as to many things pertaining
to Church Matters. Every Parent among the Jews, by the Law, I suppose, was to
circumcise his Male-children, Exodus 4.24, 25, 26. Genesis 17.10. But under the
Gospel it is made a part of the office of Pastors to Baptize Children; and for
Parents to do it, is a sacrilegious invasion. Under the Law all their Ministers
were chosen out of one tribe, the Tribe of Levi: It is not so under the Gospel.
The Jews Commonwealth was a Theocricy, it was Divine and from God: not only
their Church-laws and institutions, but even their political, judicial, and
civil statutes and sanctions were from God. And it was the same thing or office
among them, to be a Divine and a Lawyer; to declare what was Religion and
Divinity, and what was law and right between party and party. And thence it was
that the High Priest and other inferior Priests and Levites were made not
coercive and revenging Judges and Magistrates, Deuteronomy. 16.18. Ezra 7.25, but a
sort of spiritual Lawyers and Casuits, to teach the people what was Law, right
and wrong, and to decide in cases and questions concerning matters
Ecclesiastical, and Civil right, as seems evident from Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10, 11,
12. 2 Chronicles. 19.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. In those times it was counted for a
heinous crime for any man to invade the Priests Office. Vzzah for putting his
hand to uphold the Ark when the Oxen shook it, was smitten dead. And King
Vzziah for attempting to burn Incense in the Temple, which was not lawful for
any but the Priests to do, was withstood by fourscore valient men who were
Priests, and the Lord smote him with Leprosy for his insolency, and he
continued a Leper to the day of his death, living in a several house. And I
think it cannot be proved that it was ordinary with Gods people then to make
Magistrates Ministers, and Ministers Magistrates; but these Offices were kept
distinct and entire, and no man ordinarily was entrusted with both.

I do further add, That those Laws and Customs of the Jews, they do no further
oblige Christian people, than they are significative of the Law of Nature; and
so are Laws universal founded in natural equity, and are laws and rules of
perpetual order and observance. Jew and Gentile by the coming of Christ are
made one. The Jews Temple, Commonwealth, Church-rites and Institutions, are
ceased, expired, and an end is put to them. There is a new ministration come
in, and substituted in their room, more glorious and excellent, more proper
for, and suited to the Church universal, consisting of Jew and Gentile, of
Nations, and People, and Languages throughout the World. There is now but one
Law, and that is the Law of Nature and Christianity; which is not two, but one
entire Law or way of governing mankind under Jesus Christ, supreme under God in
Heaven and in Earth, and who himself also is God: By Kings and Princes, as
supreme; and subordinate-Rulers and Magistrates under them; and by Christian
Pastors, Guides and Bishops of Souls, Magistrates to do what is pertaining to
their Office and no more; Pastors also to do what pertains to their Office,
and no more.

Besides, the Jews having their judicial and political Laws shortly and
compendiously framed into one body by God himself, it was no distraction to the
Priests and Clergy then to study those Laws as a part of their Divinity, and
become able to decide in Causes and Questions of civil Right and Judicature.
But with us of this Nation, the study of the Law is become very laborious, some
are ready to say, Frius vitiis laboravimus, nunc legibus. A man cannot be a
good Judge, Chancellor, nor Justice of Peace, nor bear any considerable Office
in the Commonwealth, without insight into the Law, the Statute Law, which is a
vast body of Laws; and every Parliament is adding new ones, and the Common Law
and Customs of the Realm, and of p^rticular Courts and Places, the knowledge
whereof cannot be attained with little pains, and time, and study, and without
some experience. We have Inns of Court among us. It is made a distinct
profession and order of men among us, to be men skill^^ in the Law. The Laws
and Customs of England are so intricate and hard to be well known, that it
would be a great ^istraction to a Divine to give himself to those Studies; and
when he has done, he might perhaps attain to some scraps and pieces to make him
a Sciolus, a Novice therein, so much as might serve him for his own private
use; but hardly could he attain to so much, as to make him ripe, and judicious,
and knowing enough to be a Judge or Magistrate. And ignorantia Judicis est
calamitas innocentis. An ignorant Judge or Magistrate cannot but do much wrong,
and pervert judgment for want of knowledge. A Lawyer may far better be a Divine,
than a Divine can be a Lawyer. Indeed, no man can be a good Divine or Lawyer,
that is not a good Christian and learned in the Laws of God, the Law of Nature,
and Christianity, what it is to be under Law to God, and live under his
Government. To be a right Divine, is to be a heavenly Lawyer. But this a man
may be, and be ignorant of a thousand quirks, and points, and matters in the
Laws and Customs of England. They are so many, and so intricate, and so
uncertain, and so out of the road of Divinity, and the knowledge and study of
universal right, that it would be against conscience and faithfulness in a
Minister to give himself to the study of them: and without giving himself to
the study of them, he cannot attain to the knowledge of them, competent for an
English Judge and Political Magistrate.

14. Arg. 7. There are able men enough to be Judges and Magistrates; but there
is a great defect of Ministers, and therefore it cannot consist with wisdom and
expediency, that, I say, not with conscience and honesty, to rob the Church to
make the State and Commonwealth: luxuriate. That there are able men enough to
be Judges and Magistrates, and to serve in all offices of the Commonwealth, is
either true, or it is some reproach to the Nobles, Gentry, and Commons of
England. Cannot you do all the offices of the Commonwealth, serve as
Magistrates, Judges and Rulers, and bear the Sword, and see to the common peace
and quiet of the Nation, having the direction, advice, and endeavors of
Pastors both in public and private, as Pastors and no more, unless withal,
Pastors be made Judges and Magi^^rates too, and come into your aid? Surely
then you are a degenerate seed, you are not Christian Nobles, Gentry and
Commons. Let us pray for you, and pity you. If there be able men enough to bear
the Sword and serve in all offices of the Commonwealth, why should Ministers,
Bishops and Clergymen be called from their employments and spiritual function,
when there is an unobserved want of Ministers throughout all the Nation? The
work of a Bishop, Minister and Pastor of Souls, is to do all the ordinary
Lords day work in public, which to do well and substantially, will take up no
small part of his chiefest time, thoughts and pains. But this is not all, nor
near all of his work; for he is to watch over every Soul: 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. Acts
20.28, 31. Col. 1.28. 2 These. 2.11. Genesis 31.40: Act. 15.6. Mat. 18.17.
he is personally to instruct, and catechize, and confer with all of his
charge; he is to visit the sick; he is to admonish, reprove, comfort, counsel,
warn and charge every one night and day, with tears, as a Father his Children:
he is to assist in neighbour-meetings and Church-associations of Pastors and
Brethren, for concord and communion; he is to hear all such* Causes, as need
due and regular discipline. And is any one man able to do all this, as it
should be done, to any of those Parishes in City o^ Country which abound with
multitudes of Souls, that would find work for many Minsters to do it
faithfully, as it should be done? Whereas if there be one in a Parish; and in
some, one with a Reader, or Curate, that is thought, enough. I confess at that
rate, that many do the work of the Ministry, it is an easy matter for one man
to be a Pastor to a Parish of a dozen Miles compass in the Country, and St.
Giles's in the Fields, St. Martins, Stepney, and Cripple-gate in the City of
London. But to do the work of a Pastor faithfully and entirely to all the
Souls within any one of these, and such like Parishes, would require a whole
College and combination of Ministers. We see in a Troop of Horse, of but some
forty or fifty men, there is a Captain and a Lieutenant, besides other
Officers. In a Regiment of Fifteen hundred, much more of fifteen thousand, what
a vast number of Officers are there! Captains over thousands, Captains over
hundreds, Captains over fifties, and Captains (...) tens, Deuteronomy. 1. 15. Every
tenth man was to have a Captain or Officer. But there is many a Parish in
England that may have Ten thousand Souls in it: and but one or two Pastors
appointed to look to all these fouls: When King Solomon built his Temple, He
set threescore and ten thousand to be bearers of burdens, and fourscore
thousand to be hewers in the mountains, and three thousand and six hundred to
be overseers, to set the people a work, 2 Chronicles. 2.18. But in the building of
the Lords spiritual Temple there is not one Pastor to a thousand Souls in many
Parishes of England I know many will think there are too many Ministers. I
think there are to many bad ones; but I never read or heard of any Kingdom, or
place, or people, to this day, that had too many faithful Ministers: And I
shall think it a holy and happy time when such a thing is; but I despair to see
it in this world. Were it not that there are not Ministers enough to do all the
pastoral work of each Congregation, I should think most of the godly Ministers
in England notoriously guilty before God, of gross neglect and unfaithfulness,
for want of personal and private oversight of all their people; though I think
a great deal more might be done by many, than ordinarily is.

Well then, there being so great a want of Ministers, and no want of
Magistrates, would you have Ministers to turn Magistrates too? must those few
that are, be hindered and distracted, by calling them off to worldly and
secular businesses? Is it not enough that Ministers have more work upon their
hands than they can do? and would you make them more, and that too diverting
and alien work extra. Episcopal, and almost, if not altogether pragmatical
work? What is this but to serve Satan in the name of Christ, and under pretense
of Order to pull down Order, and make the Church more low and weak by much than
it is? The holy Apostles of our Lord were of another mind; when they saw they
could not both look to the corporal necessities of the poor, and the spiritual
necessities of Souls too, they contrived an expedient for both: They appointed
a new office of Deacons in the Church, to see to the bodily necessities of the
poor; but say they, We will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the
ministry of Gods word, Act. 6.2, 4. Far unlike to those that leave the Word of
God and Prayer, and give themselves to the doing of worldly matters, and
secular businesses, and teach men so, and plead for it as their privilege, and
a means of advantaging the Church, and of promoting holiness and peace. Non
tali auxilis, nec defensoribus istis -- tempus eget.

15. Arg. 8. Those who maintain it to be good to have Clergymen armed with
secular jurisdiction, do urge for reason, the practice of the ancient Bishops
and Churches for the first three hundred years, while the Church was without
Christian Princes and Magistrates. It was usual in those times, for the people
to refer their dissentions about worldly things to the decision and arbitration
of their Bishops, who to prevent going to Law before Heathen Magistrates, and
to prevent and compose differences and strifes, and keep peace among their
people, would give themselves the trouble to hear and arbitrate Causes, and
Pleas, and worldly differences referred to them. And hence it is argued, that
if it was lawful for Clergymen to be Arbitrators and elected Judges, to decide
between brethren, it is lawful for Clergymen to be Judges, made and
constituted by authority, and commission from the higer powers.

16. As to this, I take it to be true as to matter of fact, that it was usual
for the Bishops of those times to hear and arbitrate civil Causes and Rights:
And it grew by occasion, I was a saying by a misconstruction of the Apostles
words, 1 Cor. 6.5, I speak to your shame, Is it so, that there is not a wise
man amongst you? no, not one that shall be able to judge between his brethren?
Thinking none more wise, and consequently more fit to arbitrate and decide
their Causes, than their Bishops. And this continuing to the time of
Constantine, and he finding them in possession thereof, continued it to them,
and confirmed it in their hands by Law; which was the beginning of Clergy-mens
lordliness and domination, the fruits and consequents whereof have been very
calamitous to the Church ever since.

17. I have many things to say as to this: As 1. That it is very likely the
ancient Bishops who took upon them this trouble of hearing and arbitrating the
civil Rights and Causes of their people, did it with no joy, they were not fond
of it, they thought it a burden, and if they might have had their choice, would
rather have been free from all such trouble. So much is intimated in a passage,
which Davenant in his Determ, quest. 11. aforenamed, quoteth out of Augustine.
They did not esteem them privileges or easements, but molestias; for so are
Augustines words as cited, molestations and troubles. But the Bishops and
Clergy of our times seek them, contend for them, and are tenacious of such
things as privileges.

2. Either the Bishops employed in the hearing and arbitrating those Causes,
were the same with our Diocesan Bishop, or they were not. If they were, then
what discretion could there be in the people, to refer all the Causes within
the Bishops Diocese, supposing it to be of the same extent and bigness with the
Diocesses of Bishops in England, to one man their Bishop? And what discretion
could it be in such a Bishop, as among us, the Bishop of Norwich, the Bishop of
London, the Bishop of Lincoln, etc. to take upon him the trouble of hearing and
arbitrating all Civil causes, controversies, and differences of the people
inhabiting so vast a compass as his Diocese? He must do nothing else but merely
hear civil Causes. He must be but a Bishop in name. How expensive, and very
inconvenient would it be, for all the Christians in any the least Diocese in
England, much more in the greatest, to travel with their Lawsuits to the
Bishop of the Diocese? His House then must be a mere Westminster hall and all
the days in the year, scarce the Lord's Day excepted, must be term-time with
him. To think that the Apostle ever meant any such thing, when he counsels them
to refer their matters to a wise Arbitrator, is a gross wresting of his words:
For he wrote to the Church of Corinth, which was but one particular Church. Is
there not a wise man among you? He must be a wise man among them, one near at
hand, easy to be resorted to, to whom they might refer their Causes. And
therefore it could not be, that the Christians then referred their Causes to a
Diocesan Bishop, such as ours.

And if not, then the Cause of our Diocesan Bishops will receive a deep wound,
and it will make way for an unwelcome truth, That the Bishops to whom the
people referred their Causes, were the Pastors of every Parish, the very same
with our Parish-Ministers, and the Rectors of Parsonages. These of the Clergy
were the fittest to arbitrate the Causes of all the people within their Parish.
A Parish-Bishop or Minister may with far more ease arbitrate and compose the
dissentions and suits of all in his Parish, than the Diocesan Bishop can do of
all the Pastors and people in his Diocese.

3. It is not the intent and meaning of the foresaid words of the Apostle, that
Pastors should be employed in hearing and arbitrating the secular Causes of
their own, people, or of the people of other Parishes. I will not say it is
absolutely and universally unlawful; nor will I say it is expedient in no case
at all. There may be Cases rarely here and there in Parishes, so circumstanced,
both under Christian and Pagan Magistrates, in which it may be both lawful and
expedient for the Pastors to arbitrate and compose suits and differences among
the people. But generally and for the most part it is inexpedient. For either
he will do right, or do wrong. If he do right, it is well if one side be not
displeased, and fall out with him, and take a grudge against him, and either
turn from him and not hear him, or hear him with prejudice; and so by this
means the Pastor may be an occasion of much sin and damage, and damnation to
his Soul, which prudence, and piety, and compassion in a Minister, does forbid,
and will make him watch against. If he do wrong, then it is hurtful to his own
Soul, it is a wronging of the Innocent, and a perverting of Justice, and a
scandal to his Ministry.

Besides, He can scarce do it but with distraction: If he do it but a little,
it will be a hindrance to his other work, and distract him; much more will it
hinder and distract him if he should use it, and do it frequently. And the
words of Christ are considerable, and worthy to be thought or, Luke 12.14, Man,
who made me a judge, or a divider [an Arbitrator] between you?

4. The words of the Apostle may be well understood in this sense; either there
is besides your Pastor a wise man among you, and one that is able to judge
between brethren, or there is not. If there be, refer your contentions and
civil causes to him. Neither go to Law before the unbelievers, nor do you
trouble your Pastors and Bishops; but single out a wise man among you, one that
is able to hear and decide your Causes, and make him Judge and Arbitrator
between you. If there be not one such wise and able man among you, then it is a
shame and reproach to you all. What? Do you call your selves Saints? Do you not
know that the Saints shall judge the world, even Angels themselves? Are they no
then fit to judge on earth small matters, and to decide a petty controversy
about mine and thine between Brethren, but Brother goes to Law with Brother,
and that before the unbelievers? This is to your shame.

5. When Constantine came to the Crown, and Magistrates became Christians, the
most expedient way had been to have eased Pastors of all those molestations and
avocations, and lest the Pastor nothing to do but his own part, and the
Magistrate his part. To make the Clergy worldly Judges and Magistrates, is no
benefit, but a burden* it is nothing that a wise man should rejoice in, but
rather groan under, as a pressure and hindrance, and pray to God to be eased of
it, and rejoice in being free from it, and at liberty to employ all the time
which was wont to be spent in such Secular affairs, in Religious and Sacred
exercises, which have a more special tendency to Souls good, and are most
becoming a Pastor.

18. Lastly, I will set the worthy Davenant against himself, who going about to
prove that the Bishop of Rome has no temporal power over Kings, lays down this
position, -- Bonum spirituale non postulat, ut ulla temporalis potestas a
Romano pontifice exerceatur. (And if not by him, then by no other Bishop or
Pastor whatsoever) Non est enim in ordine ad hunc finem, aut necessarium
medium, aut accommodatum, aut licitum, aut denique cum spirituali censura
excommunicationis ullo jure connexum. Spiritual good does not require that any
temporal power be exercised by the Bishop of Rome; for it is not in order to
this end, either a necessary mean, or fit, or lawful, or lastly by any right
knit with the spiritual censure of excommunication. Determ. quest. 4. And he
gives very substantial proofs. I am at a loss how to reconcile him to himself.
But whether he be consistent to himself or not, I lay not my cause upon that,
the other proofs and evidences do overpower my understanding.

19 Now if it be manifestly inexpedient to make Clergymen Magistrates, and
grant them civil jurisdiction, then it must needs be manifestly inexpedient to
make them supreme Magistrates, and to confer upon them the highest jurisdiction
which Subjects be capable of, as to be Lords in Parliament, and to have equal
votes with the Peers and Nobility of the Realm, and sit as Princes there, to be
many days, and weeks, and months from their Flock, and to be all that while
taken up in State-matters, Civil and Secular affairs. If the other Arguments be
good against granting any temporal authority and jurisdiction at all to Pastors
and Cl^rgy men, and the Reasons for it be exceeding weak, and but shows and
shadows of Reason; then it must needs be much more inconvenient to heap secular
honors, dignities, greatness, preeminence and authority upon Clergymen, and
betrust them with the highest jurisdiction, by making them Lords in Par^iament.

20. They that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition, 1 Timothy
6.9. It holds good most strongly of those that seek both worldly wealth, and
outward height, grandeur and state; that would be great, and sit in the highest
Seat, and be accounted Lords and Princes, and have dominion over the lives, the
liberties, the estates, yea, and souls of men, and would have wealth and riches
to support their grandeur and preferment. It is this which has let many evils
into the Church, and given occasion to the Roman-Bishop to lift up himself
above all other Bishops, yea, above Kings and Emperors themselves, and to
assume the title of Universal Bishop, and Christ's Vicar General upon earth, and
to usurp authority, dominion, and supremacy above all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Constantine the Christian Emperor thought he did the Church a
kindness in heaping Civil honors upon Clergy men, and putting them into places
of state and preferment; but in truth he did them and the Church no kindness.
It had been well for the Church of God that Bishops and Clergymen had
continued mere Bishops and Clergymen, without any worldly honors, preferments
in Parliament, outward greatness and jurisdiction.

21. Nor is there any hope that the Church of God should enjoy true rest, and
be settled in happy and lasting concord, and flourish as it should in holiness
and Peace, till its Bishops and Pastors be reduced to the Primitive and
Apostolic pattern. One would think the words of our Savior were plain enough
in this case, when there was a strife among the Twelve Apostles which should be
greatest, our Savior quickly ends the controversy, by telling them, The
Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great,
exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you; but whosoever
will be great and chief among you, let him be l^west and servant of all, Mat.
20.25, 26, 27. Luk 22.25, 26. It shall not be so among you, and consequently it
shall not be so among your successors. But so it has been, and so it is to
this day: God grant it may be so no longer. There is a striving which shall be
high and great, striving for worldly honors, preferment, and votes and
authority in Parliament: There is not a striving who shall be most humble, and
self-denying, and do the work of God faithfully. There is a striving who shall
be like the Pope, rather than Jesus Christ; who shall have worldly lordship,
wealth and preferment, and exercise domination; not who shall be most good and
holy, most faithful and diligent in the work of the Ministry.

22. Ambition and domination is not good in any; but it is worst and most
odious in Bishops and Clergymen. By seeking themselves and their own honor
rather than the honor of God, they lose themselves, and do but prepare
themselves for a fall. Is it not a most sad thing to read in Church History the
contentions and strivings of Bishops, and Patriarchs, and Clergymen, about
names, and places, and dignities, and worldly greatness, and authority; and all
the doleful evils which Clergy-domination and worldly-Prelacy has produced?
And to see Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, States and Parliaments, to
enslave themselves to a dominating Clergy? This is it which makes wise and good
men to think it were much better to let Bishops and Clergymen be mere and
simple Bishops and Clergymen, and no more; and for the Magistrate to keep the
Sword in his own hands. For if once you take up this for a principle, that the
example of Christ and of his Apostles, and of the Pastors and Bishops of the
Churches for the first Three hundred years, is not a sufficient pattern, yea,
and the very best pattern for all Christian Pastors and Churches to conform to;
if once you leave this, you depart from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2
Cor. 11.3. It is not possible to keep out pride, contention and domination,
these will be, and they will prove the scab, yea the plague of the Church, and
danger to eat out its vitals, or so weaken and consume it, that it will want
much of its strength and beauty.

23. Sound prudence is always to go by a sure and steadfast Rule. Christ's
pattern, the way and practice of the Apostles, and first and most pure
Churches, is a sure rule to go by: Keep to this, and we are safe. God will not
find fault with us for holding us to his Rules, and seeking to be no more wise,
no more holy, no more great, and honorable, and good than his Rule and
Standard requires. But if you alter your rule, and once think, and say, the
Clergy must have some more honor and jurisdiction than so, you let in
confusion, contention, domination, and a troop of evils and mischiefs not to be
told. As in the case of Ceremonies, and namely that of the Cross in Baptism, if
it be prudent and advisable to add unto Gods institution of Baptism a
dedicating symbolical sign, and say, that Baptism without it is not best as
Christ ordained it, you may by the same reason add Cream, and Salt, and
Spittle, and a multitude of vain and foolish things; no just bounds can be set.

24. And therefore Bishops, Pastors, and Clergymen in Parliament, should make
their humble address to the King, the Nobility, and Commons in Parliament to
this effect. -- Our office is to be Bishops and Shepherds of Souls, to give our
selves continually to Prayer, and to the ministry of the Word, and to take heed
to our selves, and to all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made us
overseers. Had we more time than we have, had we more wisdom and goodness in
our Souls, could every one of us do the work of ten of the best, and ablest,
and most godly Bishops and Pastors that ever the Church of God had, the Souls
in England and Wales would find us all work enough. We may not leave our work
and calling unto which we are separated, without injuring you, and us, and the
souls of our people, and procuring far more damage to all sides, than the
benefit can countervail. These honors that you put upon us, these places of
dignity and jurisdiction that you put us in, are a snare and a burden to us:
they are no privilege but a let. To strive for them, were to strive to bring
Fire and Gunpowder together. All the while we be here, we tread as upon Coals
of Fire. We are as if we were upon a high towering Steeple, or the t^p of a
Pinnacle, we cannot look upward, nor downward, behind u^, nor before us, nor on
either hand, but we be in extreme fear of falling. For Gods sake, for your own
sake, for the Churches sake, ease us of these burdens, deliver us from these
snares, let us not be pragmatical and busybodies; you do not love to hear
Divines pragmatical in the Pulpit; and why should it please you, or us, to be
pragmatical out of the Pulpit? We thank you for your love and well-meaning
zeal; but you would not have us undone by you, and Church and State suffer by
us, and by our standing for worldly honors and preferment. We had rather be
pure and simple Bishops and Clergymen, than neither pure Clergy men, nor pure
Laymen, but mungrels between both: simple bodies are the most solid and
compact. Gold and Silver mixed, is not so pure and firm as pure Gold. We had
rather be simple followers of Christ, and Peter, and Paul, and the first and
most ancient Bishops, than any thing that man can make us. Never fear that we
shall want honor, countenance, reverence and due maintenance, while we our
selves fulfill our name and place, and there are men and Christians among us. If
we want any outward desirable reputation, esteem, or convenience, God will be
to us an alsufficient good, and our very wants will be sanctified to our good.
Let us go to our flocks and several charges whence we came, hinder us not. Let
us not be advanced in wealth, in honor, in preferment above the rest of our
brethren, who be equal with us in wisdom, holiness and industriousness; and
many of them do exceed us. We had rather dye preaching, and praying, and
visiting, and instructing the souls of our people, than dye voting in
Parliament, and agitating State matters there. If ^ou need our advice at any
time in things pertaining to the Church, and which come within the sphere and
compass of our calling, we are ready night and day to do the best service we
can. And we desire you will not look upon us as a divided party from the rest
of our Brethren and Protestant Divines in the Nation, but that you will in all
your consultations about Church Affairs, use the advice of the most sound, and
holy, and impartial, and prudent, and experienced Divines in all the Nation,
and by all means possible, keep the Sword and coercive power out of the hands
of such as be proud and lordly, and usurp over their Brethren, and would set us
all on a flame, and are plain worldly, hypocritical, self-seeking men, and
rather Papists and Infidels in heart, than sincere Christians and Protestants.
You need consultation with Divines for your Souls, as you do with Lawyers for
your Estates, and Physicians for your Bodies: But as you can make due use of
Lawyers and Physicians, by advising and consulting with them in all necessary
cases, without making them Statesmen, and Peers, and Lords in Parliament, and
loading them with secular greatness, honor and jurisdiction; so you may make
all due and faithful use of us, as Bishops, spiritual Pastors, and Casuists in
Gods Church, by using our advice and consultation when there is need, without
loading us with worldly honors, and making us Statesmen, and Peers, and Lords
of the Realm, and Lords and Lawmakers in Parliament; such things be
extra-episcopal: They will be small honor and comfort to us when we come to
dye, and give up our accounts to God. Bend your endeavors to unite all
Protestants, and to strengthen the common cause of Christianity, Faith and
Holiness, against the reigning errors and vices of the times, and the most
malignant distempers of mankind, now degenerate, and far departed from God. If
you find us such as we should not be, do right and justice, and let no man's
crimes go unpunished, nor any scandal lie upon the Churches, by any person or
party whomsoever. Fidelity to God, to you, to our own souls, and to the Church,
compels us to make this address, and to quit our hands of all such matters as
will not stand with sound prudence and integrity. The first and best part of
wisdom is not to err and do amiss; for then there will need no repentance: but
having erred, the next and only wisdom is to repent and reform, that God may
forgive us, and men may have forgiving goodness and charity in their breasts
toward us.

25. In case Bishops and Clergy men shall stand for their worldly dignities and
places in Parliament, and plead prescription, and the example of their
ancestors, and the right of their successors, and think it hard measure to be
reformed, the Sovereign with the Nobles and Commons in Parliament should say to
them, We are Gods Ministers, bearing the Sword, and are to be a terror to evil
doers, and a defense to them that do well. We are to correct all disorders and
abuses. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. If we find you to be
out of your place and calling, we are to take cognizance thereof, and see that
Archippus take heed to the Ministry which he has received in the Lord, that he
fulfill it, Col. 4.17. As we may not forbear to use your advice and consultation
both public and private when there is cause; so neither may we call you to
counsel and consultation needlessly, and avocate you from your Studies, and
Episcopal and Pastoral work, in Prayer, and Preaching, and Overseeing your
several flocks, without cause: unto you belongs the power of the Word and
Keys, unto us belongs the power of the Sword. If you see any misdemeanors in
us, do your duty faithfully, kill us not by kindness, flatter us not to our
ruin, make utmost use of that authority God has given you in his Church to
edification, conceal nothing from us and the people which is godly and
profitable for us to know; spare to reprove no sin which is a sin, and which
needs reproving; do your duty faithfully, be prudent, be pious, be peaceable,
be diligent and blameless in your place, and we shall defend you, and be a
terror to all that would harm and oppose you. But if it will not content you
to be as Peter and Paul, and the holy Bishops and Pastors of old, but you will
needs be usurping the Magistracy, and seeking domination, and make your
Brethren of the Clergy your underlings; if you will needs be pragmatical and
busybodies, and neglect the work of Prayer and Preaching, and suffer the
souls of your people to want due oversight and pastoral care; if you will beat
your fellow servants, and causelessly fall out with your Brethren and the
universal Church, we must not wink at such offenses, but declare, them to be
crimes punishable by a lawful Magistracy, which we are, under God. We will hear
of no plea or prescription against Piety, Prudence and Peace. Usurpation,
domination, pastoral negligence, and unfaithfulness, and gross imprudencies,
are not privileges, but sins and crimes: to say they are ancient, is to say
they are more odious, and call for the more deep repentance, and speedy, and
sound, and through reformation.

26. There are in this, as in most other cases, two extremes, which be alike
equi-distant from the true and right mean. The one is to make no use at all of
Divines, nor to consult with them in any case. This I take to be a dangerous
extreme, contrary to the light of nature, the true office and institution of
the Ministry, and that duty which all Christian Princes, and Parliaments, and
People do owe to the Lord Jesus Christ; unto whom they are vowed and sworn to
observe his Laws, and to be sincerely subject to his government in all things.
And he does govern his Church by Pastors, Teachers, and spiritual Overseers,
with whom all persons of what degree and rank soever they be, are to advise and
consult, not in every small and little matter, but in cases of weight and
concernment, if they cannot otherwise satisfy themselves; as they will do with
Lawyers about their Estates, and Physicians about their Bodies. The Papists do
grossly tyrannize over all, both Kings and Subjects, by binding them to make a
particular recitation or confession of their sins to their Priests, at certain
times frequently; thereby making themselves Masters in some sort of men's
consciences, and unjustly privy to their secrets, and abusing the name,
authority, and ordinance of Christ, to rigor and tyranny, and thereby
deceiving and deluding souls into much superstition, vassalage, and hypocrisy.
To avoid which, Anti-papists have run into a quite contrary extreme, forgetting
of what daily and standing use and concernment Gods Ministers are, both to
persons and societies. The Priests lips are to keep knowledge, and the people
are to seek the Law at their mouth, Mal. 2.7.

When the Philistines were to send back the Ark, they consulted with their
Priests and Diviners, 1 Samuel 6.2.

Ministers are not only to be heard in public, but to be consulted with in
private, and to be made use of in all cases and questions Ecclesiastical, which
concern the general interest of the Church, its holiness and its unity, and
which cannot well and soundly be determined without the assistance, advice, and
direction, of impartial, wise and holy Divines. I am so far from being against
this, that rather I judge it a common error and mispractice in Christian
States, as well as particular persons, that they do not make that due and godly
use of Ministers and Divines, which they ought to do; whence it is that they do
so often miscarry in their ways and counsels, because they do too much lean to
their own understandings, and either consult not at all with Gods Ministers, or
if they do, they consult with those only which are partial and unfaithful, or
they do treacherously and hypocritically conceal something of the case from
them, or do like the Papists, which make confession a mere ceremony, resting in
the work done, imitating her in Prove. 7.14.

People can send for Ministers to advise with upon their sick-beds; they should
do it when they are in health. There is Parliament humility and self-denial,
which Jesus Christ does bind all Christian States and Rulers to, Luke 9.23. The
long Parliament had their Assembly of Divines.

27. The other extreme is of making more and further use of Ministers than need
requires, and than will stand with the prudence, convenience, and quality of
their work and calling; and in making an undue disparity and inequality among
Ministers and Divines, appointing some to be Lords and Dominators over the
rest, advancing them too high in worldly dignities, authority and preferment,
and thereby establishing pride and partiality: It is grounded upon a mistake,
which is, that by Gods Law, Bishops and Archbishops have a majority of power
and jurisdiction above the rest of the Pastors, though they excel, or be equal
to the Bishops, and Archbishops, in true wisdom and holiness, and Ministerial
graces and diligence; whereas it is evident from the very nature of the thing
it self, that a Bishop and Overseer of Souls, are but two names for the same
thing: and that to be an Archbishop, is to be Episcoporum primus, an eminent
Presbyter, the chief of all the Bishops, Presbyters and Pastors: not that he
has a greater commission than they. The authority and commission of Bishops,
Pastors, and Ministers, is but one, Matt. 28.19, 20, and it consists in these
three. 1. An authority to Christianize Souls, and admit Disciples into the
Family of Christ, which is his Church, by Baptism. 2. An authority to use them
as Disciples and Members of the Family when admitted, by seeding them with
knowledge and understanding, watching over them, and doing all necessary and
convenient, episcopal and pastoral acts and offices to them. 3. An authority to
discommon and cast out of the Family, by penal and juridicial Church Censures,
contumacious and grossly disorderly livers, whom no other remedies will amend.

28. This threefold authority every right ordained Presbyter or Parish Minister
has, and no Archbishop or Bishop has more; for more is not necessary, nor is
there any place for more. And less will not suffice to make a man a complete
Pastor; and Christ makes no incomplete Pastors. Qui aliquid alicui concedit,
concedit and id sine quo res ipsa nequit concedi. He that gives the end, does
includedly give the due, and regular, and subservient means. And, Qui adimit
medium, destruit finem. We must not for fear of making every Pastor a Pope,
deny him to be a Pastor. Grant him to be a Pastor, and thereby you grant unto
him pastoral power; and then you grant him authority to cast out as well as to
take in; to have an expulsive as well a a receptive faculty. Ministers may
abuse their authority; so also may Magistrates, Parents, etc. But is that any
ground to deny them the authority of Magistrates and Parents? If they be not
fit to be trusted with the pastoral office, let them not be Pastors at all. If
they be fit to be Pastors, let them be complete pastors. An incomplete Pastor
is terminus diminuens. No Scripture, nor sound Reason does give any warrant for
making men but half-Bishops, half-Pastors and Presbyters. I say again, That an
Archbishop is but an eminent Presbyter, as Peter among the Apostles, or as the
foreman of the jury. The rest of the Apostles are complete Apostles as well as
Peter, and have equal commission and authority. The rest of the Jury are jurors
as well as the Foreman, and are equal judges of the fact. True it is, that
among Apostles and Pastors who be equal as to Office and Commission, there may
be much inequality as to gifts and graces, and faithful and wise execution of
their office. As all Parents have alike authority over their Children; but all
Parents are not alike wise, and good, and officious in their places: unto some
God gives ten talents, unto some five, unto some two, unto all at least one.
And it is Gods will that he who is best, be best esteemed, and that the less
wise do learn of the more wise, that the younger submit themselves unto the
elder, yea, all of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility,
1 Pet. 5.5 Ministers cannot always be executing their Office, as Praying,
Preaching, Baptizing, etc. And there may be some parts and branches of the
Office which they may never be called to exercise, as Ordination, authoritative
Excommunication, and Absolution. And no authority is given but for use and
edification; and where there is no use of it, or where it cannot be used
without making things worse, and doing more hurt than good, it is to be
forborne. But it is fit that Ministers be Ministers, and Pastors and Bishops, be
Pastors and Bishops, and be invested and entrusted with complete Pastoral and
Episcopal power, and that they do use and exercise every branch and part of
their office and authority, when, and so often as sanctified Conscience, and
sound prudence and discretion shall say it is convenient, and they cannot
forbear to do it without manifest damage and inconvenience; as it is convenient
a Captain have his Sword, though he may not be put to use it in fight against
any. And it is fit that a Schoolmaster have power to use his Ferula, and
moderately correct untoward and misruly Scholars, though possibly he may have
none such, and so never be put to use the Rod.

29. This being so, I must needs grant, that if it be convenient, and
advisable, that the whole tribe of Ministers who be of the order of Presbyters,
be accounted Lord-Bishops, Lord-Presbyters, Lord-Pastors, and Lord-Preachers,
and have equal right to be Lords and Statesmen in Parliament, and supreme
Judges in all causes and questions, both Political and Ecclesiastical, which
shall come before that honorable Assembly; then I yield the cause, my position
is erroneous, and I do ill to say it is inconvenient that Clergymen be Lords
and Statesmen in Parliament. But if it be inconvenient and against sound
prudence, to honor, or rather burden the whole Tribe of Ministers, and
right-ordained Pastors and Presbyters, with these honors, preferments,
greatness and authority, then I see not but my position will hold sound and
good; for if all appearance of evil is to be avoided, then all appearance of
partiality is to be avoided; and of that partiality which has conjoined with
it many snares, and which a wise man is bound to avoid as distractions,
precipices, and burdens. I have no envious partiality against Archbishops and
Bishops; I am neither against the name, nor the office and thing imported by
the name. Every Pastor unto whom God does give more than ordinary gifts and
graces, is in my judgment a real Archbishop in Gods Church, jure Divino: a
chief Pastor and eminent Prelate in Gods Church above his fellows: of which
rank I do estimate the famous Usher, Augustine, Athanasius, Calvin, Zanchy,
Bradford, Davenant, Cranmer, D^d, Bains, Hildersham, Preston, Sibbs, Gataker,
Joseph Hall, Babington, Joseph Allaine, and many more both ancient and modern
Divines: all burning and shining lights in Gods Church, more eminent than
vulgar Divines. I think my self not worthy to carry their Books after them. I
think they better deserve the Title of Lord, than many a temporal carnal Lord
that is honored with that name. The fifth Commandment binds me to honor my
Father and my Mother: and my Catechism teaches me, that by Father and Mother
is to be understand all superiors in office, age and gifts. Good Obadiah says
to Elijah, Art thou that my Lord Elijah, 1 Kings 18.8? The truth is, our
ordinary word Master, or Sir, which we give to almost all, imports the same
with the title Lord, it being in Greek, Kurios and Kurie, in Latin Dominus and
Domine, save that custom which is the great arbiter of Speech, does appropriate
this title Lord, to the temporal nobility. If we must give honor to whom
honor is due, and honor all whom God does honor, or else we are disobedient
to Gods word and unholy, then both Clergymen and Laymen, Magistrates,
Pastors, Parents, and private Christians are to be honored with decent and
seemly honor, without denying them what all wise and peaceable Christians
account to be their due, and to be safe and decent to be given to them; or
giving them more, out of flattery and baseness, having men's persons in
admiration because of advantage. See Job 32.22. Jude 16.

30. But now it is not the custom with us, nor with the Churches of Christ and
Christian people, and custom in this case creates a Law, 1 Cor. 11.16, to give
the Title Lord to the Parish-bishops and Presbyters, though never so eminent:
and it is but meet, that according to the use of all Nations, and the Scripture
it self, a difference be made between the temporal Nobility and the Clergy. And
why it should be given to a Popish Bishop merely because a Bishop, such as
Bonner, Gardener, and many of the Popes and Cardinals, who have been wretched
men, or to a Ridley, a Hooper, a Davenant, rather than to a Bradford, a
Philpot, a Dod, a Joseph Alleine, I know not. If the honor be due to the
Office, then all Ministers must be counted Lord-bishops and Lord-pastors, I am
clear in that, Act. 20.28. Phil. 1.1. This I know will not please our Lord
Archbishops and Bishops, and those whose zeal upholds them. All that I contend
for is, that all that be equal in office, be equal in honor, and no one
partially preferred; no one assume to himself carnal state and superiority over
his Brethren. Jam. 3.5, Behold, how great a matter a little fire kindles! This
advancing of equals above their equals, and brethren above their brethren, and
pastors above pastors, in Gods Church, is not good.

31. I do not impugn bare names and titles, but my aim is to impugn factious
partiality, and pride in Clergymen, occasioned by the over-indulgence of
Princes and supreme Magistrates. It is simplicity, humility, and sincerity in
Bishops, which I contend for. Either the Archbishops and Bishops must come
down, and abate of their honor, their lordliness, their principalities and
worldly state, and be upon even ground with the rest of their Brethren, who
have as good insides as they, and are as real Bishops and Overseers of souls as
they, and have equal office, authority and commission with them, Matt. 28.19,
20. Joh. 20.23. and will pass for as much at death and judgment as they: or
else the rest of their Brethren who be equal in office and merits to them, must
be heightened and advanced, and made to be upon even ground with them. This
latter is not advisable, nor will be granted; it is not fit it should: The
other is both feisiable and convenient. It will make our Archbishops and
Bishops to be no worse men, nor worse Arch bishops and Bishops, if they be but
mere and simple Bishops of Souls, and meddle no more in State-matters, and
secular affairs, than needs they must, and will stand with the order, and
quality, and greatness of their work.

32. Do you think in good earnest, that Church and State will all go to rack
and ruin, if our two Archbishops, and the Diocesan Bishops be not present in
Parliament, and sit as Lords and Princes there? must they have the hearing of
every Cause, and be supreme Judges and Magistrates, and political Officers
under the King? were it not more becoming you to be among your people,
Preaching and Praying, and visiting the Souls and Families under your charge,
in imitation of the Apostles, Act. 20. Act. 6.2, 3, 4, 21, 28, 31. than
striving for worldly greatness and secular precedence? Is not the way to Heaven
strait enough to you, but you will make it more strait? cannot Traitors and
Murderers be tried without you? would it be any disparagement to the best of
you all to be as Peter and Pa^l, yea, as Jesus Christ himself, rather than like
the Pope? do you stand for these worldly honors and preeminencies out of pure
zeal for Gods Glory, and the Churches good? Why then do you heat your
fellow servants, and use them more unchristianly than Pagans have used
Christians? Act. 38.20, 21. and give your Votes that all the Pastors in the
Land be silenced and put down, for not assenting and consenting to many things
which you your selves confess to be in their own nature indifferent, all
moderate and sound conforming Ministers confess to be burdensome and
inconvenient, and multitudes of conscientious, and learned, and peaceable
dissenting Divines and Protestants do say, are flatly unlawful?

33. It is an error to think that Episcopacy, and Arch-episcopacy cannot
stand, unless Bishops and Arch bishops be made Lords, and Legislators, and
Princes in Parliament, and have worldly grandeur, authority, and greatness to
support the simple office of Prelacy and Episcopacy in Gods Church. These
worldly additions and cumulations of secular office and honor, are things
extrinsical to right and simple Prelacy and Episcopacy. Right and simple
Prelacy and Episcopacy do not stand by the will and donation of Princes, but by
a superior Law, even by Divine and unchangeable Right, by the Word of God, and
by the Law and light of nature, and the intrinsical goodness and expediency of
the thing. For if there were no Christian Magistracy or Parliament, yet would
there be Prelacy and Episcopacy in Gods Church. It is of the law of Nature that
the best be best esteemed, and that vulgar Pastors and Divines, that have but
one or two talents of Ministerial and Episcopal learning, holines^, wisdom and
usefulness, give place to those who are more eminent, and whose graces and
virtues do render them singularly excellent above their Brethren, though they
have but one and the same commission and authority. Authority is one thing,
spiritual and mental qualifications and endowments are another thing. Now we
see how that God himself does difference among the Pastors, by conferring on
some, extraordinary abilities, and qualifications, and thereby notifying to all
the Churches, the singular reverence and esteem which he would have such
eximious persons to have from all the Churches; as Daniel was preferred above
the Presidents, Dan. 6.3, and Esther and her Maids above the Women, Esther 2.9.

34. Every man naturally has a Pope in his belly, is the common saying: Pride
is an inborn sin. It is excessive pride in the Pope, to think himself more than
a man; and it is excessive pride in an Infant to think himself a grown man: and
in Pastors that be but of infant-understandings, to think themselves equal with
such as be of grown, and large, and singularly eminent understandings.

Simple Prelacy among Divines, is a Divine thing. Every eminent, holy and wise
Presbyter, is a real Archbishop in Gods Church: This he would be, were there
no Christian Magistracy to uphold him. There is a subjection due from one
Pastor to another, as from one man to another, 1 Pet. 5.5. As it will not stand
with true Christian humility, self-denial, and subjection to Christ in all
things, that Pastors do dominate over Pastors, and Lord it over their Brethren,
1 Pet. 5.3: So it will not stand with the same Christian graces and duties, for
one Minister of inferior and smaller parts, gifts and graces, not to acknowledge
the greater gifts and graces of others whom God has made more eminent.

There is as great variety of Pastors, as there is of Men and of Saints; some
are as eyes, some as hands, some as feet in Gods Church. The weakest sincere
Christian Pastor, is a Pastor, as truly as the highest and most excellent
Pastor, and is of use in his place: In this there is no difference between the
most eminent Archbishop Usher, and the meanest honest Parish-Minister. But
then as to wisdom, and holiness, and usefulness, there is great difference and
inequality; and out of this arises natural, simple, divine and unchangeable
Prelacy, Episcopacy and Arch-episcopacy; which is not a thing pleasing to flesh
and blood, and it does neither favor, nor make against any of the three forms
of Church Government called Prelacy, Presbytery, and Independency; further than
they do favor, or be against true impartial godliness: of which this divine
and simple Prelacy among Divines, is one essential branch. I do not say, it is
an appendant or appurtenant of Godliness and Religion; but is an essential
branch. It is of the essence of my Religion that I put a difference, as between
a godly and ungodly Pastor; so also between a godly Pastor, that is almost
ungodly, and has but one talent of godliness; and a godly Pastor, who is of
the highest rank of godly Pastors, and is full of the wisdom, and grace, and
joy of the Holy Ghost, and is of extraordinary usefulness and eminency in Gods
Church.

We must not, for fear of inclining to the Popes lordliness and supremacy, run
into another dangerous extreme, and tempt Infants to think they are Men, and
Scholars to think that they are fit to be Teachers; and Learning Disciples,
Novices, and Children, that they are equal in wisdom and knowledge to their
Parents, Masters and Tutors, between whom there is no compare.

35. I make no doubt but there have been holy and eminent men Lord-bishops and
Archbishops, Peers in Parliament: God forbid that I should think or say
otherwise. But either they were no more but mere and simple Bishops and
Archbishops, chosen and singled forth from among their Brethren, to be
consulted with in matters and cases ecclesiastical, and proper for Divines and
Bishops; or they were more.

If the former, and they kept in the rank and station of Bishops and Divines,
for my part I am not he that shall oppose it. And if there be any word in all
this disputation against such use of Bishops and Divines, indictum volo, I wish
it unsaid.

But if they were more, and took themselves to be more than simple Bishops and
Pastors in Gods Church, and to be superior to their brethren in power and
authority; if they took themselves to be supreme Magistrates and Judges, under,
and with the King in the House of Lords, and to have jurisdiction and lordship
proper to Magistrates and supreme coercive Judges, and to the Nobility, Peers
and Princes in Parliament; this I hold to be extra episcopal, to be a swerving
from the simplicity that is in Christ, and an undue prelation of Pastors above
Pastors, and a deformity added to the beauty and luster of simple Episcopacy;
and it is a cause of more evil than good, and upon a just computation of all,
both conveniences and inconveniences; it will be found a truth, that Church and
State have been both losers; that Bishops and Archbishops themselves, who have
had such external honors, preeminences and authorities, have been losers in
their Souls by them, and that it had been better for all sides, that they had
kept in the station and quality of simple Bishops and Divines.

36. The Archbishops and Bishops with us have three Ordinations; first, they
are ordained Presbyters, then they are ordained Bishops, then they are ordained
Archbishops. Now these two last Ordinations are rather nullities and
corruptions, and do suppose that there is a majority and superiority of power
in Bishops over Presbyters, and in Archbishops over Bishops; and the next step
must be in the Pope over all. For to be a Bishop and Shepherd over all the
Souls and Shepherds which be in England, is a vice of the very same kind with
that of the Popes, who says he is Christ's Vicar upon Earth, and Bishop over all
the Bishops and Souls which be in the world; which is to claim and usurp the
office of Jesus Christ, and to attempt the doing of that which is absolutely
impossible. It is indeed more impossible for one man to be Bishop and Pastor
over all the Souls and Bishops which be in the world, than it is for one man to
be Bishop and Pastor over all the Souls and Pastors which be in England. Both
be alike simply impossible, though the one is more impossible than the other.
And they do both savor of proud self ignorance, and gross affectation, and
self-seeking, as though one man could be in a thousand places at once,
Baptizing, Preaching, giving the Lord's Supper, visiting the sick, instructing
souls, and doing all other the acts and offices of a Scripture-Bishop and
Spiritual Overseer of Souls, Act. 20.28. To the creating of a Bishop or Arch
bishop, there needs no more but an election and nomination of him to the place,
as is done by the House of Commons when they choose a Speaker. His office is no
more but to be as the Foreman of the Quest. If he have not wisdom, holiness,
and Ministerial worth and usefulness answerable to his name, he is but an
Archbishop in name, he is rather a post or cipher than a man.

37. Also our Prelates do take upon them to be Ecclesiastical Legislators and
Canon-makers to all the Churches, and to all other Pastors; and they constitute
them a Lay-Chancellour, and require of all the Clergy an Oath or solemn promise
of Canonical obedience to them and their Chancellors. They call their
Chancellor their Vicar in spirituals, and unto him is committed the power of
discipline and jurisdiction ecclesiastical over all, both Clergy and Laity; and
the Church-Canons are his Law and Rule, which being too crooked for honest men
to conform to, he spares not to excommunicate them; and upon a significavit
made by him into the Chancery, out comes an Excommunicato capiendo, and the
party must either go to Prison all his days without Bail, or make his
composition much to his shame or damage, or both. And Excommunications and
Absolutions in the Bishops Court are bought and sold for money; and the worst
men are spared and countenanced, while the best men are harassed, and
anathematized, and accursed from Christ and his Kingdom.

38. Now the Bishops being conscious to themselves, that this kind of prelacy,
and domination, and jurisdiction, is not good and equal, but rather like the
Popes supremacy over all, and those whom the Holy Ghost brands, Nehem. 5.15,
who ruled over Gods people by their Servants, as now the Bishops do by their
Vicars, Substitutes, and Chancellors; but so did not good Nehemiah, because of
the fear of God: They, I say, being sensible hereof, do get to be Princes, and
Lords, and Statesmen in Parliament, and thereby insinuate themselves with the
Sovereign, and with such of the Nobles and Gentry as love to be flattered and
smoothly dealt with; and by this means establish to themselves, and to their
Chancellors, worldly and carnal jurisdiction, and dominate over their Brethren,
and become the Authors of Sects and Factions, and hinder the holiness, the
unity and concord of the Churches, and rather than they shall not be
Lord-bishop, and partial, and factious, and busy bodies in Parliament, Church
and State must suffer, and the common quiet be endangered. They will not endure
to be upon equal ground with their Brethren as wise and good as themselves: as
the Pope will not abide to be touched in his supremacy.

39. I shall add this one word of caution, Though it be not expedient that
Bishops be made Magistrates, and Pastors trusted with the Sword; yet it is fit
that Magistrates be Magistrates, and not Ciphers, and that they do not bear the
Sword in vain; and that they do back the power and authority of the Ministry,
and countenance and uphold the sacred Office, by being a terror to evil doers,
and a praise and defense to them that do well. There ought to be a due
temperament of Magistracy and Ministry, that we might lead a peaceable and
quiet life in all godliness and honesty. Though the Sword is not Go^s Ordinance
for the conversion of souls, yet it is Gods Ordinance for the punishing of
vice, and protection of virtue outwardly; and for the just encouragement of
worthy Pastors, and the discouragement of the unworthy. Anciently God did lead
his people by the hand of Moses and Aaron; they both made but one hand.

And it is a Law of universal equity, binding all Christian Commonwealths.
Judges and magistrates shall thou make thee in all thy gates, which the Lord
thy God gives thee throughout thy tribes: and they shall judge thy people with
just judgment, Deuteronomy. 16.18. And as there ought to be a sufficient Ministry in
every Parish; so also there ought to be a due proportion and contemperament of
coercive Judges, and revenging Magistrates, in Cities, Towns and Parishes, that
the people might have both Law and Gospel; means for their Souls, and means for
their outward peace and safety nigh at hand.

It was the custom in England anciently, for the Bishop and the Sheriff, who
was then called Earl of the County, and was supreme Magistrate under the King
in the County, to go in Circuit all over the County, the one to teach the
people Religion and the way of good living, and to visit all the Churches; and
the other to decide civil Causes, and to chastise and correct offenders and
offenses, and execute revenging wrath upon evil doers: And by this means there
was much quiet, and good living, and order in the Realm. This course is now
antiquated and degenerated into another course, not so profitable and
convenient for good order and public quiet; and that is the Circuit of Judges
itinerant twice each year through the Realm, keeping their Assizes at one place
only, and making all the County to come thither: and having a Judges Sermon
Preached at the entrance of the Assizes.

Though the Church and Ministry will stand if the Pastors do their duty; yet if
Christian Magistrates do not their duty in their place and calling, they do so
far unchristianize themselves; and if they protect the evil, and punish the
good, or think that (...) pretense of Liberty of Conscience men may be allowed
to blaspheme God, to teach Atheism, Infidelity, and Soul-destroying doctrines,
and ac^ the part of Corah and his accomplices, against the faithful Ministers of
Christ, God will make them know one day, that that was not the end for which he
appointed them Magistrates, and that they be his Ministers, and are therefore
called Gods, and ought not to bear the Sword in vain, and to stand by, and see
the Church wasted, persecuted and torn in pieces by violence, heresies,
schisms, profaneness and wickednesses, and they be like Gallio, unconcerned,
and care for no such things.

And the truth is, it is no ^^ttle that the due execution of the Magistrates
office does conduce to the success of the Gospel, and the promoting of the
Ministry, and of the Word and Work of God upon men's Souls. And therefore though
I dissent from the worthy Davenant in this, That he would have Pastors to be
Magistrates, and I would have Pastors to be but mere Pastors, and the Off^ce of
the Magistrates to be an Office by it self, and bestrusted with (...) persons
who are no Pastors, and who may intend it, and make (...) their work: yet thus
far I agree, that it is most convenient and godly, that throughout all the
Churches, there be in every place an heir of restraint, a revenger to execute
wrath upon them that do evil, and to protect the good; that these two standing
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and of God the Father by him, may stand and consist
together, and walk hand in hand, and mutually support and conserve each other
for the Glory of God, and the good of Church and Commonwealth. And this is no
Vtopia or Platonic Idea or form of a Commonwealth, which is but a fiction or
imagination, no where to be found in this World: But it is obvious and plain to
all, and needs not so much any new institution, as a restoration of ancient
practice, and a faithful execution of what all sides agree in, consistent with
the munici^al laws and sa^ctions of this Kingdom.

40. If any shall think I have committed inexpediency in writing against
inexpediency, and have meddled with a point that will not abide to be meddled
with* when I am convinced of it, I will acknowledge my error: Till then, I will
stand upon mine own defense, and plead not guilty. Almost imprudent, is
prudent. If any t^x me of pragmaticalness, I answer, it is pragmaticalness that
I write against, and I cannot cure the wound unless I search it to the bottom,
and apply to it suitable Plasters. Pragmatical Divines cannot content
themselves to be Divines in common with their Brethren; but they will play the
Bishops in another Diocese, and think it well becomes them to immerse
themselves in State Affairs. If it shall be said, that hereby I cast aspersion
upon the Government of the Nation, and censure the judgment and esteem of many
generations of Princes, Parliaments, Wisemen, Divines and Counselors. I
answer, That if it be lawful for a Davenant to assert in Schools, and publish
to the world an erroneous position, Civilis jurisdictio, jure conceditur
ecclesiasticis; it cannot be thought unlawful by equal judges, for another,
though not to be named with Davenant, to assert the contrary, and show the
unsoundness of his opinion, though with all just reverence to so worthy a man.
And in doing this, I do but expound the true meaning and extent of the fifth
Commandment, and assert the rights of the Church universal, and the consentient
judgment of the best and soundest Divines, and the due bounds of Magistracy and
Ministry, and reduce things to primitive order and simplicity, according to the
pattern of Christ and his Apostles, and the first and purest times of the
Church.

FINIS.

