THE DISSENTERS GUIDE, RESOLVING THEIR Doubts and Scruples, ABOUT KNEELING At
Receiving the Sacrament.

Published to prevent Men and their Families from being Ruined by
EXCOMMUNICATION.

LONDON, Printed for, and are to be Sold by Richard Janeway, MDCLXXXIII.

THE DISSENTERS GUIDE, RESOLVING THEIR Doubts and Scruples, ABOUT KNEELING At
Receiving the Sacrament,
A Rightly informed Conscience is the indispensable Duty of all men to seek as
a concernment of the greatest worth; that thereby the irregularities of a
Scrupulous Conscience, may not expose men and their Families to that Ruin and
Poverty which may attend the Guidance thereof. And though if a man cannot
desert all temporal felicity for the sake of Christ, he can neither ever make a
sound Christian, or a good Martyr: Yet men must take heed that those Sufferings
which attend a Christian life, come upon them from a good warrant; even such an
one as is founded on the Divine Truths of the Scriptures, and therefore, what
contradicts those truths, is a sufficient ground for any man's sufferings. Now
whereas Kneeling at the Sacrament has lately been the occasion of sundry men's
Sufferings, the tendency of the ensuing Discourse, is to remove those
Objections that some men may have against that manner of Communion, in
endeavoring to remove those Objections and Scruples, which may cause men to
lie liable to Excommunication for Nonconformity to that Gesture: And the first
is,

Kneeling suits not with the person of a Coheir, therefore it is unlawful. And
why does it not? Answer is made, That Kneeling is a carriage whereby we
acknowledge our selves to be in a condition of inferiority and dis-fellowship
with Christ; whereas Sitting is such a position of body, as argues not
subjection and humility, but rather equality and familiarity, therefore
Kneeling suits not with the person of a Coheir. I should rather have reasoned
quite contrary, thus; We are in a conditon of inferiority and disfellowship
with Christ, we owe subjection and humility to Christ; therefore we should
Kneel rather than Sit at receiving of the Sacrament.

It is true: We are Coheirs with Christ, yet this imports not any equallity,
Christ is the Son of God by nature, we by Adoption and Grace: Christ is Heir ex
propria dignitate, we ex permissione. Heaven is his by an Eternal Right, our
Inheritance is his purchase; he is the Heir of all things; happy are we if we
can obtain the meanest Mansions in the Kingdom of Heaven. Which way soever we
consider Christ, either in his Person, Actions, or Offices, we shall find him
far our Superior, and consequently our selves in a condition of Inferiority
with him: Yea, do we not acknowledge him to be the Head of his whole Church?
And that not only as it receives from him sense and motion in the course of
Christianity, but as it owes him subjection also, in regard of his Sovereignty.
And if the natural head be the most noble of all the parts, how excellent then
is he who is the head of the whole Church?

It is true that Christ has advanced our Nature by his Incarnation and
Passion: But that must rather humble us, than puff us up, that we should
account our selves his fellows.

And lest the white feathers of our Adoption might Swan-like make us swell, yet
the black feet of our manifold Corruptions may justly deject us. The greater
favors and honors Christ affords us, the more it becomes us to be humble.

Thus the Blessed Virgin, when the Angel delivered that Honorable Embassy
from the GOD of Heaven, was not lifted up in Pride, but answered in an humble
fashion, Behold the Handmaid of the Lord. And John the Baptist, who had the
honor to be the instrument of our Saviors Inauguration at his Baptism, how
humbly does he acknowledge, His shoe latchet I am not worthy to unloose! So, if
Christ shall vouchsafe to esteem us his Servants, (as the Prodigal Son
entreated his Father) we are Blessed and happy, though we do not account our
selves his Fellows. It was no robbery in Christ to be equal with God, but it is
no less than Luciferian Pride in us, to make our selves equal to Christ.

Object. But when we come to the Sacrament, we are to act the persons of
Coheirs, so that this so this humble deportment cannot then become us.

Resp. Yes surely, very well. Our Christian duties must not be like Pharaohs
Kine that eat up one another, but like the Cherubins that looked one upon
another, and both to the Mercy Seat. Many Virtues, though different in
themselves, are so connexed, that they consort very well in the same action, as
St. Austin has observed in the Centurion, and the Publican, one receiving
Christ with much joy, the other with great humility; Ambo salvatorem
honorificantes diverso, and quasi contrario modo; each of them honoring our
Savior in a diverse, and as were it a contrary manner. And do we not act the
persons of Coheirs when we pray? for we speak familiarly to God, as to a
Father: yea, it is the Spirit of Adoption that makes us cry Abba, Father, at
those times when upon our Knees we become humble petitioners to our gracious
God for his Favors. Thus joy, humility and confidence may all concur in the
very same act: Yea, what Duty is exempted from humility, which must balance
all our actions? When we hear the Word of God, we must bring trembling Souls;
when we Pray, it becomes us well to prostrate our selves before the Throne of
Grace. And will not the like humble demeanor become us when we come to the
Table of the Lord? Yes, and to confess there upon our Knees, That we are not
worthy to gather up the Crumbs that are under his Table.

Again, it is disputed that Kneeling crossed the assurance of our Co-heir-ship
with Christ, and therefore it is unlawful.

Resp. That this Proposition is untrue, I appeal to the experience of
thousands, who do humbly Kneel at the Receiving of the Sacrament. For my self,
I have Received it diversely, and I thank God comfortably. Yet have I Received
it with as much fruit and comfort when I Kneeled, as when I used other
gestures. And I am confident those who use to Receive it Sitting, do gain no
more assurance of their Co-heirship, than those who Receive it Kneeling.

But let us examine the Reasons of this position; the first whereof is this: It
directs our hearts to an apprehension of disfellowship with Christ in our
future state of Glory represented at the Lords Table, by reason that it
convinces the performers thereof to be of an inferior, and unfellow-like
condition with Christ: Ergo, it crosses our assurance, and therefore it is
unlawful.

To this I Answer, That there is great difference between our Co-heirship, and
equality of Fellowshhip with Christ. For though we be now Coheirs with Christ
through Hope; yet do we challenge no Fellowship of Equality with him, but
acknowledge our due Subjection to him, as our Lord.

And when we shall hereafter be in actual and real possession of our
Inheritance, I hope Christ shall challenge that Privilege, In the Kings Throne
I will be above thee, yea far above all Principality, and Might, and
Domination, etc. So that if Kneeling be a Bar to our Equality and Fellowship
(as well it may) yet is it not any hindrance to the apprehension of our
Co-heirship with Christ, which is assured to us of our Blessed Savior by
Participation of the blessed Sacrament, without Consideration, Intention, or
Institution of any Gesture. For it is a groundless Conceit, to hold that Christ
intended the Gesture of Sitting as a means to give assurance of our
Co-heirship; and it crosses their opinions who will have no Gesture, or other
Ceremony in the Service of God to be Significant.

Another Reason why Kneeling hinders the Assurance of our Co-heirship, is this,
Because it Diverteth our hearts from Meditating on the Death of Christ; for we
cannot at the same time Meditate and tender to God a worthy Sacrifice of Prayer.

I Answer, that these are not such opposite employments (as they are called)
that they cannot stand together. For, if Intention and Prayer may concur, yea
ought not to be separated, why may not Meditation also, which has great
Affinity with the same? Yea such correspondence there is (rather than
opposition) between Meditation and Prayer, that they are both comprehended in
one Hebrew Word. And surely it seems strange to me it should be held
impossible, that at the same, instant a man should Meditate upon the benefits
of Christ's Passion, and Pray that he may have an interest therein and benefit
thereby.

A third Argument to prove Kneeling unlawful in the act of Receiving is, That
it does debar us from Partaking with Christ of the Privileges and Prerogatives
of this Table, because it debarreth us from social Admittance and
Entertainment, in regard we are not at that time and act, of an Equal and
Fellow-like condition with Christ at his Table.

First, I Answer, That civil Tables yield not these supposed Privileges, and
Prerogatives of an Equal and Fellow-like condition to every Guest. If a poor
man were invited to a Noblemans Table, would not an humble carriage become him?
And could he, without gross Presumption, entertain a thought of Equality, and
Fellow-like condition with the Invitant? Yet must we, poor wretches, by this
manner of Reasoning, hold our selves wronged and debased, except upon our
entertainment at Christ's Table, we assume Presumptuous thoughts of an Equal and
Fellow-like condition with him the King of Kings.

Secondly, It is considerable, that this holy Table and Banquet do differ from
others which are merely civil, neither do they yield us those Privileges that
the civil do.

At civil Banquets, being at Table with men of worth, it is civility to put on
our hats, but not seemly to do so at this Holy Banquet.

Again, when we are at a civil Table, it is a common liberty and privilege for
a Guest to take meat, and carve to himself (an action of more moment than a
Gesture) but it is not so at this Holy Table, where every man must receive,
only what is delivered to him by the hand of another; neither may he refuse to
take and eat what is delivered him; which comes too short of that liberty we
have at a civil Table.

And whereas this social Sitting is urged, as an essential Privilege of the
Lords Table, it may seem strange, that till of late it was never so esteemed,
nor held so much as any whit material. For whereas we find plain Precedents in
the ancient Writers for practice of other Gestures, I suppose it would be a
troublesome task, to find amongst them any one evident Record for the Gesture
of Sitting at the Sacrament.

Fourthly, Kneeling is affirmed to be, 1. Repugnant ^o the Law of Nature. 2.
Because it is repugnant to Decency: 3. Being no Gesture for a Table of repast;
and therefore is unlawful.

For Answer whereunto, I might first distinguish between a Civil and a Sacred
Table, and show that they require not correspondence of all Comportments, as
before I showed. But it is observable, that Nature has not prescribed any such
particular Table Gesture, as Sitting, Standing, or Kneeling at our Meat. We
know that the Muscovites neither have any Table, nor do Sit at their meats as
we do. And we read that the Jews leaned, so that their Gesture was nearer
Lying, than Sitting. Now these Gestures, in our conceits, seem very Indecent
(as M. Calvin has observed concerning the Gesture of the Jews) because they
are dissonant from ours: Yet far be it from us to say they are repugnant to the
Law of Nature; for so we should tax our Savior and his Servants for that they
could not justify. Neither may we fitly say these Gestures are indecent,
except we be content that they shall likewise censure ours, which no doubt seem
so to them. And if it were granted, that Kneeling at a Table of common Repast,
were in all men's judgments indecent, yet can it not be so concluded for our
Kneeling at the Lords Table, where we are to esteem our selves rather Beggars
than Benchers. If the more general Judgment and Practice of men, both Wise,
Learned, and Religious, might prevail, I assure my self, the Gesture of
Kneeling would be accounted Decent; and the best reason that can be given to
the contrary is, that they which write against it, do not think it so.

But for the further clearing of this Point, we must understand, that the Law
of Nature is taken properly and improperly; properly, as it is Dictamen
rationis, that which Nature does dictate to all Nations: Improperly, as it is a
Custom of some particular Country.

As for instance, the Apostle condemns men's wearing of long hair, as a thing
repugnant to Nature; not because it was against the general Law or Rule of
Nature: for the French, Germans, Romans, English, and diverse other Nations, as
their Writings and Monuments do Witness, have used in sundry Ages to wear long
Hair; yea, the Spartans especially, because it is an Ornament of little Charge;
but because Custom, which is another Nature, had made it as it were natural for
the Corinthians to wear it short, the Apostle does condemn them for Violating
the same. And so Custom having amongst us made that Gesture, which was of it
self Indifferent, the most Solemn and Seemly Gesture at the Lords Table, those
that impugn and condemn the same, come under the Apostles Censure, and dispute
against themselves.

Again it is disputed, that Kneeling is a private Worship during the time and
act of the Public: Ergo, it is unlawful. And why is it a private Worship?
Because it presents a Worship wherein the Congregation does not jointly
partake; for they are not appointed to Kneel, when the Receiver does Kneel.

I Answer, 1. This Argument condemns directly those Congregations where the
Sacrament is Received Standing; for whilst some do Stand at the Table, others
Sit in remote places, and are not appointed to Stand when the Receivers Stand:
So that the Congregation not partaking with them in the act of Standing, they
present a private Worship.

2. It Condemns diverse Congregations where the Sacrament is Received either
Sitting or Standing. For in those Churches wherein I have seen most preciseness
in the time of Celebration of the Sacrament, whilst some are Receiving, others
are employed, either in singing of Psalms, or hearing some Scripture read. Now
these actions, of singing and reading the Scriptures are more dissonant from
Meditation, than Prayer is, and therefore if the one be unlawful, the other
must needs be so.

Yea, this condemns all Congregations in the World, upon a ground of
impossibility; for it is usual that some one, or few, are Receiving whilst
others are not (which cannot possibly be otherwise, except there were as many
to deliver the Sacrament, as there are to Receive it at the same instant) so
that the Congregation does not, in your account, jointly partake in presenting
the same Worship, except you will say that bare Meditation upon the Sacrament
is the same that actual Receiving is. Now if this actual Receiving by some
particular Persons, being a substantial Action, do not cross the public
Worship, but may have concurrence with it, how much less can a circumstantial
Gesture of a particular Person do it? Actions that have such affinity, may
concur in the same Worship, without opposition of Public and Private.

Lastly, I may truly say, that this Argument is a mere Paradox, which, to avoid
Kneeling, excludes Praying; insomuch that if a Communicant, during the time of
public Administration, and after he has Receive the Sacrament, do but beseech
God to Bless the same unto him, that it may be a means to Strengthen his Faith,
to help him in the act of Mortification, and building of him up in Grace, by
this reason he shall Sin against God; than which what can be more absurd?

To Kneel at the Sacrament, is to leave the imitable Practice of Christ and his
Apostles, and in lieu thereof to observe a worse, therefore it is unlawful.

Resp. In this Argument two things are to be considered; First, whether we vary
from the practice of Christ? and this I confidently deny; neither shall it be
possible for any man, out of the Scriptures, to prove directly what Gesture
Christ used at the Institution of the Supper.

Secondly, If it were granted, that our Savior, and his Servants the Apostles
did Celebrate and Receive it Sitting; yet are we not necessarily tied to
imitate them therein.

It is truly said, that to Restrain our imitation of Christ and his Apostles,
to every particular circumstance of their Carriage, were against common sense.
And howsoever in Moral actions we ought to follow Christ in matter of
substance, yet are we not always so in respect of circumstance, especially
where there is no Precept. Now that the Gesture is not of the substance of the
Sacrament, it is clearly evinced, in that neither the Evangelists, nor the
Apostle, does once mention it: For who dares affirm that any substantial matter
is omitted by them, who have handled the Doctrine of the Sacrament most
Excellently and Exactly? But to make this more evident by as instance; It was
our Savior Custom to Preach Sitting, as all the Evangelists do show, and Saint
Austin gives reason for it; namely, because it does very well agree with the
Dignity of a Teacher; yet the most precise do not imitate him therein, but use
to stand when they Preach, though the People Sit. Now (supposing that Christ
Sat at the Institution of the Supper) if the general Practice in the one does
not tie us to imitation, how can one individual act do it in the other?

So that if we should grant, that our Savior and his Apostles did Celebrate
and Receive the Sacrament Sitting; yet both by the Positions and Practice of
them who are our Opposites we are in this matter of circumstance freed from
necessity of Imitation. Yea, if Sitting had been Christ's Gesture, and we bound
to Imitation, how durst the ancient Churches, and diverse modern Congregations
make Standing their usual Gesture in Celebrating the Sacrament; as you do write
of the one, and experience shows of the other?

The Seventh Argument; Kneeling in the Act of Receiving, is a Bowing down
before a Consecrated Creature, out of a Religious and Reverent Respect of it,
and so is against the Second Commandment, and consequently is unlawful.

I Answer, That Kneeling at the Communion is no breach of the Second
Commandment. It will be evident, if we consider the branches of the
Commandment, which are two. The first, that we make not any graven Image to our
selves, that is, of our own heads: Now the Sacrament, and Elements in the
Sacrament, are no humane inventintion, but Gods Sacred Ordinance, which Christ
himself has commanded, and left to perpetuate the Remembrance of his Death
till his Coming to Judgment; and therefore we offend not against the first
Branch.

The Second Branch of the Commandment forbids the Bowing down to an Image,
which imports the giving of Religious Worship to any Creature; and this we
utterly disclaim; for although we Kneel at the Sacrament, yet we do not Kneel
to the Sacrament, but to God the Author of the Sacrament. And this may appear
to any, who loves not to be contentious; for that in the act of Receiving only,
and not of beholding the Sacrament, we do Kneel. It is confessed, by way of
approbation, that the Ancient Fathers carried a reverent Regard to the Bread
and Wine of the Lords Supper, and had a Reverent Conceit of them. And so do we
likewise Revere the Sacrament, as an Excellent Ordinance of Almighty God, yet
is not that the cause we Kneel, but the Majesty of our God, to whom at that
instant we Pray; and the Mercy of our God, who vouchsafes us this great
Blessing, causes us to humble our selves. And if we Receive upon our Knees
temporal Favors at the hands of mortal Princes, how much more will it become
us to Receive this inestimable spiritual Favor from the hands of of the
Immortal God, with all submission and Reverence?

If the Worship at our Receiving, did determine in the Sacrament, or were
transient by it to God; As the Romanists diversely hold concerning the Worship
of their Images, then would we not Justify our Action. But forasmuch as it is
tendered immediately to God, there is no Just cause of Condemning our Practice.
For we give to the Sacrament that which belongs to the Sacrament, namely, a
reverent estimation; and to God, that which belongs to God, That is, Humble
Adoration.

This Argument used in the Dispute, is like Bellarmin, to prove the Adoring of
Creatures; for whereas it is said in the Ninety ninth Psalm, the fifth verse,
Fall down before his footstool, the Cardinal would infer, that the Ark was
adored. And thus our disputants, because we Kneel before the Sacrament, do
conclude that we Kneel to the Sacrament.

But indeed, as the four and twenty Elders falling down to him that sat on the
Throne, though they fell down before the Throne, did not Worship the Throne,
but him that Lives for ever: So we, when we Kneel before the Sacrament, at the
Receiving of it, do not Kneel to the Sacrament, but to Christ the Author of the
Sacrament, Who is God blessed for ever.

The eighth Argument is this: It was brought in by that Antichrist of Rome, for
the Worship of his Breaden-god, therefore it cannot Lawfully be entertained by
the true Professors of the Gospel.

For Answer to which, I deny both parts of the Argument. Concerning the
Antecedent, it has two Branches, and neither sound: The one, That Kneeling was
brought in by that Antichrist of Rome; the other, that it was brought in for
the Worship of his Breaden-god.

Now to the First, I demand what Antichrist that was who brought in Kneeling at
the Sacrament? Some there are, who peremptorily affirm that it was Honorius the
Third. But that is not true; For although Honorius made a Decree for the
Adoring of the Sacrament, at the time of Elevation; yet we find not one
syllable to prove that he decreed any Gesture for the time and act of
participation. Yea, it is confidently affirmed by him who wrote the Dispute,
that Kneeling in the Act of Receiving, was not brought in by Honorius.

Now if you demand, by whom was it then brought in? Silence or Ignorance must
be the Answer. But methinks, such a confident assertion, that both crosses the
practice, and troubles the peace of the Church, should have some direct and
positive Proof, and not depend upon probability. Instead whereof there is this
reason given: We find neither Decree nor practice of Kneeling, till after the
time of Honorius: therefore it is not like, that either he, or any before him
brought it in. But if that reason be good, then I may conclude, that it was
neither decreed by Honorius, nor any other Bishop of Rome following, because we
find no Decree thereof upon Record.

It is further Affirmed, that sitting was the Gesture in the act of Receiving
in the time of the Institution, and diverse years after; and then standing, from
about the year one hundred and fifty, to the year one thousand two hundred and
twenty and upward.

I Answer, That concerning the Gesture used by Christ in the Institution, I
have already spoken; and now I will very briefly examine the Testimonies
inferred for proof of the Ages succeeding.

Where first, Justin Martyr says, After the Pastors Exhortation upon the
Sundays, we all rise up and pray, and afterward the Sacrament is delivered to
every one.

Now says the Dispute, if the people had Kneeled in the time of Receiving, he
would as well have showed that, as the other practices in praying and hearing
the Word God. For Answer whereunto might not I say, If the people had stood or
sat in the time of Receiving, would he not as well have showed that, as the
other practices in praying and hearing the Word? But further, I say, had that
Father esteemed the Gesture at the Sacrament a thing so material, as you
account it, doubtless he would have showed their practice; but because he did
not so esteem it, he did not at all mention it. For whereas it is said, We will
rise up and pray: That rising up from their seats, might be as well to Kneel as
to Stand.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, that when some have divided the Sacrament, they
suffer every one of the people to take his part. Now how could they take their
parts without being reached to them, except they stood or sat at the Table?

To this I might Answer, that umere partem, to take his part, does not
necessarily import an immediate taking without delivering. And further, if it
be granted, that in the Church of Alexandria they stood at the Table and took
the Sacrament themselves, yet it is evident by that place in Justin Martyr
before mentioned, and likewise by Tertullian, and others, that in other
Churches the Sacrament was delivered to the people by the hands of their
Pastors, which might be done without Sitting or standing at the Table.

For the Age 300. Eusebius is alleged, to prove Sitting at the Communion, from
a comparison of the Christians with the Philosophers, mentioned in Philo
Judeus. The indirectness of which collection I might easily show, were it
material. But what need I do it, when it has been done so often to my hands
already?

For the year 400. Chrysostom is cited, who says, Frustra stamus ad altar, In
vain we stand at the Altar. But what is that to the peoples Gesture in
Receiving? For Chrysostom speaks only of the Ministers Gesture in the time of
Divine Service and Sacrament, at which the people were not present; and
therefore there is no mention of their Gesture.

It has been said by some that, If Gregory and many more Fathers and Doctors,
should in their writings mention that Gorgonia, and sundry others, prostrated
themselves on their Knees in the act of partaking at the Lords Table, the same
is no disadvantage to the present question. The reason intended is, because
such (though many) particulars do not show the practice of the Church. And may
not I use the same words concerning Dionysius in Eusebius, and Clemens
Alexandrinus in his Stromats? Can that which they Write of some particular
Church, show the practice of the Universal?

Lastly, the Custom and Constitutions of the Church are urged, which from the
Second Age of the Church, to the Year 1220. forbad Kneeling at Prayer, on every
Lords Day; for if Kneeling at Prayers was removed, it cannot be imagined that
Kneeling at the Sacrament should be allowed. Now to prove that Kneeling at
prayers was removed generally on the Lords Day, diverse Fathers and Councels are
inferred, yet some of them inconsideratly, and impertinently (that I say not
cunningly) as namely Cyprian, Stamus ad orationem, We stand at prayer; as
though this had been the only gesture, whereas he says, quando stamus ad
orationem, when we stand at prayer, without reference to time or place, And the
like may be said of Anselme, cited after the same manner.

Again, inconsideratly, as that of Basil, de spiritu sancto, cap. 27. For not
only Erasmus sufficiently, but Mr. Cook abundantly has showed, that this Book
of Basils, or at least the later part of it, (whereof this 27th. Chapter is a
part) is a mere counterfeit.

Concerning the testimonies of Tertullian, and the Council of Nice, they indeed
seem to testify this practice of Praying standing on the Lords Day. but yet
that this was not an universal practice, it may appear by St. Austin's
Addubitation, who Epist. 119. says, Vt autem stantes in illis diebus and
omnibus Dominicis oremus, uterum obique servetur ignoro: That we Pray standing
on those and every Lords Day, whether it be every where observed do I not know.
And more evidently by Chrysostom's Relation of the Churces Practice in those
Parts; which accords directly with ours at this day. Before the Celebration of
the Sacrament, (says he) Prayers are made in general for all People, and after
that, those who do not communicate, are dismissed, another Prayer is begun,
wherein we all (not stand, but) cast our selves down in Prayer together, and
rise up together. By these Testimonies it is evident that Kneeling at Prayer
was not generally removed every Lords Day, and consequently the foundation of
this Argument does fail. Again, the Inference, if the Antecedent were granted,
is not good; They did not Kneel upon the Lords Day at Prayer; Ergo, not at the
Sacrament.

Thus we see, that what has been urged and alleged, does not prove the first
Branch of the Antecedent; namely, That Kneeling in the Act of Receiving, was
brought in by that Antichrist of Rome; and therefore much less ean the second
be proved, viz. That it was brought in for Worship of a Breaden God. For, as we
find no footing concerning the Author, so much less concerning that End.

Now as the Antecedent is uncertain, So is the Argument unsound: Some
Antichristian Bishop brought in Kneeling in the Act of Receiving: or thus; It
has been abused to Idolatry by some Antichristian Bishop; therefore it is
unlawful. A man might as well reason thus; It was proper and peculiar to the
Sacrifices of Hercules, that the Heathen did celebrate them Sitting; therefore
it is not lawful for Christians to celebrate this Eucharistical Sacrifice of
the Lords Supper so. The unclean Spirit said to our Savior, Thou art the Holy
One of God; and the Spirit of Divination, by the Damosel concerning Paul and
Silas, These men are the Servants of God; (yea, and this they spoke to evil
ends) therefore we may not say so. Yea, if this Argument be good, we must
remove Fire from our Houses, the Sun out of the Heavens, Bells out of Steeples,
Fonts out of Churches, Churches out of the world, because the Chaldeans abused
the one, the Persians the other, and the Papists the rest. The places of
Scripture cited for proof of the Argument, are very impertinent: Some which
have a particular reference, are made too general, as that in Leviticus. For
whereas it is said, After the doings of the Land of Egypt, and the Land of
Canaan, you shall not do; that has relation to those sins of Uncleanness which
are mentioned in the same Chapter. And the same being general, can no more
abide the Light than this; After the manner of the Pagans and Papists shall you
not do; but the Pagans and Papists do kneel in Prayer; therefore you shall not
kneel in Prayer. Or rather thus: The Papists and Pagans do kneel to their
Idols, therefore Professors if the Gospel may not kneel to God: For so indeed
it is inferred; because the Papists in the Act of Receiving, do kneel to the
Bread, therefore we in the same Act may not kneel to God.

The other Places require the defacing of Images and Idols, but what is that to
Kneeling? For there is great difference between that which is in it self
lawful, and that which is unlawful, as their Idols were, which represented
False Gods; between a permanent Substance and a transient Action; between that
which may have good use, and that which cannot.

If Antichrist has stained this Gesture by his Idolatry, shall Christians
therefore, having purged it, be debarred of their lawful Interest therein? Or
rather, as the Israelite, having taken in war a Woman amongst the Enemies, when
he had shaved her head and pared her nails, might take her home as his own; may
not the Church of God take this Gesture, being pared and purged from Romish
corruption, and apply it to the Service of God?

Mr. Cartwright tells us, That, If amongst the Romish filth we find any good
thing, that we willingly receive, not as theirs, but as the Jews did the holy
Ark from the Philistims. For (says he) herein it is true that is said, The
Sheep must not lay down her Fell, because she sees the Wolf sometimes clothed
with it. St. Austin shows that we may lawfully use the water of Fountains, and
woods of the Forests, which by Pagans have been dedicated to their Idols,
Epist. 154. And may we not use that Gesture that has been abused to Idolatry?

But it is Objected, That this Gesture can never be purged; And to this purpose
are urged the Positions of sundry learned men, who would that all things which
have appearance of Popery be banished; and the same is confirmed by the
practice of diverse Godly men in the like case.

To which I answer; First, That this Position is strange, which will admit no
possibility of purging any Ceremonies corrupted in the Church of Rome.

Mr. Robinson, a Dissenter, says, We do acknowledge it (meaning in the Church
of England) many excellent Truths of Doctrine, which we also teach, and many
Christian Ordinances, which we also practice, being purged from the pollution
of Antichrist.

Let us further consider the Opinions of sundry eminent and learned men in this
Case.

Beza says of this very Gesture, Epist. 12. Geniculatio speciem habet piae
venerations, etc. This Bowing of the Knee has a Kind of godly Reverence, and
therefore it might heretofore be used to good purpose,

Bishop Jewel says, I grant that Sitting, Standing, and other like Ceremonies
in the holy Ministration, are left to the discretion of the Church.

Yea, Mr. Cartwright acknowledges again and again, That Sitting is not
necessary; and though he say, that Kneeling ts dangerous,, yet he says not
that it is unlawful.

Peter Martyr says in general, I cannot be persuaded,, that the wickedness of
the Pope is such, that whatsoever he touches must thereupon be polluted, that
afterward it may not be of use to the Godly.

And concerning this Matter in particular, he says elsewhere, It is no matter
of Difference, whether we receive the Sacrament, sitting, standing, or
kneeling, so that Christ's in^sitution be preferred, and occasion of
Superstition removed.

And surely those are bad Surgeons that have no other means of Cure but only
by the Saw and the Cautery.

Again the Fact of Hezekiah may be objected, who did not seek to purge, but
brake in pieces the Brazen Serpent; and the practice of our Savior Christ, who
held it not sufficient by Doctrine to speak against the Jewish Washings, and so
to use them to another end, but refused that Custom wholly.

Hereunto I answer, first, particular Facts, even of worthy men, do not tie us
necessarily to imitation. Moses proceeded far against the Israelites Idolatry,
when he took the Golden Calf, burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder,
strewed it upon the water, and made them drink of it. What, have others sinned
that have not done the like?

Again, there is great difference between the Brazen Serpent and Kneeling at
the Communion, both in their Nature and Use. In their Nature, the one being a
transient action, the other a permanent substance, and consequently more apt to
be abused to Idolatry. In their Use; for the virtue of Cure being vanished, the
Brazen Serpent ceased to be of use; but the Act of Kneeling will ever remain
necessary, to manifest our humble thankfulness for so great Benefits as we
receive by the blessed Sacrament.

3. There was great cause why Hezekiah should thus proceed against the Brazen
Serpent, in regard that to those days the Children of Israel burnt incense unto
it: But so is not the Gesture of Kneeling abused by us, and therefore needs not
such an absolute abolishing.

And for our Saviors Practice, it is rather with us than against us; for
though he did shun the Superstitious Washings of the Pharisees, yet who can
think that he did utterly forbear all civil and wholesome washing before meat? So
we do shun and detest the Idolatrous Kneeling of the Papists at the Sacrament;
but to abandon Kneeling totally, we have no cause nor warrant.

FINIS.

