A DISCOURSE OF THE NECESSITY of ENCOURAGING Mechanic Industry:

Wherein is plainly proved, That Luxury and the want of Artisans Labor, became
the Ruin of the four Grand Monarchies of the World, in the Former Age, and of
Spain and other Countries, in This: and the Promoting of manual Trades the rise
of the Dutch, Germans, etc.

Paralleled and compared with, and shown to be practicable under the present
Constitution of England.

LICENSED, Aug. 23d. 1689.

LONDON, Printed for R. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXC.

The PREFACE to the READER.
SO visibly is this Kingdom degenerated from the great Achievements of Virtue
and Industry, into all the soft Indulgences of Sloth, and of an effeminate and
luxurious course of Life (the former the Dignity, and Preservation, the latter
the Reproach and Ruin of a State) as makes it a Work of as great
Seasonableness as necessity, to endeavor a Recommendation of such laborious
Improvements, as may, in some measure, regain to us that high Reputation and
Esteem in the World, which was justly due to the industrious management of our
careful and active Predecessors, and which our present Idleness and too
apparent a neglect of Mechanical, and other, Employments, has either incurred a
Forfeiture of, or at least can pretend no good Title unto. The nature of this
Subject, chiefly relating to matters of Trade and Business, seems not to
require any great Art of Rhetoric, or accuracy of Expression in the Composure;
and so comes not with those Ornaments and Embellishments of Oratory, and of a
correct and eloquent Style, which are due to more learned and refined
Discourses. 'Twill (I presume) be satisfactory to the judicious Reader, and to
Men of Action, if they find any thing of Weight, and substance in it, that may
be of Force to evince; and persuade them, of the reasonableness of what it
proposes, and that what is here offered for the promoting of Mechanical and
other Arts, is neither impracticable, unnecessary, nor yet unseasonable in the
present Juncture of Affairs, and this Age of declension from Labor and
Industry: But on the contrary, will (if pursued) derive public Advantages upon
the State, as well as tend to the Preservation and Advancement of private and
individual interests, which from the Methods laid down in this small Tract, we
find to have already accrued to other well-governed Commonwealths, in a due and
regular Exercise and Encouragement of Arts and Occupations of all sorts. This
being the principal Aim and Scope of the following Discourse, will not (I hope)
upon its perusal appear altogether void of, or defective in its Design; which
to enforce by prevalent, if not, cogent Instances and Inducements; I have
attempted to give the Reader a succinct View, or an Abridgment of those
National Mischiefs and Calamities; and these the most remarkable, both in
Ancient and Modern Governments, which have been entailed upon Luxury and
Idleness, how they consumed the very Vitals, and became destructive of the four
great Monarchies of the World, the Assyrian, Persian, Grecian and Roman: How
several Countries in this Age (...) wasted and depopulated; some from an high
and flourishing, descending to a most indigent and contemptible Estate; others
remaining a sterile and uncultivated Chaos, stocked with a sort of rational
Brutes (pardon the illogical Expression) which have nothing but human Shape to
denominate themselves Men; and the source of all this bestial Inhumanity or
barbarous Rudeness, is the want of Arts and Labor among them. On the other
Hand, I have shown you the prodigious Rise of other places, from an abject to a
very wealthy and honorable Condition, effected by means of their great
Industry; and in fine, have paralleled both, in an applicatory Relation to our
present Constitution and Government, as well demonstrating how our luxurious
Ease and Plenty, and the discountenancing of Labor among us, threaten an
Introduction of that Ruin, which has attended other Nations, that sunk into
Voluptuousness and Sloth; as prescribing of other Kingdoms as Patterns of our
imitation, who are famed for their Industry, will in Consequence, confer upon
us proportionable Emoluments and Advantages.

A DISCOURSE Of the NECESSITY of Mechanic Industry, etc.
THat which the Great Jehovah justly inflicted upon Adam, as a Punishment due
to his violation of, and apostasy from his original and pristine estate of
Innocence, In the Sweat of thy Face shall thou eat Bread] was in the days of
Solomon turned from a Curse into a Blessing: For, this being pronounced by God
to Adam, as well in the nature of a Command (obliging him and his Posterity,
then in his Loins, to a laborious course of life for the future) as by way of a
just Judgment upon him for his voluntary defection; did consequently derive
many secular felicities and enjoyments upon such as lived in obedience and
conformity thereunto. The Golden Age, or rather that momentany state of
Integrity, (not so in its own nature, but of Man's continuance in it) was
indeed exempt from all painful Anxiety or laborious Toil. Nature, as a
plentiful Storehouse, furnished every living Creature with proper and distinct
Provisions, without any Cultivation or Improvement, Art or Industry; the whole
Universe abounded with plenty of its own production, and seemed, like a Tree
overcharged with Fruit, to bow down to Adam, that so he might easily, and
without any trouble, pluck of all sorts, except that of the forbidden, which
though but one, must needs be tasted by his extravagantly-delicate Palate, which
sowred and embittered all the pleasing sweetness of the rest; and those things
which he had so freely fed upon before, must now be eaten with sorrow all the
days of his Life.

Man thus wilfully descending into a lapsed condition, from his free and happy
estate in Paradise, the whole World, and all the creatures in it, (as a Curse
appendent to his Fall) by the immediate designation of Divine Providence,
became degenerated from their admirable subserviency, and usefulness, so fitly
accommodated to the convenience of Mankind in their first Institution. That
which had of it self brought forth Fruits, and variety of Herbs, fit for the
use of Man, must now be cumber'd with Thorns and Thistles: Nature is now so far
declined from her first estate, that Art and Industry are indispensably
required to preserve her from Ruin; and the Breach made by the Fall of Adam,
must either be repaired by humane diligence, or else she will sink under her
own weight, and return (at least by gradual approaches) to her primitive Chaos
and Confusion. This being then the state of Affairs under the Fall, so
different from, and inferior to that of Original Innocence, which naturally
flowed with an abundant affluence of all worldly Blessings and Enjoyments, and
which seemed like so many Corrivals equally contending which should first court
Man's acceptance, and invite him to solace himself with them, rather than
require a laborious search, or indefatigable toil, in their pursuit. It remains
then, That whoever would under this lapsed Economy and degenerated Government
of the World, arrive to any tolerable degree of felicity in it, or to a
participation of the Divine Favors, and still bountiful Provisions of
Sovereign Providence; that the way to compass these naturally desired
Accommodations, is, by Labor and Industry; by a diligent pursuit, and an
industrious management in the World. For, since the State of Original Purity
soon expired, and that pains and toil is not only the Curse, but Condition of
the lapsed, which God has appointed us to make use of, if we would taste of the
Comforts and Emoluments of humane Life: it is plain then, that it is as well a
Duty prescribed them from God, as the most conducive Expedient for men's
Interest and Advantage, to apply themselves with vigilance to their respective
Vocations and Capacities. And this is an undeniable Truth, not only capable of
illustration from several Instances in the infant days of the World, which may
be derived from the Patriarchs, whose Labor and Industry were the marks of
their Honor and Dignity; but is also evident from the Gentile Kings in this
Case: as for instance, The King of Moab, who was a Sheepmaster. And however the
Mechanic and Rural Employments are now (by the vanity of the Age) become
contemptible; yet we find, that he that was the most competent Judge of these
matters, made choice of two of the first Kings of his People out of such. And
we do not read, That Royalty in them put a period to the Employments of the
Fathers, so as not to descend to their Children. On the contrary, we read, That
Absalom had his Sheep-shearers and his Corn Fields in his own management; as
appears by remarkable instances. But now the prodigious growth of the World, as
well in Impiety as in Mankind, is arrived to that height, that Nimrods are
rather chose than David's, and Government oppressed with a greater burden of
Labor and Toil, than that which is annexed to the Plough.

Seeing then that even the Throne is not exempt from Labor, and consequently
he that sits upon it not divested from Care and Anxiety; it seems but
reasonable, that there be an exact Harmony and Consort betwixt the Prince and
the Subject, and that every String in the grand Instrument of the World should
be wound up to its height, that so there might be no jarrs. In order whereunto,
it shall be my work to show, That though it is impossible to bring men to
conformity in all points of Labor and Industry, yet that it is extreme easy to
effect such a Reformation, as might free this Kingdom from that load and
oppression of useless men, under which it labors so much at present; and yet
not part with them, but rather take such methods, whereby every individual
person may become a profitable Member to the whole Community. For, though this
Kingdom is plentifully stocked with too many Persons, who are addicted to
Idleness and Sloth; yet has it too few mouths in general, and cannot be
accounted above one third Peopled, if compared with other parts of the Universe.

And therefore, in this Discourse, I shall First show the Mischiefs that attend
those Countries, where Men are suffered to live without honest Employments.

And in the Second place, shall particularize some Instances, setting forth,
how men are obliged to Employments in some Kingdoms, and the good effects which
result from that Engagement.

And in the Third place, shall demonstrate with what good success the same
might be effected in this Nation.

In reference to the first of these Particulars; If we consult History, whether
ancient or modern, we shall undoubtedly there find, that Idleness has, in all
Ages, been the Nurse and Parent of Voluptuousness and Effeminacy, which
gradually increasing in proportion to a constant diminution of Labor and
Industry, finally brought in irreversible destruction upon such Countries,
where they gained the ascendant, and did predominate.

Of this, the Monarchy of the Assyrians is a pregnant and remarkable instance,
who degenerating from those masculine and great Achievements (which first gave
the rise to their Universal Greatness) into a libidinous and an intemperate
course of life, became an easy Prey to Cyrus the Great.

And thus it happened to the Persian Monarchy, which being over run with Ease,
Luxury, and Riot, with soft and effeminate Delights, and wanton Pleasures,
withal manner of Delicacy and Licentiousness, seemed to the Great Alexander
rather like Beasts fitted for the slaughter, than for use and labor, and gave
his Warlike Macedonians more trouble to disrobe them of that Pageantry and
sumptuous Apparel which, like so many Theatrical Grandees, they came vainly
adorned with to Battle; than they found in obtaining of an easy Conquest over
those pusillanimous and gaudy Persians, who scarce gave any opposition.

But then, how quickly do we find the Scene changed in this mighty Conqueror,
who no sooner began to consult his pleasures, and to foster up himself in
idleness and immoderate excess, but this very man (who had been the terror of
the Universe) becomes a Scorn and Contempt to his own Soldiers. Whilst he
pursued the Macedonian strictness and followed the genius of his native Country
in a warlike Industry, so long they adored him as a God: but when he began to
wear the effeminate habit of the Persians, and to accustom himself to their
Vices, even his greatest Favorites hardly accounted him a Man; whose
Debauchery and Intemperance soon put a period to the Life of that illustrious
Prince, and to the Macedonian Empire, which otherwise might have been of a
lasting duration and continuance.

The like ill destiny attended the Roman Monarchy, when the Turks (who had been
constantly inured to hardship and perpetual Toil) found the others a People
uneasy with their Plenty, and so burdened with their time, that 'twas
difficult to find ways enough how to spend it.

And, 'twas (doubtless) foreseen by that grand Impostor Mahomet, that Idleness
and Luxury would, if indulged, so gradually enervate that mighty Empire, as
soon to bring it to destruction; for the prevention whereof, like a subtle
Legislator, he enjoined it for a Law, which even their very Emperors were not
to be exempted from; namely, to eat no more than the Labor of his Hands could
purchase every day. 'Twould be an infinite undertaking to enumerate the several
Miseries which at this day attend upon those People, who are denied the benefit
of Arts and Labor. How do the wild Arabs live, and associate with their Herds?
from whom, besides the erectness of their stature, no other mark of distinction
is so visible upon them, as that they are the more careful Beasts in providing
for their Companions.

We may see in another shape the desolate Americans; those of them especially
who inhabit the Northern parts, where the Men account it a degradation to their
Sex, to expose themselves to any Pains for the Food they eat; but believe it to
be a Duty incumbent upon the Women, to make provision for such as they bring
into the World. And this Brutish Sloth and Stupidity is attended with as signal
and extraordinary a Judgment; for notwithstanding that, the Country, as to
healthfulness and other conveniences of humane life, is inferior to none in
Europe; and besides that, Polygamy is allowed and practiced amongst them; and,
that they will no longer retain any Woman whom they find to be barren or
unfruitful; yet are they so few and inconsiderable in number, as by a
reasonable computation, might be thought not to be the Progeny of one Family,
in less than an Hundred years.

But to come nearer home, we find the Irish, by the account given us in their
own Histories, written in their Mother Tongue, to have been the most miserable
People in the Universe, when the English first arrived amongst them. And, That
then, although they lived promiscuously, as to the use of Women, yet the Souls of
that Kingdom were not so numerous, upon the English first reduction of them, as
they afterward were, in the Reign of K. James the First, notwithstanding that
their frequent and reiterated Rebellions had, by a whole Series of War and
Slaughter for some Ages, consumed a vast, or rather incredible, multitude of
People amongst them. The Reasons which they assign for a Solution of this
seeming Paradox, are two: First, they say, That before the English Conquest
they lived in great Idleness and Sloth, having neither Arts nor any thing of
labor amongst them; which put them upon a necessity of committing of what
Rapin and Spoil they could, and continually to rob and prey upon one another;
for, another man's Herds being more numerous than his Neighbors, seemed just
grounds to him of making War with him; and so mutually cruel and barbarous they
were upon such occasions, that it is observed in all their Poems (for such they
had amongst them) that there is not to be found one of Mirth; nor to this day
have they any Musical Note or Tune (though they afford some variety) which is not
melancholy and doleful. The Second Reason they give for their being more
numerous now than in former Ages, is, That the English Laws and Government
having introduced Arts and Labor amongst them, they now, by virtue of their
own Industry, make provision for their Children, and are early in their
Marriage, that so they may be eased of their Charge. And, though the
maintenance which they now provide for their Children, be still very mean and
contemptible, yet however it is such, as to preserve life, which in former Ages
they were not able to compass. Nor were they at all sollicitous what became of
the Fruit of their Lusts, which perhaps was so intermixed, as 'twas difficult to
distinguish or claim a Property. And now, notwithstanding that they are bounded
from these Exorbitances by the restraint of English Laws and Constitutions,
which are found to be a stricter Curb and Obligation upon them than that of
their Superstitious Devotion; which gives a known Latitude and Indulgence in
that and other Sins; yet are they not now utterly free from, but, as it is said,
rather frequently addicted to the same Vice.

Nor has the good Example of the English Industry been of that prevalence among
such of them, as entitle themselves Gentlemen (who are very numerous in that
Kingdom) to assume the most honorable and gentilest Employments relating to
Trade, though at the same time they are ready to starve for want of sustenance,
which they had rather beg or steal, than labor for.

This has visibly, and to a demonstration, been the ruin of that Kingdom, for
that the most useful and best men amongst them either are forced to foreign
Service, and so necessitated to desert their Country, or are executed for
Robberies, Murders, etc. or, which is not the least in strumental to their
destruction, perish for want of convenience and necessary Provisions; an
irregular Life bringing Distempers upon them, that shortens their days; for,
it is a common observation, That among the many Thousands that live, as they
call it, by coshering, there is rarely seen an old man.

Whereas had the Irish been industrious, and had been educated to Arts and
Labor, they had kept out those Numbers of Mechanics that went from England
into that Kingdom; and by that means might have been Masters of their own
Country, notwithstanding their Subjection to England; I mean they might have
been Masters, in this Sense, so as to have had the Command of Trade and
Business. But Divine Providence saw it not fit to put Opportunity into their
Hands, as that would have done, whereby to capacitate them to act greater
Barbarities by their Numbers: Whereas both now and in the former Rebellion,
they have, for their own Service, preserved abundance of Artizans of all sorts,
without whom they could not subsist, which otherwise had felt the unsupportable
effects of their bloody and inhuman Cruelties. But having now done with these
Excrescencies of Spain, from whence they pretend to have originally sprung; let
us see how those which they lay claim to for their Ancestors, have throve in
their Aversion to Industry.

If we descend to a particular view of the State of that Kingdom, in all its
Respects and Circumstances, it may reasonably be accounted a Prodigy in Nature:
And as by a vulgar Mistake, some term a Defect in Nature to be a monstrous
Production; we may more rationally affirm, That Spain has made it self so by
Sloth.

Take it in the Convenience of its Situation, Fertility of Soil, in the
Advantages of its Rich Mines in the Indies, (which if rightly managed would be
so) and it might be reasonably accounted almost an absolute Impossibility, to
be reduced to that extreme Poverty an Scarcity of Men, wherein it now stands.

I know the Causes assigned are the banishing the Moors, and their Numbers
buried in the West Indies; but it is plain that that is not the sole occasion
of the aforesaid public Inconvenience: for were there Arts and Employments
encouraged in their Country, as one Set went out at the Southern Door, another
would come in at the Northern, and Europe would supply their Loss in America.

It were easy to show, How with their own Wool, and such of courser sorts,
their Neighbors abound with, they might with their own Manufactories furnish
their West Indies, by which means their Bullion would be their own; which now
they are no better than Christian Slaves to provide for Europe.

Besides, if they had Manufactories, they would fill their Country with People,
and not put them upon a Consult, as they had in the year 1649, Whether the
Court should not remove for the Indies, not having People to keep both.

Add to this, That the want of Employment in Spain, occasions those frequent
Acts of Violence, which are committed in that Kingdom; for though it is so thinly
peopled in some Parts, that there are scarce Men enough to entitle it to the
Name of a Country inhabited; yet are there great numbers of Bandittoes to
ravage upon the few that are there.

Thus we see the dismal Effects of Idleness in Spain, which has been of that
mischievous and almost fatal Consequence, as to bring that Kingdom upon the
very brink of Ruin; which had before this been devoured by the French, had not
their other large and industrious Dominions preserved them.

Having thus taken a succinct and transient View of the ill Estate of those
Kingdoms and People, which are destitute of Arts and Labor; let us in the
second Place, according to our former Method, particularize some Instances,
setting forth how Men are obliged to Employments in some Kingdoms, and the good
Effects which result from that Engagement.

In pursuance whereof, I shall begin with Germany, where we shall find a People
inferior to none in their just veneration to Antiquity, and due estimate of
Noble Blood that is truly derived from virtuous and honorable Progenitors,
which they set so high a Value upon, as that even to Excess they despise mixing
with the Plebeians; and yet among these great Nobility, the younger of whose
Families are employed in their Armies, rarely is there found one of them
without a Manual Art; by which, if reduced to Extremity, he may earn his Bread,
rather than live upon the Charity and Benevolence of others, a sordidness of
Temper which they bear an utter Abhorrence and Detestation to, having too much
of that Roman Spirit, which had rather lose a Life, than hold it at the
Courtesy of another.

And this recals into my Memory a Story, which for its pertinent congruity to
the present Discourse may not be improper to relate: There was about the year
1615 a Nobleman in Germany, whose Daughter was courted by another Lord, who was
a very young Man; when he had made such Progress in this Affair, as is usual by
Friends, the old Lord desired to speak with him, and, after some Conference
together, asked the young Nobleman, How he intended, if he should marry his
Daughter, to maintain her? He replied, Equal to her Quality. To which the
Father returned, That was no Answer to his Question; he desired to know, What
he had to maintain her with? To that the younger Lord replied, He hoped, that
was no Question, for that his Inheritance was as public as his Name. The old
Lord owned his Possessions to be great, but asked him if he had nothing that
was securer than Land. The question was strange, but ended in this, That the
Father of the young Lady gave his positive Resolve, Never to marry his
Daughter, though his Heir, and would have two such great Estates, but unto a
Man that had a Manual Trade, by which he might live, if drove from his own
Country. This young Lord was Master of none at present, but rather than lose
his Mistress, he desired but a years Time, in which he promised to acquire one:
In order whereunto he got a Basket-Maker, the most ingenious he could find, and
in six Months became Master of his Trade, with greater Improvement than his
Teacher; and as a Proof of his Ingenuity and great Proficiency, in so small a
Time, he brought to his Mistress a Piece of his Workmanship, being a white Twig
Basket; which for many years after became a general Fashion among the Ladies by
the name of Dressing Baskets, brought hither to England from Germany and
Holland.

But to complete the surprizingness of this Relation, it happened some Years
after this Nobleman's Marriage, that he and his Father in law sharing in the
Misfortunes of the Palatinate, were drove naked out of their Estates; and in
Holland, for some Years, did this young Lord maintain both his Father-in-law
and his own Family, by making Baskets of white Twigs, to such an unparalleled
Excellency as none could attain: And it is from him that they derive those
Curiosities that are still made in Holland of Twigwork.

This is large a Digression from the Matter in Hand, but the more insisted
upon, because I deem it not altogether improper to my Design of showing, How
fond and ambitious Men are, in Foreign Countries, of learning Arts and
Mechanical Employments, whereby to avoid Idleness, that common Pest to the
Public Good, and consequently to every private and individual Interest, as
involved in the other.

From this Prospect of the Nobility and Gentry, we will now descend to a lower
View of the meaner and inferior Sort, among them, whose Industry is so
remarkably great, that even Children of four Years old will earn their Bread:
Add to this, That they are kept out of Harm's Way, by the same Diversion, though
more profitable, whereby we keep our Children in this Kingdom; and that is by
making wooden Toys, painted Boxes, Pipes, etc. for our Children to play with:
There they employ all the Children of a Town from three Years to eight in those
easy Matters of shaving a little Stick of Fir, or dawbing a little Paint upon
a Stick or Box; things of that easy nature, as may be done by a Child that can
speak, and but hold a Knife, or other small Instrument in its Hand.

When they advance more in Years, it is then usual to pitch upon a Trade; and
generally they apply themselves to that of their Fathers, whereby you shall
oftentimes find 'em to derive their Pedigree and their uninterrupted Succession
in the same Trade or Employment, in a continued Line from Father to Son, for
some Hundreds of Years. And this Genealogy as well in Occupation as Descent, is
insisted upon by them with as much Pride and Ostentation as can be shown by
their Nobility, in their continued Tracings and Derivations of themselves, from
a numerous and ancient Stock of their famous and heroical Progenitors.

It Is not their Practice, as with us in this Kingdom, to bind an Apprentice for
seven Years; three or four is their common Standard: and the reason is, because
they are educated from their Cradle to something of Employment, which renders
them the more apt and docible, and consequently the more capable of attaining
to a Ripeness and quicker Proficiency in Business. Whereas our Youth, here in
England, being bred to nothing before they come to be Apprentices, make a very
slow Progress, and require much longer Time, wherein to reach the Perfection of
accomplished Artists.

And such as are of Families not educated in Mechanical Employments, those they
make use of, either in Affairs Military, or else in Studies of gentiler and
finer Arts than either of these; by which admirable decorum, so regularly
observed, in proportioning every Order and Degree of Men among them, to their
suitable and respective Vocations and Capacities, it thence happens, That in
whole Provinces there is not a Man that eats the Bread of Idleness, or of other
Men's Labor and Industry.

Nay, in the Hans-towns, they still show a greater Care and solicitude in
these Matters, not judging it expedient to admit of any more than an useful and
competent number for the City, of any who profess the liberal Sciences; but, on
the contrary, oblige all their Natives and Inhabitants either to Merchandise,
Navigation or to Manual Arts and Manufactories; insomuch that that famous Mart
of Hamburgh (to which City belong more Ships of Burden and Value, for all
manner of Trade and Commerce, than to any City of Europe, London and Amsterdam
excepted) does admit but of one Physician, of two Civilians for the Law, and
but one Divine, besides those which are constantly employed in the City: Yet on
the contrary Hand, offer great Encouragement to Men of all Nations, to inhabit
among them, that are for Mechanic Labor and Sea-Service, as accounting him
but a necessary Evil, whose Industry and Parts lie only in the Brain, or bound
their Situation in the Head; and one of such they deem sufficient for
thousands, which work with their Hands.

By reason of which orderly management of Affairs, and the Provision made to
promote Labor, and to discourage Idleness and all useless and unactive Men: It
is very remarkable, That in this City no Man ever saw a Beggar: yet many aged
and unfortunate Poor there are, occasioned by Losses and cross Accidents at
Sea; but then so Christian and Charitable a Commiseration of their Condition is
entertained by the Government, that in all Bargains and Contracts, in that
City, something is still preserved, as a voluntary Gift for the Poor: Or if I
may so say, as a Free Will Offering to God for their Supply; and this reposited
in the Hands of the Minister of the Parish, who has Churchwardens joined to
him, in order to a right Disposal of this Money for the Poor.

A Ship puts not forth to Sea, but with an Iron Box, for the use of the Poor,
of which the Keeper has no Key, but is kept by the Minister and Churchwardens,
and upon the Return of his Voyage, when he receives the Holy Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, he brings to the Altar his Box, which he uses all Care to
replenish and supply; and there is not a Seaman in his Ship but puts something
into it, whenever he receives his Wages.

To what has been already premised, 'twould be needless to name or instance to
you, the Example of the United Provinces, which are so contiguous to our
Island, as well as justly famed throughout the whole Universe, for their
eminent and industrious Improvements, and for such superadditions of Art to
Nature, or rather of such as Nature seemed not capable of; and which have been
of more use to them than all their Martial Strength, for the Defense of their
Country against their Enemies, and have advanced them from the poor distressed,
to the honorable Title of the High and Mighty Estates of Holland: And that
formerly useless, and now little Spot of Ground, become the richest in Europe]
is a most evident Demonstration of the miraculous Power of Industry, and of
those prodigious Acquirements which Human Nature is capable of attaining to, by
a laborious and an indefatigable Pursuit; which as it has created a general
Esteem for these States throughout the whole World; so has reflected no small
Disgrace upon their Neighbors, whilst enjoying fertile and profitable
Countries, both in their Situation and other abundant National Advantages and
Emoluments, far superior to this, they suffer their Lands to lie waste and
uncultivated, and neglect all the Opportunities both of Art and Nature, whereby
to enrich and improve them; when on the contrary, these are forced to change
the very Elements, having more living upon the Water than they have upon the
Land; which is so plentifully stocked, that it admits of no more.

If from this little Spot of Ground we pass farther into the Country, it will
be worth our while to consider, What Care and Diligence is used by the
Government to oblige the Rural unto Works, for the Public Good.

In Flanders they admit not a young Man to enter into the State of Marriage,
without first obtaining a Certificate from the Magistrate of the Place of his
Residence and abode, setting forth, His having planted such a number of Trees,
etc. I might demonstrate the Truth of this Point to you, from a great variety
of other Instances, both of Countries and Persons, which would be agreeable and
pertinent enough to my present Design, but aiming at Brevity, this may suffice
to show the great Care and laudable Endeavors of Foreign Governments, to
oblige their People to Labor and Industry; and to evince this Nation of that
wonderful Success it has met with, for the Growth and Improvement of their
respective Inhabitants in Riches and the like prosperous Contingences of this
Life.

I come now, in the third Place, to demonstrate with what possibility and good
Success, the same Industry might be effected, and consequently become
practicable in these Kingdoms, which is used in others, and how the want of it
leads to the same Fate, which became destructive of those Monarchies and
Countries already mentioned.

We are not ignorant, That Christianity in general, and more especially as
professed in its ancient Purity in this Nation, does indispensably oblige all
its Votaries and Adherents to a sober and laborious course of Life. We know, by
the Parable of the Talents, in the Gospel, That we must increase both our
Spiritual and Temporal Enjoyments; that both a Stock of Grace and of worldly
Comforts and Accommodations, are to be improved by our Labor and Industry,
though it is true our Care and Solicitude for the last, must be subordinate to
the first; yet however, as we are but Stewards to what we enjoy, we must so
manage, as to be capable of giving a good Account; and as we are but Servants,
entrusted with an industrious laying out of these Advantages of human Life, we
must so husband and improve them too, as to be able to return them with an
Increase (the effects of our Labor and Vigilance) when our Grand Master shall
require them at our Hands. And indeed the institution of the whole Creation, is
in all its parts so fitly accommodated to, and so naturally capable of Labor
and Industry, that though Man in his first Estate was exempted from, yet now must
bear a considerable share in this general Pains and Toil of the World. The very
inanimate Creatures, the Sun, Moon and Stars, have in their kinds their proper
and distinct Offices of Labor, to which they were first designed by Sovereign
Providence, and which they duly and regularly perform. The Trees and Plants,
and things of a Vegetative Nature, discharge their several Functions, in
concurrence with this grand Design. What Slavery and Toil is undergone by
Sensitive Creatures, how they labor and are harassed with continual Pains,
needs not be illustrated. In the Order of the Creation, the next Degree above
these are Men, which by reason of their Superior Faculties incommunicable to
Sensitive Beings; we call Rational Creatures. But to pass by them at present,
if we look up unto a higher Species or Rank of Creatures, the Angelical Beings,
we shall find that those Blessed Spirits are continually busied and employed
either in repeated Hallelujahs and Eucharistical Praises; or else are sent upon
frequent Embassies and Negotiations into this lower World; or admitting the
Speculation of their Tutelary Function, are many of them obliged to a constant
Warchfulness, and an immediate Attendance upon Man, whereby to oppose and repel
the Temptations of Satan and his Apostate Legions, by instilling into their
Hearts a Love and Veneration of the Divine Nature, and by striking them with an
awful Dread of, and a most submissive Regard to his Sovereign and Imperial
Majesty, and consequently by impressing deep Characters of Religion, and the
Fear of God upon their Souls. It remains then, That of that great variety of
Creatures which God made, all, in their distinct Conditions and Capacities, are
naturally subjected to Labor and Industry: shall then man be excepted, who was
made but a little lower than the Angels, and consequently in a superior degree
to all other created Beings, endowed with those excellent Faculties of Reason
and Judgment, of which brute and sensitive Creatures do not participate, and
consequently are not so qualified for a right management of Labor as Men are?
for though many of them exceed man in Strength, whereby they become in the
greatest Toil more indefatigable than they; yet for want of Judgment, and the
discoursive or rational Faculty, cannot direct their Pains to proper and
advantageous Ends and Uses; but in this are ordered and governed by Man, as
they are the Instruments which God and Nature has appointed to be useful and
subservient to him, in the promoting of Labor and Industry. Seeing then that
Man is thus eminently qualified beyond all the other Beings of this lower Orb
for great and laborious Improvements; it follows necessarily, that he must
either act agreeably to these peculiar Excellencies of Human Nature, or else
sink himself below the Condition of Brutes and the most inferior Beings, who
(as is already proved) do by natural Instinct carry a direct Correspondence to
their first Institution in this respect. But to pass from a Religious to a
Natural Consideration: If we consider that Nature aims at an exact Symmetry and
Proportion in all things, and does as much pursue a constant Order and Harmony
in all her Operations, as she carefully declines Irregularity and Confusion; we
must then needs acknowledge, That that which we look upon as a Deformity or a
superfluous Excrescence in a Body Natural, must in a parallel Proportion be
justly reckoned to be so in a Body Politic: And if it be so, then though we must
confess the Fingers to be the Instruments of the Hand; yet one more than of use
is vulgarly styled a monstrous Production (tho more properly a deviation of
Nature from her Intention of Order) Why then may it not be with a Parity of
Reason so thought of an useless Man, in a State or Commonwealth; such a one
being not only a Deformity, but a Nuisance unto it, as well as a Blemish to, as
an Excrescence in, any Government. That which takes away the Life and Sap from
the Root of the State, but neither imparts any to it, nor produces any Fruit,
and therefore must either be so cultivated and disciplined by good Laws and
Government, so as to make it Fertile, or else deserves no better Usage than
that of being cut down, for why cumbreth it the Ground?

But I must beg Pardon for this tedious Harangue, upon these two Arguments
drawn from Religion and Nature, obliging Men to Labor and Industry; and
proceed to show, How what has been premised may be calculated to the Meridian
of, and applicable enough to this Nation: For the proof whereof, That England
exceeds any part of Europe for the Advantage of its Situation and its Utensils
of Trade and Commerce, is a matter of so unquestionable a Nature as none will
dispute, neither that they can want Vent for their Labors, since it is a Spot
of Ground, which so many of other Countries must necessarily pass by: All the
Mischief that attends it is its Ease and Plenty, and that the Provision for a
Day requires not the Labor of half an one in many Employments.

Now if it be a Matter of so great Facility to purchase a Livelihood, it seems
to be a Crime of an higher Aggravation, to live upon the Labor of others.

But the common Plea of Idlers is, That they would work if any would employ
them; which seems to charge the Government with omission, in not providing
Employments for all Ages and Sexes, as to which the Laws already made (we see)
do not, though in some Parts of the Kingdom, where the woollen Manufactory is
considerable, the common sort are so taken care of, that they are no Trouble or
Charge to the Parish: But then pass to other Parts of the Kingdom, and you
shall find numbers a Burden both to themselves and others.

It is a Matter then that deserves our Consideration, What Vocations and
Employments every Part of the Kingdom is most fit and proper for; and where
there is not Employment in Manufactories, if it be by the Sea, to employ them
in fishing or Navigation; or if they take not to either of these, and their own
Country affords them not other Employments, that then they should be removed to
other parts of the Kingdom; by which course they would not remain idle at Home.
And why may not this be as practicable at large, and in the whole, as at this
day it is in part in some places of the Kingdom; as for instance, in the
Manufactory part of Norfolk, where the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor
visit their Neighbors Houses, and where they find any Children above ten years
of age, not kept to some Trade or Employment, they take them from their
Parents, and put them to some.

Now, if this be done to the Poor, why may it not be so to the Rich? I know it
will be answered, That the reason is not the same; for, say they, One is to
prevent a charge to the Parish, that of the Poor, which cannot be feared of the
other, the Rich. But there have been some Instances of that too; besides that,
Gentlemen's Children are often not only a Charge, but also Enemies to the
Kingdom: And, Why should not this public Inconvenience be provided against, of
which we have but too frequent and lamentable Examples at the Bar and the
Gallows? How many Hundreds in the year are taken off by the hands of Justice,
that might have been useful Members in the Kingdom, if they had been taken care
of, and been thus educated in their Youth? It is a strange piece of Gentility,
that looks upon it as an Invasion upon its Privileges, if put to a Trade, and
will rather submit to an Halter than Indentures.

Now, where an evil Custom is become hereditary and predominant, a Law is
needful to cut off the Entail.

The Glory of a Kingdom is Men and Money; England has, in a competent
proportion, the Blessing of both, but might be improved to more than double.
For at the most moderate computation, it is not half Peopled; and since there
is so much wanting in number, the best way to supply that deficiency; is, by
Industry, which would not only increase the Treasure of the Kingdom, but that
which is the more valuable Treasure, Men. It Is a matter as well of Experience
as Lamentation, That want of Employments puts Men upon loose and unwarrantable
actions: Idleness must be fed, and Luxury indulged, and Pride maintained; and
Gentility supported; and when Profuseness has eaten up the hereditary
Substance, especially where there was but little at first, as most commonly it
is in younger Brothers, then the Padding Trade, and the gentile way of taking a
Purse, is generally the Prologue to the succeeding Tragedy, whose Scenes are as
dismal as they are common. Now, if such idle Extravagants as these cannot
maintain themselves singly, without running into these violent courses, which
end in their destruction, they can much less provide for a Family.

And therefore, if a Statute were made, That no Child under Three hundred
pounds per annum, should be admitted longer at School, than to the Fifteenth
year of his Age: but then, if his Parents or Guardian did not, he should be put
to some Trade or Employment, there would be less work for the Executioner, and
more for the Cook; and probable it is, that in Twenty years there would be a
greater number of People than in Fifty before.

It Is not possible, in so narrow a compass as this Tract, to set down the
methods that must be used in such an alteration as this would produce. I shall
only answer two popular Objections, which seem to lie opposite to a general
Reformation in that Latitude wherein I have proposed it. The first is this,

That if none under Three hundred pounds per annum, were admitted to apply
themselves to Learning, and to a study of the Liberal Sciences; this would be
looked upon as an act of great severity, and a very unreasonable limitation of
such whose natural genius and capacity might entitle them to a very great
proficiency in Learning, and consequently to very eminent Stations both in
Church and State, and yet come not under any such qualified degree of Fortune
or yearly Substance. This, say some, would be a great obstruction and
discouragement to Learning, which it is as well the Ornament as Interest of
every Nation to promote, and which we want not Instances of some great Patrons
in this kind, who were men of mean Birth, and of an inferior Fortune in the
World. To which I answer, That the Limitation insisted upon, in the method
proposed, would occasion no want or decay of Learning of any, much less of all
sorts, where there are so many Thousands that will come under the Qualification
of having Three hundred pounds per annum, or Money to purchase it.

Again, That it would be an Act of Severity and an unreasonable Limitation upon
such who could not come up to that Qualification, and for that reason be
excluded from Study, notwithstanding that their Ingenuity seemed to animate
them with hopes of attaining to no contemptible degree in it.

To this it may be replied, That if there appears much more Prejudice to the
Kingdom in general, by admitting of such, than the loss will be to every
particular Person in this Case; then, I presume, a private Prejudice is much
more reasonable than a public; and some particular Inconveniences are to be
born and connived at, when the removal of them is incompatible with the common
Good and general Interest of the State.

That the Sons of diverse very ordinary persons have arrived to an eminent
height of Learning and Parts, and have become very great Scholars in all kinds
of Literature, is a truth too undeniable to be disputed: and indeed, by how
much they have by their Studies advaneed themselves from a low and despicable
estate, to an high degree, and to an eminent figure in the World; by so much
are they justly to be accounted the more honorable, and do accordingly deserve
our greatest respect; for Honor (as the Moralists speak) is founded upon
Virtue, and it is that alone which merits Honor. And, indeed I must needs
account those men to be much the more honorable, and consequently to merit a
greater share in our Esteem; who raise themselves by their own acquisitions of
Virtue and Industry, from a Plebeian or vulgar state, to some eminent post or
station; than those are, who derive their persons from Heroical Ancestors, in a
long and uninterrupted Line of Succession; but basely degenerate from those
Actions and virtuous Achievements which were the first ennobled the Blood of
their Predecessors.

These last seem as great a reproach and infamy, as the others are a credit,
both to themselves and their Progenitors. But then we must consider, that
though there may and have been some such rare men among the vulgar, yet there
are Hundreds for One, which every year produces of the same Fund, who come
abroad into the world, like Pharach's Frogs, that only croak, and make a noise
in the Country, and not finding Preferment, either for want of Interest or
Abilities, or both, become, instead of an Ornament or Help, a Disgrace and a
Nuisance to the Kingdom; nay, and not seldom create public Disturbances, and
oftentimes make dangerous Concussions both in Church and State. For, Who are
generally the Authors of Schisms and Factions in the Church? Who of Mutinies
and Seditions in the State, but such Malcontents, whose ignorance, or other
contemptible circumstances, debar them from any considerable share in either?
and then what their Parts or virtuous Endowments cannot compass, their Malice
and inveteracy does commonly endeavor to destroy. Were it not for this, we
should not see so many heterodox Professors of Divinity, so many Enthusiasms,
Errors and Heresies in Religion; not so many Mountebanks, Quacks, and Empericks
in Physic; not so many Pettifoggers and ignorant Barreters in the Law; and to
complete these Legions, Who are the men they call Sharpers, but generally such
whose ignorant Parents ambition is to make Gentlemen by educating them Beggars?
for, perhaps not one of ten is able to do more than to send his Son to the
University, and there he must shift for himself, and oftentimes, for want of a
competency to subsist upon, is forced to come down into the Country by the next
Carrier, and spend the greatest part of his time there in solitude and want of
conversation: and unless he can become a Philosopher by Inspiration, or by a
Sympathetick Influence be instructed in all the Learning of the University, at
an hundred miles distance from it, it is an hundred to one but, at the seven
years end, he is become Retrograde, and has scarce so good a stock of Learning,
as when he commenced a Fresh man. And is not this man like to make a very
eminent Doctor in the Church, or an able and accomplished Politician in the
State.

But suppose that one of these poor men can maintain his Son in the University,
till he arrives to the degree of a Batchellor, or perhaps a Master of Arts; yet
upon his leaving the College, he comes abroad in necessity; which oftentimes
puts him upon evil and preposterous courses, whereby to provide for himself.
Now were it not infinitely more conducive to the Good of the State, to want one
man of Learning from the Mechanics, suppose him never so excellent, than to
have an hundred that prove Vermin, and are destructive, instead of one, or say
a few more, that may become active and serviceable Members to the Common wealth.

Besides, there is scope enough for those of the Vulgar, that are of a pregnant
ingenuity, to employ it in the finest Arts and most curious sort of Industry
and Labor, wherein they may not only arrive to great eminency, but become more
profitable Instruments to the Good of the Kingdom, than they can hope to be by
their Learning, of which we have no present Prospect of any want, but may be
thought to stand upon equal, if not superior, terms with any part of the
Universe.

But then, it is more than manifest, That we are so far from disputing the
Priority above, that we come infinitely short of other Countries in our
Mechanics and finer Arts, which seem to be a proper Province for the middle
People of this Kingdom to be engaged in, leaving the study of humane Literature
to those who are able to maintain themselves, if by an adverse genius, or other
obstacles and contingences, they should happen to miscarry in it.

The second Obligation will be, That if we educate all Gentlemen's Sons unto
Trades, it will hinder the Nation from Martial Improvements, and so be reduced
to a necessity of employing Foreigners in the greatest Places of Trust in the
Army.

In answer to which, we must consider, That such of the younger Brothers as are
addicted to War, may be early instated in that Employment, and so may be
reasonably accounted, as if actually conversant in Trades; and such as shall
affect the Seas, may be bred up in Navigation; Of which we have Examples near
home, particularly the French King, who breeds up Gentlemen and others in this
manner, at his own Charge.

But it may perhaps, though with no semblance of reason, be urged, That loose
and indigent Youth are in some respects needful in the Commonwealth, for
private Soldiers, which would be wanting, if all men were bred to Trades. But
daily Experience shows, That numbers who are put out to Trades prove idle and
extravagant; and of such there is a greater proportion in the Kingdom than
would compose an Army.

So that if this method were pursued, of putting all the Youth of the Nation
upon some Employment or other, this signal Advantage would accrue from it: That
whereas now Armies are supplied out of the Vagrants, and Refuse of the Kingdom
they would then be made up of a better sort of men, though yet so extravagant, as
to be impatient under sober Confinement and daily Labor.

By what we have hitherto discoursed and insisted upon, it is sufficiently
apparent, That the use of Trades and of Mechanic Arts are more commodious for
the State, than the educating the poorer sort in Learning and the Sciences:
And, if this be plain, it cannot then be denied, That there is more reason to
bring up those that are necessitous, in Mechanical or other Occupations.

The next thing to be considered, are the great Advantages that will arise to
the Kingdom in general, by keeping all hands at work, and these are numerous,
the principal of which are reduceable to the following Heads.

First, It will, in some proportion, be an occasion of bringing in new
Colonies, and of increasing the number of our own. We are now supplied from
foreign parts with diverse Commodities, which, if the Kingdom were replenished
with Artizans, they would furnish us with here at home: For, Pray what is it
which makes the United Provinces so full of Commodities of their own Arts and
Manufactories, which they transport to all parts of the World, but that every
one there is bred to some Trade, and so are forced to rack their Inventions to
obtain a livelihood? And, notwithstanding that they abound with so many People,
as would with us be accounted a Burden, yet there is still encouragement given
out of the Public Stock for any Foreigners or Fugitives, that are Artizans, to
live among them. Of this we have Instances recent among our selves, of the many
Hundreds that abandoned this Kingdom, upon the Restoration of King Charles the
Second, and had Houses free to settle in.

Now as this employing of all sorts of People would increase the Strength of
the Kingdom by its numbers; so would it also as well the Riches and Stock of
it, by its Treasure (every Be adds some Hone^ to he Hive) and at the same Time
would ease every individual Man from a great part of the Taxes which now he
lies under.

It would also disburthen the Kingdom from Beggars, that by their Multitudes
are become the Shame and the Plague of the Nation, whose Children are begot,
and so bred up in the Trade of Begging, as if they were embodied into a
Society, and established by a Law.

Not that I design to discourage here that admirable Virtue of Almsgiving*
which is certainly a most Christian and Divine Grace, when duly placed and
regularly and prudently dispensed, and which the Law both of God and Nature
require from us; and which is not only the best way, to cause God to shower
down upon us his Divine Favors in an immense affluence of temperal Blessings;
but also to lay up heavenly Treasures and everlasting Provisions for us, in the
immortally Divine State in the other World. It remains then both as our Duty
and Interest, that we act agreeably to the Infallible Author's Direction, in
this Case (viz.) Thou shall take Care for thy poor; but then the Question is
how, and in what manner, this ought to be performed? for the same infallible
Author also tells us, That there was no Beggar in Israel.

And indeed though Charity be as well the Duty as Ornament of a Christian, as has
been already touched upon, supposing that it be dispensed in a fit and regular
manner; yet on the other Hand, it is a barbarous Cruelty, becoming none but the
Sons of it, the Emissaries of Rome, to distribute Charity to common Beggars.

It is rather Christian Compassion to prevent it; and indeed it is no small
matter of Wonder, that Good should be so often faulty in this respect, and that
our Divines (with reverence to their Order I speak it) should so much preach up
Charity in general, and yet seem many of them to omit the weightiest part of
it, namely, the Provision for the Souls of those poor Creatures that beg for
Bread to support this Life; but neither themselves nor others take thought or
are solicitous for the Life to come. If such, whose sacred Function does
immediately oblige them to the Cure of Souls, would (I say not all, but at
least some of them) more seriously weigh and consider this Point, many of our
Pulpits would not be so still and unconcerned, upon this Subject, as they
appear to be. By our preposterous distributing of Charity, we seem to invert
that of the Apostle, Not many mighty, etc. but the poor of this world are
chosen. In this Kingdom it is quite otherwise, for we take only the same Care
of them that we do of Brutes, to prevent their starving, but alas have too
small a regard of what becomes of their Souls.

Now there can be no effectual way of doing this, but by laying a good
Foundation, in taking up the younger sort, and putting them to Trades; and as
for the Elder and decrepit, that are capable of no Employment, such to be
maintained by the Parish, but so as to have no liberty for Begging; and the
Effects of this will be, That there will hardly be any aged or decrepit Poor,
most of which are made so, either by Fraud and Design of Vagrants themselves,
or by being the Children of such, and so for want of Care or Attendance, are
become deformed or maimed.

It is also remarkable, That Mechanics prevent Famine in a Nation; this at
first sight will appear a Paradox, that the multiplying of Mouths, that eat
Corn, whose Hands sow none, should yet increase Food; which Matter of Fact
demonstrates the Truth of, notwithstanding: For whoever saw a Famine in Holland?
on the contrary, they who sow none, yet supply other parts of the World with
Corn, which they effect by means of their Arts and Trade, which drives the more
profitable Plough of the two, that of the Sea.

It is observed, That no places are more frequently afflicted with Famine, than
those Countries which are employed in Tillage; and the reason of this Scarcity
is very plain. For if their Corn fail, they have no other way whereby to supply
their Want; but it is otherwise with those who depend upon Arts and Trade, for
the extent of their Harvest reaches the utmost Confines of the Christian, if
not known World; and if one Place fails, they can easily have recourse to
another.

Again, Labor and Arts are a means to purchase to us one of the greatest
Blessings of this World, length of Days; for it both prolongs Life and
prevents untimely Death: And for the proof of the first of these, it is
observed, as a Matter of common Experience, That there are more old Men who
from their Infancy have been employed in Labor and Trades, than there are of
Gentlemen; which is agreeable to what the Physicians affirm with a great deal
of Reason and Truth, That the Work of the Body is not so destructive of, nor
decaies not the Vitals so much as the Study and Labor of the Head, or the
Intemperance of the Appetite, which Men who consult their Ease, and sensual
Complacencies, are too too apt to indulge.

And in the second Place, That they prevent untimely Death, is a Truth so
undeniable as needs no Arguments to confirm it, every Days Experience
sufficiently evincing it unto us, That when Youth are educated in the way and
course of Business, their Heads are employed as well as their Hands; which
leaves no room for vicious Plots and Designs, nor for pinching Necessity to
enforce their breaking through the Laws of God and Man, to make Provision for
those Lusts and Exorbitances, that at last bring them to the Gibbet.

I now come to the last part of this Discourse, to show the Mischiefs that
attend, and it is reasonably to be feared, will fall upon this Kingdom, for the
want of a good and regular Discipline, in the Manners and Lives of the People.

I shall begin with those ill Effects and Consequences which Idleness produces
in Religion. It is the Care of most Parents to educate their Children in some
Religion or other, of whatever Shape or distinct Profession it be entitled to;
for he may be reasonably accounted a Monster in Nature, and a common Enemy to
Humanity, that professes the Christian Religion himself, and could patiently
suffer his Child to be bred up in Mahometanism: yet perhaps we want not
thousands who do worse than this, it being easier to convert and proselyte a
Man to Christianity that believes a Deity, but is zealous in his erroneous
Apprehensions of his Divine Nature and Worship; than to peswade one to embrace
the Faith, who denies that prime and received Principle of the Existence of a
God, and consequently disowns all the subordinate Tenets and Articles of
Religion. Now alas too many there are of this Kind, whose Parents bring them up
without Trades, and consequently having no Employment, will naturally have
recourse to those which are Vicious and Unlawful, which the evil Spirit that
acts them will be sure not to be deficient in supplying them with an abundant
variety of, as being conscious of the hazard he incurs of losing them, if he
affords them leisure for serious Thoughts and Reflections.

And as men bred up to no Trade or Employments have rarely any Religion, so
neither are they demeanable to the Laws of the Land, to which Religion is the
most lasting and surest Tie or Obligation; and subordinately to that Business
and Employment have the next prevailing Force with them: for these naturally
beget a Property which requires Protection and Security by the law; whereas he
that has nothing to lose, nor endeavors to acquire any thing but by a manifest
Violation and Infringment of the Laws, his sinister Interests are such as
strongly incline him to destroy them.

Hence it is that we frequently find, That Men of no Business are and have been
the public Disturbers and Incendiaries of a Nation; no Plots or Rebellions are
brought upon the Stage, but are managed and projected by this sort of Men, who
are the most considerable Party among the Actors, who take no greater Pleasure
in any thing than in fishing in troubled Waters, by which means they not only
become destructive to themselves, but allure and entice others, inveigling and
drawing in those (that are in a way of Trade and Business) to their Mischievous
and evil Practices, to the irreversible Destruction of many Families.

And as they thus ruin diverse in their Estates, so also in their Lives. It is a
Subject of great Grief and Lamentation, to consider what Numbers are every year
brought to violent Deaths by the Hand of the Executioner; and yet more numerous
they are, by much, who destroy themselves by Debauchery and Intemperance: so
that it may be said by by a moderate Computation, That as the Sword of Justice
has slain its thousands; so a complication of Diseases contracted by idle and
loose Men, without Employments, have slain their ten thousands. And to sum up
all, these are the Men that in the present Juncture of Affairs, are the Plague
and Pest of the Nation, that as Locusts swarm in all Places, echoing out the
most extravagant Panegyricks upon their Defender, the abdicated King; they go
by the Name of Sharpers in London, and are so formidable a Body that none dares
oppose their assaulting any that assume to contradict them, in magnifying their
Protector the late King; for of such indeed are his Party and Adherents
composed, whose Actions carry an agreeable Resemblance as well to the present
Principles as known Practices of the Church of Rome; there being not any
Profession in the World, that allows of or connives at and indulges Idleness in
an equal degree to the Papists.

For as Ignorance is the Mother of their Devotion, so is Idleness the Nurse of
it, as is observeable in their rude and implicit Votaries in Ireland: in which
Kingdom it is usual with them, at Mass, to make public Collections for a Thief
or Idler; but if a constant laboring Man, that spent not his Time with them in
Drinking and idleness, be by Misfortune reduced to Poverty, they will give
nothing to such a Man, but say, he was a Churl, that never was Good, but was
always making for himself.

And it is to be remarked, that there was never so many Stone-Weavers (as the
Dutch call idle men) seen in England as in the few years of the late King
James, such profligate wretches being the aptest Instruments for the Subversion
of the Established Laws and the Religion of the Nation, and the introduction of
Popery.

It belongs not to me to assume the prescribing of Laws and Methods, whereby to
redress these public Evils and Inconveniences too predominant in the State,
and to prevent greater, that seem to be imminent over, and dangerously to
threaten this Kingdom, by these infinite swarms of Wasps, which act the part of
sluggish Drones, in living upon the labor of others, but are but too
industrious to do mischief, and too ready to embrace every occasion, whereby to
put the whole Kingdom into a flame and a general combustion.

However, there seems to be a possibility, at least, to lessen this growing
Evil, and yet not by the usual way of driving these Malcontents and bad
Members out of the Nation; a Remedy worse than the Disease, which in another
Discourse may be proved. But the more profitable way seems to take them all up,
and such of them as are young, to dispose of to such Trades and Employments as
are most suitable to their natural Genius's and Capacities, and to supply the
want of Money usually given with Apprentices, to enlarge the time of their
Service.

For the other sorts, which are either Gentlemen's Children, or else such as
pretend to be so, because educated to no Employments, and are become Sharpers,
and live by Cheating and Gaming.

For the first of these there seems to be a commiserating and a compassionate
sense of their quality and condition, due from the Government, and equally to
their Birth, they should be preferred in Civil and Military Employments, which
perhaps they would have long since taken up, but had not Money to purchase; a
sin now become barefaced, and ought to be universally exploded by all Mankind;
for, it is the Pestilence that walks in darkness, and ruins the Kingdom by a
double Mischief. First, obstructs the Preferment of Gentlemen, and of Persons
of worth, and in consequence to that misfortune, puts them upon lewd and
extravagant courses, whereby to supply their present necessity: And then in the
second place, fills up Vacancies with such men, whose Gold, not Parts, entitle
them thereunto.

The other set or sort of men, are the Sharpers, who by the Iniquity of the
Times are become a Fraternity almost too great for the Civil Magistrate to
manage or correct. I will not presume to determine which is the greater Evil,
hanging for Felony, or letting those escape that are justly to be deemed the
greater Offenders; but sure I am, that the law is wanting to them, and may well
be so, these being a Disease newly sprung up in the Kingdom, and therefore as
yet there is no Law made or provided, as a proper Antidote against it.

Now, for these Sparks who are become thus rampant amongst us, What Remedy can
be prescribed more conducive to the Good of the State, than to exchange them
for honest men, that were taken upon their lawful Employments at Sea by the
Turks.

This, I foresee, will not escape a severe censure; I must therefore beg leave
to offer such Reasons as have induced me to be of this opinion; in the
prosecution whereof, I perceive that it will be urged, That it is a just Law to
hang Felons and Robbers. But, Would it not, I pray, be a milder Punishment to
exchange such Offenders, for honest men that are in Slavery?

Again, These Sharpers, that subsist by Cheating and Gaming, are more
destructive to the Commonwealth, and consequently occasion the ruin of more men
in it than Thieves and Robbers can be said to do. Where then lies the
difference? But that the Law was made for suppressing Felons, when there was
not such a Vermin known, as now exceed them. It Is plain then, That there
remains nothing but a Statute to render them the greater Criminals, for
otherwise they are already so in themselves, and then sending them to Turkey,
would (I presume) in all reason be deemed an Act of Grace to save them from
Tyburn; and that upon a double account. First, In regard that it would afford
time for. Repentance to the one, and deliverance from Slavery to the other, by
which means a Soul might be saved, and a Body added to the Kingdom; which, of
how contemptible an account soever this may be reckoned, to be, yet is it
certain, that the loss of a man is an Injury to the Commonwealth.

This is no selling of Christians to the Turks, as some may at first view be
apt to believe, but it is the redeeming of a Christian by a dead Man; for so he
should be in the Eye of the Law, before he was sent.

This way of proceeding, would, doubtless, be a great occasion of Terror and
Discouragement to those lewd and profligate sort of Men, who are become the
Pest, and if uncontrolled, will be the Bane of the Nation, and by consequence,
would be a means of preserving many hundreds from the Gallows, and put all men
upon honest courses and industrious expedients, whereby to compass a
livelihood. And, to complete all, to take off the better sort from their
extravagancies, and to necessitate the ordinary to apply themselves to
Handicrafts, the most conducive method whereby to produce two such desired
effects, would be, to take away the Benefit of the Clergy, and in lieu thereof,
to enjoin a piece of Mechanic Work, of some Trade or other, to be made by the
Offender.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now in the Press a Discourse entitled, St. Paul the Tentmaker;
showing how Religion has in all Ages been promoted by the Industrious
Methanick. Written by the same Author.


