WESTMINSTER, 26 Dec. 1688.
Diverse of the Members of the Parliaments in the Reign of the late King Charles
the Second, and the Aldermen and Common Council of the City of London, pursuant
to His Highness the Prince of Orange's Desire, meeting at St. James's the 26th
of December, 1688.

His Highness spoke to them as follows.

YOU, Gentlemen, that have been Members of the late Parliaments, I have desired
you to meet me here, to advise the best manner how to pursue the Ends of my
Declaration in calling a Free Parliament, for the preservation of the
Protestant Religion, and restoring of the Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom,
and settling the same, that they may not be in danger of being again subverted.

And you, the Aldermen and Members of the Common Council of the City of London,
I desire the same of you; and in regard your Numbers are like to be great, you
may, if you think fit, divide your selves, and sit in several places.

Upon which they immediately agreed to go to the Commons House at Westminster,
where being set, they chose Henry Powle Esquire their Chairman, and upon Debate
they resolved upon Heads for an Address to be made to his Highness, and
appointed Persons to draw up and prepare the same, and in the Afternoon it was
done accordingly, and read and approved.

And his Highness having appointed to receive the same, on the 27th Instant in
the Morning, he was then attended accordingly, and the Address was presented
and read by the said: Mr. Powle to his Highness, being as follows.

WE who have served as Members of the Parliaments during the Reign of the late
King Charles the Second, together with the Court of Aldermen, and Members of
the Common Council of the City of London, assembled at Your Highness's Desire
(in this Extraordinary Conjuncture) do with an unanimous Consent, tender to
Your Highness our humble and hearty Thanks for your Coming into this Kingdom,
and exposing Your Person to so great Hazards for the Preservation of our
Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and rescuing us from the Miseries of Popery and
Slavery: And do desire Your Highness, That (in pursuance of those Ends, and for
the Preservation of the Peace of the Nation) Your Highness will take upon You
the Administration of Public Affairs, both Civil and Military, and the
disposal of the Public Revenue.

We do also desire that Your Highness will take into Your particular Care the
present Condition of Ireland, and endeavor, by the most speedy and effectual
means, to prevent the Dangers threatening that Kingdom.

All which we do desire Your Highness to undertake and execute until the
meeting of the intended Convention the 22d day of January next.

We do likewise desire Your Highness to cause Letters to be written, and
subscribed by Your Highness to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal (being
Protestants) and to the several Counties, Universities, Cities, Boroughs and
Cinque Ports of England, Wales, and to the Town of Berwick upon Tweed.

The Letters for the Counties to be directed to the Coroners of their
respective Counties, or any one of them, and in default of Coroners, to the
Clerk of the Peace of the respective Counties; and the Letters for the
Universities to be directed to the respective Vice-Chancellors; and the Letters
to the several Cities, Boroughs and Cinque Ports to be directed to the chief
Magistrate of each respective City, Borough and Cinque-Port, containing
Directions for the choosing in all such Counties, Cities, Universities,
Boroughs and Cinque Ports, within ten days after the Receipt of the said
respective Letters, such a number of Persons to represent them as are of right
to be sent to Parliament.

That for such Elections, and the Times and Places thereof, the respective
Officer shall give notice in manner following, (that is to say) As to the
Elections for the Counties Notice to be published in all Market Towns in the
respective Counties, by the space of Five Days at least before such Election;
and notice of the Elections for the Cities, Universities, Boroughs, and
Cinque Ports, to be published in the respective Places, by the space of Three
days before at the least.

That the said Letters, and the Execution thereof, be returned by such Officer
and Officers who shall execute the same to the Clerk of the Crown in the Court
of Chancery; so as the Persons so to be chosen, may meet and fit at
Westminster, on the 22d day of January next.

This we humbly offer Your Highness as our best Advice in this Exigency of
Affairs, for attaining the Ends of Your Highness*s Declaration; and as the best
means tending to such an Establishment, as that our Religion, Laws and
Liberties may not be in danger of being again subverted.

Dated at Westminster, the 26th day of December, 1688.
Whereupon his Highness was pleased to declare to this Effect, That (being a
Matter of Weight) he would consider thereof, and give his Answer the next day
in the Afternoon.

And accordingly his Highness did give the Answer following, viz.

GENTLEMEN,
I Have considered of your Advice, and as far as I am able, I will endeavor to
secure the Peace of the Nation, until the meeting of the Convention in January
next: For the Election whereof, I will forthwith issue out Letters according to
your Desire. I will also take care to apply the Public Revenue to the most
proper Uses that the present Affairs require. And likewise endeavor to put
Ireland into such a Condition, as that the Protestant Religion, and the English
Interest may be maintained in that Kingdom. And I further assure you, that as I
came hither for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and
Liberties of these Kingdoms, so I shall always be ready to expose my Self to
any Hazard for the defense of the same.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by John Starkey, Awnsham and William Churchill, MDCLXXXVIII.


