Concerning the Case of taking the New Oath of FEALTY and ALLEGIANCE With a
DECLARATION, etc.
THE Gentlemen concerned in this Case, professing still to adhere to the
Doctrines formerly Professed and Practiced in our Church, they cannot take it
for a begging of Principles, if we reason with them on those same Principles
which themselves have formerly owned, and which they are unwilling to have it
so much as thought they have deserted. It will therefore concern them to
consider whether their Old Notions be any way consistent with this New
Declaration?

The Declaration is, that they Conceive, That all that the Oath obliges them
to, is to live peaceably under the present Government. If they will mean fairly
and sincerely, they must necessarily intend Two things: 1. That, Though they do
not think themselves obliged to be active in Maintaining the Government in its
present possession, in Opposition to the K. de jure, yet they promise at least,
not to disturb the Government in possession, and therefore never to be active
in Assisting even the K. de jure, against it. That they must mean this, if they
mean veraciously, is plain from the whole design of imposing this New Oath, in
our present Circumstances, which is, with a particular and a principal regard
to the K. de jure, that the Swearers may secure the Possessors in Opposition to
him. And the Oath is designedly contrived in such general terms as may reach
all the Cases that may fall out during the whole life of the K. de jure, at
least whilst his Competitors are living also. And therefore the Swearers must
mean, not only at present, but neither also for the future, to assist the K. de
jure against his present Competitors, if they will mean what is expected from
them by the Imposers of the Oath, that is, if they will mean really, as in
honesty they ought to be presumed to mean. And 2. They must intend not only to
abstain from real disturbances of the Peace (for that might be consistent with
endeavors to restore the K. de jure, as the only means of settling a Peace on
solid and lasting Foundations) but from such things also as shall be called and
voted disturbances of the Peace by the present Possessors. For the design of
the Oath being to satisfy the Possessors, the Swearers ought to mean it so, as
that it may in reason give them the satisfaction desired by it. But the
Interpretation of the Oath by any others can never be meant by the Imposers.
And it certainly belongs to the Party concerned to interpret promises made to
satisfy himself, especially when he is a Governor. Then it may be presumed
notorious what is meant by breaking the Peace. That is, whatsoever it may be
expected will be Judged a breach of Peace by them who are already possessed of
all the Legal Tribunals in the Execution of those Laws which were never
designed by the Legislators, for the support of the Government de Facto, which
were not also de Jure.

If therefore the Swearers can indeed and veraciously mean these things now
mentioned, I shall then confess that they may bona fide take the Oath with the
annexed Declaration.

But it will then deserve a further enquiry whether the Duty of their former
Oaths be consistent with such a meaning? That is, Whether their Oaths to the K.
de jure, be consistent with a Neutrality? that is, Whether they do not oblige
them to be Active in contributing toward his Restoration? For we have now to
deal as I said, with such persons as own themselves still obliged by their
former Oaths. Such all must be who stand by Bp. Sanderson's Principles, so much
magnified by them who differ extremely from him in their Application. And such
must All be who stand by the Practices of our Fathers in Cromwell's days, who
did not think that either Cromwell's Possession, or K. Ch's disability to
protect them, did any way excuse them from their Obligations to K. Chapter the II.
though neither he had taken any Coronation Oath to them, nor they any Oath to
Him, otherwise than he was included in the Lawful Successors of his Royal
Ancestors to whom they had Sworn. Let us therefore see whether these former
Oaths did not Oblige them who took them, to be Active for the Interests of the
Prince to whom they were made. If they did, Two things will thence follow
against the sense of these Swearers: 1. That these New Oaths being made to our
New Possessors with the same design, and in the same sense of the words already
known from ancient Practice, must also oblige them to be Active for our present
Possessors, which themselves will not excuse from Perjury, if the action be
particularly designed against the K. de Jure. 2. That, on the same parity of
Reasoning, the same Oaths being made to the excluded K. de Jure, will also
oblige Swearers to be Active for him, which must necessarily oblige them to do
that which the Possessors will certainly judge inconsistent with what they have
Sworn to them, that is, with living peaceably under their Government.

And if we were to decide this Question by the Practice and Precedent of our
Church in the last Case, that now mentioned one of Cromwell; it seems plain,
that our Brethren then thought their Oaths to the Royal Family obliged them to
be Active, when a favorable occasion should serve, and not only to a bare
Neutrality. What should otherwise have hindered them from taking the Engagement,
when they might thereby have so much bettered their own condition in this
world, if they might have done it without prejudicing their condition in the
next? The same pretenses that are made use of now, were as truly appliable
then. The Government was then also already settled without K. and House of
Lords, without any Sin of the Royal Party, from whom this security was required
for the future. K. Chapter the II. was as unable to protect them as K. J. II. is
now. The probability of their being likely to be in any Capacity of
Contributing to the Restoration with any likelihood of success, was then as
little as it is now. And therefore, supposing that to be the only Case wherein
the Actual Obligation of their Oaths for active Contribution would return, as
many of them do suppose; yet the taking of the Engagement had been much less
Culpable than the taking of This present Oath is now. The only Condition that
can make it lawful for us to promise we will never do that which, in some
Circumstances we think our selves obliged to do, can only be the assurance we
have at the making of the Promise, that those Circumstances which may reduce
the Obligation shall never return upon us. And therefore by how much the more
or less probable the returning of those Circumstances is, by so much the more a
Promise or an Oath not to do what in those Circumstances we are obliged to do,
will also be more or less excusable. But whilst the Controversy is depending,
whilst the Right is on Legal (and Chapter of Engl.) Principles, unquestionable
there can be no excuse for Promising or Swearing not to do that which, in so
little and not unlikely a change of Circumstances, we may notwithstanding think
our selves obliged to do.

They say indeed, and say truly that even their former Oaths could not oblige
them to Impossibilities; That even the Legislators and Imposers of them cannot
in reason be presumed to have obliged the Subject to an active assistance that
should certainly ruin himself without any probability of being Serviceable to
the Government; that therefore there can be no obligation for single Subjects
to oppose a K. de facto, who is once established in a full and complete
Possession; that in such a case it must therefore be lawful to live quietly,
that when it is lawful to live so, it must also be lawful to Promise and to
Swear to live so. This Reasoning would indeed be very good, if the Promise and
the Oath extended no further than the Case supposed in the Argument, that is,
if their Promise and Oath were no longer to forbear active endeavors to
restore the K. de jure, then their endeavors were destitute of any prospect of
any probability of Success, or of any other public advantage that might make
amends for the hazard to which they must thereby necessarily expose themselves.
But if they would speak out, and express the limitation intended, how could
they expect that such a taking the Oath could ever be accepted by the Imposers?
Why should they thank them for Swearing no more than what they must have been
obliged to, though they had never sworn it, by the dictates of common prudence,
and their natural concernment for their own preservation. Why should they thank
them for qualifying themselves for favors by seeming theirs when there was no
need of them, and at the same time owning an Obligation to leave and betray
them in the very Case in prospect of which the Oath it self was designed, that
is, in the time of danger, and danger from that very Enemy against whom the
Imposers expected to be secured by this Oath? If they go no further than the
case supposed, they can never give the Government de Facto that security that
is expected. If they Swear and Promise more, that will be more than they can
justify by their own Principles, who both suppose their former Oaths to remain
as obligatory now as ever, and to require more than an indifferent Neutrality,
and to require active Endeavors for restoring the K. de jure, when ever they
may attempt it with any probability of Success. Such, though they do not think
themselves obliged to endeavor it at present, yet cannot promise, much less
Swear, that for the future, they will never endeavor it.

This was the sense of our Ancestors, and is the sense of our Brethren, with
whom we are at present dealing. But we will not oblige them to continue any
longer of the same mind than their own Principles oblige them. Let us therefore
see whether their other Principles do not oblige them to believe the
Inconsistency of their present and their former Oaths. Indeed, if by living
peaceably they mean no more than Non-opposition, a perfect Neutrality would
satisfy the Oaths on both sides, both to the K. de facto and to the K. de jure
also. By not contributing to the War against the K. de jure, they would
satisfy their old Oaths; and withal by not contributing to the Restoration of
the K. de jure, they would satisfy their new Oaths to the K. de facto. But it
is strange how they can fall into such a mistake as this is. There is no doubt
but the Possessor, whoever he be, will never be content with a bare Neutrality,
but will expect active assistances from his liege Subjects, and this by virtue
of their Allegiance and their Oaths. If they do not serve him in their own
persons, they must at least do it by their Contributions for the maintaining
others to do that duty for them. And what reason can they give, why Allegiance
sworn to a K. de facto, should signify more, than the same Allegiance when
sworn to a K. de jure.

But let us lay aside the Opinions of Men, and consider nakedly the things
themselves. The things sworn in both Oaths are Fealty and Allegiance, Terms
taken from the barbarous Feudal Laws, and with them most certainly signifying,
not a Neutrality, but an active Contribution. Feudum among them, upon which the
Oath of Fidelity was grounded, signified a Tenure of Lands by the Beneficiary
from the favor of the Benefactor, the Liege Lord, on which account the Tenant
became his Liege-man or Vassal. And can we think that all this Endearment and
Obligation was designed to hire them only to a Neutrality? No, it is plain they
intended thereby to oblige them to all that gratitude that might in Reason be
expected from Persons so beholden to them for their worldly maintenance. The
Duty was very much the same as between the Liberti and the Roman Patrons. For
here, as well as there, was allowed an action of Ingratitude only with this
difference, that whereas, among the Romans, the Person convicted of Ingratitude
was reduced into his former state of slavery, here the Tenure, which alone was
servile, the Person being free, was forfeited on that Conviction. The Vassal
therefore was obliged to help his Lord in all wars wherein he thought the Cause
was just, or at least, doubted whether it might not be so. Feud. L. 1. Tit. 5.
l. 11. Tit. 24. 28.
This in case of offensive Wars. In defensive wars he was to help him, whatever
the Cause was, without Exception. Nay, if the Lord were besieged, and by that
means disabled to protect him, the Vassal was yet obliged to use all his
endeavors to restore him to his liberty. If he did not, that was also an
Ingratitude that forfeited his Tenure. And therefore the doing of it must
undoubtedly have been a condition of it, and therefore a a particular of the
Oath he was to take to his Liege Lord for the performance of Conditions. This
was the case in those Feudatory Tenures for which the Feudal Laws in the Body
of the Civil Law were framed by the Modern Empire. Much more of the Fees
depending on the Emperor himself, from whom these inferior Feudal Lords derived
their Authority, and that with a particular exception of such cases wherein
they might any way interfere with it. Feud. l. 11. tit. 7.
And certainly the Rights of the Empire by these barbarous Feudal Laws are
common to the Emperor with all other Sovereign Princes where the same Feudal
Laws have obtained, (as they have done generally in these Northern Countries)
but most especially to such as those of our Kingdoms whose very Crowns are
called Imperial.

Fealty in the new Oath is called Faith, and so it is by the Feudalists
themselves with particular regard to the Etymology of Feudum. Feud. l. 11. tit.
3.
As if this Fealty were essential to the very notion of Feudal Tenure. But it
is certain this Fealty required more than an empty Neutrality. So the Collector
of the Books de Feudis tells us in express Terms: ib. tit. 6.
Sed quia non sufficit abstinere a malo nisi fiat quod bonum est, restat ut in
sex praedictis (what those are may be seen in the place) consilium and auxilium
Domino praestet, si beneficio vult dignus videri, and de Fidelitate esse
salvus. And it appears in all the particulars promised and sworn to, in all the
Oaths of Fealty and Allegiance. Such are the concealing all the secrets of the
Lord, and discovering all conspiracies against him. Such are also the
maintaining and defending his life and limbs and terrene honor. These things
are generally expressly mentioned in all the Oaths of those times, in all the
places and Nations wherever the Feudal Laws obtained, by which we may easily
gather that they are not singular cases separable from the Nature of Feudal
Tenure in general. And therefore wherever Fealty and Allegiance are promised
and sworn in general, without any express mention of any particulars; As we
cannot be so absurd as to think no particulars are intended, (which would make
the whole Oath insignificant) so neither can we doubt, but if any were, these
certainly were so. And so it always appeared in practice. Whosoever had sworn
Fealty and Allegiance, without mentioning any particulars, was notwithstanding
called to an account, and deprived of his Fee, if it could be proved against
him, that he had violated any of the particulars now mentioned. And that this
maintenance of life, and limb, and terrene honor was meant of doing it in an
active way, will the more easily appear, if we consider that this was
originally a Military Tenure. It was the Tenure of a Miles in that Italian
collection incorporated into the Civil Imperial Laws. It is Knight Service with
us, of the Fensible men, in the Civilian language of Scotland. The Feudatory
was obliged to keep a Coat of Arms, and to maintain his proportion of Soldiers
to be commanded by the Liege Lord, as often as he had occasion for them. This I
take to be the original of our Coats of Armor, that used anciently to adorn
our Gentlemen's Halls, that they answered the number of Men at Arms, that their
Feudatory Tenants were bound to find them, and they to find their Sovereign
Lord the King, when required by him. And personal service was generally
expected at first, which made it more difficult for Women to be admitted to
this Tenure then. However contribution of the Purse toward the Hire of
Soldiers to perform the duty for them was indispensibly expected from all. By
which we easily understand how far a neutrality is from satisfying the duty of
it.

And now it will concern our well-meaning Brethren to consider whether this
same Fealty thus explained as sworn to a K. de Facto, and a K de Jure, be any
way consistent. Is it possible for them to maintain the life and limbs and
terrene Honor of the K. de Jure, without opposing the K. de Facto, at the very
time when he deprives the K. de Jure of his terrene Honor? whilst he is
engaged in an actual War against him, not only to maintain the Honor he has
deprived him of, but to put him also to further hazards of his life and limbs?
Will not the Law call all such countenancing the Title of a Rival Prince, and
living in his peace, a breach of his peace whom the Law calls our Sovereign
Lord the K? And will not, on the other side, the same Laws, as expounded by the
Tribunals of the K. de facto, condemn all peaceable behavior to the K. de
Jure, as a breach of the peace of that K. for whom they are concerned? And then
how can they mean veraciously that they will not disturb the peace, in the
sense of the present Possessors? How can they keep the secrets of the K. de
Jure, against the K. de facto, without violating their Fealty, and breaking
their Oath, to the K. de facto, which (as I have shown) oblige them to discover
all Designs and Conspiracies against him? Or how can they conceal the secrets
of the K. de facto, against the K. de Jure, without breaking their former Oaths
to the K. de Jure?

This was plainly the nature of this Fealty and this Allegiance in their first
originals, that they were Military duties, and therefore perfectly inconsistent
with Neutrality, and inconsistent also with themselves when promised to Princes
in hostility with each other. And several expressions in the Act of H. vii. so
much misunderstood of late, seems plainly to imply that this Military Fealty
alone was that for which the favor of that Act was intended. Which, if true,
will, by the way, cut off all others, who either hold no Lands from the Crown,
or hold them not in Military service, from even that Indemnity which seems to
be the uttermost favor designed by that Act. Afterward this Allegiance and
Fealty was extended farther by the Oath of Allegiance introduced by K. James
the I. This Oath might be tendered to all Persons living in the Kingdom above
Sixteen Years of Age, supposing therefore that even such Persons living in the
Realm, under the King's Protection, were, on the very account of their enjoying
that protection, under the same obligations of gratitude to the K. that the
Knights were formerly, though neither Soldiers by profession, nor holding any
Lands on that condition from the Crown. This is that which we call usually
natural Allegiance, due on account of our being born in these Kingdoms, and of
those benefits in Law to which we are entitled by being born Subjects, of
Purchases, and Inheritances, and benefit of Wills and Testaments, and some
liberties of Trading which strangers cannot attain to otherwise than by an Act
of Parliament for their Naturalization. And this is the present Notion of
Allegiance alluded to in the Act for imposing these present Oaths. They are
substituted in the Room of these Oaths of Allegiance, and are therefore
required from all persons qualified by Law to take the former Oath of
Allegiance, from all persons above sixteen years of Age, though neither
Soldiers, nor holding any Military Tenures. This therefore being the Fealty and
Allegiance concerned in our present Oaths, we are further to consider whether
the duties of them be consistent with a Neutrality between the K. de Facto, and
the K. de Jure?

In order whereunto I consider that the change made in this enlarged Notion of
Allegiance is rather in the Motives and inducements on which the Duties are
grounded, than in the Duties themselves. In both Allegiances the Liege-man is
supposed to be a Beneficiary of a Liege-lord, and the duties thence resulting
are also supposed obliging in gratitude for the favors received, not barely on
account of the Authority requiring them. Only in the Benefits on which the
Obligation is grounded the difference is considerable. In the former case were
favors uncommon to all the Subjects, particularly that of a Beneficial
Tenement for life. In the latter, only that protection which all Subjects
receive from the Government, and the common beneficial capacities which all
freeborn Subjects have a Right to on account of their being freeborn Natives
of the Government. The reason of the Fealty or Allegiance in these two cases is
indeed very different, yet the Notion is very much the same. The Obligation,
being in both cases due antecedently in point of gratitude, cannot be
understood to imply no more than a bare Neutrality, or a duty of not hindering
the Benefactor from his Right. But as there are supposed positive favors from
the Benefactor to the Beneficiary; so the natural Return that might be
expected, in point of gratitude, can be no less than positive and active
assistances from the Beneficiary for maintaining his Benefactor in his just
Rights. And the same terms of Fealty and Allegiance being made use of for
expressing the nature of this new duty of the Subject, without any intimation
of any new signification, the most obvious and likely way of understanding them
will be to take them in the same sense in which they were used as terms of Art
before, as near as the change of the reason, and circumstances in deducing the
secondary signification will give leave. Otherwise the words Fealty and
Allegiance would not have been mentioned in the late Oaths without instancing
in particulars meant by them, if it had not been supposed notorious, what
particulars used formerly to be designed by them in their Original
signification, and that the same were also intended in this secondary
derivative extended one, as far at least as the Circumstances of the Obliged
Person will give way. For if the Person be also Military that will go far
toward the continuance of the Military obligation.

And if so, then all the Duties of the former Fealty and Allegiance will return
in this Natural Allegiance also, and consequently this new Fealty and
Allegiance will be as inconsistent with a Neutrality as the other was. The
Liege-man must here also, not only not oppose, but maintain, the Life, Limbs,
and terrene Honor of his Liege Lord. He must also keep his secrets, and
discover all Plots and Conspiracies against him. And this new extended Notion
of Fealty and Allegiance being introduced by the Laws, it cannot be more
Authentically interpreted than by the Laws that introduced it. Whatever the
Laws punish as a Breach of Allegiance that certainly the Lawmakers intended
that it should be included in the Oaths imposed for the securing Allegiance.
And whatever the Laws punish as not maintaining the Life, Limbs, and terrene
Honor of the Liege Lord, or as a Violation of his Secrets, or as a concealing
or abetting Conspiracies against him (which were all of them directly contrary
to the duties of the original Allegiance) those things they certainly look on
as a violation of Allegiance, and consequently of the Oath imposed by them for
the securing that Allegiance. Hence it will follow that whatever the Laws, if
they had their course, would punish as Treason, all that must be understood to
be contrary to the Promise and Oath of Allegiance. For all forms of Indicting
for Treason are, that the Facts concerned in the Indictment are against the
Duty of the Subjects Allegiance expressly, or, at least, for depriving the K. of
his Royal State and Dignity, which is directly contrary to the maintaining his
terrene Honor, which was the principal design of the forementioned Original
Allegiance. But is certain that the very owning of another as K. the very
abetting him, the holding correspondence with him where it may be avoided, the
entertaining him, and voluntarily relieving him, especially after a warning by
Proclamation, is always judged and condemned for High Treason whenever Laws are
allowed to take their course. Thus a voluntary corresponding with Enemies, on
either side, is contra pacem Domini Regis in the Interpretation of the Law. The
Peaceable corresponding therefore with a K. de facto set up in opposition to
the K. de jure, will be a breach of the Peace of the K. de jure; and on the
contrary, the living peaceably under the Government of the K. de facto, will
oblige them, by the Interpretation of the Legislative Power under him, to
renounce all correspondence with the K. de jure, to betray his Secrets, and his
Person too, if ever it should come to be in their power to do so, which I am
confident our Brethren would abhor to do from their very Souls. To be sure it
will oblige them to conceal Conspiracies against him, and many ways to
contribute to the depriving, or at least, to the detaining his Right from him.
This will certainly be the Interpretation of living Peaceably under the present
Government, in the sense of those to whom the Oaths are made, and therefore
ought to be their meaning also; if they will mean sincerely with the present
Government which requires these Oaths from them, and to whom they pretend to
give satisfaction by taking them. But then it will concern them highly to
enquire further how this will be reconcilable with the Allegiance themselves
believe due to the K. de jure. Certainly it can never be reconciled, if they
will but allow the K. de jure the same favor of Interpretation for determining
his Rights, which they must be forced to allow the K. de facto, whether they
will or no. And it would be strange if they should allow him less.

The Reasoning now mentioned concerns all Subjects equally, how far distant
soever their Profession may be from being Military. The Practice of the Law and
of the Courts does punish these things indifferently in all Subjects, though
not Soldiers, as breaches of the duties required by the Original Allegiance.
So that is plain, that this new extended Notion of Allegiance may concern
Ministers, and Scholars, and others who have no Sword at all, and who cannot
therefore be obliged to maintain the Life and Limbs, and terrene Honor of
their Liege Lord by the Sword, unless they be otherwise lawfully called to it.
But it is certain, the old Military Allegiance did oblige the Feudatory Vassal
to maintain the Rights of his Liege Lord by the Sword. And I cannot tell how
far the same Obligation may hold still, when the Liege Lord, who has the Right
of the Sword, requires and obliges them to use it in his defense. In most of
these Northern Nations, from whom the Feudal Laws are derived, the Arrierban
may be called by the Sovereign Power in distress, wherein all Subjects are
concerned who are any ways capable of Military Service. Answerable whereunto,
we have here our Ancient Laws of the Standard, which whether they oblige all
Subjects personally, especially since the settlement of the Militia, perhaps in
lieu of them, I leave to them to determine who are better skilled in our common
Law. For our present purpose it is sufficient that, even to men who are not
concerned in the Sword, there are so many interfering Duties between a K. de
jure and a K. de facto, as that it is impossible they can ever be obliged to
them both by Oaths. Especially on their Principles who think themselves obliged
to their Allegiance to the K. de jure, notwithstanding the Possession of the K.
de facto.

I might content my self with this Reasoning, from the Principles of the
Persons with whom I am at present concerned. And I am sure this must be the
sense of as many as take the Oaths on Bishop Sanderson's Doctrine, so much of
late urged on this occasion. He plainly denies all disobligation from their old
Allegiance, notwithstanding the Possession of another, and by no means allows
any sideing with the Possessor de facto against the Rightful Prince, which yet
must needs be understood to be the principal reason of imposing and requiring
these Oaths in this particular juncture. I add farther, that this very
Principle seems to be granted them by the Imposers themselves. What can they
else mean by the distinction they so much insist on between the K. de facto and
the K. de jure, but that the Possessor is so a K. de facto, as that he is not
also a K. de jure; and that the K. de jure is the only K. in Right, though he
be not in Possession? And when they plead the Laws which own, as they say, this
distinction: that, sure is more than arguing ad homines. And what can they mean
less by it than, that the Laws do also not own such a Possessor for a Rightful
K? He is a pretensed K. indeed and not in Right. This is the very language of
the Statute of Edw. IV th. concerning his rival Predecessors of the Lancastrian
Line. This being therefore granted by the Imposers, that the excluded K. is the
Rightful K. how can they avoid our Brethrens consequence, that Allegiance must
still be due to him? And, it being on the other side, granted, that the
Possessor is, in the Law, a pretensed K. indeed, and not in Right; how can they
possibly defend the giving him the Rights of him whom they own for their
Rightful K. and confirming that gift by a Promise and an Oath, against so many
antecedent Solemn Promises and Oaths? What can the name of a K. de jure
signify but that he has still a Right to the Kingship, or, that the Jura
Coronae are still his in Right, though not in Possession? How can they then
avoid but that he must still have a Right to the Government, to all the profits
and dependences of it, and (above all) to the Fealty and Allegiance of his
Subjects? And what reason then can they have to be angry at our Brethren, for
drawing just and unavoidable Consequences from Principles already given by
themselves? And is it not a strange thing, that at the same time they should
understand the words, due Allegiance, in the Act of H. vii. of a truly due
Allegiance, and not only of such a one as will be judged due by the Possessor?
How can any thing be truly due to him who has no Right to it? Or how can he
have a Right to that Allegiance, which is only the Right of lawful Kings, who
is himself only a pretensed K. in deed, and not in Right? What would they say
of Wives that should also take Husbands de facto, and promise and swear to give
them all the Rights of Husbands de Jure? They may assure themselves such
practices of Wives would not be more inconsistent with the Laws of Monogamy
introduced by our Savior, than these repugnant Rights of opposite pretenders
are to the essential Law of Monarchy. Thus solidly our Brethren reason from the
Principles of our new Legislators themselves, and so little reason have they to
desert or suspect those Principles.

The good God awaken the Consciences of Persons concerned in this Dispute, and
give a timely stop to that Deluge of Perjury that may prove in the event so
fatal to our beloved Churches and Countries. In vain do we think to save our
Protestant Religion by Practices so naturally destructive of all Religion. How
can we, for shame pretend Conscience against Popery when secular Punishments do
so easily and so universally drive us from our Principles? And what will the
Imposers gain by this unhappy victory over Consciences? The obvious event will
be, when the first modesties and Reluctancies of Conscience are overcome, that
then all their Tests will be taken, and yet their Trusts will be betrayed, and
it will be impossible for them to reckon on the faith of Men. If I might give
them my advice, it should have been this, and I assure them I now do it with as
hearty a good will to them as any of their Flatterers. Considering their
proceedings were directly contrary to the Oaths of the Nations, perhaps it
would have been better policy, rather to have taken away the Oaths in being,
than to have added new ones, (having made such pretenses for Liberty of
Conscience) and to have obliged the subject in Interest, by making their burden
easier than it had been under K. J. Interest, which with ill men would
certainly have prevailed more than the Conscience of any Oaths. And it would
have so far influenced good men, who had sussiciently discovered their aversion
to Popery, that they would not have supererogated in their duty against them,
which is more than ever they are likely to gain by their new Oaths, which have
disobliged them in point of Interest who think themselves otherwise under no
obligation to them in point of Conscience. This may yet be done in some
measure, and whether it be not for the common Interest, I leave it to their
second and sedate thoughts to consider of.

THE END.

