A SALUTATION OF MY Endeared Love TO THE FAITHFUL In ALL PLACES, That bear
their Testimony for the Lord, and keep in the Lowliness to Truth as it is in
JESUS.
THe Blessing of the Lord is with you that have given up your all to the Lord
as an acceptable Sacrifice; and if you keep to that pure unchangable Power,
that gives dominion over Sin, the Lords multiplying Hand will attend you, as it
did Faithful Abraham, and make you a blessing among the people, and so you will
feel the Lord nearer to you then when you first believed, and Truth more
precious to your Souls then ever; for your beloved will be yours, and you will
be his; then in the sense of what he has done for you, you will be willing to
endure whatsoever the Lord permits to come upon you for the trial of your
Faith, Knowing that the trial of it is more precious then Gold that perishes;
and therefore have we great cause to count it all Joy, that he has counted us
worthy to suffer for his name; for it is those that have fellowship with the
Death and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus that come through the great
Tribulations, and are found worthy to walk with him in white, such have Right
to eat of the Tree of Life: Therefore, my dear Friends, let us be wholly given
up in our Souls and Bodies to serve the Lord Joyfully and willingly; for it is
the free will Offerers that God accepts at this day, as in Ancient Time; when
the governors and people of Israel Offered themselves willingly, the Lord
Accepted of them, and prospered their undertakings, to the Reviving of their
hearts, which caused them to praise the Lord, and Rehearse his Righteous Acts,
in the sense of the great deliverance they had Obtained from him alone; and
then they also called to mind what great thoughts of heart they were once in
forthem that staid behind, etc. who came not forth to the help of the Lord
against the wicked; but the Lord had no need of the help of man at that day, to
get himself a name above every name, neither has he in these latter days, yet
he delights in such Instruments that stand up Valiently for his holy Name on
the earth, and they shall wax Valient with Spiritual weapons; before their
faces many shall be much pained, for the Lord will rore out of Sion and utter
his Voice from his holy Habitation; and thou Oh Israel that have been faithful,
and kept to thy first Love, shall have a Habitation in him, the Rock of Ages,
and shall be as a Royal Diadem in the hand of thy God, and he delights to
appear for thee and in thee, because thou have delighted to appear before him,
and to wait for him in the way of his Righteous Judgments, and Kept them till
they were brought forth into victory; and though thou art very few in number,
and least among the Nations, and dare not meddle with Carnal Weapons, yet Great
will the Holy one of Israel be in the midst of thee when he marches through
the Nations to plead with the Heathen round about for thy sake; and the
Spiritual Battle is already begun in the Nations, in which the great and mighty
God will plead with all Flesh as in the Valley of Jehoasphat, which is the Valley
of Judgment, for the honor of his great Name, and deliverance of his people,
which is as near to him as the Apple of his Eye: Therefore let us be Encouraged
in our God, as David was when Ziglag was taken, and burnt with Fire, and the
living carried away Captives by the hand of the Spoiler, and his Friends that
should have stood by him talked of Stoning of him, because of the great
distress of mind that was on them, which came only for the trial of their
Faith; but great was David's Faith and Confidence in God, and in the same he
called upon him in the time of trouble, and the Lord heard, and Answered, and
delivered him out of all his Distresses, both on the right hand and one the
left, and all the living that the enemy had carried away captive was recovered
again by the help of the Lord to Praise him, neither did he miss any thing; for
the great Creator of all things was with him, and gave him Victory over his
enemies, and so he divided the Spoil; and he is the same to the Faithful this
day that have put their trust in him in the midst of difficulties; for he is
the same to his people as ever he was, God Almighty and Unchangeable, without
Variableness or shadow of turning, therefore my dear Friends let us be engaged
to follow the Lord Fully as Joshua and Caleb did, that so we may press through
all Difficulties, and hold out to the end, that so we may be Saved; for this is
my hearty desire to the Lord for my own Soul and all the Faithful, that we may
be Preserved to the end.

And so dear Friends, keep in true Wachfulness against the enemy, that Seeks to
defile and hinder the true access to God, and watch unto Prayer; for the Lord
delights to hear the Prayer of the Faithful, and it prevails much with him,
and it shall reach to Heaven and draw down a blessing in abundance, when all
Babels-Builders shall be thrown down, that have sought to reach Heaven in their
vain Imaginations, even like Capernaam, who was exalted on high till the Lord
cast them down to Hell, and now the day of the Lord is going over the Nation to
break down all Images and pleasant Pictures of Religion that are not of his own
Appointing and Setting up, and he will dash them in pieces as a Potters Vessel;
for he will not give his Honor to any Idol, nor his Glory to Graven Images:
and blessed are all those that have a place in the munition of Rocks, while
those things are bringing to pass; for they shall be glad to go together to the
House of God, as David was, where the Lord does teach his people of his ways,
and gives them power to stand still and see his great Salvation brought to pass
for their deliverance from all oppression; for it is but a very little while
and all those that keep to the word of Patience will be delivered out of all
Temptation; and my Prayer to God is, That he will preserve my Soul in
Faithfulness among the living in the Heavenly Jerusalem to the End.

ANd now I have also a deep concern upon my Spirit, as a Faithful Warning to
you in all places that have slighted the Assemblies of the Lords People, and in
so doing have neglected your duty to God both in Private and Public; for I
know right well that those that keep their hearts with all diligence to the
Lord, to feel the Issue of life in the Secrets of the heart, dare not neglect
their Duty to God in Public, but must come forth in their places, and stand as
Landmarks, that cannot be moved for fear of Man; and for this end did the Lord
mark us out, that we should bear his Name in our Foreheads, and appear to
others as Living, Monuments of his Mercy; Oh? therefore have a care, you
Carless Ones, that have slighted your own Mercyes, which you have in a large
manner been Pertakers of among the Faithful; for it is those that keep in a
living Sense of Gods Dealings with them that do prize it, and receive it with
Thanksgiving, and to such the Sure Mercies of David are continued and
multiplied Morning by Morning: Oh therefore be concerned for time to come you
that have been negligent in the work of the Lord, and work while you have a
day; for the Night is hastening upon many, in which there can be no work done
for the Lord, for the work of the Lord is to be done while the Light shines,
which gives a true discovery of the Deeds of Dark^ess; therefore bring your
deeds to the Light, that they may be made manifest whether they are wrought in
God or no; for the Just Man's Path is a shining Light, that shines more and
more to the Perfect Day; so in tender bowels of true love my heart is open to
you, that have tasted of the good Word of God, and the powers of the World to
come, to persuade you to persevere in the work of the Lord, and to wait
diligently upon him, that he may perfect his own work in you to his own praise,
that so you may Sanctify his great name in the sight of the Heathen, and
appear to be in deed what you have made a long Profession of; and for this end
did God Manifest his unspeakable Love unto us, and give us a Manifestation of
his good Spirit that we might profit therewith and be Perfected by it, that so
we might come to witness, as the A postle said, that we are able to do all
things through Christ that strengthens us-and as it was said of old, by one
that had seen the end of all Perfection, that the commandments of the Lord
were exceeding broad, so it is manifest to the faithful this day, and they can
keep them with great delight, and they are not grievous to them; for it is such
that are in the true possession of the true Faith that shall hold fast the
Profession without wavering, and they do shine as a City set on a Hill, that
cannot be hid, and dare not hide their Candle under a Bushel or under a Bed,
nor rest in a bare knowledge of the Truth, b^t are willing to be Faithful in
their measure to what God Requires of them, that so they may feel the increase
of Gods Love to their Souls, to preserve them; though there be no need to say
to some Know the Lord, yet there is great need to say to some Obey the Lord;
for Obedience is better then Sacrifice, and to hearken to the Voice of God then
all vain Oblations; and for want of Obedience many are become vain in their
Imaginations, that were once Englightned, and their Understandings again
Darkened, and the Ear that was once open to hear the Voice of the true Shepherd,
is again stopped by the Philistian nature; so though the Lord speak once, and
again, yet they Regard it not; for the Abomination is yet standing in the
hearts of such which are not Faithful to the Lord, and therefore they cannot
hear the Voice of him that calls for purity and holiness; this hinders the work
of the Lord; that so their Calling and Election is not made sure, but Excuses
are made by such, that they are not to be too forward to go in a Trying time
to offer Sacrifice, and so cause the daily public Sacrifices to Cease, and see
not so much need of the continuance of it as the Apostle did when he spoke to
the Church in the sense of what Christ had done for them, to offer up
Spiritual Sacrifice through him to God; and they were exhorted, not to forsake
the Assembling of them selves together, as the manner of some were, that saw
not the necessity of it; for those that know the blotting out of Sin, and
passing by Iniquity, saw they had as much Need to wait upon the Lord to feel
Refreshment from his Presence, and their strength Renewed in him, as they had
before to gather together to wait for him in the way of his Judgments; and the
travel of my Soul is, that it may be so with all who make a Profession of his
name at this day, so that we may press forward toward the mark of the high
Calling in Christ Jesus, that the Enemy do not betray us from the Simplicity of
the Gospel, that so in the end we may say as the Apostle did, that in
Simplicity and Godly Sincerity we have had our Conversation in this World. So
blessed are all they that do order their Conversation aright, the promise is to
them, that God will show them his Salvation; for he that has called us to
cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrills has also commanded us to live
in the Spirit and power of holiness, and obey him in all things, lest we be cut
off from the True Vine, and cast out as Fruitless Branches, fit for nothing but
the Fire; wherefore seeing and knowing these things, let us take the more heed
to our ways, and consider what manner of Persons we ought to be in all our
conversation, to the end if we are Christ's Disciples the offense of the Cross
is not to be ceased from, but a daily taking it up is to be known by all them
that follow the Lord fully, because it crucifies the world to them, and they to
the world; and this is the Saints Glory, for they dare not to glory in any
thing saving in the Cross of Christ, but must forget what is behind and wait
upon the Lord for daily strength to go forward to perform our reasonable
service to him, seeing we can do nothing without him that is acceptable in his
Sight, we have great Reason to Wait at the heavenly Jerusalem, to be endued
with power from an high, that we may be carried on in the ark of safety, Christ
Jesus, who Vanquished the Tempter when he tried him with various Temptations,
and when he had overcome in all things the Angels Ministered to him, and in the
power of the Spirit he was carried into Galile and all places to do his Fathers
will, and it was his Delight to please his Father in all things though through
Deep Sufferings, and though a Son, yet learned he obedience to his Father, and
his Father Delighted in him, and gave him that testimony that in all things he
was well pleased with him; and it was for our sakes tha^ he gave the only
begotten Son of his love to Suffer for us, that we might be redeemed to God
through his name, and find acceptance to the Father by him, who is the only
propitiation for our Sins; and as we live in obedience to his power we shall
Receive an answer from God that he accepts of us and our doings, because we
live and move and are acted by him in whom his Soul takes pleasure, and
therefore has he made him heir of all things, and put in subjection under him,
and anointed him with Oil of Joy above his Fellows, that the Virgin Daughter
of Sion may love him, because of the preciousness of the Ointment that proceeds
from him, who is the Husband of the true Church, and therefore is her desire
after him, and those that do live in the sense of the great love he has
bestowed on them, will prize it, and walk worthy of it; and they are of the
same mind the Apostle was when he said, but whose keeps his word, in him is
the Love of God perfected; hereby know we, that we are in him; he that says he
Abides in him, ought himself also to walk even as he Walked. So in true love
to all that make a profession of the Truth my Soul is enlarged beyond what Ink
and Paper can demonstrate, desiring the prosperity of Sion and welfare of
heavenly Jerusalem; and my Prayer to God is, That all might be gathered into
that Faith that works by love, and gives Victory over the World; for they shall
prosper, that Love Sion.

So having Cleared my self of what lay upon me from the Lord I am a Friend to
all that love the Appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Prisoner to Newgate in Bristol for the Testimony of Jesus, the 17th of the
12th Month, 1684. Dorcas Dole.

THE END.
LONDON, Printed by John Bringhurst in Leaden Hall, 1685.


