The Undoubted ART OF THRIVING; Wherein is showed. 1. That a Million L.
Sterling Money, or more if need be may be raised for Propogating the Trade of
the Nation, etc. Without any kind of prejudice to the Leiges, but on the
Contrair to their great Vtility and Advantage. 2. How the Indian and African
Company may Propogat their Trade, and that Trade and Manufactures of all sorts
may be encouraged to the Honor, Strength and Wealth of the Nation. 3. How
every one according to his quality, may Live Comfortably and Happily.
Concluding with several thoughts tuching the Management of Public Concerns.


EDINBURGH, Printed by John Reid, 1700.

To His GRACE, JAMES Duke of QUEENSBERRY, His Majesty's high Commissioner to
the Session of PARLIAMENT, Comencing on the 21st. of MAY 1700. And all the
Honorable Members in Parliament Assembled.
MOST HONORABLE,
Some time ago, being by the Providence of GOD, Reduced to a low condition,
like a Man that had fallen from a precipice. I began to look about, and to
think by what means to Re^ascend; for that end strearched my Invention to the
utmost extent, I took a view of every thing upon which I could fix mine eye. I
examined the conduct of all sorts of persons, both as to public and private
concerns, in order to find some footsteps by which to climb up. in my my survey
of things, found severals that I thought might be Improven. And amongst many
others, this project of making Nots to pass for current money occured; as did
likewise several others of no less moment, which I could have expanded on this
occasion, were it not that too many projects at once, may rather obstruct than
advance the procecution of any; And also that this one may be sufficient at the
time, if it take effect, which if it do not I shall hencforth be discouraged to
attempt any thing of the like Nature.

After I had made several discoveryes, as is said, New difficulties occured, as
to the manner of giving them vent. The concealing matters of so great
Importance I thought a Crime: On the other hand, fearing it was in vain for me
to propose any thing of this kind having had so bad success in my own Concerns
none would relay on any Overture I could make concerning the prosperity of
others; I strugled long between these difficulties; However at last I resolved
to put in form one of my projects, and show it to some who could advise me how
to proceed therein; And accordingly made a short draught of this Note-Project,
as that which was most likely to take effect, I showed it to some of the
Honorable Members of Parliament. But the draught being short, and not so
distinct, as what is here deduced, nor the Foundation on which it was proposed
to be settled, so solid as what is now proposed, it was thought there might be
several difficulties in it, wherefore I laid it aside at that time.

The next Effort I made, was an Essey upon the manner of Husbandry, in which I
thought most People of this Kingdom Committed Condsiderable mistakes, tho this
was not received with that Approbation, which I humbly conceive it deserves,
yet it found acceptace beyond my expectation, for it is not to be Imagioned
that upon an overly Glance, one can have the same Sentiments as an other that
has made it his business to consider it thoroughly.

Now (I hope in a good time,) I Resume my Project concerning the Notes. The
Kingdom at present being drained of Money, by reason of the great quantities of
it that has been given for Corn from Foreign parts these several years past,
and likewise People seem now Inclined to Cultivat Trade and Manufactures more
than formerly, which certainly makes a project of this nature more Necessar
then at other tims; Wherefore in all Humility I present the following Sheets to
Your Grace, Lordships and Honors; The first part of which Respects the
Circulating of Notes may perhaps be some what dark at first veiw, yet after
perusal and the serious thoughts of any person of Tolerable Capacity, I think
it will be plain to a Demonstration. I have considered it over and over many
tims, and according to what sense GOD has given me. I think nothing can be
plainer, and doubt not in the least to Solve all manner of objections that can
be made against it. As to what follows in the other two Chapters is plain at
first view, and will not be difficult to determine what is fit to be done
therein.

Some years ago I Remember, there was an overture made to the Parliament, for
the Streicking a vast number of Notes or Talies, but the manner of Circulating
them was keep'd a secret, till the Author should have the promise of a
Considerable Reward; tho it is but reasonable that a Man should be Rewarded for
his good service, not only with Respect to the pains be is at. But likewise
with Respect to the benefit others receive by his Good Offices: Yet I have made
no such Preliminary overture, leaving that Inteirly to Your Wisdoms Discration.

As when an Artificer has finished an Instrument of Music, with all imaginabl
exactness, it may suffer the bending or unbending of several Strings, before it
can be fited to a particular Tune or Air. In like manner the following project,
may perhaps receive some inconsiderable Amendiments when it comes to be put in
practice, which till then cannot be observed. Yet I humbly Conceive there is no
material part wanting to make it Complete; However it be, my thoughts of it to
be so, has induced me to lay it before Your Wisdoms, who after Considering of
it thoroughly, can eosily give your Judgment therein. That GOD may give you
Wisdom, and grant a happy Isue to this Session of Parliament shall be the
earnest Prayer of

Your Grace's, Lordships, and Honors, Most Humble and Obedient Servant Ja.
Donaldson.

THE Undoubted ART of THRIVING
TO THRIVE and to PROSPER, Being Generally taken for one and the same Thing,
'twill be needless to Enquire into the Etimology or Signification of the Verb
THRIVE; But seeing it may be taken in a threefold Sense, Viz. In Respect to the
Soul, Body, and Estate, it is necessary to distinguish them, and to show which
of these I intend to Prosecute.

To make Provision for the Soul is undoubtedly the Duty as well as the interes^
of every One, And that wherein most People are too Remiss; But to give public
Directions therein, is that which I neither reckon my self called to nor
qualified for.

In matters of Medicine or Physic. I am not acquainted: And therefore shall not
offer to meddle in things of that Nature.

(...) follows, That I must say some thing touching the Preservation or
Increase of the Estate, or say nothing at all (...) in this also. I cannot
pretend to much Knowledge. I would offer only things which I Humbly Conceive
may be of Good Use, and perhaps a Foundation for some Good Architeck, to build
a Magnificent Structure upon.

(...) coun^^^ be supposed, that a Thing of this Nature can be so ex(...) first
Draught as afterward it may be brought (...) therefore expected, the Discreet
Reader will rather Correct than Rigidly Censure any thing he may find not so
directly to the Purpose.

Thriving being that which we are to fall about on good Earnest? I shall not
detain ^he Render with (...) tedio^s introduction, but: endeavor to (...) what
I have (...) say, in the most co^ceise and plain Manor I ^an, so that any
Person of Ordinary Capacity may the more easily comprehend the same, my Design
being rather to write I^telligibly than Elega^^ly.

'Twas observed in the Entry that Thriving may be taken in a threefold-Sense,
and that it was in Matters relating to the Estate, of how that one may provide
Necessaries for his Comfortable Living in this World, that I undertook to
prosecute.

When I speak of Ways and Means how one may preserve or increase his Estate; I
hope it will not be incong^uous to think, that at the same time he may be in a
prosperous Condition also in both Soul and Body, there being no inconsistancy
but rather a Harmony amongst them all. For a Person moderatly exercising
himself in the Performance of his lawful Employment, thereby purchases things
necessar for the Support of his Body: The Body being supplied with things
necessary and employed in moderat Exercises, is keept in a good Temperature and
healthful Condition. The Body being in good Condition, is in Capacity to
perform Duty to GOD and Man with the greater Alacrity; and reciprocally when a
Person with Integrity performs his duty, he may warrantably expect the Favor
of GOD and Man, and a Blessing upon his Labor, which he is the better able to
perform while his Body is in Health and Vigor: Whereas on the other hand, one
that cannot provide for himself, is commonly despised of Men, depressed in his
Body, and dejected in Mind, by all which he is much indisposed to perform Duty
to GOD or Man.

But some perhaps may say, Commonly such as have great Possession employ these
Benefits to quite contrary Uses, thereby strengthening themselves to the Paterns
of Vice and Immorality, and do not only this way impare their own Health, but
also proceed on a Course of Disobedience to GOD. and of injuring and oppressing
their Neighbors.

This is often too true, as may easily be made appear, but it does not in the
least repeal my Proposition, the misapplying of Benefits derogateth nothing
from their Worth.

That every Man should employ him self not only for the advancing of his own
Interest, but likewise that he may propogate the Welfare of others, will, I
suppose, be sooner granted than practiced: but that we may the better conceive
how every one may assist another, and contribute to the benefit of all, the
several Professions, Callings, and Corporations of Men in a Kingdom State or
Republic, may be compared to the several Members of a Man's Body, the King or
Supreme Governor resembling the Head, by which the whole Body is Governed,
These in Military Office may be compared to the Arms by which the Body is
defended. Cities or Citizens may be compared to the Heart or Trunck of the
Body, to which Retreat is made in time of danger, and Supplies brought from one
extraordinary Emergencies. Mechanics or Tradesmen may be called the Hands
with which Labor is performed; And the Husbandman does resemble the Legs
which supports the whole Structure. Money may be called the Blood which
circulates through all the Veins of the Body, and convoys Life and Vigor to every
part.

I might proceed to show in what respects Persons of other Professions and
Employments do resemble other Members of the Body, but my design being to show
that every one ought to be Subserviant to another, and not to enquire what
Anology is betwixt the Members of a Man's Body and the Members of a
Commonwealth, I think it needless to follow the similitude any further.

To give particular Directions how every one ought to Act in his particular
Vocation or Profession, so as he may not only support himself, but also be
Aiding and Assisting to others, will readilly be acknowledged to be a hard
Task, and that which I cannot undertake, yet with Submission I would offer a
few things to be considered, which I hope may be of good use unto all.

Man's Calling in General (besides his chief Concern) being to provide Things
necessary for the support of his Body, that requiring a daily Subsistence, and
the Things needed for that use, or at least for the more comfortable Support
thereof, being many and various, every one cannot acquire sufficient Knowledge
in all the Arts Sciences and Employments that are necessary for the providing
himself with every thing he wants.

It Is therefore necessary, That some be employed one way, and some another; So
that each may attain to some Competent Degree of Knowledge of, and Dexterity in
the Vocation or employment, he Professes, So that every One may be Useful and
Assisting to another, And by a mutual Good Correspondence with one another, all
may live Comfortably together.

Man being thus destined to Labor for his Food and Raiment, and that by a
special Command of the Supreme Law Giver, it is not indifferent for him to
Labor or be Idle, even though his Circumstance may allow of the Latter.

How much time Men ought to Labor each day is not positively prescribed (tho
the number of days to wit six of seven is, and by the By, those who enjoin
Anniversary days would do well to consider by what Authority they do it) nor
can we think all are required to labor alike much, it being very reasonable to
think that these whom GOD has Blessed with Plenty, may Warrantably enjoy his
Benefits, and are not called to such Violent Exercises, as those whose Pinching
Necessities oblige them to Labor hard, to Earn Bread to their Teeth; Yet it is
both Necessary and convenient, that every one follow some Honest Vocation, and
I think any Man diligently plying himself to Labor seven or Eight Hours a Day,
may acquire as much as is necessary for his Subsistence; And others in the
hardest Circumstances need nor labor above ten hours, which is no hard Matter;
the remaining 14 hours being sufficient to Refresh themselves by Sleep and
other ways.

But as I have formerly observed, that the several Professions and
Incorporations of Men in a Commonwealths, do resemble the several Members of a
Man's Body, each having us proper Use and Employment assigned it, every one
aiding and assisting each other; And besides there is more required for the
propagating of a mutual Assistance amongst the Members of a Commonwealth, then
that one Man make or prepare things that may be useful to others, seeing he
cannot prepare all Things necessary for himself, there must be an Exchanging or
Bartering of Commodities, which cannot be well done without some kind of Talees
that may pass current in all Bargains at a certain value; So that the
Possessors thereof can have whatsoever they want upon the same, it being very
hard, if not impossible for every One on all Occasions, to get the Product of
his Labor Bartered for the very things he stands in need of.

The Talees most in Use in all the Trading World are of Gold, Silver Brass and
Tin, being appointed to pass at such and such Rates, as the several Kings and
Princes of each Kingdom and State think fit to value them at.

Ye may Remember I compared Money in a Kingdom or Commonwealth, to the Blood
that Circulats through the Veins and Arteries of the Body, and communicats Life
and vigor to Every Part, without which the Members would become Dead and
Incapable to assist or comfort one another.

Seeing Metalling Money is of so great Use, though of little intrinsic Value, it
being neither fit for Food nor Raiment, the chief Necessaries of Man's Life,
though it may serve for Vessels or other necessary Uses; Yet Iron for many Uses
is found much preferable to Gold, it being only the Scarcity or Rarity of that
Mettle that makes it in so great Esteem: However it be, it is plain, that the
Use of Gold and Silver-money is very convenient all the Trading-World over, yea
partly amongst Barbarous and Savage People; And by Experience, we see the
Possessors of it can command any thing the Place a Toords at their Pleasure.

If therefore it can be made appear, that any thing besides Gold and Silver
Money may be made Use of in all Transactions and Barganings, with as great Ease
and Security as Gold or Silver can be; then shall the following Project be
found both Profitable and Convenient.

That something besides Gold or Silver Coin may be made Use of in Traffic and
Merchandising, that does Answer all the Ends and Uses of it, shall by and by
make appear.

And that I may immediately come to the Proof, I think that I may refer it to
the Judgment of all that are acquainted with the manner of the Circulating of
Bank Notes. that something besides Gold or Silver-Money may serve in Exchange
of Goods, or be made Use of in Commerce and Traffic.

If I shall yet make it further appear, That such Notes may be struck o^ made
Current, without any other Fond of Credit than the public Faith of the Nation,
I hope I have performed my Undertaking.

The Public Faith, perhaps by some may be thought of no good Security; But if
such Gentlemen will have Patience to hear me to Amen. I shall make it evident
that the same shall be a sufficient Security, wherein there can be no manner of
Danger.

But before I proceed to the Author or Foundation of this Security, I shall
first show in what manner those Notes may be Circulated without any Danger of
Fraud, or Possibility of Forgery or Vitiation, which in my Opinion is the only
point that can make this Project Practicable.

The Notes to be made Use of must be struck and cut out of Books, much after
the Fashion of those given out by the Bank, but with this Difference, that
whereas the Bank Notes have the Value inserted in the Body, and on the Margin
which are liable to Vitiation, it were sit the Value of their Notes be also at
large in Letters upon the Seal; So if there should be a Vitiation presumed by
Razing out a Word in the Body and Margin of the Note, and putting another in
place thereof, it will not be possible to get that razed out off the Seal, and
another put in its Room.

But besides all this it will be necessary, that the Secretary or Clerk of the
Office, after having Registered each Note in a Distinct Post by it self, give
out with each Note, a Paper wherein he must write to the Effect, as follows,
Viz.

This enclosed Note Number first. Vol. first, is delivered to R. P. of G. at
Edinburgh this 10th Day of June. 1700. By me A B. Clerk to the Exchequer Note
Office.

Then when the Person to whom the Note is delivered, has Occasion to give it to
any other, he must in like manner write,

At G. the (...) day of (...) Years, delivered this enclosed Note of Five Pound
to S. C. of B. by me R. P.

And so forth, every Person to whose hands the same shall come must Transmit it
in like manner; And if the Paper shall happen to be filled up by these
Indorsements, before the time of Chequing the said Note, and delivery of a new
Paper by the Clerk of the Office be accomplished, he to whose hand the same
shall come last, must begin a new Paper, to the Effect following.

I J. B. of K. having received the enclosed Note Number first, Volumn first,
Value Five Pound, and the Paper in which it was enclosed being filled up by
Indorsments, is retained in my Custody, and shall be produced, if there be
Occasion or the same, by me J. B.

And every one to whose hands the said Note shall come, must Transmit it to
another, as in the first Paper; and at the end of the Year, or short time
before the Year expire, viz: Two Weeks for all Residing within fifty Miles of
Edinburgh, and others at a greater distance so much sooner, as may be
convenient to have Notice given to the General Office, before the Year be at an
end, must give in Accounts of what Notes are in their Custody, to one or other
of the Offices appointed for receiving the same in all considerable Burghs of
the Kingdom, and the Persons appointed for receiving such Accounts, must send
Lists of the same to the General Office, which the Clerk must compare with the
Books; And finding none a missing of that Days date, nor two of one Number, nor
any of another Number than what ought to come in on such a day, they may safely
Transmit new Papers back to the several Offices from whence the Lists were
sent, bearing to the Effect, as follows.

That whereas I have reoeived Advice from A. B. that the Note Number first,
Volumn first, has been Transmitted in due Form, and was in the Custody of GOD,
upon the (...) day of (...) and having compared the same with the Register,
finds that no other Person pretends to have a Note of that Number, and value in
his Custody. This is therefore to satisfy all concerned, that the said Note may
pass current as formerly.

This Paper being sent back to the Keeper of the Office, from whence the
General Office had Intelligence, the person in whose Custody the Note is at the
time, showing to the Keeper of this particular Office, that the same has been
duly Transmitted to him, the same may pass for a Year longer, as at the first.
Thus every Year once, must the Notes be Chequed, as is showed above.

SECTION II. Anent the Security, Safety, and Ease of circulating of Notes.
SOme perhaps may form many dificulties in the Prosecution of this project, and
in order to their satisfactions, I shall solve all the Material objection which
I conceive any can suggest against it.

If it be said, that it will be an unaccountable trouble to Indors each
particular Note every time the same shall be Transmitted from one hand to
another; I Answer

That considering the vast Benefit that will accress to the Nation by the use
of them, a little pains may be the more Tolerable. But further if it be
considered, that these Notes may contain in value five pounds Starl: at least
Reconing great and small promiscuously, it will be found, that they may be
sooner Transmitted by Indorcements than one can well tell over as much Money,
especially when it is i^ different Species, as most of our Money is.

If it be said, that it will be a great trouble to give in Accounts frequently
to the Offices throughout the Kingdom, and to receive back new Papers from the
General Office as is above Narated; I say

The Difficulty here is not so great as at first view some may take it to be,
for this is not needful but once in the year, that is to say some short time
before the date of the Paper, wherein the Note is enclosed be a year complete,
as was above shown; And it is only he to whose hands the Note comes about that
time, that is to be at that trouble.

If it be said tho the time of Chequing each Note be only once in the year, yet
some Notes coming out at all times of the year, and that they are to be Chequ'd
on the same day of the year they come out on, it will occasion a constant
trouble, for some of all Dates may frequently come to hand; I Answer.

If it be found Convenient, that a Vast Number of Notes shall be struck, 'twill
be necessary that some of them be given our at all times of the Year, because
the Chequing of them will take a considerable time, but if there be not a very
considerable Number necessary, one Month or two will serve to give them all
out in, each year: As for Example the Months of May and October, and in that
case none will be put to this Trouble, but at these Terms of the Year.

If it be asked why these Notes should be only Chequed once a Year, and why I
would have the Clerks of the General Office ^o do it on the very Day on which
they were given out.

The reason is. that is any Cheat shall happen, that it may immediately be
discovered; As for Example, I suppose Notes numbered from 500 to 700, should be
given out on the 4th Day of May, all those to whose hands the Notes of that
Days date shall happen to come in the Month of April next Year, must give
notice thereof to the several Offices throughout the Kingdom, appointed for
receiving such Accounts, so that the same may be notisied to the General
Office, before the 4th day of May: and the Clerk ma^king down in whose hands
these several Notes are in their propper Posts, which must must be Ranked in
Order as those in the first Book, where these Notes are marked down at giving
out; if the Account of two Notes of one Number, or the Account of any Note of
that Days date, that is not of the Number between 500 and 700 shall happen, to
come to Hand, it can be easily discovered, and notice returned to the Office
from whence he had the Account, to enquire anent it, and by the Indorsments the
same may be traced to the Author of the Forgery or Vitiation, if any shall
happen to be so impudent, as to attempt the same, whereas if these Accounts
came not all in on one Day, it could not be so well discovered, if any
Vitiation should be, and till they were beyond doubt, notice could not be sent
back to permit the Circulation of the Notes, as formerly.

If it be said, that here there is a Supposition of a Forgery or Vitiation, and
if such a Thing may happen to be, how is any Person Secure, It Is Replied,

Tho there be such a Thing supposed, yet it is next to impossible, that any
such Thing can be, for first there is all the Security in the Note it self,
which the Bank Notes have, and besides, the value of the Note may be put at
large on the Seal, as was formerly mentioned, which the Bank Notes want: It Is
true the Managers of the Bank are now about making Notes of diverse Values in
Different Characters, and also the Paper on which they are struck with this
Moto, The Bank of SCOTLAND, made in the Paper it self, and if this be thought
Necessary, the like may be made in their Notes likewise; But that on which I
reckon the greatest Security of all depends, is the Indorsement, as above.

My Reasons for it are. Let all the Art of Man be employed in making Notes of
what Character they will, and with as many Subscriptions and Seals as possible,
yet the same may be imitated; it being as easy for an Engraver to cut the exact
Copy of 20 several Subscriptions and Seals as to Engrave the Note it self: Though
perhaps it might be difficult to get People in this place who would ingrave
Plates, cut Seals, or make Paper, whereon Notes may be struck like those given
out by the Office, because it were hard to get the same performed without being
Discovered; yet how easy were it for any Rogue to go Abroad, or Strangers to
come from Foreign Parts (where they could have all these Things done exactly)
with Counterfit Notes, if there were not something else Required than a simple
Production of Notes. bearing the same Form and Figure with those given out by
the Office; It Is true the Office by Cuting their Notes out of a Book, might
that way Cheque them as not to receive any forged Note whatever; but what
security is this to People that are some Hundreds of Miles from the Office, and
the Party from whom they had them gone off before any such Trial can be had.
Therefore it is absolutely necessary for the secure Circulating of the said
Notes, that the same be Indorsed from hand to hand, as is showed above.

If it be asked, may not Rogues that can Forge Notes as is above supposed, as
well Forge Indorsements? I Answer.

No, My Reason for it is this, either he is a Man of Stock and Reputation or
not, if he be a Man of Stock and Reputation; It is not to be supposed that he
will attempt so difficult a Work, where the hazard is so great, for considering
that he must give it under his Hand, that he had this Note duly Transmitted to
him; at the end of the Year when this Note comes to the Test, it cannot ^ut be
discovered, and Undoubtedly he will be called in Question for the same; what
his Dange^ may be inthat case the Parliament can best determine: But if he be a
Man of no Stock or Credit, than he can have no Prospect, so much as to get one
Note fairly off his Hand, for any that are acquaint with him, being Jealous of
the Deceit, have no more to do but to enquire at the Person who is said to be
the last Indorser. whether he has Transmitted such a Note, to him, in whose
Custody the said No^e is, which if he deny, as surely he will, if it be not so,
then he is found out and brought to Condign Punishment.

If it be said there can be no Traffic with, or payments made by these Notes
to Strangers, because they cannot have Recourse to the Persons who has
Transmitted these Notes unto their Hands, and consequently may be imposed on by
some that may Forge Notes and Feign Indorsements. To this it is Answered.

If Merchants or others have Occasion to go to a Place to buy Goods with such
Notes, or make Payments where they are nor acquainted, it will be necessary to
have Letters of Recommendation from some Persons of Credit acquaint in the
Place, where the payment is to be made.

If it be said, that such as intend to Forgo the said Notes, may also Forge
Letters of Recommendation.

I think it may be easier for such Persons to Fotge Precepts and Letters of
Recommendations, which as the case stands, might procure Money from the Persons
on whom the Bills are drawn, if Men may be supposed to be so simple as to
accept of sham Recommendations.

If it be said, 'Twill be a great dale of Trouble to obtain Letters of
Recommendation so frequently. It is Answered.

This will not be necessary but upon Extraordinary Occasions, it not being
needful amongst Persons well known to one another, or living upon the Spot
together, for in that case where there is the least Jealousy, by Enquiring at
the last Indorser, the Cheat may be immediately discovered and I do'nt think any
man will be at so great pains as 'twil cost him toForge the said Notes. when
undoubtly he must be discovered before he can get one Note off his hand, unless
he deal with persons supinly negligent; And such as have Occasion to make
payments in places at any considerable Distance, use frequently to do it by
Bills, it not being safe to carry Money, by reason of Robbers and other
Accedents; And in that case there is mo^e pains required in procuring such
Bills, than will be needed in obtaining Recommendations besides the Expense of
Exchange on the said Bills. And in this Respect. these Notes are preferable to
Gold or Silver Money, for not only may payments be made by them in the farthest
places of the Kingdom without any Loss by Exchange, but also they may be
Transmitted from one place to another without Danger or Robery. being of no use
to any but to such as have them by Indorsments: And moreover when any of them
happens to be lost by accident upon notice given to the General Office, with a
particular Account of their Number and value, the same may be renewed to the
Owner, provided that at the time of Chequing no other Person pretend to have
any of the same Number and Value, Or if a Person were going to bestow Money in
a Pair, in small Parcels among Strangers, 'twill b^ no hard Matter to get his
Notes changed to Gold or Silver Money.

But if it be objected. That perhaps People may have Notes of the same Value
regularly Transmitted to them, That is to say, true Notes, which by some
Accident, such as death of the Owner, or otherwise may be detained, and Notice
not timely given for the Chequing thereof, it was hard to give out Certificats
to other People, whereby they might pass for god Notes. To this I answer,

When any Po^son shall inform the General Office. that they have left such and
such Notes, the same is to be marked down by the Clerk; and it at the time of
Chequing no other Person pretend to have the same, it is probable that their
Information is true. But to prevent Deceit in this Matter, let the Person who
pretends to have lost the said Notes, give sufficient Caution to be
accountable, in case any other Person shall produce the true Note (which he
pretends to have lost.) orderly Transmitted to him.

If it be asked what poor People that cannot write shall do anent the
Transmitting of the said Notes.

It will be necessary for them to have a Person or two present when they
receive any of the said Notes, that may Attest under their Hands, that they saw
the same fairly Transmitted to the foresaid Party; and this I think may be
sufficient to satisfy him who shall next receive the same: Or when any of these
Notes is offered in payment to a Person that cannot write, if he be due the
like or greater value to any other Person he may order the same to be Indorsed
in the Persons Name to whom he is owing the Money.

If it be asked what People shall do when the Notes become old and torn. Let
them present the same at the Office nearest the place of his Residence,
appointed for receiving such Accounts, and let the Keeper of that Office fend
Advice to the General Office to have the same renewed, who must send a new One
of the same number and value and take up that which is torn, which the Managers
of the Office must see cancelled.

SECT: III. Showing the Basse on which this Fond of Credit may be Established,
The Number and value of the Notes required, and the Expense of Management.
SOme have a proposed raising a Fond of Credit by making a certain Number of
Notes, and that it be lodged in the Hands of the Royal Burrows, others upon
Security of all Lands in the Kingdom; The latter I do not understand and shall
as little Inquire into, but that which to me seems the most preferrable of any
that has been hitherto proposed is. That, by the Authority of the Parliament, a
certain Number of Commissioners be appointed for the Management of a certain
Number of Notes to be struck, and Circulated in manner as above expressed and
that the whole Value of the said Notes be reserved for a National Stock and
applied only in National Concerns, or otherwise as the Parliament shall think
fit.

In that project for raising a Fond of Credit upon Seturity of all Lands in the
Kingdom, it has been proposed that Tallees shall be made in the Value of 100
years Purchase of the whole foresaid Lands.

To what Use such a Vast Number can be employed is more than I can Comprehend;
for as 'twas formerly observed, the Use and End of Money is only to be given a
pledge to the party of whom one is to purchase any thing he wants; And what
occasion every Gentleman, and Heritor in the Country can have for six-times the
value of his, lands in ready Money, is more than (...) understand.

It Is tr^e, if of one Gentleman, two, three, or a dozen of them, had each
six-times the volue of his Lands, in ready Money, perhaps thy could find Use
for it, to lend to such of their Neighbors as had Occasion for it: But if
every one had so much to lend and none need to borrow. I leave it to the Author
of that project, to direct them how to employ it, for my own share I see not
what occasion any Gentleman or Heretor that has a Land Estate has need for
above a year, or half a years Rent lying by him in ready Money; And if
Merchants or others that make a Trade of Buying and Selling or has their Stocks
in Move^bles, have one third or fourth part ^f their Stocks by them in ready
Money, it is fully sufficient to carry on a Trade.

I do not mean, that a Merchant can never have occasion for more Money than the
third or fourth part of his Stock, but if every one be so well provided, he may
easily borrow what he wants on exerordinary Occasions.

Now if so much Money can be provided as to supply every one with the
quantities above mentioned, there will be no occasion to murmur for the want of
Money, or any good design frustrated upon that Account.

That such a quantity, or at least as much as shall be found convenient may be
easily raised by the foresaid Notes (I Suppose) will be readily believed.

And to satisfy such as may make any Difficulties touching the Circulating the
said Notes. I shall make it appear, that the said Notes shall in the space of
25 years be totally cancelled, and yet the whole value of them still ^emain
entire.

I cannot particularly condescend on the number of the Notes or the quantity of
the Stock this way to be raised, for that must be according as People shall
^al^e them out upon their Bands bearing Annualrent, for it is not to be
supposed that these Notes are to be given People gratis, neither will it be
necessary that they should be all strucker at one time, but from time to time
as there shall be occasion, and at the end of 2 or 3 years, or as soon as there
shall be abundance of them dispersed Abroad, so that People's Hands are
thereby sufficiently filled for the carrying on of Trade, no more Notes are to
be struck, but on the contrary 4 per Cent, or (...) 25th part of the whole
Notes are to be taken up and Cancelled each year, so at the end of 25 years
none of them will be remaining, and yet their whole value will be entire.

The Annualrent of the Money lent out will be sufficient to defray all expense
of Management, and take up 4 per Cent of the whole Notes yearly, as does appear
by the following Calculation, Viz.

I supose one Million of Ster: Money may at least be struck in Notes. The
Interest of which at 6 per Cent is Sixty Thousand Lib: Sterling. Forty Thousand
Pounds of this must be given every year for the Notes that are Cancelled, and
the other twenty Thousand is more than sufficient to pay Triple the Charge or
Expenses of Management.

Seven or 8 Commissioners I Judge may be abundance for Directors or Chief
Managers, who may take Security from such as take out these Notes upon Loan,
and when any Person in places at a distance would borrow, provided none of the
Managers be acquainted with his Circumstances, it will be sit that they bring
Certificats from the Magistrates of Burrows, Commissioners of Supply, or some
other persons of Credit in the Place, so that the Managers may on all
Occasions, be ready to Accomodat the Lieges upon reasonable Security; and once
every Year, or at such other times as the Parliament shall appoint, produce
their ^ournals unto such Auditors as the Parliament shall think fit to Nominat
for Revising their Accounts, and Examining the whole Course of their Management.

That such persons may be provided with reasonadle Salaries for their constant
Attendance and Diligence, let two Hundred Lib. Sterling be allowed to each of
them a Year, the Governor or President the double, the Secretary two Hundred
Pounds likewise. This altogether will not exceed two Thousand Pounds Sterling.

It was formerly observed. That it would be a great Ease to the Lieges to have
the time of Chequing of the abovementioned Notes at two Terms in the Year; and
that the same may be effectuated, 'twil require the greater Number of Clerks
for marking down and Chequing the said Notes at the Respective Torms of
Chequing; And I Judge forty employed a Month or six Wheels about the Terms of
Whitsunday and Martinmass Yearly, will be sufficient to Cheque the whole Notes,
though they be upwards of a Million Pounds Sterling in Value; And that half a
Crown per Day, will be sufficient allowance for to each of them.

Forty Men three Months at half a Crown per day will require 360 Pounds.

Besides these, six or eight Clerks would constantly attend the Office for
giving out and Registring Notes marking down the Informations of such as loose
their Notes, and dong every thing else requisite, 30 or 40 Pounds a piece
yearly may be sufficient for their Attendante, which will not exceed 250 Pound.

These that attend the Offices throughout the Kingdom must next be provided
for; their number I think needs not exceed four or five score being sixed at
convenient places; Their pains and Labor not being equal, by Reason some will
be in places of greater Repair than others, it is but just that their Sellaries
be proportioned to their pains, and the twelve Weeks in which the Notes are
Chequed being only the time in which their Bussiness is greatest; Let 20 sh.
St: per Week be allowed to each of them promiscuously (because it were both
needless and tedious to make a particular Calculation) during the said twelve
Weeks; For the rest of the year they will have nothing to do but to give notice
to the General Office of any Note that is lost in their Respective Bounds, or
for the Exchange of worn or torn Notes: Therefore very small Allowance may be
sufficient for all this pains.

Now suppose them to be 100 Complete, 1200 will pay their whole Sallerys for
the ^^ ^^^^^ in which they are chiefly employed, and grant they have 200 or 300
L, allowed amongst them all for their other Service, this will not exceed: in
all ^^ 900.

The next Expense to be considered is the Postage of Letters to and again, and
if a Hundredth Pound^ Sterling or two be allowed for this, I think the
Postmaster will be at no los^.

But because some of these Offices being (...) some perhaps a dozen or twenty
Miles from any Post Office, or off the Post Rod, it will be necessar that one
be sent express with Accounts from such particular Offices to some Post Office,
and this Expense also must come off the Public, and that we may Guess what
this may amount to.

I suppose 20 or 30 of these Offices lie 20 Miles off any Post way; being only
at the Terms of Chequing, that there will be Occasion for employing such
By-Posts, neitheir will they need to be employed above once a Week. Say 30
Fellows be sent with Expresses 20 Miles for 3 Months once a Week, or because
some of the Notes may be sooner or latter given notice of, grant they are thus
employed 4 Months in the Year, and that each of these Foot Posts have 20 Miles
to go with his Letters, Whereas some of them will not have above six. Allow
also each of them half a Crown for his pains each time he goes out and comes
back with his Packet, the who^e Money to defray this Expenses, will not exceed
50 or 60 Lib: Sterling: but allow it to be 100.

Every thing being thus Reckoned at large, which on occasion may be
Retrinchedone Third at least, the whole Expense of Management exceeds not 4410
Lib:

The Interest of a Million at six per Cent. amounts to 20000 Lib, over and
above the 40000 Lib: which is to be given out Yearly for the Notes that are to
be cancelled

Here is no less than 15590 Lib. of Annual Excressions, beside what defrays the
Charge of Management, and taking up of the foresaid Notes, and yet the whole
Capital Stock Remains entire.

This 15590 L. may be applied for the public Concerns of the Nation, the whole
time the Notes are Circulating, and at the end of 25 years, when the whole
Notes are Retired, the whole 60000 L. will be a Perpetual Annual Fund to be
applied for the Use of the Public.

Before I close, I shall Answer two Objections or Scruples which some may have
anent the Prosecution of this Project.

The first I suppose will be by such as have considerable Sums lent upon
Interest, least the party in whose Hands it is shall borrow the like Value of
Notes, and make payment to them with the same.

To this I say, this ought to be no manner of Scruple, For a Law being
Estbalished, ordaining the said Notes to pass in all payment whatever, and a
Method laid down. rendering the persons in whose possession they are fully as
secure as if they had the like value in Gold or Silver Money; (Yea in some
Cases better as has been already shown) they can be in no worse Circumstances
to have their Money paid in Notes then in Gold, unless they say by this
project, Money will Become more plenty than ^^w it is, and therefore they would
find it more difficult to get their Money Secured in good Hands.

This Argument ^ Judge to be much of the same Nature, with that which a certain
Person propon'd to the Council of a certain City, wherein an Epidemick
Distemper raged, when some Encouragement was proposed to be given to an Eminent
Physician that he might come and Reside with them. The honest Gentleman
proudently moved, that the Council would consider, that whereas formerly there
was but one Man in that Town, which made Coffins for Dead People, and that of
late another had set up; If they should give Encouragement to this Physician,
and his Medicines prove effectual, it might much prejudge the Trade of these
Cossin-makers.

Perhaps some may say, what if a Revolution should happen? what shall become of
all those who have such Notes in their Custody? For we Remember during the
Wars, about 50 years ago, considerable Sums were borrowed upon the Public
Faith, which few had the good Fortune to get Repaied.

I am almost ashamed to Form such an Objection, it being so far from the
purpose, but that I have heard some thing of this Nature has been already
Objected.

In the first place I say, let all honest Menpray that no such Revolution may
ever happen, and also thank GOD, Matters are so Established, that we have
little or no Ground to fear it. Howbeit, seeing all things Earthly are Subject
to Mutation and Accidents. I should think it a very ill Founded Project, if
even an Accident of that kind could Overturn it,

Therefore, I must tell any that makes such a Suggestion, that in my Judgment
there is such a Vast Difference in the Comparison, that I may Warrantably say
there is no Parallel.

For in the case instanced. the Money was lent for the most part by such as
were Reputed no great Friends to the Government afterward Established. That
Money was employed to such Ends as the Government after Established did not
approve. That Money then advanced was spent and gone, and would have been a
Sensible loss to the Nation to have made it up; in all which Respects, the
Project here proposed is Diameterically opposite.

I have insisted on the two former Sections, beyond what I thought to have
done, but because every one will not so easily conceive it. I thought I could
not bestow too much Pains in holding forth a Matter of so much Consequence, and
that I may make it plain to the meanest Capacity, do not think it impertinent
to resume the whose Project in a plain Demonstration, Viz.

SECT: IV. An Example of the whole Project of Circulating Notes.
THE Clerks of the Office having made their Books with a distinct Post for each
Note Numbered as the Notes themselves, begins to write, as follows. Volem 1.
Note 1 Is delivered to Andrew Wright Carpenter in Lies, this 10 of Oct. 1700
Note 2 Is delivered to John Smith, Hamarman in Canogate, this 10 of Oct. 1700
Note 3 Is Delivered to Matthew Long of little Town, this 10 of Oct. 1700. Note 4
Dito Note 5 DitO Note 6 Dito Note 7 Dito


The Clerk with each of these Notes must give a paper bearing to whom it was
delivered, as for Example.

The Enclosed Note Number 7th. Volum first, Value five Pounds is delivered to
William Long of Littletoun, this 10th of October 17000, by me

Henry Green Clerk of the National Stock-Office.

Edinburgh November 2d: 1700 Delivered this enclosed Note Number seventh Volum
first. Value five L. to William Trader Merchant in Edinburgh by me, John Long

Edinburgh November 15 1700 delivered this enclosed Note Number seventh Volum
first. value five L. to Michael Good Ale, Brewer in Edinburgh by me William
Trader. Edinburgh February 2d. 1700 Delivered this enclosed Note Number seventh
volum first, value five L. to John Gentleman of Braeside in Aberdeen Shire by
me Michael Good-Ale.

Aberdeen Mar^h, 25 1701 delivered this enclosed Note, Number seventh, Volum
first, value five L. to George Cook Vimner in Aberdeen, By me John Gentleman.

Abercleen, May 10th 1701. Delivered this enclosed Note, Numb: seventh, Volum
first. valne five L. to George Dier, L^tster in Aberdeen, By me George Cock.

Aberdeen, June 15th. 1701, Delivered this enclosed Note, Numb, seventh, Volum
first, value five L. to Jean Knitsicker, Stocken-Worker in Aberdeen, in
Presence of John Waft and Thomas Thrumb^, Weavers there, By me George Dier.

Aberdeen, June 16th. 1701, Delivered by Jean Knitsicker this enclosed Note
Numb: seventh, Volum ^ it value five L. to Andrew Fairdealer, Merchant in
Aberdeen, before us Witnesses, John Wast, Thomas Thrumb.

Edinburgh, August 3d 1701, Delivered this enclosed Note, Numb: Seventh, Volum
first, value five L. to John Barganer Merchant in Edinburgh, By me Andrew
Fairdealer,

I suppose by this time the paper may be filled up with Indorsements, and the
Man in whose custody it now is, begins another paper, as follows, Viz.

I John Barganer Merchant in Ed inburgh, having received the Enclosed Note,
Numb: seventh, Volum first, value five L. given out of the General Office the
10th of October 1700. and the Papers in which it was enclosed, being filled up
with Indorsements, is retained in my Custody, and shall be produced if there be
Occasion for the same; And in the mean time the Note it self here enclosed is
delivered to Thomas Sheepherd of Green-braes, in the Shire of Dumfreis, By me
John Barganer.

The time of Chequing the said Note now approaching, as it may be perceived by
taking notice what time it came out of the Office: Notice is thereof given to
the Office at Dumfreis appointed for receiving such Accounts, and the Keeper of
the said Office, sends in a List to the General Office, showing in whose Hands
such and such Notes are to be Chequed that day; among which he notifies that
the fore said Note Numb: 7. Volum 1st. value five L. is in the Custody of
William Sheepherd.

The Clerk having viewed all the Lists of Notes of that Days date, and finding
Numb: 7. Vol: 1. value 5 L. to be in custody of William Sheepherd, be takes his
Book with blank Posts, Numbered as that wherein the Notes were marked down at
giving out, and in the seventh Post marks down.

The Note Numb: 7. Vol. 1. is at present in the custody of William Sheepherd of
Greenbraes.

Then he takes a Paper as at the first, and therein Writs, as follows.

Edinburgh, Oct: 10th, 1701, Whereas I have received Advice from A. B. that the
Note Numb: seventh, Volum first, value five L. has been Transmitted in due
Form, and was in Custody of William Sheepherd of Greenbraes, upon the 25th of
September last. And having compared the same with the Register, finding that no
other Person pretends to have a Note of that Number, Volumn, and Value in his
Custody. This is therefore to satisfy all concerned, that the said Note may
pass Current, as formerly.

This Paper is sent back to the Keeper of the Office at Dumfreis, and if it
hapen that the forementioned person has Occasion to deliver the Note to any
other Person between the time of his giving Notice that it was in his Custody,
and the time of receiving of this new Paper, he must transmit it, bearing that
he has given Notice thereof to the Office, and the Person in whose Custody the
Note shall happen to be at the time when this Paper comes to Dumfreis may call
for it, and when he has Occasion to deliver the Note to any other Body, make
Use of this new Paper in Transmitting of it from Hand to Hand as in the first
Paper, and when tho said Paper is filled up with Indorsements, begin one of new
as was formerly Described, and next Year notice must be given in whose Custody
the said Note is at the time of Chequing, which must still be the self same Day
on which it was first given out, or at least on that Day which the Paper given
out with it bears it is be Chequed on, and this Method must be follow, so long
us the Notes are in Circulating, which will not be above 25 Years, if one 25th
part of them be taken up Yearly, as is proposed.

Or if at any time before all the Notes shall be Cancelled, if the Parliament
find it necessar that some Money be advanced on any National Concern, they may
Suspend the Cancelling of any Notes for a Year, less or more as they shall
think sit, and appoint the Money which should have been given for taking up of
the Notes for that time, to such Uses a^ they shall see meet.

CHAP. II.
SHevreth how the Notes proposed in the former Chapter, may be disposed of, and
how the Honor, Credit, and Wealth of the Nation, many several other ways be
advanced.

SECTION I. How the Notes proposed in the Preceding Chapter may be disposed of
in part.
THE SCOTS Indian and African Company has been the Subject of much Discourse
in the world for some time past, that it may be a profitable Undertaking to
this Nation, is Undoubtedly the Concern of a^l SCOTS Men, and that to which
every one in his propper Sphere ought to ^he assisting, but the bad Success
hitherto of the Efforts, for Propogating, it has created such a
Misunderstanding amongst People, that every one is Jealous of another.

To ^nquire into the particular causes of the Disapointments, that has hitherto
hapened, in the prosicution of that design will not be so necessary, as to lay
down Methods to prevent the like for the future, a Physician knowing the
Distemper, tho he do not publish the same, may prescribe Remedies; And a Man
may quench Fire, tho he inqure not how it broak our. and because the great
obsticle or Impediment that frustcrats the carrying on of that design, is the
want of Money; I think the Parliament may Lend upon interest a hundredth
Thousand, or two Hundredth Thousand Pounds Str: of these Notes, to ou^ Indian
and African Company.

Perhaps some may say, the Money that has been already given to carry on that
Trade, has been so Mismanaged or misaplyed, that there is but little hope that
there will be a good account given of this, provided the Parliament should
allow them the same.

The Setlement by all the Accounts we have of it may be made, one of the most
Comodious and most Profitable Colonys in the World. The Spainards are a People,
which are not in a Condition to do us Damnage by Sea, if we had any
considerable Naval Force; I mean even what we may have, if so much Money as is
mentioned, were employed to propogat that Colony; Nothing need we fear from
France, for in that case we may expect the Assistans of the English, it being
the interest of England, that we should have that place, rather than the French.

By Land there is no Danger, for not only are the Spaniards of those parts an
Esteminate lazy People, unacquainted with Wars, but like wise are few in
Number, scarce able to keep Possession of the Plantations they have already;
Morover, they live at a considerable Distance from our Settlement, and the
Woods between them and our People are unpassible for Armies with Wagons and
Artillery, and other necessaries for a Siege.

But the greatest Fears of some perhaps may be, that our own Countrymen
entrusted with the Effects and Concerns of the Company, may prefer their own
private Interest to the public Good, and by this means Ruin all.

To prevent this, there would be special Care taken in the Choice of those who
are to have any considerable Trust there, that they be Men of Conscience,
Probity and Honor, for it is not to be supposed, that Men of no Principle will
study the Good of the Company: further than it jumps with their private
Interest; And it is but reasonable, the Parliament should have a special Hand in
their Election seeing they lend the Company a considerable Sum to carry on their
Trade.

There would be likewise Care taken in the Choice of those who are to labor in
the Plantation. that they be People inured to Work, for one Plew-Man, Wright,
Gardner or other Tradesman bred with hard Labor, can be more serviceable in
the Colony, than three Men bred to an idle Life; And the Expense of
Transporting them thither, and mantaining them while there, is a like in both.

The next Difficulty proponed, perhaps may be, that it will not be so easy to
find Tradesmen, and Others Inured to Labor, as disbanded Soldiers, and other
sort of idle People.

Suppose it be so, yet the vast difference of their Usefulness will do more
than countervail the Expense and pains that the One will cost more than the
Other; For I suppose the Company cannot send a Labourer to Caledonia under Five
pounds, considering he is to be subsisted from the time he is Listed till he be
set a Shore in the Colony: And it were better that they give a Lusty Able
Workman Five pounds in Hand, and transport him to their Settlement, than to
transport Two bred to Idleness thither, tho they give them nothing in Hand, For
not only is the Two as much Expense in Transportation as the Others and his 5
Lib. besides Transportationin, but this One shall be more Serviceable in the
Plantation than the Other two, and live on the half of their Allowance whilst
there.

But after all, I do not think there will be any great Difficulty in getting
Good Men, if the Company would make choice of some Farmers and Tradesmen of
good Repute and Interest in the Country, to be Persons of inferior Charge in
the Colony, for every One would find abundance of his Acquaintances to go along
with him, and would be much fitter to Direct and Oversee the Work of these
under his Command, than disbanded Officers, and Gentlemen unacquainted with
Labor.

As to what may be Objected, touching their unfitness in Military Service,
'twas shown already, that there is no Danger of an Attack by Land, and I shall
by and by give my Opinion how they shall be secured against any Attempt by Sea;
But grant there should be Martial Action, these Laborers may be as fit for
that Service as the other, provided they have a few Experienced Officers to
head them, of which there are abundance already there.

Besides these already in the Settlement, iuppose Twelve or Fifteen Hundred
Good Men may be sufflcient for the Stock of a Colony, able to defend the same,
and Cultivate the Ground, that it may be capable not only to afford Provisions
to themselves, But likewise or all other that shall settle there, And to
afford American Plantation Goods for transporting hither; And within a Year or
two so much of the Ground may be Cleared and Cultivated, that whole Families
may be transported thiter. For this end Seeds of several Herbs and Roots, as
also Corn would be sown there, with all possible speed, that the Expense of
sending Provision hither, may no longer be a Burden to the Company.

Some say our Corn by reason of the strength of the Ground, shuts up to a
Wonderful hight, but is not Fruitful.

I cannot positively say, what may be the Nature of that Ground, but I am apt
to believe this proceeds more from want of Skill in Husbandry, than from any
Defect in the Corn, for Sir Walter Raligh gives Account, that in the Province
of Baby lon the Ground is so Fertile, that it bears 200 Fold, yet they have it
Sown with Wheat like what we have here, which he says grows to the height of
Trees, and is unfruitful if let alone, but that the Husbandmen Cropped ir twice
with Hooks, and once by Sheep, by which means it is keept low, and is exceeding
Fruitful, This may be tried, and if it will not do, such Corn as is commonly used
in the Indies must be made use of. Some Cattle would also be taken there as
soon as possible.

If at Sea they have their Ships that went on the first and second Expedition,
together with these three Frigots that were made use of in the late War upon
our Coasts, well Manned, I dobut not but they are able to oppose the strongest
Naval Force Spain can make against them.

The Expense of Equiping and mentaining these Ships, will not exceed the Money
mentioned to be lent to the Company, for several Years, and I doubt not but
e're a full Year Expire, that the Spaniards will be obliged to agree to
reasonable Terms, which if they do not, Our Colony will be in a Condition to
seize upon their Mines in those Parts, for as is said the Men that are already
in the Colony, with 1200 ot 1500 more, can oppose any Force the Spaniards can
make against them, and those at Sea will be in a Condition to meet with their
Fleet when they list.

Some hard dozen of Advice Boats, or light Vessels to run too and from the
Colony, would also be of great Use, the want of which hitherto has been
prejudicial to the Company.

Here you see a considerable Number of these Notes may be disposed of to
Advantage but because it may be said, these Notes can only serve amongst our
selves but can be of no use beyond the Limits of this Kingdom. I shall show
that there will not be any great Occasion for them without the Kingdom, but
because it may be also objected in other cases, I shall referr it to another
Place, and there give an Answer to all together.

SECTION II. Which Respects Manufactures.
MOst Nations in Europe Endeavor to Cultivat Manufactures to as great a height
as they can, and that not only by the Industry of Private Persons, but also by
Laws and other public Encouragements.

That this is the Interest of every Kingdom and Common Wealth, is to obvious to
need any Proof, for not only is it the Opinion of most Men and Encouraged and
required by the Laws of all well Governed Common Wealt^s, but even by Divine
Precept Industry is enjoined. Nevertheless it has been too much neglected in
this Kingdom, to our great Loss and Reproach.

It is well known, that the Inhabitants of this Kingdom are as Capable to
Undergo Labor and Fatique, and to perform Mechanic Operations as most People
in Europe, and that Our Soil and adjoining Seas produce what may make us Live
as Comfortably as any People in the World.

It Is true, Our Soil is not so Fertile as in many other Countries, (yet in
another Place I have showen that it may be made much more Fruitful than it is)
but thus says nothing to other industry.

The Seas which bound Our Coast, abound with Fishes of several sorts,
particularly Herrings, of which I believe no Place of the World can boast of
greater Plenty.

How many Thousands of People that live idle, might be employed in Fishing, and
tho we have not at present such a way to Export Our Fishes yet several Methods
may be fallen on to Increase Trade that way, particularly that Encouragement
may be given to the Dutch, who are well acquainted in that Trade, to come and
settle amongst us, and that Towns and Harbors be Built alongs the Shore, at
Places most convenient for Fishing.

This perhaps may be rejected by some as a thing prejudicial, to suffer
strangers to settle among us, and to allow them the Privilege of Natural Born
Subjects, but if it be considered, that those People that come from Foreign
Parts to reside amongst us, become one People with our selves in a short time,
that what prosites they make, tend to the Enriching and strengthening of the
Nation, as much as that which is acquired by Natural Born Subjects. That in the
mean time those People bring us to a way of Trading wherein we are but little
acquainted, and that which is more, while we give them not Encouragement to
dwell amongst us, they follow the same Trade, taking the Fish upon Our Coasts,
and carrying them where they list, while we Reap no part of the Profit, I think
all reasonable Men will readily acknowledge that the least of these
Inconveniences is to allow them to settle amongst us.

But I am persuaded no such inconveniencie follows the Tollerating of Strangers
amongst us, as is commonly believed, I am persuaded it were the interest of the
Nation to allow Foreigners as ample Privileges as Natural Born Subjects, I
shall put the case whether is it not better that French Resugees that are
obliged to abandon their Native Country, for not conforming themselves to the
Idolatries and Superstitions of the Church of Rome be Encouraged to settle
among us. sor setting up Silk Manufactures, and others wherein we are but
little acquainted, as to send our Money out of the Kingdom to purchase these
Commodity's, and thereby strengthen such as are Enemies to Our Nation and
Religion.

Here it may not be impertinent to Enquire into the Freedom or Privileges of
Citys, Burghs, and Corpotations, whether it does not more Obstruct as advance
the honor, Wealth, and Popolousness of them, that there is such hard
Conditions and Restrictions to obtain Communications or Freedom in Trade.

In my Opinion, such Restrictions and Qualifications required of such as would
partake of their Privileges, are very prejudicial to the Corporations
themselves; My reason for it is, that the more populous a City is, so much is
it the better for the Inhabitants in general; Let any Man take a Survey of all
the Citys or Towns he knows, and see whither this does not hold in general; Now
the requiring of hard Conditions of those that would incorporat, is certainly a
great Impediment to Incorporating.

The Objections I know against this are, we bought our Previlage dea^, either
with our Money o^ long Aprentissips, or both. We have it derived to us by our
Ancestors or the like, and therefore if others that have not Purchased it so
dear, shall be admited, they shall share in the Profits, that we expect to
make, and couse quently prejudge us, of as much as they shall gain.

By whatever means, those who have the present previlege, have procured it, it
is not to the purpose, if the Admiting of others on easier terms be not
prejudical, but on the Contrair profitable to the former, then have they no
cause to rejict the latter. But so it is, that by admiting of every on that
pleases, is the advantage of all.

To make this evident, let any person make a Calculation, whither there be more
Tradesmen of all sorts in Edinburgh or Musselburgh, I belive without much
enquiry the majoritie will be granted to Edinburgh.

Let is next be enquired, whither the Inhabitants or Tradesmen in Ediuburgh or
Musselburgh, be most woalthy, and have the best Trade, I supose also, the
Prehemmence will be given to Edinburgh.

But some says, what is that to the purpose Edinburgh is the Capital City of the
Kingdom, the State of Superior Judicators, which occations the frequent
Conflouance of People to that Place.

Let them next enquire of the state of Glasgow, Aberdeen, Dundee, Montrose, or
any other Town they please, and if it be found in all these, that the more
populous the place is, the more wealthy the Inhabitants are, 'twill be no
absurd Consequence, to belive, that the Inhabitants of any on particular Town,
should become the more wealthy, as the City grows populous.

I supose it will be easily granted that to tolerate all that please to come
and reside in Burghs, to Trasfique and follow other Vocations, may be a ready
expedient to make them populous; and upon strict Enquiry 'twill not be found
prejudicial to any particular Calling or Corporation; For I make a Supposition,
that upon Liberty granted to all persons to set up in Citys and Corporations
for a small Ackowledgement, it would bring in six Mansions to this place: But
says some of that Employment. we are at a great Loss, for so many Men will take
away a great deal of our Profit; but if it be considered. that at the same
time, Twenty Merchants, Ten Smiths, six Wrights, Ten Tailors, and
proportionable of every Trade and Calling come hither, by which means the
Inhabitants are considerably Increased, so that the new Incomers will be
Subject of Employment to one another; As for Example, if all these new
Inhabitants shall Employ these Ten Tailiors, the New come Shoe-Makers, etc.
There will be no Occasion of their being employed by the old Residenters.

Much might be said, and Examples given, both For ^eign and Domestic ^^
infor^^ this; As for instance, let any inquire into the State of the ^rewars
and Bakers of Edinburgh, The Bakers have a Privilege amongst themselves, that
none but such as serve Aprentiship^ to them, or that Marry Freemen; Daughters,
can be received into their Corporation; As to the Brewers there is no ^e^trant,
any Man may follow that Employment that pleases; yet it is obvious that the
first are not E^^ri^hed by their great Privileges, nor the latter the poorer
that they can de ba^ none from following that Voc^^tion, but on the contrary
the latter is an a much more prosperous Condition than the former.

If this Example have no weight because it is too Private, Familiar and
Domostick, look but over to Spain and Holland, ye will see that the former are
very strict and nice in vouchafing Privilege of Naturalization, and the latter
so lax that they refuse none, which is doubtless one of the strongest Reasons
that can be given why they are so Populous and Rich.

Shiping is a thing we much want, and that which greatly encreasses the
Strength, Wealth and Honor of a Nation, this we may have encreassed greatly by
the stricking of Notes as was described in the preceding Chapter; For not only
may a considerable value of these Notes be Lent to a Company that shall be
Erected for Building Ships, but I think it were very convenient that a Law
should be made Prohibiting of any Ships under certain Penalties to Trade to
this Kingdom but what are Built within it after such a day.

I doubt not but at first view this may seem to be a very absurd opinion
considering that we want Wood; Nevertheless seeing that which will buy one Ship
Equipt and ready to put to Sen, will Buy Wood for four, tho I had said Six
perhaps I had not been much by the way;) and there is abundance of People in
the Kingdom that may be Employed to Build them, and the same Mariner^ which
will serve to bring home a new Ship may bring home Wood to be one in another
Ship, for I believe any Vessel is capable to bear as much Wood in her Hold as
will build another of her own Burden; and there is a vast difference between
the value of the Money or Goods given for a Ship Equipt, and the Materials to
make it of.

That Shipping may be here equipt, 'twill be necessary that Encouragement be
given to Carpenters, some from Abroad, and chiefly that others at home may be
Bred to that Employment; and it were very commendable that Gentlemen who are
not able to provide their Sons to such Portions as they can live on suitable to
their Quality. would breed them to this or some other honest Employment, rather
than that they should be obliged to go and carry Arms in the Service of
Foreign Princes; and some Gentlemen who are in Condition to provide their
Children to handsome Livings, would do well to give Example in this Matter, for
commonly Mechanics or Tradesmen are so much despys'd, that those who would be
reouted Gentlemen think it below them to apply themselves to such Employments.

This will be a great Mean to promote the Wealth, Honor, and Strength of the
Nation, for not only might many of our Countrymen, That go Abroad for a Lively
hood remain at home, to be Employed in the Service of the Nation upon Occasion,
but likewise much Wealth that is given for Foreign Commodities would be kept
at home; and if Gentlemen or People of any Tolerable Stocks did Apply
Themselves this way, they would certainly be more Capable to advance Trade than
the meaner Sort of People bred to those Employments, who after having served
their Apprentic^ships have little or no Stock; and therefore can do but little
to propogate Trade, whereas others who have but little Stock to follow a
Gentleman Employment, would have enough to set up as a Mechanics, and in the
Account of all considering Persons the best of the meanest Employment is
preferable to the meanest of the best.

There would likewise be some pains taken to bred up the Youth of poor People,
that are not able to put them to Trades, even at the Expense of the Public. A
small part of the 15000 L. Excressions on the Annual Profit of the Notes
formerly mentioned. would go a great length this Way, and many that Live in
Penuary and are a Burden to the Nation, might by this means support themselves
handsomely and be Serviceable to the Nation.

There will not be so great Difficulty in finding Carpenters as some are apt to
believe, for a few Expert Tradesmen to direct, would perform a great deal of
Work by the Hands of others, who have little Knowledge in that Employment. Any
person that can handle an Ax by their Direction, is Capable to do most of the
Work belonging thereto, and Masters of this and all other Employments we are
least acquaint in would be got at any Rate.

Much might be said on this Subject, and doubtless it is worth the Consideration
of the Honorable Estates of Parliament to think on Ways and Means, and to make
Laws for the Encouragement of Manufactures of all sorts within this Kingdom;
It Is a pity that so great a Number of Inhabitants that might be Serviceable to
the Nation, should be so great a Burden to it, some of them actually Begging,
Others Loi^ering about some Cottage in a Sterving Condition, and many following
silly Employments, whereas they might be more Useful to themselves, and the
Nation in other Capacities.

The Scarcity of Money having Rendered many good Designs impracticable or
ineffectual, being Supplied by the Use of the foresaid Notes, it will be no
hard Matter to get Manufacture^ Erected; For several Company's being Formed,
may borrow of these Notes upon Interest, for Carrying on their Trade.

If a Company for Building Ships were Established, I suppose they might have
occasion to Employ 100000 L. Starling to carry on that Trade. A Company for
Fishing would require twice as much, and many other Manufactures would require
considerable Sums to set them up, against which none can make Objections for
want of Money, for this may be Supplied by Notes as is said, which the several
Companys may borrow upon Interest.

But because some may aledge Bussiness cannot be ca^^yed on by those Notes
since they will not be received in Payments but only within the Kingdom, and
that there will be occasion for paying considerable Sums Abroad for several
Commondity's to Erect and Propogate such Manufactures, as also for mantaining
the African and Indian Company us was for^^erly hi^^ed. To this it is Answered.

First. A Fishing Company will not have occasion to Dispu^se any considerable
Sums in Foreign parts, but on the con^^air will have considerable Incomes from
thence. 2dly. What the other Manufactures will require will be much less than
what is given out for the Commodities that are now bought Abroad, which may
then be by them prepared at home. 3dly. What the Indian and African Company
will need to give out in Foreign parts will not be much, for all their
Mariners and others that receive wages may be paid, and their Ships Victualed
here, till the Colony be in a condition to afford them Provisions, so that
there will be no need of sending Money out of the Kingdom for their Support,
but for Refitting and putting to Sea their two Ships at New York and Jamaica,
and that is inconsiderable in respect of what may be raised by the said Notes.
And lastly, considering that as the Matter stands we have occasion to Export as
much Goods as purchases all foreign Commoditys we want, it may be Rationally
concluded after Manufactures of all sorts are here Erected, especially
Fisheries, our Export will be much greater, and Import much less, for as has
been said, Goods Manufactured cost much more Abroad than the Mattetials of
which they are made. From all which it is visible that whatever Notes are Struck
and Circulated in manner as above represented, is so much clear Gain to the
Nation. And tho it was supposed that there might be only occasion for raising a
Million Starl: Money of them, yet I doubt not but three times as much might be
raised that way, if Manufactures were encouraged as is said, and what a vast
profit this may be to the Nation, besides the profit arrising from Fisheries
and Manufactures let any Person consider.

Manufactures may not only be set up and Encouraged to the great Benefit of the
Nation, but several other things may be done to promote the welfare thereof,
such as taking efectual Measures to prevent the Export of Wool, the Import of
Foreign Woollen-Cloth and other Commoditys that may well be wanted;
togethtogether with many other things that no doubt the Wisdom of the
Parliament will find convenient and profitable for the Leiges.

I thought to have touched several other things of this Nature, but not knowing
how this may be accepted, and being unwilling to be tedious,. I shall at
present forbear, and give some Directions, to the effect that all in their
several Ranks and Capacity's, may live comfortably in the World.

CHAP. III. How all Ranks and Degrees of People may Live Comfortably.
SECTION I. Which Respects the Poor.
IT being hardest for those of the meanest Degree to live Comfortably, I shall
begin with them, and proceed Gradually, ^ill I come to those of the heighest.

When I say every one may live Comfortably, it is not to be thought I mean every
one may have all the Comforts of this Life at his Pleasure, my meaning is (and
that which is the propper meaning of the Words) that every one may have
neceslars Suitable for one in the Rank it has pleased GOD to place him. If any
can advance his Fortune by Virtue and industry it is well, but I know no Rule
that can be given to make all Men Rich, for that were not only contrair to the
Order GOD has Established, and Foretold, that there shall alwise be some Poor
in the World, but also is in its own Nature impossible, for as one increasses
in Riches, some others must Decrase as Natively asone Scale of a Balance goes
up when the other is pressed down. Happiness does not consist in the having of
abundance of this World's good things, a Person following a Plow, or driving a
Cart all Day, and going Home to his course Fare and mean Cortage at Night, may
have as much Satisfaction as the greatest Pear or Prince, And that every one
may have Food and Raiment fit for him, is what I shall Endeavor to make appear.

It has been the Unhappiness of this Kingdom, that great Numbers of Beggars
has been Tolerated to go up and down Begging, from whence many inconveniences
proceed, for not only do many Vagatants and Lusty persons able to Work, go
about asking Alms, but likewise many lewd Practices are amongst them committed
without Censure, they not being under the particular inspection of such as
ought to Curb Vice.

Several Acts have been of late Inshued out by the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, for the Regulating of Beggars, and providing for such
as are not able to mantain-themselves, but hitherto these Acts have not taken
effect, partly in that those who ought to put the same in Execution, are not so
diligent in that behalf as could be wished; And partly through the indulgent
Temper, and Charitable Disposition of many People that cannot forbear to give
Alms to the begging Poor, that so frequently Accoast them (many of whose Faces
plead pity) not considering that this manner of Treatment Encourages the
Beggars to neglect the Entertainment they would get in Hospitals, and also
o^ens a Door to Vagarants, (or as it is Vulgatly Phrazed Ranney Beggars) to go
through Begging, who often by their importunity, gets more Alms than these who
are ^ot able to Work for their Sustinence.

But that they may be Supplied in the most equal way; is what ought Undoubtedly
to be studied, and to put in Execution the several Acts already Emited to that
effect, no doubt will be a good mean, but I humbly Conceive, several things
might be done to Facilitat the same, Viz.

First, That there be a certain Number of Men, such as Deacons of the Church
and other honest Neighbors, appointed to Enquire into the Condition of all
those within their several bounds, so that they may Verily know who are Objects
of Pity and who not, in Order to inform the Magistrates of Burghs, Sherisss,
etc. who are appointed by the Council to take care therein.

Secondly, When any are found Begging within their Bounds to seize them
furthwith, and send them to the place of their Nativity, Others would herein
also Concur, and at least inform some of these appointed to take notice of the
Poor, when they come abroad, for it will be hard to get this effectuate, if
People indulge Beggars and give them Alms, except in Hospitals, or some other
Orderly way.

Thirdly, When any shall leave the Hospital or place of his Nativity, after
being once sent thither, let him be brought back and Chastised by stricter
Confinement, more Scrimp allowance, or otherwise as shall be most Expedient,
and upon a second Disertion punished more Severely.

Fourthly, The Poor of those parts where they are most Numerous, would be
supplied from other places, for commonly the Shire or Paroch in which the Poor
abound most, is least able to supply them, for it is but reasonable, every one
should bear a share of that Burden throughout the whole Kingdom, proportionable
to their Ability's. It were therefore very convenient, that such a
Correspondence should be settled amongst all the Shires in the Kingdom, that
the State of the Poor and Condition of the Inhabitants were Communicated to one
another, and let Contributions be sent from the ablest to sustain the Poor of
those parrs where they are most Numerous.

5thly, What is appointed for the Poor for the most part would be bestowed on
Provisions to be Distributsd for their Sustainance, for this being the way the
Poor must bestow it themselves, it is to be presumed great quantitys of
Provisions can be bought Cheaper than small, and whatever is given less for
them in Bulk than the Poor would do in retail, is saved, and those who are not
put into Hospitals, but need some Monthly or Weekly Charity besides what
Industry they can make, would also be supplied out of these Provisions.

If this were but one year (or perhaps less) put in practice, it would be no
hard Matter to restrain vagarat Beggars in all time coming, that Custom being
once entirely supressed, few would atempt it and none would Encourage this
manner of Begging. But by all means care would be taken, that none truly
Objects of Charity be neglected even tho the Contributions should not come in
punctually for that end, these Entrusted with the oversight of the Poor most
not let them want, and Measures would be concerted to Refound them, otherwise
it is impossible ever to suppress the beeging Poor, for if the Poor be obliged
to leave any Hospital for want of Entertainment, a Door is opened to let all
Vagarants loose.

The Difficultys objected against the Prosecution of this Bussiness, I Judge
may be chiefly. That many People upon the Inportunat Demands of Beggars will
give Alius, that will not give Monthly or Quarterly Contributions, That when
Beggars come about they may be Refreshed with broken Meat, and otherwise
suppleed more insencibly than by Monthly or Quarterly Contributions.

Both these may be in part true, yet do not contravail the Inconvenionces above
montioned, in Tolorating a great number of Ranie Beggars who perhaps obtain
thrice as much Alms as would support the like number of necessitous Persons,
and besides, those when are able to Contribute may be be compelled if they
Refuse to give freely according to their Abilitys; I know not whither there be
any standing Law to that Effect, but I think it very Equal that such as have
abundance should be compelled to give part to the Poor if they refuse to do it
voluntarly, and to that end a Law may be made if it is not already.

If it be said that it will be hard to get all the Beggars sent to their
Respective places of Nativity or Places where they have long resided, in
Respect some of them have no certain place of Abode, and will be disowned by
every place.

The matter will not be very much in what Hospital they be sottled if a List of
all the Poor in the Kingdom be taken once every year * and every Shire
appointed to keep so many of them according to their Abilities, and this I
Judge a better way than requiring every one to keep its own Poor, tho at the
same time this may be done as near as can be, and there would also be Measures
laid down that such who advance any thing for Maintenance of the Poor may be
at no loss that way.

These who are born of poor People that have not whereupon to sustain and
Educat them, are Undoubtedly. Objects of Charity, and ought to be taken care
of, and supplied by others to whom GOD has bestowed Substance; and to Educat
and put such of them to Apprentiships as are capable of instruction, and able
to work; Would not only be an Act of Charity to them, but like ways free the
Kingdom of the Burden of mantaining them for the suture.

SECT. II. Which Respects Servants and other Persons of low Degree.
I Shall not enter upon the Duty of Servants in Relation to their Masters, that
which I intend being only to show that People who have no manner of Substance
besides their Appare, may by their Industry live Honestly and Comfortably; the
Matter is plain to the Observation of every one, the greatest part of Men being
in such Circumstances, and if it be possibie for those that have nothing to
live comfortably. it is easy for others to live Comfortably also.

But says some, It is easy for those that are in Service to be supplied, but
others that are not in Service will find it more hard to sustain themselves.

People that are Sound and in health, can scarce ever want Employment, unless
such as have been inured to Idleness and will not apply themselves to Work, or
otherways by their Undutiful Behavior render themselves unworthy to be
employed, and in this Case it is their own fault if they be straightened.

But if Manusactures be encouraged there will be more Work for all sorts of
People than hands will be got, and such as are able and will not apply
themselves to Work, deservedly suffer for their Negligence when they are
pinched.

I know some People will not be altogether sit to work in Manufactures to which
they are not accustomed, but nevertheless they may assist others that are
Expert, and through time become capable to perform the most difficult parts of
the Work without direction.

By their Labor they may earn 6, 8, or 10 pence a day, more ot less, according
to the manner of the Work they are employed about, and as they are capable to
perform.

According to their Incomes they may proportion their spending the least being
sufficient for their Mantainance; For it is evident, that such as can and are
able to work, may earn as much as may sustain them. I need not enquire how much
this may be, it being demonstrated in the Experience of Multitudes, that these
who apply themselves to work live by their Industry, even tho the Employment
they follow be mean

SECT. III Which Respects Mechanics, Husbandmen, etc.
TRADESMEN, Farmers and Others of the like Employments, being a Degree above
the Common sort of Servants, come in the next Class to be spoken of; And tho
their Condition may seem to be better than the former, yet many times some of
them are more straightened than Servants themselves, by Reason of some Accidents
happening contrary to their Expectations.

To prevent Accidents no Rule can be given; Nevertheless if People of these
Employments be careful and Cautious, they may Regulat their Affairs so, that
seldom any thing will happen to defeat their Designs.

To give particular Directions how exery one may order his Affairs to the best
Advantage, were a difficult Task, and that which would be very tedious; But
that wherein I Judge People most frequently Err, and by which they come to
fail, being a Miscalculation as to the State of their Affairs, not truly
Ballancing their Accounts, not considering how to proportion their Outgivings
to their Incomes; this shall be briesly touched, and some General Rules given
touching their Conduct in this behalf, as for their manner of Laboring buying
and selling, and the like, I suppose they may be pretty expert, and shall
therefore pass it this being the only thing infuised in them by those who bread
them to their Respective Employments.

That which frequently tends to the Impovirishment of many, Proceeding from
their not making a Just Calculation as to the state of their Affairs, and not
Ballanceing of their Accounts, as is said; that which every one would take care
in, is to make a Just Balance of his Profits and Incomeings, to what he has
Occasion daily to Disputse or give out, and if he find that his outgivings be
greater than what he Receives, he must of Necessity Retrinsh his Spending, and
proportion it to what he gets in, or otherwise he cannot expect to continue in
any Tolerable Condition.

Let none think that this is a thing Impossible, alleging that their
Outgivings are already Retrinched, as much as can be,, for it has been already
shown, that those in the meanest Capacity are able to sustain themselves, and
until their Outgivings be reduced to the lowest Degree, they may allwise be
Retrinched, and better to do it betimes as let it Run to too great a length,
and then be Reduced to the last Extremity. No doubt, when most People find
their Condition grow worse, they have Expectations to better it again, and for
that end perhaps may take several Measures different from their former Course
of Management, but if those prove likewise ineffectual, he most conform him
self to such a way of liveing, as may Correspond to his present Condition, or
otherwise he cannot Rationally expect, but it will daily become worse and in
the end tend to his Irrepareable Loss.

To make a particular calculation of the Incomes or Profits, and of the
Expense or Dispursements of every different Degree of People is impossible,
they being so Various, but some things in the General would be considered.

First, That every one take a particular Account of his own Profit and
Expenses, if at the end of the Year he find the Later to exceed the former,
consider wherein he has been most Extravagant or Negligent, and therein make
amends for the Future.

2dly, It would be considered, that tho his Profits may Balance his Expense,
yet seeing some Extraordinar Accidents may happen, it is necessar that his
Expense should be some less than his Profits, when nothing Extraordinar occurs,
it being conveniant as the proverb is, that something be kept for the sore
foot.

3dly, His own Circumstances at the time would be considered, that is to say,
whither his Family be nomerous or few; If nomerous and consequently requiring
so much to sustain it, that it will nor readily require more, than may he go
near to spend his whole Profits, but if his Family be in its Infantry, that is
to say while he has few or no Children, and Apparently will have more, he may
not go so great a length in Spending as at other times, it being necessar that
some thing be Reserved for the growing State of his Family, Again, when his
Children come to Age, and are Capable to Work, they will be a great help to
him, and conseqently he needs not Retrinch his Dispursements so much.

And lastly, that at all times it is Convenient to keep within Bounds, and never
let the Disbursements exceed the Profit.

If it be alleged that this is Possible, for at some times they may meet with
Disappointments and considerable losses, it is Answered these cases are
excepted, for what I spoke of is only in O^dinar Cases, no Humane Endeavors
can prevent Accidents, not provide for all Events.

But if some should say that even in the common course of their Management,
they are not able to get this done, either by the decay of their Employment, or
that they have never fallen in a way of Trade. To this I can say nothing, but
that they must Retrench their Dispursements till they bring them as low as can
be, and rather let this be done in time, than after things come too great a
length, for as the Proverb is hetter hain at the Breard as the bottom; and if
they can afterward advance their Fortune they may easily their profits Live up
to; And as to the matter of their Trade I would only say, deal fairly.
ingeniously and discreetly with all, for as this is a duty in point of
Conscience, so is it no less necessary in Matter of Interest, and the chief
thing that will engadge Customers: for whatever a covetous Person gains by
fraudulent Tricks at some times, he is ^eady to loss much more by the wound
this gives to his Reputation.

How their spending ought to be proportioned to their Profits I shall touch in
another place.

SECT: IV. Which Respects Merchants, Shopkeepers, etc.
BOok keeping is certainly very Necessary to all, and without which no person
of Bussiness can easily understand the State of his affairs; But above all
others, it is peculiarly Useful for Merchants. Captain Collison says in the
Preface to his Book of Book-keeping, that he looks upon a Merchant, that is not
acquainted with Book keeping, to be like on that Professes to be a Soldier,
that knows not how to handle his Arms. I am much of his Opinion, for it is very
hard, if not impossible, for a Morchant that understands not Book keeping, and
does not place his Accounts in Method, to understand the state of his affairs
as he ought to do if he have any considerable bussiness, and how any Man can
proportion his Debu^sements, or Spending to his Profits or Incomes, that
understands not his own Condition, let any Person Judge.

In so far as, the Circumstances of Merchants does agree with these mentioned
in the Proceeding Section, what Respects the one is Applicable to the other,
but in many things it is more difficult for Merchants to keep an equal Poise in
the state of their Affairs, than for Mechanics or Trades Men, for not only are
they uncertain of the sale of their Goods, but likewise run many Risques by
Sea, as well as by the Rising and falling of Mercats, the decay of several
sorts of Goods, and others that goes out of Fashion, if not speedily sold off,
besides many other hazards, as bad Debtors, danger of being Overseen in buying
and the like.

All these things being considered, it is no small difficulty for a Merchant to
guard against so many dangers and keep his Stock entire, not to speak of making
profit: 'Twill therefore be very hard to lay down any certain Method by which
they may sustain themselves and Families and keep their Stocks entire: Howbeit
provided these following Rules be observed I think there will be no great
danger, Viz.

First, That an exact Journal of all their Barganings be placed in their Books,
and the same Transmitted to their Legers and balanced in due Form; This gives
exceeding great satisfaction to behold how every thing is disposed of,
especially if they meet with disapointments, and when their Endeavors succeed
well, it directs them yet further toward the Improvement of their Stocks, and
in fine let their Condition be prospe^ous or otherwise, they at one glance will
see their Condition, and consequently may know how to take M^asures accordingly.

2dly. That they be not do rash in barganing or buying any quantity of Goods
they are not thoroughly akill'd in, or knows not how to dispose of.

3dly. That they Risqu^ not too much of their Stocks where there is any eminent
danger tho there may likewise be great prospect of Gain. Be^^or one should
regrate his want of a considerable Gain, that he might have had, provided he
had bestowed a great sum on such a Commodity, as have to say Iventured my whole
Stock upon a very promising Bargain, but alas it misgive and I Am totaly Ruined.

4thly. That they be cautious in buying any sort of Goods that may soon decay
or go out of fashion, unless they know how to dispose of them speedily.

But besides all this, there is something else to be adverted, for if a Person
live higher than his Stock can afford, it will deminish by degrees and he at
last be reduced to a low Condition. It Is therefore absolutely necessar for all
sorts of People to Proportion their spending to their profits, that is to say
that the former may not exceed the Latter.

But because it may be a Question (and that none of the least) what part of his
Stock or Profits may a man spend, so as his Stock may not be wested or he
rendered incapable to provide for his Children as fit for one of his degree or
quality.

At first view one would think he may spend his whole Profits, But there is a
great many things to be considered in this, for as was observed in the
preceding Section, there must be Respect had in this to the present state of
his Family. If it be upon the growing hand, than may he not go the whole length
in Spending that his Profits for the time may bear, for in case he should be
obliged to Retrinch his Spending, or at least be more straightened to mantain his
Family upon the same allowance, when it becomes more Numerous; and likewise
that there is a great many Accidents that commonly fall out, which will require
Money besides what is needed in the common Course of his Debursements, which
something most be Reserved for, otherwise his Stock will be Deminished by the
De^raying such Extraordinar Expenses, beside several other things of which I
shall speak more particularly in the next Section.

SECT: V. Which Respects Merchants and Tradesmen together, etc.
HAving said something concerning People of those Employments seperatly, in the
Proceeding Sections, And seeing what agrees to the one Respects the other
likewise in many things, I shall more particularly in this place such what
Relates to the daily Debursements.

When I mention Merchants and Tradesmen, it is not only to be thought I
Restrict it to these Allenerly. But that all others of Inferior quality are
likewise to be understood under that Denomination.

It was formerly showed, that a person who can Earn six Pence a Day, may live
Comfortably upon the same,

It is therefore plain, that whoever can earn more may Live at least as well
upon the Product of his Labor, provided he conform his way of liveing, to what
he is able to baer forth.

It was form^rly Remarked. That the sole or principal occasion of People's
Running themselves a Ground, proceeds from their not proportioning their
Debursements to their Incomes or profits, and that perhaps not so much from
their Total neglect of this, as from their not Considering it thoroughly, for
one that can Earn 8 or 10 pence a Day, or what else you please, most not in his
Ordinar Course of Liveing, spend his whole Day's profit each Day, but he ought
to consider, Accidents may frequently befall which may not only Incapacitat him
to Earn his usual Wages, but may likewise require even more than Ordinary
De^ursements. Therefore, he would alwise keep with in bounds, and Reserve
something for Extraordinary Occasions.

How much of his daily Profits ought to be reserved for Exterordinary
occasions, must likewise be proportioned to the Circumstances of the Party,
that is to say if his difficultys be apparently upon the decreasing hand; That
which is to be Reserved for Extraordinary Occasions may be less; But if they
seem to Increase, it would be be the more. However, I think one 5th part may be
a good Medium, if his Circumstances be not very extraordinary.

So much concerning such as have no Stock, and live only upon the product of
their Labor.

The next sort of People that are to be spoke off, are such as have but small
Stock, yet by the frequent changeing of it, and them having a constant Trade,
may Reckon upou some certain daily profit, Proportionably far exceeding what
they could make, if their Stocks were any thing considerable, of this Sort may
be reckoned Ink-keepers. Retailers of Liquors, small Shopkeepers, Hooksters
and the like.

Tho this sort of People can not certainly know their Daily or Weekly profits,
yet after some times Experience they may guess pretty near what yearly Profits
they can make, and must proportion their outgivings to the same; That is to say
in like manner as the Tradesmen abovementioned, Viz. still to reserve about a
5th or 6th part of it for extraordinary occasions.

Those whose Stocks are Considerable, must observe an other Method in their
spending, because they will not so frequently get the same bestowed, and
because of the many Risques and hazards they run, as was formerly mentioned,
they cannot well Reckon upon any certain profit beyond the ordinary Interest of
their Stocks, and consequently ought to proportion their spending to the same*

This perhaps may be thought too little, as certainly it is, if their Stook be
small. but in that Case they are partly to be considered as the inkeepers, etc.
above mentioned, but if their Stocks be considerable it will be sufficient, and
if their Condition can allow of more, their Stocks will Encreass the more
speedily, and consequently the Interest thereof will be the more, to which they
may alwise conform their spending.

In these three Classes, all Tradesmen and Trading People may bo comprehended,
and if every one would keep a particular Jurnal of his profits and Debursments
and Regulate his Affairs So that he does allwise keep within Bounds, and know
the State of his Affairs; None could ever altogether faill, unless by some
unexpected or extraordinary Accident.

SECT; VII. Which Respects Gentlemen, etc.
HAving given some hints at what may be expedient in the Conduct of several
sorts of People. as to the Regulating of their Affaris. I come in this Class to
tuch what Respects Gentlemen and other Persons of Quality, as to what Concerns
their Living Comfortably in their several Ranks, and according to their Estates.

We shall begin with such as are in public Office, and for their Service, have
either a certain Annual Sallarie, or Pension allowed them, or some certain
Casual Profits or Emoloments pertaining to their Office.

Some may say, there is no great difficulty for such People to Regulate what
Concerns their manner of living, And that if their Spending do not exceed their
Profits, think all is well enough.

In this there is a very great mistake, for if those in public Office, such as
Ministers, Officers of the Army, etc. who commonly have no considerable Stock
(besides what they gain by their public Service) shall Spend their whole
Annual Revenue, how shall their Children be provided for, who being Bred as
Gentlemen's Children, cannot apply themselves to mean Employments, or Boorish
Drudgerie, and wanting what is necessar to support them, will be ready to
Embrace many Temptations, and to take Unapproveable Measures for their
Subsistence; If Persons in such Circumstances do not lay aside one half or
thereby of their Yearly Profits, for the use of their Children, they will
Undoubtedly Render them more Miserable than the Children of Boors or Tron-men,
and no doubt the Neglect of this may be one principal Cause of the Vulgar
Opinion, that many of the Children of Ministers, become no great Patrons of
Virtue, tho at the same time, I believe People takes more particular notice of
them then of others, something more then Ordinary being expected from their
Education.

But if those who Act in public Capacities, have any Stock besides what they
gain by their Service, they may Spend the Annual profits of it, as other
Gentlemen that have Heiteable Estates, And as their Stock encreasses by what is
added to it of that which is laid aside, gained by their public Service, the
Interest of it will become the greater, and consequently able to support them
the better.

And as to Gentlemen who have Heritable Estates, and follow no manner of
vocation, but only live upon there Rents, they most proportion there Expense to
what they have to receive from their Tennants; neither would they in the common
Course of their Management Spend all that they get in, for Consideration ought
still to he had to several Extraordinary Occasions, which may occasion their
Debursing of more than was expected, and also that they may be Disappointed of
what they ought to get in.

Some perhaps may think there is no Difficulty for such as have Land Rents or
other certain Annual Prosites to preserve their Estates and Live Honestly, but
I may Warrantably say, there is no less Art in preserving an* Estate, than in
acquiring it.

The Conduct of Gentlemen, or such as have no manner of Employment, but only to
Husband, and Live upon their Rent, is different from any of those
abovementioned, for whereas the Husbandman, the Trades man, and other Laboring
People, have less difficulty to mentain their Families, when their Children
come to Age than formerly, because by their Labor, they are helped to support
the same, neither is it to expected, that they can provide Opulantly for them,
they being in as good Condition as can be expected from those of their Quality,
tho nothing of Consideration be left to them, besides their Education; and
Merchants Living within Bounds, as was above proposed their Stocks will
Encreass, unless they meet with cross Providence, and consequently they will
be in Condition to provide for their Children, but Gentlemen, not having any
other way to supply their Families, and provide for their Posterity, but only
to Husband well what they have, they must not go so great a length in Spending
of their Yearly Prosits, as those above mentioned: Respect must be had to the
present State of their Families, as of all the rest afo^eid, that is to say
while their Families are but small, they must Spend the less and as it
Encreasseth, they will have the more, to Suply it.

Perhaps some may think, if they go not beyond their Yearly Incomes at any
time, there will be no hazard but that I may show how ill grounded this Opinion
is, I shall make a Supposition, that a Gentleman of 4 or 5000 Merks a Year,
having new taken up Family, keeps out a Port, so as to Spend a Years Rent the
first Year, next Year having a Son or Daughter born unto him, it will Require
something more for keeping a Nurse, and other things necessaty for the Child,
besides some extraordinary Expenses at its Birth, All which he must Retrinch
off his last Years Spending or so much of his Stock will be Deminished, next
Year again, perhaps he has an other Child, which will require the like Expense
to mentain it. Thus his Family increassing from time to time, within 20 or 30
Years, several of his Children may be Marriageable, and most be provided to
Portions Suitable to their Quality, besides what is given out to Educate them,
let any Prudent Man consider, whither one in such Circumstances should not far
Outshoot himself by such Conduct.

I think no Gentleman who has no other way of living, can be reckoned a good
Husband, if he spend above an half of his Rent while his family is in its
Infancy. And as it Increases, having said by what he saves while his Family's
on the Increasing hand, he may be in Condition to provide portions to his
Children, Suitable to their quality.

I might proceed to make a particular Calculation, showing how much he might
lay by each Year; As for example, the first year 100 Lib. Starl. the 2d. 90
Lib. Starl. and still less and less, as his Family Increases, till perhaps he
could not lay by any thing at all; But this being no defieult matter to
conceive, I only in the General would desire every one to Consider their own
Circumstances, and to make a Calculation of their Spending, and how they will
be able to bear it forth; For as I said at the Entry of this Chapter, that
which occasions the failour of most People proceeds from their not
Proportioning their debursments to their Incoms; And that Chiefly from their
not thoroughly considering the same.

It will be needles to make any more instances of this kind, let the Annulrent
or yearly incomes of Gentlemen, be it little or much, if they have no other way
of living, but what accresses from these certain prosits, they must proportion
their spending to the same, as above said. viz. To save about on half of it,
while their Family's are small etc. And that they may the better understand the
state of their own Assiairs; Book-keeping is very necessar for them to Learn,
as it is likewise to all others, that have any Considerable business in the
World.

SECT. VIII. Which Respects the Mannagement of Public Concerns.
AS every person is Concerned to provide for himself, so is the Prince or
Sovereign Lord concerned to give necessar orders, apointing every one to his
proper Post, for the Public good, of those under his care.

It may seem a piece of Arrogance for me to offer my opinion in things of this
nature, or to middle in matters which concern the Government of a State; But for
as much as all human Capacity is finit, things necessar to be considered, my
escape the Remembrance of the most Judicious, I hope it shall be no Crime, to
offer a few things which at present occur, with respect to this matter, some of
which (so far as I know) have not yet come under the Cognizance of the August
Assembly, to whom I intend to present this, and as I humbly conceive may not be
nuworthy of their Consideration.

The King or Sovereign having the Oversight and Care of the whole Nation or
Realm committed to his Charge, is not only obliged to Care for what Concerns
the support of his own Dignity and Grandeur, but likewise for what may most
promot the welfare and Prospetity of these over whom he Reigns, and as in all
things the means are Adepted to the end for which they are designed, and just
measures taken in effecting thereof, otherwise they cannot be imagined to
accomplish it; And as has been observed, every Degree and Rank of People above
Represented are obliged to proportion and accomodat their manner of Living, to
the fund by which they are suported. it will not be doubted, but that certain
measures are to be observed by Princes, for Regulating their Affairs, and that
a King or Prince may sustain as much prejudice, by not proportioning his
Debursments to his Revenue, as People of mean quality may do by keeping out a
Port above what they are able to bear forth.

The Revenue of Princes are certain Taxes and Customs upon their Subjects, it
being must reasonable, that every one according to his ability, should
Contribute to the suport of the Government, under which he is, that a sufficent
Force may be always in radiness to defend the Kingdom or State, from any
Foreign Invasion, and to Supr^ss all intestain disorder or Broils that may
Happen; Nevertheles this must be proportioned, to what the Subjects are able to
bear, otherwise their Hearts are Aleniated, and they become uneasy.

A Prince's greatest Wealth and Security is the Hearts of his People, for when
he has this, he can want nothing that is in their Power to grant. Neither can a
People be more happy than under the Conduct of a good and Virtuous Prince, who
makes it his Endeavors to make them Happy, wherefore I think it not absurd to
affirm, that the Prince and People's Interest is not Divided, and that both may
do what in them lies for the public Good, ought to he the Prayers and
Endeavors of all good Men.

Punishments and Rewards ought not only to be Dispensed in Obedience to Devine
Authority, but in Police it is necessar to Chastise Vice and Encourage Virtue,
the Vicious person being like a Gangrin or F^estered Member, ready to insect
the whole Body, if not timely Cuted or cut off, and a Vertuo^us person is no
less profitable to a Common Wealth then the other is prejudicial thereunto.

Some think it necessar for Princes to bring Disaffected persons over to their
Interest to heap Favors upon them, alledgeing that those who are true Friends,
will still continue so, and by this means, others may be gained.

No cloubt, such as are good Men, will never be so Disobliged for missing
favors, that in Justice they might have expected, that they will turn Enemies,
but I shall scarce be persuaded, that the like Fedelitly will be found in one
who for self ends is brought over, as in him who has a Heart Affection, and
will not easily be brought over as the other who joins with him that bids most.
Neither does every one attain to such a degree in Mortification, as not to
entertain some disgust when he thinks himself hardly used.

Clemency is an Excellent Virtue, but Excess in it becomes a Fault.

The Psalmist in extoling the Government of the Supreme Judge, says, Justice
and Mercy are the Habitation or Basses of his Thron, and it is the Glory of
Princes to establish theit's upon the same Foundation.

A merciful Prince is like an indulgent Parent, that out of Tenderness to his
Children, does not Correct them according to the degree of their Ofsence, for
which reason they become the less Obedient, presuming to much on his Goodness.

The end of Chastising being not only for punishment of Crimes past, but for
Example and Terror to Others, to prevent the like for the Future, in
Correction, Respect would be had to the Consequence, as well as Satisfaction
made for the Offense Committed.

Any person may forgive Injuries done to himself, but what Respects another, he
cannot without the party's Consent.

Justice says, give every one his due, and ^ransgresions against GOD cannot be
forgiven by Man.

Being straitened in time, I shall only mention a few things more, which more
particularly Concern the present State of this Kingdom.

The Genuis of People seem at present to Run more upon Trade than formerly, and
besides what was formerly said on that Subject.

I humbly Conceive, it will be nessary for the greater Security of Companys, or
these that enter in a joint Trade, that it be Enacted, that whoever has the
Manadgement of other Men's Effects, shall be a person thoroughly acquainted in
Book-keeping, and that he post all his Company Transactions in ample Form; And
if it can be made appear, that in one Article he has dealt unfaithfully, let
him be Doem'd worthy of Death, and accordingly Exicuted, or at least that he
suffer Consiscation of Goods.

This may seem too serve, there being no proportion between the Offense and
Punishment, but when it is Considered, that the Consequences of dealing gently
with such Rogues, (for no better Name can I give such, who deal Deceitfully
toward those that Credit them with their Effects) opens a Door to all manner
of Fraudulent Dealing, and consequently interups Trade, the want of which
Renders this poor Nation Miserable. It will be found as Tolerable as for a
General to put to Death him that leaves his Post, when he is set to Watch the
Motions of an Eney. I need not insist on this, for a Word's enough to a Wise
Man, Only I humbly Conceive, Trading in Company is Impracticable in this
Kingdom, if some such Law be not Exacted.

Law Processes are very Tedious, and much complained of on that Account, I am
not ignorent that it is better to defer Justice, as to give Sentence Rashly,
without the necessar Informamation of both parties, Nevertheless, I think a
dozen, sixteen, or Twenty years to long for a Cause to be Depending, and doubts
but some Expedient might be found for Discussing of it sooner; But however it
be, I think such as are visibly Litigious, and by Hook or Crook having once got
Possession of another Man's Effects, fights him with his own Weapons, and at
the Latter end when obliged to restore the other Man his own Geer, after a long
use of it, ought to pay the Injured party the whole Expense and Damnage that he
sustains at least, if not to be surther Puniched as a Fellon or Thief, And as
it is a Crime before GOD, to assist an Unjust Person in the wronging of his
Neighbor, so I think an Advocat or Procurator that pleads in an Unjust Cause,
where it is Visible, that he can not but know it to be so, ought likewise to be
Punished as Art and Part with his Cliant

Advocations and Suspensions are often times founded upon slender Grounds, and
some times the Defender will Remove a Cause from an Inferious Court, merely to
Vex and put his Creditor to Expense. I think, where the Grounds are not Pugnent
in Advocations, it is most reasonoble, that the Cause should be Remitted to the
Judge before whom it was first Called, or rather that it should not be brought
from before him, for according to the first Constitution of Judicatures, small
matters were appointed for the Peoples case, to be Decided by Inferior Judges.

Perhaps this Doctrine may not be agreeable to some of the Members of the
College of Justice, it not being usual in Millers to wish Corn to go by their
own Mills, but if the Wisdom of the Parliament find it: reasonable, some thing
may be done therein for all that.

If a Blind Man might be permitted to Judge of Coulors, I would say only a
short Word concerning the Law it self.

Our Laws I believe are as good as those of our Neighbors, (tho often Complained
of, as not being put in Execution) but that they might be made better I nothing
doubt, for whoever considers from what Fountain we have Our Laws, may easily
think they might be brought from one more Pure and Wholesome.

The Roman Laws were good, considering how they had them Transmitted from Age
to Age, and from one Nation to another, the best Way the Wits and Learning of
those times could Convoy them from hand to hand, but that they come far short
of the Copy whence they were first taken, I think no Christian will deny.

Moses in his Exortation to the Israelits. Duet: IV. 6. Tells them that GOD
would give them Wisdom and Understanding in the sight of all Nations which
should hear all these Statuts, and say surely this great Nation is a Wise and
Understanding People, and in the 8 Verse, And what Nation is there that has
Statuts and Judgments so Righteous as all this Law which I set before you this
Day. I believe it will not be much doubted, but that the Roman Law, and Laws of
all the best Governed Nations in the World, are founded upon the Law delivered
by Moses, and that they have Received no Advantage by those through whose hands
they have come.

Our Modern Lawers, (as well as our Moderen Poets, that use the pagen manner of
Invocation) do too much imitate the Pazens. I wish some able Lawer would begin
and reform this, the Scriptures of Truth may afford him Matter to Work upon,
for as they contain a Complete Body of Divinity, so do they contain an entire
Body of Law, directing how to Dispense Justice between Man and Man, as well as
in things relating to the Worship of GOD. Why shhould we follow an imperpfect
Copy, when we have the Original at hand.

As to the Execution of the Law, let there be no partiallity, for one Offender
fin^ing favor, gives Encouragement to 20 Others, to presume to do the like
Offense, and think themselves injured, if they meet not with the like favor.

Let inferior Magestrats or Others who are to put the Laws in Execution be
punished for their Omissions, if they pass an Offender without full
Satisfaction for his Offense.

This will be so far from being any Discouragement to inferior Magestrats,
that it will be a great ease to them, and they could with the greater Courage
Execut the Laws, for as the matter stands, when they proceed according to Law
against Offenders, they in some cases must either take the prejudice of the
party upon them. or allow them what favor they ask, especially if the party
shall afterward obtain the favor that he sought of them from a higher
Judicature, and if the Majestrat were to suffer himself for his Omission, no
Man could have the Confidence to desire a favor of him, nor the Wickedness to
Entertain a grudge against him who refused it.

There are some Fourteen pence pieces, and 3. d half Pennys, that Creat a great
Unoasiness to the Leidges, and often times the poor suffer by it, tho such as pay
Sums can oblige the patty to whom he makes payment to receive them, yet when
they come in single Ones to poor People's Hands, they are obliged to pass them
with an Abatement, besides not one in half a Paroch has Scales to Weigh them in
the Country, and will not take them upon the other persons Word. It has been
thought by some, that as much Money has been given for Scales to Weigh that
kind of Money, would have made up all the Loss of Re-coining it. Some have
likewise thought that the Mannagers of the Bank would have taken it all in for
the Privilege of Coining as much Coper as the value of it, which will not be
very much.

If this shall be thought an injuring, of the General of the Mint, it were to
be wished that the Parliament should lay on a Tax to make up any Loss that
would be in Recoining of it; Better that every one should bear a part, as let
the Poor suffer.

FINIS.
READER,
BEsides Words not right Spele^, turned Letters, pound for pounds in several
places, together with other such Omissions, which does not mar the Sense, take
the following Errata.

ERRATA
PAge 14, line 7, for off, Read of, P. 15, l. 20, for or, R. ^or, P. 38, l. 6.
for six Wheels, R. six Weeks, P. 29, for it was, R. it were, P. 59. l. 5, for
many, R. may, P. 60, l; 12. for Others, R. Other, P. 62. l. 12, for hither, R.
thither, P. 64, l. 10. for hard dozen, R. half dozen, l. 11, for Run too R. Run
to, P. 65, l. 10, for to Obious, R. too Obvious, P. 67. l. 4, for alongs, R.
along, P. 100, l. 19, for possible, R. impossible, P. 101, l. 17, for may
easily their Profits live up to, R. may easily live up to their Profits, P.
11o. l. 20. for them, R. their.


