THE DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England, Concerning the Independency of the
CLERGY ON THE LAY-POWER, AS To those Rights of theirs which are purely
Spiritual, reconciled with our Oath of Supremacy, AND THE Lay-Deprivations OF
THE Popish-Bishops in the beginning of the Reformation.

By the Author of The Vindication of the deprived Bishops.

LONDON: Printed, MDCXCVII.

THE CONTENTS.
I. THE Independancy of Bishops on the State, pretended to be contrary to the
Oath of Supremacy. P. I. II. And contrary to the Principles on which the Popish
Bishops were deprived, and our present Succession depends. P. III. III. The
Authority of the Primitive Catholic Church is great^ then that of any Modern
particular one. P. IV. IV. Even with regard to our particular Church: Our
behavior signifies more Love and Concern for her than that of our late
Brethren does. P. VII. V. We show our greater Love to our Church particularly
in not yiedling so easily as they do, that she should lose her Rights, on any
Te(...) P. IX. VI. What we do is perfectly consistent, with the Authorized
explication of the Supremacy vested in the King. P. XI. VII. Archbishop
Cranmers Opinions in Henry the VIII's and Edward the VI's time, perfectly
destructive of all Spiritual Authority. P. XII. VIII. Archbishops Cranmers
Authority in these matters none at all. P. XV. IX. It is not for the Interest
of the Church, of Reformation, that his Authority in these things should be
regarded. P. XVII. X. His Opiniens in this matter no more agreeable to the Sense
of our present Adversaries than to (...). P. XXI. XI. The Supremacy and Title
of Head, when first assumed by Henry the VIII, consistent with our Doctrine. P.
XXIII. XII, When the King gave the encroaching Commission to Cromwell, it was
not yet agreeable to the true Sense of the (...). P. XXV. XIII. The Appeal
allowed from the Archbishops to the Kings Commissioners in Chancery no Argument
of any Spiritual Power derived from the King. P. XXVII. XIV. The Supremacy
explained 26. H. VIII. 1. not contrary to our Doctrine in this Cause. P.
XXVIII. XV. The Supremacy as explained 37. H. VIII. 17. full to our Adversaries
purpose, and the sense of Archbishop Cranmer. P. XXX. XVI. The same notion of
the Spuremacy continued also under King Edward the VI. P. XXXIII. XVII. King
Henry the VIII's Reign by no means to be allowed for an Age of Precedents. P.
XXXV. XVIII. Queen Elizabeth explained the Supremacy in a sense consistent with
our principles. P. XXXIX. XIX. That Explication discharges us now from any
Obligation to believe Archbishop Cranmers Principles. P. XLI. XX. What the
Queen requires, we can Sincerely undertake, and in a Sense fully answering the
Imposition of the Leg(...)ors P. XLIII. XXI. The Queens Injunction excuses us
from Swearing to the Supremacy over Spiritual Persons in Causes purely
Spiritual. P. XLVI. XXII. This Injunction of Queen Elizabeth still in force. P.
L. XXIII. The Explication in the Injuctions Authorize by our Church in her
XXXVII Article. P. LI. XXIV. The same Explication of the Injunctions confirmed
by Act of Parliament. P. LIII. XXV. It is rather supppsed than contradicted, by
the 2 Canon. P. LV. XXVI. The Practice of the Supremacy to our times no
Argument of the Imposed Sense of the Legislators against us. P. LVIII. XXVII.
The Objection proposed, that our present Protestant Succession seems to depend
on the validity of the Deprivation of the last Popish Bishops. which was no
other than Laical. P. LX. XXVIII. The Lay-Deprivations of those Popish Bishops,
who took out Lay-Commissions for their Episcopal Power, does not by any jast
consequence effect our present Case. P. LXI. XXIX. The Popish Bishops were of
another Communion, and therefore needed no other Deprivation than that of the
Lay-Magistrate. P. LXIII. XXX. This Doctrine agreeable exactly to the Sense and
Practice of Antiquity. P. LXVI. XXXI, If the Popish Bishops had had a better
Title, yet that could not have illegitimated Successors any longer than their
own Lives. P. LXVIII. XXXII. If the Popish Bishops then had the better Title;
yet their discontinuance of their Succession has made their Title worse now P.
LXXI. XXXIII. Present Settlements give Right where no better Rights is injured
by them. P. LXXII. XXXIV. This is proved from the Donatist and Luciferian
Disputes. P. LXXIV. XXXV. They who took out Lay-Commissions for their Episcopal
Power might yet keep their better Title. P. LXXX.
THE DOCTRINE OF THE Church of England, Concerning the Iudependecy of the
Clergy on the Lay-Power, as to those Rights of theirs which are purely
Spiritual, reconciled with our Oath of Supremacy, and the Lay-Deprivaons of the
Popish Bishops in the beginning of the Reformation.
I. SINCE the finishing of the former Discourse, The Independency of Bishops on
the Sat, pretended to be contrary to the Oath of Supremacy.
I have been warned of one Prejudice ogainst the Doctrine delivered in it
concerning the Independancy of Church Power on the State, very necessary to be
removed, in order to the preparing our late Brethren for an impartial
consideration of what we have to say in it is defense. That is, that as our Case
of Protestant Bishops, set up in opposition to other Protestant Bishops
deprived by an incompetent Authority, is new, so our Principles, on which our
Plea, in reference to the Schism, is grounded, are also charged with Novelty;
if not with regard to the Doctrine of the first and purest Ages of the
Christian Church, yet, at least, with regard to the Doctrine of our late common
Mother, the Church of England; and with regard to that later Antiquity which is
derivod no higher than the beginning of our Reformation from Popery. It is
therefore pretended, that our Doctrine concerning the undeprivableness of the
Bishops by the Lay-Power, is inconsistent with the Supremacy asserted to our
Princes in all Causes, as well as over all Persons, that it is therefore
inconsistent not only with all the Lay Acts, by which the Supremacy has been
asserted, but also with all those Acts of the Church, by with she also has
concerned her self in this Dispute; with the xxxvii. Article, and the Injunct.
Q. Eliz. An. 1559. 5
Injunction of Queen Elizabeth owned by an Eliz. 1.
Act of Parliament in her Reign, for an Authentical Interpretation of the
Supremacy; with the Doctrine of the Homilies, and the several Injunctions of
the Ecclesiastics, for explaining and recommending the same Doctrine to the
Bel^ef and Consciences of their Auditors; particularly with the Second Canon,
which Excommunicates all those who deny the Supremacy in any of those branches
wherein it was allowed either to Jewish, or Christian Princes; and with all
those Legal Oaths, for maintaning it, which have been taken not only by the
generality of the Laity, but the Ecclesiastics also, as many of them as have
been admitted to any eminent station in the Ecclesiastical Government. Not now
to descend so low as a particular enumeration of the suffrages of our most
celebrated Writers. It is withal pretended, that this Power of depriving
Bishops, has ever since the beginning of the Reformation, been allowed in the
Secular Magistrate in the Practice of this Supremacy, as often as there has
been occasion for it. The first practice of it was lodged by King Henry the
VIII. in Cromwell a Layman. Yet his Commission In App. to Bishop Burnet's
(...). of Refor.
Authorized him to proceed against the highest Ecclesiastics, without
exception, as far as deprivation. And in the same Reign Bishops were required
to take out Patents from the King, for even the Spirituals of their Office,
their Power of conferring Orders, which virtually included all the Rights
conveyable by Orders so conferred, the Right of Preaching the Word, and of
Administering the Sacraments. These if they were given by the Lay Power must, by
necessary consequence, be deprivable by it also. But they are sensible how
little reason there is for making the Reign of that imperious and assuming
Prince a Reign of Precedents, in arguing that what was actually done then, must
therefore be presumed to have been well done, and therefore fit to be done
again. If this were allowed, they know very well, that no Right whatsoever,
even for securing the Peoples Liberties (which they pretend most zeal for, who
have least for those of the Clergy) can be made so sacred as to restrain the
Conscience of him who has, by any means, got the possession of an overruling
force. For he who made no Conscience of invading the Rights of those very
Persons, by whose intervention all other Rights were made Sacred, (even those
of Magna Charta, and the Coronation Oaths themselves not excepted) could much
less be terrified from invading those Rights which could pretend to no other
Sacredness than what had been derived from the intervention of those same Holy
Persons, whose own Rights had been violated by him.

II. THIS consideration therefore obliges our late Brethren And contrary to the
Principles on which the Popish Bishops were deprived, and our present
Succession depends.
to insist on the Precedents, rather of King Edward the VI. and Queen
Elizabeth' s Reign, which they think not so easily avoidable by us. Here they
tell us, that all the Deprivations of the Popish Bishops were by no other than
the Secular Arm. They tell us withal, that the way of deprivation by Synods of
Ecclesiastical Persons was, in their Case, perfectly impracticable. No Acts
could have been reputed Synodical, but what had been carried by a majority of
them, who had been allowed votes in Synods, who were only Ecclesiastics. But
by this method of proceeding it was impossible that the Popish Bishops could
have been deprived at all, because themselves made a majority of the Episcopal
College. Here therefore they think, that we are not at liberty to question, at
least, the validity of what was done in this affair. They think, we cannot do
it with any consistency with the Principles on which we insist in our Plea
against the present Schismatics. They think, we cannot do it without
subverting the Rights of those same Fathers, for whose Rights we are our selves
so eagerly concerned. For if those un-synodical deprivations of the Popish
Bishops then were null and invalid, the Popish Bishops were still the true
Bishops of their respective Dioceses, to whom all the Offices of the Subjects
of those Dioceses were still in Conscience due. And that on the same Principles
on which we pretend our deprived Fathers to be still, in Conscience, the
Bishops of those Dioceses, of which they are said to be deprived, and that they
have still a Title to the Episcopal Dues of the same Dioceses from those who
were Subjects to them before the deprivation, on account of the invalidity of
their deprivation, as not being Synodical. This being so, they think it will
follow further, that the first Protestant Bishops must, by our Principles, have
been Schismatics, as having been ordained into full Sees; that they must
therefore not have been second Bishops, but none at all, according to our
Reasoning on St. Cyprian' s principles. And this Nullity in the Original, they
conceive sufficient to affect the whole Succession derived from that Original.
Thus, they think, we cannot maintain any Right in our present Fathers, if
vacancies made by Lay Deprivations be not allowed sufficient to legitimate
their Titles who are possessed of those Sees, which are vacated by no other
Power than what is Laical. This, I take to be the utmost of what they have to
say upon this Argument.

III. I should most heartily congratulate the zeal of these Objectors for our
Church, were it really such as it is pretended The Authority of the Primitive
Catholic Church is greater than that of any modern particular one.
to be. But I can by no means commend any zeal for any particular modern Church
whatsoever, in opposition to the Catholic Church of the first and purest Ages.
We cannot take it for a Reformation that differs from that Church which ought
to be the Standard of Reformation to all later degenerous Ages, at least in
things so essential to the subsistence and perpetuity of the Church, as these
are which concern the Independence of the Sacred, on the Civil, Authority. Nor
is it for the honor of our dear Mother to own her deviation, in things of so
great importance, from the Primitive Rule; much less to pretend her precedent
for overruling an Authority so much greater than hers, so much nearer the
Originals, so much more Universal, so much less capable of corruption, or of
agreement in any point that had been really a corruption. It is impossible that
ever the present Breaches of the Church can be reconciled, if no particular
Churches must ever allow themselves the liberty of varying from what has
actually been received by them, since the Ages of divisions, the very reception
thereof having proved the cause of those divisions. If therefore our modern
Churches will ever expect to be again united, it must be by acknowledgment of
errors in particular Churches, at least in such things as have made the
differences, and which (whilst they are believed) must make them
irreconcilable. Such things could never proceed from Christ, who designing his
whole Church for one Body and one Communion, could never teach Doctrines
inconsistent ^i^h such Unity, and destructive of Communion. And why should a
Church, such as ours is, which acknowledges her self fallible, be too
pertinacious in not acknowledging mistakes in her self, when the differences,
even between Churches, which cannot all pretend to be in the Right whilst they
differ, and differ so greatly from each other, are a manifest demonstration of
errors in Authorities, as great as her own? Nor can any such acknowledgments of
actual errors be prejudicial to Authority, where the decisions of the Authority
are to be overruled not by private Judgments, but by a greater Authority. And
if any Authority be admitted as comp^^^nt for arbitrating the present
differences of Communion be(...) our modern Churches, I know none that can so
fairly pretend to it, as that of the Primitive Catholic Church. Besides the
other advantages she had for knowing the Primitive Doctrines above any modern
ones whatsoever, she has withal those advantages for a fair decision, which
recommend arbitrators. She knew none of their differences, nor dividing
Opinions, and therefore cannot be suspected of partiality. And it was withal an
Argument of her being constituted agreeably to the mind of her blessed Lord,
that she was so perfectly one Communion as he designed her. And the
acquiescence of particular Churches in her decision, is easier and less
mortifying, than it would be to any other Arbitrator. To return to her, is
indeed no other than to return to what themselves were formerly before their
Divisions, or dividing Principles. So that indeed, for modern Churches to be
determined by Antiquity, is really no other than to make themselves in their
purest uncorruptest condition, Judges of their own Case, when they have not the
like security against impurities and corruptions. I cannot understand therefore
how, even on account of Authority, our late Brethren can excuse their pretended
Zeal for even our common Mother the Church of England, when they presume to
oppose her Authority to that of the Catholic Church, and of the Catholic
Church in the first and purest Ages. I am sure we have been used to commend her
for her deference to Antiquity, and to have the better opinion of any thing in
her Constitution, as it was most agreeable to the Pattern of the Primitive
Catholic Church. Here by the way, I think it not amiss to take notice of a
mistake common to P. 14.
Dr. Hody, and the other Defense of the Church of England, p. 20, 21, 22.
Answerer to the Vindication of the deprived Bishops. The rather because it is
introduced by them both, with some insulting triumph. The Vindicator had
charged his Adversaries with Heresy, in regard of their singular opinions on
which they insisted so far as to found their Schism upon them. This they both
retort upon the Vindicator himself, as grounding his Defense on opinions now
singular, and different from the greatest numbers of our present Churches. I
should have thought their retortion just, if the Vindicator had grounded his
Defense on Opinions singular in the first Ages of Christianity. But they might
both of them have observed that the Vindicator did not grant this to have been
his own Case. He did pretend the Principles insisted on by himself to have been
generally received, as fundamental to all the Discipline that was practiced in
the first and purest Ages. What was generally received then, and therefore to
be presumed true because it was so, cannot change its nature by being
afterward as generally either forgotten, or deserted, in later degenerous
Ages. And as the Vindicators Cause did not, so neither did his design, nor
Topic of Reasoning from the Sense of the Primitive Catholic Church, oblige
him to be concluded by a generality in these later degenerous Ages. But this is
again another instance of their advancing the sense of our particular modern
Church, as a standard of Primitive Catholic Antiquity. But this is a deference
too great, not only for our own Mother, but indeed, for any particular Church
whatsoever, at such a distance from Primitive Originals.

. IV. HERE therefore we cannot be of our Adversaries mind: Even with regard to
our particular Church, our behavior signifies more love and concern for her,
than that of our late Brethren does.
But as for the Duty owing to our particular modern Church which is consistent
with her Subordination, we still profess as great a Zeal for her as themselves
can, and are ready to strive with them in a generous Aemulation, who shall best
express their affection to her, and their zeal for her preservation. Indeed our
difference from them is wholly grounded on such Principles, as we should think,
in all other parallel Cases, would be taken for Arguments of a greater
affection. We are willing for a Vindication of her Rights, to expose our selves
to all the effects of the displeasure, not only of her Adversaries, but even of
her own late Children, and our own late Brethren. This is a glory wherein our
present Adversaries cannot pretend to rival us. Whatever they pretend of good
will to her, they cannot pretend to suffer any thing for her. So far they are
froin that, that they are not contented to be neuter, and at least to connive
at their Brethren asserting their common Mothers Rights: They defend the
Magistrates encroachments on their Ecclesiastical Liberties. Even the
Ecclesiastics do so, whilst the Magistrate has the disposal of the
Ecclesiastical Revenues. The Doctor has indeed wisely postponed the Vindication
of the Magistrates Right for doing what has been done, (though nothing short of
that can satisfy the Consciences of Ecclesiastical Subjects, as to the
lawfulness of acquiescence, and submission to the Invaders of those Rights
which they are, by the Constitution, obliged to defend;) as unwilling to expose
himself an Ecclesiastic, to the odium of betraying them. He therefore here
proceeds on the Supposition, that the Rights of the Church are invaded, not
only injuriously, but invalidly; and pretends to prove (after his way of
proving by naked Facts) that we not only may, but must, submit to the Usurpers.
Upon this he pretends what the Vindicator says for disproving the Right of the
civil Magistrate for doing what has been done, to have been impertinent. To
what end is all this, but that he may avoid the Odium of betraying the Rights
of his own Function, and of defending laical Encroachments on them? But I
cannot conceive how this will excuse him from this charge. He promises, in
another Book, to defend professedly what he is yet so willing to be excused
from, even the Right of the Magistrate for such Invasions. He even here makes
all asserting such Rights impracticable, and unavailable for preserving them.
He makes the Bishops, whose Rights are invaded, obliged in Conscience to yield
as often as they are invaded, when the substituted Successor is not a Heretic,
that is, as often as there is no other question, but only that concerning
Right. And what can a Plea of Right signify for preserving Right, that must
never be insisted on? We know all Laws make frequent cessions of Right, at
length, to extinguish the Right it self. Much more that must do so which is
perpetual, as often as a stronger hand is pleased to invade it. Much more that
which must be perpetually yielded on obligations in Conscience. And what can
restrain the Laity from invading them as often as they please, when they are
told before that the Persons, whose Rights they are, must not, (...) ought not
oppose them in it, if they will be true to Obligations of Conscience? When they
are told also, that this very consideration of an irresistible force is alone
sufficient to oblige them to it? Suppose notwithstanding, the Bishops not
satisfied with what he says to prove their obligation to recede; yet he makes
it impossible for them to assert their Rights, for he discharges the Subjects
from Duty to them, whether they will or no. He pretends the irresistible force
sufficient for this purpose, whether the Ecclesiastical Superiors will or no.
And how then is it possible for such Ecclesiastics to assert their own Rights,
when they are oppressed by the irresistible force, and deserted by their own
Subjects? He allows them indeed a liberty of remonstrating. But what can even
that avail them, when they neither have power to enter their Remonstrances on
any Records, or to oblige their Adversaries, upon their pleading such Records,
not to suffer such violences to be Precedents for future practice?

V. THUS if our common Mothers Authority be urged We show our greater (...) to
our Church, particularly, in not yielding so (...) as they do, that she should
lose be Rights, on any terms.
by our Adversaries, as an Argument of their good will to her, I cannot see how
they can, in that regard, pretend to rival us. They may indeed tell us, that
our Mother has, by her own Act and Deed, in the surrendry of the Clergy in King
Henry the VIIIths time divested her self of that Authority, which before that
surrendry, was justly her due. Whatever the belief of this would signify to
show our good will to her; I am sure we might, by doing as the Objectors do,
better signify our good will to our selves (if we could consistently with our
Duty to her, qualify our selves for the favors of the Invaders of her Rights
and Privileges) as far as gratifying flesh and blood, can be taken for
consulting our own Interests. But still, methinks, it should be a greater
Argument of our good will to our common Mother, to be unwilling that she
should, on any terms, be deprived of whatever was once her due. Still, it would
become wellwishers to her, not to be too easy in believing such a cession of
Rights, though by her self, till it were well proved, and proved still to be
obliging. Still, it would become well-meaning Children to be willing to
contribute, as much as lay in them, to recover such Rights, at any rate of
inconvenience to themselves that may be less to the Public, than the loss of
such Rights, of so great importance for the Public Interests of Souls. And all
worldly inconveniences would be reputed less by generous and affectionate
Judges of the Public Interests. Such would still be favorable Auditors, of
what might be produced for discharging her from such Obligations of Conscience,
which if still in force, may make it unlawful now to retrieve and challenge her
lost Rights. They would be ambitious of prudent and lawful occasions of
testifying their love to her, at the expense of worldly losses, when they might
be once secured from any danger of sin in incurring them. I am sure it must
needs argue more love and good will to be so. Nor could they think it imprudent
to retrieve public Spiritual Rights, by losses only private and temporary.
Especially where there might be the least appearance of Duty that might oblige
them to it. That very Duty would overruled loving and dutiful Children, beyond
all worldly and carnal considerations to the contrary. Much more it would do
so, when the Duty incumbent were pretended of so great importance as this here
is by us, as that without it, we could not have a Church, or a Communion any
longer, than it should please the Civil Magistrate; that without it, we could
have no Principles that might cement us under a Spiritual Government in a state
of Persecution, at least, that might oblige us to do so, as most certainly
Christ has done. When these things were pretended, they would, at least, let us
know what might satisfy them, if it could not us, how these consequences,
intolerable to a true lover of the Church and Religion, might be avoided. And
till they could do so, they could not think the considerations hitherto
insisted on by them, of an irresistible force, etc. sufficient to make amends
for so abominable consequences. But hitherto, they have not signified that
solicitude for avoiding such consequences, which would certainly have become
them as hearty lovers of Religion. Nor have they attempted any thing on their
part, for a reunion with such as differ from them in things which would be as
much their interest, as ours, for us all to be unanimous in, if they really
took the subsistence of our Church and our Communion, for our common Interests.
How then can they, even in this regard, of their so easily yielding in matters
of so intolerable consequence, pretend to rival our good will to our common
Church and Communion?

VI. BUT we must not suffer even our good will to our What we do is perfectly
consistent with the Authorized explication of the Supremacy vested in the King.
Mother, to mislead us into any Acts of undutifulness to her, though it were on
pretense of saving her. Uzzah laid hold on the Ark with a good design, when he
thought it in danger of falling. Yet God struck him dead upon the place, for
venturing on his own judgment, to show his zeal for him beyond what was
allowable to his Station. So among the Romans, Fabius Rullianus with great
difficulty escaped punishment for venturing, on his private Judgment, though
with as probable a prospect, and as great success, as his General himself
Papirius Cursor could have desired; and that for fear of the many ill
consequences that might follow on it for the future, if such a Fact had been,
by its impunity, recommended to posterity for a precedent. But I have already
shown that not to be our case here. We do not oppose our private Judgments to
any Authority at all. But we oppose the public Judgment of a greater, to that
of a lower, Authority. Yet we have no need of insisting on that Plea at
present. We can fairly reconcile our sense in this affair with the imposed
Sense of our dear Mother the Church of England, even as established by Law, and
with the full design of the Legislators, as far as that can be gathered from
the Cases in prospect of which the Laws were made, and with Authentical
Interpretations of the meaning of the Legislators themselves allowed by both
Powers concerned in them, as well the Civil which has imposed them by Civil, as
the Spiritual, which has done the same, by Spiritual, coercions. I know not
what our Adversaries themselves can desire more. And I cannot but look on it as
a peculiar overruling Providence, that this is capable of being performed in a
Reformation, wherein the Ecclesiastics have been so manifestly overborn by the
Laity, and a Laity headed by a Prince so impatient of restraint, as Henry the
VIII. was, Who could expect that, where the encroachers made themselves Judges,
in their own Case, and the true Proprietors were forced to submissions and
surrendries of their Rights; the determinations could be just and equal on both
sides?

VII. IN Henry the VIIIth time, under whom the Oath of Arch-^p. Cranmers
Opinions in (...). cury the VIII. and Edw. the VI. time, perfectly destructive
of all Spiritual Autho^^^.
Supremacy, was first introduced, the Invasions of the Sacred Power were most
manifest. Yet so that even then, they appear to have been Innovations and
Invasions. But who can wonder at his success, considering the violent ways used
by him? So many executed by him for refusing the Oath? The whole Body of the
Clergy brought under a Praemunire, (for doing no more than himself had done, in
owning the Legatine Power of Cardinal Wolsey,) and sined for it, and forced to
submissions very different from the sense of the majority of them? He did
indeed pretend to be advised by some of the Ecclesiastics, as appears from
several of their Papers still preserved. But they were only some few selected
by himself, never fairly permitted to a freedom and majority of suffrages. And
when even those few had given their opinion, yet still he reserved the Judgment
of their reasons to himself. And to show how far he was from being indifferent,
those of them who were most open in betraying the Rights of their own function,
were accordingly advanced to the higher degrees in his favor, and were
entrusted with the management of Ecclesiastical affairs. None had a greater
share in Ecclesiastical Counsels, than Archbishop Cranmer. Nor is See those
Papers published by Bishop Stallingfleet Iren. c. ult. and by Bishop Burnet
Hist. of Resor. Part. I. Collect. n. XXI. B. III.
there any who, upon all the Questions proposed, wherein Ecclesiastical Power
was concerned, does more constantly side with the Kings imperious humor
against the true Rights of his own Order. He allows the King the Rights even of
preaching the word, and administering the Sacraments, and allows neither of them
to the Ecclesiastics, any further than as they derived them from the Princes
Lay Commissions. He permitted indeed their Consecrations, as he had found them,
by those of their own order; but derives nothing of their Power from those
Consecrations. He makes the Ceremonies of Consecration indifferent things, no
way concerned in conveying the Spiritual Power. That he derives wholly from
their Lay Deputation. He gives them a Power of preaching the Word and
administering the Sacraments where the Lay Powers allow it, and he allows them
neither where the Secular Magistrate forbids them. They must admit whom the
Laws oblige them to admit, and they must not excommunicate any whom the Secular
Laws take into their protection. The Magistrate, notwithstanding his being a
Layman, may perform these offices himself, if he pleased. And the
Ecclesiastics, notwithstanding their Consecration, are not by him permitted to
perform them, unless the Magistrate be pleased to give them leave. Nay so far
he proceeds in his flattery of the Civil Magistrate, that he allows no more
gifts of the Holy Ghost, in the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, than
in the collation of any Civil Office. Even in the Apostles themselves, he
rather excuses than commends all the exercise of their Spiritual Authority, as
necessitated to it by the exigency of their present Circumstances. As if any
necessity could excuse Usurpation. As if any exercise of a Power not belonging
to them could have been seconded by so visible manifestations of God himself,
as that was which was exercised by the Apostles. Yet even their Authority he
makes perfectly precarious. He owns no obligation on the Consciences of the
Christians of those times to obey even the Apostles themselves, but ascribes
their Obedience then wholly to their good will, so as to leave it to their own
liberty, whether they would be subject, or no. And why so? Only because the
Apostles had no Civil Empire. This wholly resolves all obligation of Conscience
into Civil Empire, and makes it impossible for the Church to subsist as a
Society and a Communion without the support of the Civil Magistrate.
Accordingly, that same Archbishop Cranmer took out a Patent for his Episcopal
Power, preserved by Bishop Burnet, full of a Style so pernicious to
Ecclesiastical Authority. Part II. Collect. Number. 2.
He there acknowledges all sort of jurisdiction, as well Ecclesiastical as
Civil, to have flowed originally from the Regal Power as from a Supreme Head,
and as a Fountain and Spring of all Magistracy within his own Kingdom. He says
they who had exercised this Jurisdiction formerly (for which he took out this
Patent) had done it only PRECARIO, and that they ought with grateful minds to
acknowledge this favor derived from the Kings liberality and indulgence, and
that accordingly they ought to yield whenever the King thought fit to require
it from them. And, to show what particulars of Ecclesiastical Power he meant,
his Patent instances the Power of ordering Presbyters, and of Ecclesiastical
coercion, meaning (no doubt) that of Excommunication. Nay further, the same
Patent gives him a Power of Executing, by the Kings Authority, those very
things which were known to have been committed to him by God himself in the
Scriptures, per and ultra ea quae tibi ex Sacris Literis divinitus commissa
esse dignoscuntur. By which we understand that no branch of Spiritual Power
whatsoever was excepted. Yet all this grant was to last no longer than the
Kings pleasure. I know not what the Lay Encroachers themselves can desire more.
Here is so little security for the Churches subsisting, when the Secular Laws
discountenance her, as that she is not allowed the same liberty that other
subjects have, of pleading the Secular Laws already made in favor of her, but
is left exposed to the Arbitrary pleasure of the Prince, which is thought hard
in the Case of other Subjects. This yoke the Politicians have lately imposed on
the Church of Scotland. GOD, in his good time, release her from it.

VIII. I have often wondered how the most learned Bishop Archbish^p C^^^mer's
Au(...) (...) these matter no^ at all.
Stillingfleet who first published the forementioned Papers, as far as they
concerned Archbishop Cranmer, could think them consistent with his own
Principles: They are so perfectly contradictory to his Discourse concerning the
Power of Excommunication subjoyned in the Second Edition of the Irenicum, and
indeed to the Doctrine of the Irenicum it self, as far as it was consistent
with it self, or with any one Hypothesis. For sometimes he seems to doubt
whether there can be any Power properly so called without coercion, or any
coercion without external force. As if indeed the fears of the future
mischieves attending exclusion from the Privileges of Church Communion, had
not been in the purest Ages of the Christian Religion, more properly coercive
than the fear of any evils that were in the power of the Secular Magistrate. It
is certain that good Christians then chose rather to suffer any thing the
Magistrate could inflict, than Excommunication. But I more admire that such a
betrayer of Ecclesiastical Rights should, by our Ecclesiastical Historian of
the Reformation, be proposed as the Hero of his times, and as Exemplary to such
as might, in his opinion, deserve the name of Heroes still. Yet he calls it a
strange Commission in Bishop Bonner, when he took out a Commission from the
King as to his Spirituals, conceived in the same terms with that of Cranmer, in
the particulars now mentioned. He grants that Bonners inducement to take out
that Commission was, that it was observed, that Vol. I. Book III p. 267.
Cranmers great interest in the King was chiefly grounded on some opinions he
had of the Ecclesiastical Officers being as much subject to the King, as all
other Civil Officers were. Yet Cranmer was to be excused, because that if he
followed that opinion at all, it was out of Conscience. Why he should doubt,
whether he was of that Opinion, I cannot guess, when himself has published
those very Papers of the learned Bishop Stillingfleet wherein Archbishop
Cranmer does so plainly own himself of that opinion; when he has also published
Cranmers own Commission to the same purpose. As little reason I can see why he
should say, that Cranmer was once of that opinion as if he had afterward
retracted it. The Papers upon the Consult were written in Henry the VIIIth's
time in the year 1540. And then, even by the Bishops observation, the change of
his Opinion had lost his interest with the King, if is Interest had been
grounded on that Opinion. But Cranmer kept to the same Opinions in the Reign of
K. Edward the VIth. Then it was he took out his Commission. The young King
himself seems to have been of the same Opinion in his 2d. Paper of the Bishops
Collections, which I can ascribe to nothing more probably than to the
Instructions of his Godfather. Nor does it appear the ABp. changed his mind
afterward. The only thing insisted on by our Historian to prove it, is his
subscribing a Book set out soon after, which teaches the contrary. But having
already shown that he still retained the same opinion in the time of Edward the
VIth, his subscription cannot prove any change of his opinion, but that he
complied, whatever his Opinion was, when he found his non-complyance could not
hinder the contrary Opinion from being acceptable. But indeed that Book was not
so clear in that point that his subscribing it would argue any change from his
former Opinions. But our Historian says that when Cranmer maintained that
opinion, he did it out of Conscience. Perhaps it might have been so. But I am
sure it is but an ill Argument to prove it so, that his interest in the King
was so visibly promoted by it. Yet if he had frequently followed Opinions
contrary to worldly Interest, that I grant, might have been an Argument that
though his Interest was indeed promoted by this Opinion, yes that might have
been no inducement to him, why he did embrace it. But on the contrary, in the
great actions of his Life, it was the serviceableness of his Opinions to the
Princes designs that principally recommended him. It was notoriously his
Opinion for the divorce from Q. Katharine that first brought him into the
Court, and into the Kings knowledge. Nor is it denied by our Historian that it
was so. And in the Case of presuming consummation of Marriage from bedding, he
gave contrary Judgments concerning the Marriage with Queen Katharine, and that
with Anne of Cleve; exactly according to the Kings inclinations, and his own
Interests in gratifying them. In Queen Katharin' s Case, he allowed it for a
good presumtion, but not so, in the Case of Anne of Cleve. Nay when the
Protestant Reformation it self was against his Interest with the Prince then in
Possession, he renounced even that, and was the only Bishop of our Church who
did so. Nor did he recant that recantation, at least he gave no public
signification of his recanting it, till he was assured by Dr. Cole, in a Sermon
before him at St. Mary's, that even his compliance should avail him nothing for
the saving of his Life. And even in that compleater Collection published by
Bishop Burnet, none of the other Bishops or Divines consulted on that occasion,
is so perpetually thorough-paced for the Kings inclinations as he was. Which
singularity alone, not only against the Interests, but the suffrages of his
function, in favor of Encroachments, sufficiently show how far he was from
being impartial in Questions of this nature. And it is but a poor
recommendation of him as a Friend of our Church, that he made a Conscience of
maintaining Opinions by which she might be ruined, by which she must be ruined,
and her Enemies obliged in Conscience to ruin her.

IX. FAR be it from me to disparage the glory of his Martyrdom. It is not for
the Interest of the Church, or the Reformation, that his Authority i^ these
things should be regarded.
His Repentance, how late soever, will excuse the scandal of his fall. And his
Martyrdom, however involuntary at first, will not lose its reward with him who
mercifully considers his servants frailties, though it may justly diminish his
Authority in comparison of others who were more forward, and withal more
constant, in suffering for the same Cause. For be it from me, in the least, to
detract from whatever was praise worthy in him. Our Historian may freely
commend him for his constancy to his deolining friend, and for his diligence in
collecting, and examining, the Testimonies of Antiquity, upon the Points
wherein he was consulted. But certainly an Historian ought to distinguish
between particular and general commendations, if he would indeed benefit
Mankind by his Histories. Just Characters are not to be denied those whose
Examples are otherwise proposed as fit rather to be abhorred than imitated, if
they have, at least, some few commendable qualities (among many other very bad
ones) deserving imitation. But none are to be commended simply; none are to
have. Elogies bestowed on them; none are to be represented as Heroes, as
Patterns, and Standards of the Age they lived in, and as Copies for Posterity,
but they whose Virtues were greater than their Vices, whose Virtues were
particularly signal and remarkable in the History of their Times, and greatly
contributive to the good events of it, and therefore fit to be imitated by
generous Posterity, when the like Exigencies shall return, and the like Cases
are again to be transacted. Particularly, in a History of the Reformation of
Religion, none ought to be commended but such as had a great zeal for Religion,
and whose abilities and prudence greatly contributed to the Promotion of it.
Nay even they who did indeed promote Religion, will not all of them deserve
commendation for it. St. Paul observed those, in his own times, who preached
Christ out of contention, and was glad of the event, that Christ was preached,
even on those terms, as being (no doubt) sensible of the good success it had.
But he does not therefore think it becoming him to bestow Encomiums on those
who were indeed accessory to good events, but with very ill intentions. Such
there were also many in those Reigns, under which the Reformation was
transacted, who very much promoted the Reformation, but with no good designs on
Religion, or Reformation. I need not instance in the King himself who begun it.
Next the King himself, none had a more active part in the Reformation than
Cromwell, whom notwithstanding, the Bishop observes to have declared himself of
the Roman Communion at his Execution. Part. I. B. III. p. 204.
The like also was the Case of the Duke of Northumberland. He had also
pretended a great zeal for the Reformation in setting up the Lady Jane Gray.
Yet, at his death, he also declared that he had always been in his heart Part.
II. B. II. p. 243.
a Romanist. Had it therefore been fit to set up these Persons as Heroes and
Patterns fit for imitation? Our Historian himself did not think fit to do so.
Their Case was not indeed the same with that of the Archbishop. Nor do I
produce them as such. All I design in mentioning them, is only to show that his
having actually promoted the Reformation, is not alone sufficient to make him
praiseworthy for promoting it. This will therefore put us further upon
examining whether the part acted by Cranmer was really contributive to a
Reformation. Had Reformation been nothing else but a Negative, a removal of
Papal Tyranny, that (to be sure) was sufficiently ruined by those Principles.
But Reformation is a mean between Anarchy on one side, as well as Tyranny on
the other; and is therefore equally ruined by either of the Extremes. For if we
consider that it is the Church which was to be reformed, and that the Church as
a Church, is a Society; it can be no Reformation which reduces it to either of
the Extremes. But of the two, that will less deserve the name, which perfectly
destroys the Government of the Church, and thereby dissolves the Society, that
was the thing to be reformed. And these are the plain consequences from those
Principles by which Archbishop Cranmer acted. If they freed the Church from the
Tyranny then in being, they naturally introduced a Tyranny of more pernicious
consequence, than that which had been ejected by them; a Tyranny of another
Body, of Interests frequently inconsistent with hers: and withal deprived her
of all security from what further Invasions soever the Lay Magistrate should be
pleased to make upon her. Indeed they deprived her of all possible security for
her very being. And though these Principles might make those who were acted by
them do her kindnesses, whilst her disorders lay in excess; yet, when that
Reformation which was advanced by them had reduced her to a just mediocrity,
whatever should be attempted further would be Injury, not Reformation. Which
ought by all means to make Prudent, and well-meaning Historians wary, (how much
soever they might like the things) of recommending the Example to Posterity. To
do so, is to encourage Enemies for the future, and to commend them for being
so, when they shall be tempted to think themselves therein to follow the
Examples of celebrated Heroes. Archbishop Cranmer particularly, could, upon
neither account, deserve such Elogies. His Principles were not naturally such
as were likely to benefit the Church, but to ruin her. Nor were those
Principles consistent with any probability of good meaning to her, when he
showed himself so partial to the Magistrate against her, not only against the
majority of his own Order, but against the Principles of his own Education,
upon so very small appearances on that side, and against so great evidence to
the contrary. As little reason there is for that advantageous Character our
Historian gives his other Hero, the Duke of Somerset. He it was that advanced
the Sacrilege of the former Reign against Monasteries, and now in the time of
his own Protectorship, against the Universities themselves. Our Historian
himself has published a very angry Letter of his to Bishop Ridley, for opposing
his designed beginnings of it in the suppression of Clare-Hall. If it must be
represented as Heroical to betray the Rights, and rob the Revenues of the
Church; if it be represented so by Ecclesiastics themselves; how naturally
must this tend to the encouraging the like Practices for the future? How little
does this become the Office of an Ecclesiastical Historian, who ought to make
the true Interests of the Church the Standard of his censures, as they are
indeed in themselves the greatest that can be, by all Rules of just Estimation?
I heartily and seriously recommend these things to the second thoughts of that
able Author, not only as to his Panegyricks upon the Enemies of the Church, but
as to his frequent Satyrs on his own Order. His meaning in both I will not take
upon me to censure. But let himself judge of the obvious tendency of them in
this unhappy Irreligious Age we live in, wherein men greedily lay hold on such
Authorities as his, for countenancing their wicked designs against the Church,
and Religion in general. For my part, I cannot see how the Duke of Somerset
could reconcile any true zeal for Religion, and the Church, with his
Sacrilegious designs against that very same Church, whose Communion was owned
by him.

X. BUT to return to Archbishop Cranmer; I know His Opinions in this matter no
more agreeable to the sense of our present Adversaries, than to ours.
none of even our present considering Adversaries, who either proceed on these
Principles as true, or who have attempted to reconcile them with the Interests
of the Church, or the Reformation. Even the Historian himself censures them as
singular Opinions in the Archbishop. And so they were even in the sense of the
Bishops of those times, as appears from that number of them who were concerned
in that Consult. Few of them were for those Opinions, so much for the Interest
of the Secular Prince, and none so thoroughly as he. Nor would the Court
venture to trust the trial of these Opinions to a Synod of the Bishops. This
made Bonner' s Commission (who perhaps gave the first Precedent of such a
Commission) have so few Followers that took out the like Commissions, even in
those unhappy times. Afterward in the latter end of the Reign of King Henry
the VIII. and the beginning of King Edward the VI. some more of the Court
Faction imitated him. There was one, of a Bishop of Worcester in the beginning
of King Edward' s time, transcribed for our Historians use, though not
published by him, in the same Style with that of the Archbishop. But this might
have been a consequence of that Thought of the young King himself expressed in
his second Paper, for not trusting the Bishops with the entire exercise of the
Ecclesiastical Power, and perhaps, of an Order of Council pursuant to it; or,
at the utmost, of the Act made in the last year of King Henry the VIII. which
we shall mention hereafter. But their little constancy in obliging all the
Bishops to do so, is a great Presumption of the difficult reception these
Sacrilegious Principles met with, even in those Ages. But whatever reception
they wet with then, it is very manifest that they are singular now. Our
Historian himself observes that Bonner, after his taking out this Commission,
might well be called one of the Kings Bishops. Intimating that he did P. I. B.
III. p. 267.
not deserve the name of Christ' s. And our Adversaries, who have yet appeared
against us in this Question, have generally owned even our deprived Fathers
themselves as valid Bishops as ever, both as to the Episcopal Character, and as
to all exercises of Spiritual Power relating to the Catholic Church,
notwithstanding the pretended Deprivation. They only deny that they have now
any Right to their particular districts and Dioceses, which being vacated by
the Lay Power may therefore excuse their Successors from Intrusion and
Usurpation. But the Hypothesis of Archbishop Cranmer would better have
accounted for all that their Cause obliges them to defend. For if the
Apostolical Predecessors could derive a Power to our Bishops undeprivable by
the Civil Magistrate, they might consequently derive to them a Right to
districts confined to the exercise of that Spiritual Power, as independent on
him as the Spiritual Power it self. And if they could, they did so; it being
notorions in those Primitive Times that they had no more consent of the Civil
Magistrate for the one, than for the other, and yet exercised both, and were
seconded by God in their Acts of Discipline, which supposed their claim to both
of them. But, by Archbishop Cranmer' s Principles, the Apostles themselves
could lay no claim to either of them without the consent of the Civil
Magistrate, and therefore could derive no such Rights to Successors claiming
from them, that could be undeprivable by the Civil Magistrate. Had this
Doctrine been true, Bishops deprived by a lawful Magistrate could have claimed
no longer. But even our Adversaries themselves seem sensible now, not only how
contrary those Paradoxes were to the Sense of truly Catholic Antiquity, but
also how little agreeable they are to the prevailing Opinion of them, who
cordially espouse the Cause of Religion in general, and of the Church of
England in particular, even in this present degenerous Age. This being so, our
Adversaries themselves cannot be displeased at us for disowning a Supremacy
explained by, and grounded on, such Doctrines as even themselves dare not
undertake to defend.

XII. AND such indeed was the Supremacy as it was The Supremacy, and Title of
Head, when first assumed by Henry the VIII. consistent with our Doctrine.
first introduced by King Henry the VIII. and as it was continued under King
Edward the VI. Then as much was challenged as could be allowed by even those
licentious Principles of Archbishop Cranmer. I mean, so much was challenged by
the Kings themselves, and by the Laity who made a majority in the Legislative
Power by the Constitution. So much was plainly the design of King Henry to whom
Cranmer so effectually recommended himself by these Opinions, as our Historian
observes. And the Sense of the Legislative Power cannot be better proved ^^an
from the Expressions of the Laws themselves. T(...)st Law is more 24 Hen. VIII.
12.
modest, and though it do own the King for Head of the Body Politic,
consisting of Spiritualty and Temporalty, yet withal it clearly distinguishes
their two Jurisdictions, and does not make them interfere any further than as
that perhaps might be meant by making the King the common Head of both of them.
For so the words of the Act run: The body Spiritual whereof having power, when
any cause of the Law Divine happened to come in question, or of Spiritual
learning, that it was declared, interpreted, and showed by that part of the
said Body Politic, called the Spiritualty, now usually called the English
Church, which always has been reputed, and also found of that sort, that both
for knowledge, integrity, and sufficiency of number, it has been always
thought, and is also at this hour, sufficient and meet of it self, without the
intermeddling of any exterior Person or Persons, to declare and determine all
such doubts, and to administer all such Offices and Duties, as to their rooms
Spiritual does appertain, etc. And the Laws Temporal, for trial of Property of
Lands and Goods, and for the conservation of the People of this Realm in Unity
and Peace, without rapin or spoil, was, and yet is administered, adjudged and
executed, by sundry Judges and Ministers of the other part of the said Body
Politic, called the Temporalty: And both their Authorities and Jurisdictions
do conjoyn together in the due administration of Justice, the one to help the
other. Accordingly it is afterward enacted that all Causes concerning our
Dominions be finally and difinitively adjudged and determined within the Kings
Jurisdiction and Authority, and not elsewhere, in such Courts Spiritual and
Temporal of the same, as the natures, conditions, and equalities of the Cases
and matters aforesaid in contention, or hereafter happening in contention,
shall require. These things plainly show the State wherein that assuming
Princes ^ound things, when he began his Innovations, and which all o(...) to
endeavor to restore, who desire that the ancient bounds of Magna Charta should
be preserved inviolable. For what security can it give us, in our present
Settlements, if former violations of it in others, by not being repealed, must
be allowed to pass into Precedents for new and future violences, when any are
possessed of force sufficient to attempt them. But this will directly overthrow
the Legality of what has been done for depriving our Holy Fathers by a Lay
Authority, even supposing it Legal. It is indeed probable that when this Act
was made, the King himself designed no such exercise of purely Spiritual
Authority by Lay Persons. Bishop Burnet himself observes, that in Cromwell' s
first Commission, as no such Precedence was granted him, as was afterward,
next the Royal Family; so neither was any Authority at all granted him over the
Bishops. And this Act now mentioned, shows plainly that the Case was so. All
Appeals here of private Persons in Spiritual Causes, are ultimately to the
Archbishops, saving the Prerogative of the Archbishop and See of Canterbury.
And in Causes wherein the King should be concerned, the ultimate Appeal is to
the Spiritual Prelates, and other Abbots and Priors of the upper House,
assembled and convocated by the Kings Writ in the Convocation being or next
ensuing, within the Province or Provinces, where the same matter of contention
is, or shall be begun: Thus far therefore it is very plain that neither the
Title of Head nor the Supremacy, could oblige us to own any Lay Authority
whatsoever to be sufficient for a Spiritual Deprivation, even interpreted
according to the Sense of the Legislators themselves. So all the Right that the
King as a common Head could pretend to over the Clergy, in Causes purely
Spiritual, was not a Right to give them any Power which they were not supposed
to have Antecedently to any exercise of the Kings Authority over them, but a
Right to oblige them to make a good Use of that Power which they had already
received from God. But on this Supposition, as he can give them no new Power in
these matters, so neither can he take that Power from them which he never gave
them. Which will alone be sufficient to ruin the validity of Lay Deprivations.

XII. HOWEVER Archbishop Cranmer' s Opinion When the King gave the encroaching
Commission to Cr(...), it was not (...) ^greeable to the true(...) of the
Legis(...).
being so grateful to the King and the Laity, who made the majority in the
Legislative Power, did accordingly prevail. But being withal as singular among
the Clergy, who were notoriously the only competent Judges of Spiritual Rights,
it prevailed in such a way as one would expect an Opinion laboring under such
a disadvantage of true Authority would do, that it was urged to the height when
either elation of success, or an exigence of affairs, urged them to such odious
extremities; otherwise, the practice of it was intermitted, when cooler
thoughts took place, as having great presumptions against it, (that it was
unwarrantable,) and those good ones even in the Opinion of the Governors
themselves, who having now entirely subdued the Clergy, were no longer under
any other restraint than that which was from their own Consciences. Accordingly
after the surrendry of the Clergy, when now all his violences had success
according to his own mind, the King gave Cromwell a more ample Commission over
the Bishops themselves, and with Power of Spiritual Coercion answerable to the
utmost rigor of these loose Opinions now mentioned. And he was a person every
way fitted for it. As he was an intimate Friend of Archbishop Cranmer' s, so he
was also a favourer of that singular Opinion which was so much for the interest
of his Commission. Our Historian himself takes notice of it as one of the
things objected to him at his Attainder, that he had said that, it was as
lawful for every Christian man to be the Minister of that Sacrament [of the
Eucharist] as a Priest. This clearly shows that Opinion Vol. I. B. III. R. 278.
to have been odious, even then, in the Consciences of the Attaindors
themselves, and therefore that their other Acts grounded on that and such like
Opinions were not bona fide, upon true conviction of Conscience. Otherwise they
could not have had the confidence to charge the belief of such Opinions as a
Crime on him, if they had in earnest believed them themselves. The odiousness
also of such a Power as was exercised by Cromwell appeared also in this, that
after him there was no Successor substituted in his place with such a
Commission as his was, nor any general Vicegerent appointed for executing the
Kings Supremacy in Spirituals, distinct from the Bishops and Archbishops.
However whilst his Commission held, he acted to the height of what his Friend
Cranmer' s Opinion would warrant him. He gave out general Injunctions for all
Spiritual Jurisdictions, as Bishops had done formerly for their own Dioceses.
He took upon him to call Bishops to an account for their administration in
Spirituals. Our Historian himself has inserted some of his Letters to this
purpose sufficiently Imperious. But however odious such general Commissions
were for things beyond the Power of the Laity, yet the Lay Lawmakers could not
be restrained from encroachments as they thought they had occasion. But this
they did by the degrees now intimated.

XIII. In the next year which was the XXVth of that King's The Appeal allowed
from the Archbishops to the Kings Commissioners in Chancery, no Argument of any
Spiritual Power derived from the King.
Reign, there is an Appeal allowed from the Archbishops themselves to the Kings
Majesty in the Kings Court of Chancery. And upon such Appeal a Commission was
to be directed under the Great Seal to such Persons as should be named by the
Kings Highness, his Heirs, or Successors, which Persons so empowered were
thereby Authorized to give definitive Sentences, from which no further Appeal
was allowed. This was the very Power which had formerly been allowed to the
Pope. Accordingly it is enacted that no Archbishop nor Bishop of this Realm
should intermeddle with any such Appeals, otherwise, or in any other manner,
than they might have done before the making of this Act. So that 25 H. VIII. 10.
as the Power of the Pope was, by the former Act, translated to the upper House
of our own Convocation, in matters wherein the King himself should be
concerned; so here the same Power is again translated from the Convocation to
the King himself, and the Power of the Convocation is transacted by a smaller
number, and those of the Kings nomination. This did put the decision of such
Cases as much in the Kings Power as himself could desire, though the persons to
be nominated by him had been Ecclesiastics. Yet even that confinement is not
laid upon him, that they should necessarily be so. He was therefore at perfect
liberty not to exercise any part of this Power by Laymen, any further than as
the Ecclesiastics acting herein by his Commission, might be supposed to derive
their Power from him who was himself a Layman. Yet even that was capable of a
better Interpretation, that the Commission did not give them the Power by which
they acted, but only Authorized them to exert the Power they had before, with
impunity from the Secular Laws, and with the secular support. This was only
dare Judices, as the Praetor did to particular Causes, out of those who were by
the Laws qualified and empowered to be Judges in general. Thus Constantine the
Great did dare Judices to the Donatists, Melchiades and other Gallicane
Bishops, who otherwise was notwithstanding very wary of encroaching on the
Bishops Rights in general to judge concerning Spiritual Causes. What therefore
was done hitherto, was fairly reconcilable to our Doctrine, without asserting
any Right as to Spirituals derived from the King to the Bishops, which as it
was given by him, might consequently be deprivable by him also. What the King
himself did in giving such a Commission to Cromwell, was a Personal Act not
granted him by any express Law during the time that Cromwell possessed it, and
therefore cannot be any just ground for interpreting the Supremacy, and the
Oath concerning it, with relation to Posterity, but must have been extinguished
with his Person, though he had been more constant to it than it appears he was.
Much more considering that even he himself did not think it fit to continue th
Office after Cromwell. The same may also be observed concerning the Bishops,
who took out Commissions for their Spiritual Episcopal Power. There being
hitherto no Law obliging them to do so, must make their Acts also Personal. For
this is sufficient to show they were not obliged to it by any Sense of the
Legislators, which cannot be known but by their Laws. There was not so much as
Proclamation for it, that might reduce it to that Law which was made in the
same Reign, for equalling the Kings Proclamations with Acts of Parliament,
though that Law had continued still in force, as it is certain it has not. Less
than one of these will not suffice for proving us concerned in what was then
done, as an Argument of that Sense of the Legislators, which was to oblige all
Posterity till the Law was The Supremacy explained 26 H. VIII. 1. not contrary
to our Doctrine in this Cause.
repealed by the same Authority that made it.

XIV. THE next Act in the XXVIth year of the same King gives him as Head of the
Church of England full Power and Authority from time to time to visit, repress,
redress, reform, order, correct, restrain, and amend all such errors, heresies,
abuses, offenses, contempts, and enormities whatsoever they be, which by any
manner Spiritual Authority or Jurisdiction, ought, or may lawfully be reformed,
repressed, ordered, redressed, corrected, restrained or amended, etc. Here are
Spiritual Causes, Errors and Heresies given as Instances, wherein the King
might concern himself. And Spiritual Power in all the kinds of it, is supposed
in these Corrections to be performed by the King, when he is allowed to correct
all sorts of abuses that might by any manner Spiritual Authority or
Jurisdiction be corrected. No part of the Episcopal Power is here excepted, not
even that of Excommunication. But then it is not even yet determined, whether
this Spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction be supposed in them who are to be, by
the King, obliged to exercise it; or whether also the Authority was to be
derived from him too. If the Authority was not supposed derived from him, it
will not follow that it was deprivable by him. And if it were not; then all the
obligation the King could lay upon the Bishops, to do as he would have them,
could not be in Conscience, but in Interest, so far only as they thought the
inconveniences they might incur by his displeasure greater than those the
Church might suffer by that imposition on their liberty. This therefore might
be born with by the Bishops, so far as they might judge it reconcilable with
the Churches interests. And that indeed no more could be intended, appears from
a Paper published by Bishop Burnet from a Cottonian M S. Addend. to the First
Vol. Number. V.
For there is a full acknowledgment of a distinct Authority in the Bishops,
from the Potestas gladii lodged in the King. Yet it is signed by Cromwell, and
that after his second, and more ample Commission; because he signs before the
Archbishops. And long after this Act, between the years 1537. and 1538. as the
Bishop himself conjectures. Thus far therefore Cromwell himself was not very
positive in that Opinion (no nor Cranmer who here subscribes among the rest)
which makes the Spiritual Authority derived from the King. So far it was then
from being the Authorized Sense of the Legislators. But I cannot, by any means,
think it commendable in the Prince to impose, even so far, though the Right of
external force be indeed his. Should the Church follow his example, she has as
good a Right to impose on his Actings in Temporal Causes by her Spiritual
Censures, as he can pretend to for his interposing in her Spiritual Affairs by
his Temporal Force. For he cannot pretend to a more immediate Title from God,
for his Temporal Force, than she can for her Right of inflicting Spiritual
Censures. And if it should be thought reasonable for either of them to make use
of that Right of coercion, which justly belongs to them both, for imposing on
the other in matters not belonging to them; it would certainly be more
reasonable for the Spiritual Power to impose on the Temporal in order to
Spirituals, than for the Temporal Power to impose upon the Spiritual in order
to Temporals. For my part, I would rather that both would keep within their own
bounds, that as we must render to God the things that are Gods, so we may also
render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. But whether the Laity did, in
this Act, assume more than what was really their due, I am not so much
co^cerned at present. It is sufficient that what was assumed by them was not
sufficient, either directly, or by any necessary consequence, to put it in
their power to deprive our Bishops of their Spiritual Authority.

XV. HOWEVER though hitherto they did not, The (...) as explained in 37 H.
VIII. 17. full to our Adversaries purpose, and the sense of Archbishop Cranmer.
yet at length our Legislators of those times did advance the Supremacy as high
as Archbishop Cranmer' s Principles would warrant them. But it was not before
the later end of that Sacrilegious Reign. In the seven and thirtieth year of
it, there was a scruple started concerning the Lay Doctors of the Civil Law (by
whom the Discipline of the Ecclesiastical Courts was managed after the death of
Cromwell) on account of their being Laymen, whether the Spiritual Censures
issued out by such, could have any effect with regard to Conscience. This
scruple being raised on that account of their being Laymen, was conceived by
the Parliament, by manifest consequence, to affect the Kings Power also for
such Censures, because he also was a Layman. This could not have been, if they
had not intended to assert such a Right in the King, though a Layman, even for
Spiritual Censures. For had they intended no more than that the King, by his
Lay Power, should only oblige Spiritual Persons to do their duty in exerting
that Spiritual Power which they had received, not from him, but from God
himself; in this case, the consequence objected against the Supremacy had been
out of doors; and that which had signified nothing, would have needed no
remedy. When therefore to prevent this consequence, they assert the Supremacy
in such a Sense as may qualify the King, though a Layman, to a Right to
inflict such Censures; they must consequently mean it so as to assert this
Right to him as a Supreme Magistrate, though not invested with any Power from
God distinct from that of the Sword. Accordingly they tell us, that his most
royal Majesty is, and has always justly been, by the Word of God, Supreme Head
in the Earth of the Church of England, and has full Power and Authority to
correct, punish, and repress all manner of Heresies, Errors, Vices, Sins,
Abuses, Idolatries, Hypocrisies, and Superstitions, sprung and growing within
the same, and to exercise all other manner of Jurisdictions, commonly called
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. They tell us withal the occasion of this
Objection, That, though the Decrees and Constitutions by which the exercise of
Spiritual Jurisdiction had been confined to Holy Orders, had been utterly
abolished by the Act of the five and twentieth year of this same Reign, yet
because the contrary is not 25 II. VIII. (...) 19.
used, nor put in practice by the Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons, who have no manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but
by, under, and from your Royal Majesty, it adds, or at least may give
occasion to some evil disposed Persons, to think, and little to regard the
Proceedings and Censures Ecclesiastical made by your Highness and your
Vicegegerent, Officials, Commissaries, Judges, and Visitors, being also Lay and
married men, to be of little or none effect, or force, -- And, Forasmuch as
your Majesty is the only and undoubted Supreme Head of the Church of England,
and also of Ireland, to whom by Holy Scripture all Authority and Power is
wholly given to hear and determine all manner Causes Ecclesiastical, and to
correct all Vice and Sin whatsoever, and to all such Persons as your Majesty
shall appoint thereunto: Therefore it is enacted, that Doctors of the Civil Law
though Lay and married, being put in office by any one having Authority under
the King, his Heirs and Successors, may lawfully execute all manner of
Jurisdiction, commonly called Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and all Censures and
Coercions appertaining, or in any wise belonging unto the same Here the Bishops
are denied to have any manner of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical but by, under, and
from the Prince. Here all Authority and Power is said to be wholly given him,
to hear and determine all manner Causes Ecclesiastical. Here he is said, by the
Word of God, to have full Power and Authority to exercise all manner of
Jurisdictions, commonly called Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. And all this is
asserted as their Sense of the Title of Head, and of the Prerogative of
Supremacy. If so, the Bishops can have no Power but what is derived from the
Lay Magistrate (for all this is challenged to him as he is a Layman) and
therefore none but what must be supposed deprivable by him. Then after their
deprivation, their Character is gone, and all their Power as Bishops of the
Catholic Church is gone, and all they do after the Lay Magistrate has deprived
them, will be perfect Nullities, till they be again confirmed by Power derived
from the Civil Magistrates. This Hypothesis supposing the Legality of the Civil
Power, will indeed serve our Adversaries designs to the full. But it is as
notoriously false, as it is notoriously true that there was, even in the
Apostles time, a Discipline exercised independent on the Civil Magistrate. And
our Adversaries dare not stand by it.

XVI. THIS extravagant Notion of the Supremacy The same Notion of the Supremacy
continued also under King Edw. the VI.
continued through the next Reign of King Edward the VI. Not only as that same
Act continued still unrepealed, but as the same Practice which supposed it,
continued, and as no better Explication of the Supremacy was substituted in
stead of it. Now it was, that Archbishop Cranmer took out his new Commission
from the King for his Archbishopric in the style formerly used by Bishop
Bonner, perfectly adapted to his own singular Opinion. Now it was, that the
Bishop of Worcester took out the like Commission in the very beginning of this
Reign. Though Bishop Burnet observes that no such form was imposed on Bishop
Ridley, nor on Bishop Thirlby, who were consecrated in the year 1550. In that
same year it was, that the young King himself expresses his own Opinion in
these words: But as for Discipline, I would wish no Authority Bishop Burnet
Vol. II. Col. B. II. The Kings Re(...). Pap. 2.
given generally to all Bishops, but that Commission be given to those that be
of the best sort of them to exercise it in their Dioceses. By which we may
easily understand that Bishop Ridley who did put out Injunctions, had singular
favor shown him in that he was permitted to do so. So that no general
Inferences are to be gathered from his Case. Yet even he, and such as he, were
to Act by Commission, which is perfectly consistent with the Hypothesis that
was so destructive of the Churches Authority. The only difference between him
and others was, that he was to hold his Authority for Life, they only during
the Princes pleasure. But, for proving the sense of the Lawmakers of those
times, I rather choose to insist on the expressions of the Laws themselves. And
those are very home to this purpose. In the Statute 1 Edw. VI. c. 2. They say
that all Authority of Jurisdiction Spiritual and Temporal is derived and
deducted from the Kings Majesty as Supreme Head of these Churches and Realms of
England and Ireland. They therefore enact that all Processes Ecclesiastical
should run in the King's name, only that the Test should be in the name of the
Archbishop, Bishop, or other having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, who has the
Commission and grant of the Authority Ecclesiastical immediately from the Kings
Highness. They add withal, that the Seal of Jurisdiction was to have the Kings
Arms on it, as an Acknowledgment from whom the Jurisdiction was derived. There
are indeed some exceptions in that same Act wherein the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the other Bishops are allowed to use their own Seals. But
considering that the reasons given for their using the King's Arms are general,
such as extend to all Archbishops, and all Spiritual Jurisdictions whatsoever,
those exceptions cannot argue any independence of the Spiritual Jurisdiction,
even in the Cases so excepted. The Archbishop had a liberty of using his own
Seal in Cases of smaller consequence, which were not likely to be exempted from
the Secular Power, when the greater were not; and in Dispensations to be
granted to the King himself, where though the Power had been in general
originally derived from the King, yet it had not been decent in the
Dispensation it self to express its being so. For that had been to the same
purpose as if the King, by his own Authority, had dispensed with himself. Yet
the Power might have been derived from him, as that of our ordinary Judges is,
when they give Sentence against the King in favor of a Subject, by virtue of
their Commission from the Crown empowering them to do so. And the Cases wherein
other Bishops are there allowed to use their own Seals, are only such wherein
their own inferiors are concerned, who derive their Power from them, which is
very consistent with their own deriving their Power from the King. Especially
when this liberty is granted them by that very Power which pretended to be the
Original of all their Episcopal Spiritual Power. I mention not now the several
Acts sufficiently frequent in this Reign, requiring Clergymen to admit to
Communion, and empowering them to punish by Spiritual Censures, though these do
also proceed on the same supposal (when they are not in execution of Canons
made before by Ecclesiastical Authority) that even such Spiritual Authority is
originally vested in the Lay Magistrate. For my design at present is not to
enquire how far the Lay Power, even the Legislative Power, has encroached on
the Rights of the Clergy actually; but how far they have declared their
encroachments included in the Sense of the Supremacy for maintenance of which
the Oath was made, and which must therefore be maintained by them, who would
then take the Oath veraciously, according to the true meaning of the
Legislators. But what I have insisted on from this Act, shows the Legislators
sense of the Supremacy it self.

XVII. YET though this impious notion of the Supremacy, King Henry the VIIIths
Reign by no means to be allowed for an Age of Precedents.
was continued in the Reign of this excellent Prince, who did not live to that
maturity of his own Judgment that might otherwise have enabled him to have seen
the falsehood, and all tendency of these ill Principles, which had been
instilled into him by his Godfather, who was always the most forward promoter
of them; yet they were first introduced in the Sacrilegious Reign of King Henry
the VIII. And why should any Posterity have regard for such an Age as that was,
which had themselves so little for all the Acts of their own Ancestors? Why
should any who regard Religion, have any for them who brought in principles so
destructive to all Religion, and to the very Fundamentals of the Church as it
is a Society and a Communion? Atheists themselves who have no concern for the
Truth of Religion, yet cannot choose but be concerned for the security Religion
gives them in their present enjoyments, by the Opinions of those who do in
earnest believe it true, and for the restraint it lays on such not to molest
them in their possessions of what they are Legally entitled to, when it is
otherwise in their Power forcibly to dispossess them. That wicked generation
broke even this security. All that could have been done, had been done by their
Ancestors for the security of Magna Charta, and the Rights of the Clergy
concerned in it, as the first and sacredest part of it. It had been confirmed
by solemn and frequently repeated grants of all the Parties who had a Right to
confirm it. Not only so, but all the Obligations for observing it were laid on
their Posterity that could possibly be laid on them by Ancestors, all the
obligations they knew of from Conscience and from Religion, that where no fear
of Man could, there at least the fear of God might, restrain them. Nothing was
then thought more available for this purpose, than the imprecation of curses on
those who should presume to violate it, ratified by the concurrence of those
who were Authorized by God to oblige him as the Ministers of his Religion, and
with the Solemnities then used to make the imprecation yet more dreadful. It
argues very little foresight, and is unworthy those excellent endowments
wherewith God has blessed our Ecclesiastical Historian, when in his Apology for
Sacrilege in the Conclusion of his Discourse concerning the Regalia, he would
weaken the fear of these Imprecations now, on account of the superstitiousness
by which they were transacted. He might easily have foreseen that by suggesting
this, he did not only weaken the security of his own function (for which it
would have become him to have been more concerned) but the security of the
whole Nation, for which he must be concerned, whether he will or no, if he will
enjoy any benefit by the grant of our common Ancestors. For we have no other
security for all the Charters and Customary Immunities of this present Age, no
not for the Great Charter it self, nor consequently for our Liberties and
Properties, than what he is there so prodigal of, and so willing to own
unobliging. Now what can we say why any who can, should not, invade the Rights
already constituted, besides the Right that Ancestors have for obliging their
Successors, in matters wherein themselves had once a Right by the Constitution
under which they lived? I know even this is questioned now by some who can find
in their hearts to prostitute great parts to ill designs. Yet the Interest of
Mankind in general (which is an infallible Argument of Right in Cases of this
nature) requires it should be so. Otherwise, all Leagues and Covenants must
expire with the Persons that made them, and every Monarchs death must dissolve
the whole Body Politic, and leave subjects in the state of Nature, and their
Successors at liberty, whether they will ratify the grants of their Ancestors.
This must oblige Successors in Justice and Conscience to perform the will of
the deceased, though it be in their Power to do otherwise. But what if this
will not restrain them? All the remedy that has been thought of to make them
observe it, has only been the fear of inflictions from the Deity, to which
imprecations of their Ancestors might make them liable. And the belief of these
things has obliged all civilized Mankind to own the obligation of the Laws of
Nature and of Nations, and has indeed been the principal ingredient in the
Belief, that has so generally prevailed in the World, that there is a God that
governs the whole World, as well as his peculiar people; and that with regard
to this Life, seeing the Belief of the future Rewards and Punishments, is
proper to them who have received his Divine Revelations; and that therefore he
will reward keeping of Faith with temporal Prosperity, and punish breaches of
it with temporal Calamities. Why should theyelse in passing their Faith, appeal
to that Universal Judge of Mankind, and imprecate on themselves curses from
him; if it had not been believed on all sides, that curses so imprecated, were
really to be feared from his Justice, to whom both parties had submitted the
Judgment of their Cause? Why should the like Oaths be required from persons of
very false and impious Religions, if it had not been believed Universally, that
God was obliged to perform the imprecation made for securing Faith in this
World, according to the Opinion of him that made the imprecation, how much
soever he was otherwise mistaken in his Opinion concerning the true Religion?
God did actually inflict the imprecations of his own people for securing Faith
with the Gibeonites, upon their posterity, many Ages after in the time of
David, though the Peace made with the Gibeonites was expressly against his own
command. So he did also those between Abimeleck and the Sichemites, though made
in the Temple of Baal Berith. Yet all this security was overborn by that
violent Prince, and with the consent of his Parliaments. If his Reign must be
allowed for a Reign of Precedents, then Magna Charta and the Coronation Oath,
may again be broken by a Prince who can get Parliaments to join with him in
breaking them, as he did. Then the Laity may be voted out of their Rights, and
forced to surrender them, by the concurrence of his Clergy with him, as the
Clergy were then by the concurrence of the Laity. Then any Prince who can but
go far enough from the Religion of his Ancestors, shall be encouraged to
overturn the whole Constitution, on pretense of the unobligingness of grants
made with the solemnities of a Religion which he judges false, and which
perhaps indeed may be so. But it was not only in affairs of Religion that the
Prince I am speaking of, did things unfit to pass into Precedents, though done
with the consent of his Parliaments. The most unjust thing remaining in our
present Laws, the way of proceeding by Attainder, from which no innocence can
secure a Man, was first introduced in his time. In his time, the debts of the
Crown were twice discharged by Acts of Parliament without payment. In his time,
his Proclamations were made equal with Acts of Parliament. In his time, his
Children by both marriages, that of Queen Katherine of Spain, and that with
Anne Bollen, were declared illegitimate, and that by Acts of Parliament, though
by the Law of God only one could be so. In his time, the Lands of the
Universites and Hospitals had been given him by the Parliament, if he had been
pleased to accept of them. So very liberal these Parliaments were of what was
not out of their own Purses, and so far from being a security to the subject,
against his greatest exorbitances. I meddle not with any of his or their
personal faults, because I am unwilling to engage on so unpleasing an Argument
any farther than the exigency of my Cause obliges me to do so. And that does
only concern me to show how little reverence is due to them as Legislators.

XVIII. BUT, God be praised; we are now concerned Queen Elizabeth explained the
Supremacy in a Sense con^stent with our Principles.
with a better and more tolerable Supremacy than that was. The next Protestant
Princess Q. Elizabeth, was prevailed on to lay aside the Title of Supreme Head,
and to propose and admit of a better explication of the Supremacy it self. And
that upon account of the aversness of the Bishops to it, if she had not done
so. So we are informed by a Letter of Dr. Sands to Dr. Parker preserved by
Bishop Burnet. He also tells us the Person, who prevailed on her to do so. Mr.
Lever, says he, Bishop Burnet p. 11. B. 111. Col. number. 2.
put such a scruple into the Queen's Head, that she would not take the Title of
Supreme Head. The Bishops, as it is said, will not swear to it as it is, but
rather lose their Livings, The occasion seems to be, that now the Succession
falling to a Woman, it seemed very indecent to believe her an Original of
Sacerdotal Power, who was, by her Sex, incapacitated for exercising any
Sacerdotal Act; to believe that a Right of Excommunication could be derived
from her, who was on the same account, unqualified to consecrate the Eucharist,
and to give the Communion, though they who had the Right had given her that
power; that she could be the Head of Sacerdotal Power to others, who was not
capable of being a Sacerdotal Head at all. For the Apostles Reasoning holds
concerning this Sacerdotal Headship, which is the principle of mystical Unity,
that the Man in general is as much the Head of the Woman in general, as the
Head of the Man is Christ, and the Head of Christ is God. These things, no
doubt, gave the Papists a subject of tragical Declamations then, as their Books
show they did after. Nor was the scandal only given to the Papists, but to the
Protestants also, who returned from their exile with a zeal, as great for the
Geneva Discipline, after the troubles at Frankford, as the others could pretend
to for the Papal. And accordingly, it was a Protestant that persuaded her to
lay aside the Title of Supreme Head, or rather not to resume it after it had
been laid aside by her Sister. However the Supremacy it self she did resume,
but with such an Explication as made it thence forward tolerable. The Supremacy
it self she resumed as it had been practiced formerly by her Father and her
Brother, as far as by any Spiritual 1 Eliz. 1.
or Ecclesiastical Power or Authority had heretofore been, or might lawfully be
exercised or used. So the words of the Act run, wherein she also revives the
Act of 37 Hen. VIII. 17. as far as it concerned the Practice of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction by Lay Doctors of the Civil Law. She also resumed a Power of
issuing out Commissions for exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and of
giving out Injunctions as formerly. Thus the Case stood in her first
Parliament, which began Jan. 23. and was dissolved May 8. of the year 1559.
Which things if they had held, had been little else besides the abatement of a
word. But her Injunctions themselves followed that same year, after the
dissolution of the Parliament, wherein she remits of the things themselves, at
least with reference to the Oath, which was first introduced in this
Parliament, in the form wherein we use it now. In these Injunctions; she
forbids her Subjects to give ear to those Injunct. by Queen Es^z. Edition by
Bishop Sparrow p. 77. 78.
who maliciously labored to notify to her loving Subjects, how by words of
the said Oath it may be collected, that the Kings or Queens of this Realm,
Possessors of the Crown, may challenge Authority and Power of Ministry of
Divine Service in the Church, She therefore tells them, that her Majesty
neither does, nor never will challenge any other Authority than under God, to
have the Sovereignty and Rule over all manner of Persons born within these her
Realms, Dominions and Countries, of what estate, either Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, soever they be, so as no other foreign Power shall, or ought to have
any superiority over them. She tells them therefore that, if any Person that
has conceived any other sense of the form of the said Oath shall accept the
same Oath with this interpretation, sense or meaning, her Majesty is well
pleased to accept every such in that behalf, as her good and obedient Subjects,
and shall acquit them of all manner of Penalties contained in the said Act,
against such as shall peremptorily or obstinately refuse to take the same Oath.

XIX. HERE is a fair Legal Interpretation allowed That Explication
discharges'us now from any obligation to believe Archbishop Cranmer's
Principles.
by the Regal Authority it self, for whose sake the Oath was imposed, perfectly
discharging us, who have been concerned in it, from the Belief of Archbishop
Cranmer' s Principles themselves, and therefore from meaning any such sense of
it as otherwise mig(...) have followed, and indeed must, if the taking of the
Oath had necessarily supposed our belief of those Principles. Here we find
those Principles denied to have ever been the Sense of the Legislators, even in
the time of King Henry the VIII. or King Edward the VI. The Queen, in the same
Injunction, calls it a sinister persuasion, and perverse construction to think
it was so. We need not now dispute how true this assertion was for the time
past. It is sufficient for our purpose, that from the time of this Injunction
we are not obliged to mean it so, how plainly soever it may seem to be supposed
in the Acts revived by her. Yet wh^^ I have already said, is sufficient to show
how unsteady the Legislators were in urging the belief of these Principles on
them who took this Oath, even when the Words of the Laws themselves did seem
most literally and naturally to import them in the Sense of the Legislators
themselves. I have already observed the Paper subscribed by Cromwell and
Cranmer himself, contrary to their own Doctrine in the height of Cromwell' s
Power. I have observed that Cromwell' s opinion, that Laymen might consecrate
the Eucharist, was so odious, even in King Henry' s Reign, that it was made an
Article against him for his Attainder. So also in the Reformatio Legum
Ecclesiasticarum, wherein Resor. Leg. Eccl. de Excom. c. 2.
Cranmer had a principal hand, drawn up in the later end of King Edward the
VIth, the Power of the Keys is owned to have been given by Christ to the
Church, and the Power of Administering the Sacraments, and of Excommunication ^s
asserted to the Ministers and Governors (...) the Churches, and they are
allowed to be the Judges who are to be admitted to the Holy Table, and who are
to be rejected, notwithstanding the Laws made in that same Reign, prescribing
to the Ministers what they were to do in these very Cases; notwithstanding the
words of the now mentioned Acts, nay even of that very Collection asserting
expressly that the King, within his own Dominions, has plenissimam
Jurisdictionem, over the Bishops and Clergy, as well Ecclesiastical De offic.
and Jurisd. omn. Judic.
as Civil, and that both Jurisdictions are derived from him as from one and the
same Fountain. This Reformatio was intended to have been confirmed in
Parliament (according to so many Acts made concerning it) if the Kings death
had not prevented it. Whether these things be reconcilable, or not, I am not
now concerned. It is very possible that the same Legislators may own that in
certain consequence, which they do disown in express terms. And in such a Case,
the securest way for the Subject, who cannot be obliged to Contradictions, will
be, rather to be concluded by their express professions, than by their
reasonings and consequences, where they are not reconcilable. Especially where
those professions are agreeable to that Practice, which is notoriously allowed
by the Legislators themselves. Allowed Practice is granted by all to be
sufficient to abrogate a Law, much more, to interpret the Legislators mind in
Case of an (...). Indeed it is the Conclusions and Practice of the Legislators
that is the Law. Their Reasonings are so, no otherwise than as they clear their
Sense, when it does not otherwise appear so clearly from their words and
Practice. And it must have been very notorious in Practice, that men who
disbelieved these opinions of Archbishop Cranmer, were notwithstanding admitted
by the Government to take the Oath of Supremacy, and thereupon to enjoy all the
Privileges and Immunities of Persons who had fully answered all the ends
proposed by the Government in the imposition of it, when the Queen takes it for
so groundless a scandal, to imagine that the owning of those Principles was
expected (...) such as would veraciously take the Oath, even then when the
words of the Legislators seemed so plainly to suppose that the Legislators
themselves did believe those Principles true. But whatever the Legislators
themselves thought; it hence appears very plainly that they did not oblige
those who would be willing to take the Oath, to think in this particular, as
they did. And if this was not required then, when the Legislators did believe
these Principles true, and the words of the Law did so plainly suppose them to
do so, and it was, even in their Practice, manifest that they did not require
it; much more we have reason to believe it not required now, when not only the
like liberty in Practice has continued, even to our own times, but we are
withal so expressly discharged from all engagements to believe those
Principles true, by that very same Authority, for whose interest the Oath was
first framed and imposed, and when we have withal so Authentical an
Interpretation given us, by the same Authority, of what is expected from us, so
fully satisfactory to the ends of the Government, and yet withal so free from
any thing that may seem to imply our belief of those Principles which would
have made the Oath indeed intolerable, and inconsistent with that hearty zeal
which we all owe in the first place, to our Church and our Orthodox Communion.

XX. TWO things the Queen expressly insists on as What the Queen requires, we
can sincerely undertake, and in a sense fully answering the Imposition of the
Legislators.
things intended to be meant by all who will take this Oath sincerely and
veraciously. And those are points making considerably for the interest and
security of the Crown, and which have formerly been disputed, and are therefore
worthy and fit to be the matter of an Oath: First, that our Princes have the
Sovereignty and Rule over all Persons born in their Dominions, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil. This was a thing disputed by Anselm and Becket, and
decided against them, as well by the concurrence of their own Order of the
Ecclesiastics, as of the States. And it was a point of great i(...)nce in the
Circumstances of King Henry the VIII. and (...) first Princes of the
Reformation, to assure them of the Allegiance of that part of their Subjects
who, (...) they pleaded exemption from them, so had sworn Allegiance to the
Popes, with whom those Princes were then in open Hostility. To this they were
obliged not only by the general Laws of our Christian Religion, which gave them
no exemption where the Laws did not so, but by the particular Laws of our
Countries, on account of the Baronies and Lay-fees, of which the chief of them
were generally possessed. The other point was, that no other foreign Power
ought to have any superiority over the born Subjects of these Realms. This had
also been a point anciently disputed in the Case of Wilfrid, and in the
Statutes of Provisors. 25 Edw. the III. and of Praemunire 16 Rich. the II. and
was of very great importance in the disputes between our Reforming Princes and
the Court of Rome. These two are all the Queen insists on, and in the asserting
of both these Rights to our Princes, we do as heartily agree, as our
Legislators themselves can desire we should do. And in doing so, our
Adversaries themselves cannot deny, but that we serve the ends of the
Legislators, in imposing this Oath, to very material purposes. For my part, I
think, we serve all the necessary ends according to the Sense of the
Legislators themselves. They do frequently profess a design, not of Innovating,
but of asserting only Ancient and Original Rights owned by the Laws themselves,
before those later Disputes concerning the Supremacy. And, if they were sincere
in professing so, I cannot see any reason they had to intend more. These two
Rights now mentioned, had really been anciently asserted to the Crown, on
occasion of ancient Disputes that had been started concerning them. But where
can our Adversaries pretend any elder Disputes concerning the validity of Lay
Deprivations, that gave any occasion for ancient Laws, still in force for
asserting them valid? Where can they find the whole Legislative Power united in
asserting any such Right of Lay Deprivations, or of the Proposition so frequent
in the Laws of those times, that all Ecclesiastical Authority was derived from
the King? Where could they find Commissions given to Laymen such as Cromwell
was, by the Lay Prince empowering to exercise all sorts of Spiritual Censures?
There is so little appearance of any Ancient Disputes, or Ancient Laws made
concerning these things, that there is no likelihood that they did, or could,
require the belief of their opinions in this matter, if they only intended to
revive the asserting of Ancient Rights. And for the opposition made then by the
Clergy, they perfectly subdued them, and might, if they had pleased, have
imposed these Opinions on them. They might, if they had thought fit, have
inserted them into the Form of the Oath of Supremacy it self. They might
otherwise have imposed it on all the Bishops to have taken out the like
Commissions as Bishop Bonner and Archbishop Cranmer did. And there was very
little doubt of the concurrence of the Laity, who might then have carried it in
Parliament, when the Authority of the Clergy was so broken by the Praemunire
and the surrendry, if there had been any design of attempting it. But neither
of these things having been attempted, it seems to argue that, though they were
willing to keep this Opinion in some reputation, for keeping the Clergy under
those Depressions to which they had reduced them; yet they had not, even
themselves, the confidence to impose the belief of it on the Clergy, nor to
make it any part of that Supremacy, for the Security of which the Oath was
made. This reason there was for believing the Queens affection true, even for
the time past, though what she said had been considered without the Authority
of the Person that delivered it. We can hardly suppose her ignorant, either of
the facts or the designs with which they were transacted in the days of her
Father and her Brother. Yet I am apt to think that her comparing the Supremacy
assumed by her self, with that which had been challenged by her Father and
Brother, does not so much imply that her Supremacy was as bad as theirs, as
that it was not worse. This later meaning was very apposite to her purpose in
urging it on the Popish Bishops, who had owned it in her Father and Brothers
times, when it was worse than what was now expected from them. But from the
time she put out this Injunction, and downwards, her own Authority is
sufficient to assure us, whatever it was then, that it is not required now.
Especially when seconded by the other Authorities which we shall produce
hereafter.

XXI. BUT it is observable by the way, that, by the Queens explication, the
Supremacy over Spiritual Persons ^he Queen's Injunction excuses us from
swearing to the Supremacy over Spiriritual Persons in Causes purely Spiritual.
is all that is Sworn to, not that, which is expressly mentioned in the Oath,
which is in Spiritual Causes. For the Queen professes her self satisfied, if
those two things be included in the Oath, the renunciation of all foreign
dependences, and her Sovereignty at home over all her Subjects, as well
Spiritual as Temporal. She requires no more for discharging Persons who can go
so far, from all the Penalties of the Act by which the Oath was imposed. That
these two may be reconciled, it will be requisite that no more be included in
the Oath than is in the Injunction, and therefore that no Spiritual Causes be
meant in the Oath, but such as are absolutely necessary to be included, in
order to the rendering the Supremacy over Spiritual Persons practicable. Such
are all those Temporalties, which, on account of their being of their own
nature Temporalties, must therefore be supposed to have been Originally the
Magistrates Right, and are therefore only called Spirituals, inasmuch as they
are, by the favor of the Magistrate, annexed to Spiritual Offices and
Spiritual Persons. For this is a known Notion of this Word in our Laws, that
all the Temporals that were annexed to Spirituals are, for that reason, called
Spirituals also. So the Bishops Lordships, their Baronies, their Benefices are
all called Spiritual. So the Honors and Revenues also of the inferior Clergy,
and the Legal Privileges to which they are entitled by their Tenures. So the
Causes also which, being originally Political, have notwithstanding been
permitted to Spiritual Jurisdiction, of this sort are all Causes Matrimonial
and Testamentery, which belonged to Secular Courts before the Conve(...) (...)
of Princes to the Christian Religion. And upon account of this name of
Spiritual, which is given to things of this nature in our Laws, it is, that the
same Laws refer their cognizance to Spiritual Cou^^s and Spiritual
Jurisdictions. And indeed the generality (...) the Causes now tried in the
Spiritual Courts, were originally of this kind, of things of their own nature
Temporal, and therefore Originally of secular cognizance. Yet, when the Clergy
insisted on their exemption, and allowed no appeals from their Courts in any of
the matters then permitted to their Jurisdiction, unless when themselves were
pleased to deliver their Criminals over to the Secular Arm, this Practice left
the Secular Prince no remedy in so many Cases Originally belonging to his own
cognizance, more properly than to theirs, to whom it had been allowed by the
indulgence of his well-meaning pious Predecessors. This grievance was again
less tolerable to the Secular Magistrate on this account, that the very Persons
of the Clergy, on account of their being taken for Spiritual in the estimation
of the Law, were wholly exempted from the cognizance of the Lay Courts, even
when guilty of Secular Crimes, unless the Spiritual Judges were pleased to give
them up to the Secular Arm, after their having first degraded them, and thereby
deprived them of their Claim to Exemption, on account of their being taken for
Spiritual Persons. There was reason for these Exemptions, when they were first
granted by Christian Princes, full of their new zeal for their excellent
Religion upon their first embracing it. It had been practiced by the Jews, and
from them received by the Christians, before the Conversion of Princes, even in
the times of the Apostles. Even then a Brother was not permitted to go to Law
with a Brother before Infidel Judges. They could be no other than Secular
Causes that Infidel Judges were allowed to determine. The name used by St.
Paul, who calls them (...), implie^ they were so, as also the meanness of the
Persons by him (...)llowed to judge concerning them. Even our Savior himself
seems to (...) to it, and to allow of it (as I think Erastus himself (...)
first very happily observed) when he allows them, who would not stand to such
an awa^^ of their own Ecclesiastical Brethren, to be accounted as ^^athens and
Infidels, that is, to be as freely prosecuted in Heathen Courts as Infidels
might be, when Brethren of the peculiar People had any secular controversies
with them. The reason given for this was that Infidels might not know, and take
scandal at, the Infirmities of those who were to be as lights, exemplary to
those who were not of the same profession. And this reason held, as well in the
first times of the Conversion of Princes to our Christian Religion, as it had
done before. Then also Heathens were allowed, by the Constitution, to be Judges
in the Roman Courts. And it holds still in general, even since our Christian
Laws have excluded any but those who, at least, profess themselves Christans,
from being Judges in our present Secular Courts. The Clergy are still obliged
to be as exemplary to our Christian Brethren of the Laity now, as all
Christians in general were then obliged to be in relation to the generality of
the Gentile World. This makes it as reasonable still to conceal the infirmities
of the Clergy from the Lay Judges of our Secular Courts, as it was then to
conceal the Infirmities of Christians in general from the Gentile Courts. And
the grants of the Emperors to this purpose, were only to authorize them to
practice the same way of concealment by confining such Causes to the Audientia
Episcopalis, as they had practiced before any Indulgences from Princes. Nor was
this liberty abused, or like to be so, whilst the Clergy had no foreign
dependences, such as they were possessed of afterward, not only in King Henry
the VIIIths time, but long before him, when these Disputes concerning
Exemptions were first started. It was in Cases where the scandal might be
avoided by such a Judgment of Persons well-affected and concerned for their
Order, not in Case of open hostility to their Prince. None such were ever
protected by their Privilege in the first Ages after the Conversion of the
Empire to our Christian Religion. But when this foreign dependence had brought
things to this pass, that Spiritual Judges might be justly suspected of
partiality in these Causes which were not Originally of Spiritual cognizance,
then it was not unseasonable, nor unkind, if Princes (in their own defense) did
so far resume their ancient Rights as to take better security than had been
given formerly, that their favors might not be perverted against the Interests
of the Lay Power by which they had been originally granted. Thus it appears had
than Acts of Parliament were really true concerning all the Jurisdiction of the
Spiritual Courts concerning the seculars annexed to Spirituals. And even in the
Spiritual Causes, in which the Spiritual Judges had a Right Antecedently to the
grants of Princes, yet the Right of punishing refractory Persons with Temporal
Coercions was the Prince's, and truly derived from the grants of the Lay
Magistrates. So that indeed all Parts of the Spiritual Jurisdiction had some
thing of Original Secular Right, and therefore resumable by Princes, so far as
they should judge it necessary for their own Preservation. And so far it was
necessary to resume it, and justifiable too, as it was necessary for reducing
Spiritual Persons to their Original due Subjection in Temporals, for which the
Temporals annexed to Spirituals were abundantly sufficient. For this would
perfectly reduce them to the same subjection under which they were, before
those favors were granted by the Secular Magistrate. And more than that he
cannot justly challenge as his due. These therefore are the only Spiritual
Causes that can be meant in the Oath by this explication of Queen Elizabeth,
and will in some sense reach all Spiritual Jurisdiction and all Spiritual
Causes, as there was a mixture of both Powers in the Proceedings of the
Spiritual Courts of those times. And this is the Explication of the word
Spiritual given, as I remember, by Sir John Davyes in Lalor' s Case. But this
will not justify the Magistrates assuming what never belonged to him, his
intermeddling with matters of Faith, and with Crimes, not barely as Crimes
injurious to the State, but as Scandals to our Religion. Much less will it
justify his presuming to give Commissions for inflicting Spiritual Censures.
From the belief of the allowableness of these things the Queens Explication
will fully discharge us. Yet without these things he can never pretend to a
Power of depriving our Bishops of their Spiritual Power, nor of absolving us
from our duty to them as over us in the Lord.

XXII. NOR is there any reason to doubt of the sufficiency This Injunction of
Queen Elizabeth still in force.
of this Explication of the Queen for satisfying our Consciences in this Age,
as well as in that wherein these Injunctions were first set forth. I am very
well aware of the pretenses of the violent Party concerning the Canons of 1640.
which yet our ablest and most impartial Lawyers think to be still in force.
Indeed the whole Supremacy in Ecclesiasticals has been, by all the Acts made in
favor of it, vested in the King without the least mention of the Secular
States. And accordingly the Prince' s Act in such affairs has been always
thought sufficient for giving Authority to them without any confirmation in
Parliament. And that not only for his own time, but for ever, till a Revocation
of it by the same Power by which it was established. Who doubts but the XXXIX.
Articles, and the Canons made in year MDCIII. are still good Ecclesiastical
Law? Yet what Authority have they to make them so besides the Regal
confirmation of Queen Elizabeth for the former, and of King James the I. for
the later? Nor was it counted material for this purpose, whether any Parliament
was sitting or not, when the Prince was pleased to ratify such Ecclesiastical
proceedings. Indeed I see no reason why it should be counted necessary that a
Parliament should be at the same time, when the Parliament was not necessary
for their confirmation. The Act for the Kings Authority in confirming
Constitutions Ecclesiastical 25 Hen. VIII. 19. requires no more confirmation
than that of the King. And King James the I. grounds his confirmation of the
Canons on that Act, which yet none thinks extinguished with his Person. There
might have been more pretended for the necessity of a Parliament sitting at the
same time with the Convocation anciently, than can be now. Then the Clergy
acted Parliamentarily, and had their Members in both Houses. Yet not so, but
that even then we have had several Synods distinct from the Parliament. Now the
Convocation, even in Parliament time, is notwithstanding a distinct Body, and a
distinct Assembly from it, since the Clergy have been excluded from the lower
House, and the Bishops sit in the upper House, rather on account of their
Baronies than their Spiritual Jurisdiction. And their meeting and acting wholly
depends on the Pleasure of the Prince, and is not confined to Parliament times
in the Act now mentioned. I see not therefore why the Injunctions may not be
counted Ecclesiastical Law still, on the account of the Regal Authority by
which they were set forth, and why the explication given in them of the Oath of
Supremacy may not still be allowed as a good Authority. If it be requisite that
the Oath have a certain Sense, the Explication of the Oath cannot be esteemed a
more temporary thing than the Oath it self is. This, at least, will be
reasonable, that this Sense be taken for the true Sense of the Oath till it be
contradicted, and another substituted instead of it by the same Authority.

XXIII. AND yet though this should not hold, we have The Explication in the
Injunctions authorized by our Church in her XXXVIIth Article.
all the confirmation of this Particular of the Injunctions that we need
desire. The grant of the Supremacy to the King in the Act now mentioned under
Henry the VIII. was grounded on the surrendry of the Clergy, as appears from
the Preamble of the Act it self. What therefore was surrendered by the Clergy,
that same was the power that by the Act was vested in the Crown. But concerning
the Sense of the surrendry, none can be supposed more competent Witnesses than
the Body by which the surrendry was made. Especially, when the Act by which the
Oath is explained by the Clergy is, not only allowed, but Authorized, by the
Regal power, to which the surrendry was made. Upon this account we we have
reason to believe the Explication so given to be the sense of both parties
concerned in the surrendry, and to be as well accepted by the Prince, as given
by the Clergy; which should alone be sufficient to satisfy all the reasonable
Scruples that can be in this matter. At least, the Judgment of our Church must
needs be satisfactory, and a sufficient Authority to explain her own sense in
this matter, and to show what liberty may be allowed a Member of our Church in
it, consistently with the principles of his Communion, and his pretentions of
being a Member of it; and withal, how other Acts of the same Church are to be
interpreted. And the sense of our Church of England both concerning the Oath,
and the now-mentioned Injunction, is manifest in her xxxviith Article. So she
there teaches us: Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty the chief Government
(by which Titles we understand the minds of some dangerous folks to be
offended) we give not to our Princes the ministering, either of Gods word, or of
the Sacraments, the which thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by
Elizabeth our Queen do most plainly testify: But that only Prerogative which we
see to have been given to all Godly Princes in Holy Scriptures by God himself,
that is, that they should rule all estates and degrees committed to their
charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with
the Civil sword the stubborn and evil doers. Here we have the Explication in
the Injunctions approved by our Church her self, who gives us the same sense in
her own words expressly, and is fully satisfied with our believing the Prince'
s Right to govern both sorts of Persons. By this we may also know her meaning
in the words immediately preceding, where she mentions all Causes, that she did
mean only such Causes as were absolutely necessary for making the Prince's
Right perfectly practicable for governing the Persons of the Ecclesiastics. We
are also here clearly and expressly discharged from all Obligation to believe
Archbishop Cranmers singular Opinion, and consequently from the belief of that
Supremacy which was grounded on that Opinion; without which, I do not see how
our Adversaries can ever be able to justify the validity of these
Lay-deprivations. And none, that I know of, doubts but that this Article, at
least, of our Church does as much concern our times, as those wherein it was
first made.

XXIV. YET further, that no Authority may be The same Explication of the
Injunctions confirmed also by Act of Parliament.
wanting, we have this same Explication in the Injunctions expressly referred
to, and ratified in, an Act of Parliament of the same Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
still in force and unrepealed. The words are those: Provided also, that the
Oath expressed in the said Act made in the first year shall be taken and
expounded in such form as is set forth in an Admonition annexed to the Queens
Majesty's Injunctions published in the first year of her Majesty's Reign: That
is to say, to confess and acknowledge in her Majesty, her Heirs and Successors,
none other Authority than that was challenged and lately used by the 5 Elizab.
1.
noble King Henry the VIII. and King Edward the VI. as in the said Admonition
more plainly may appear. The word Admonition is taken from the Title of that
particular Injunction, (wherein it is styled: an Admonition to simple Men,
deceived by Malicious,) that there may be no doubt, but that the forementioned
Injunction is intended in this Act. And that the Supremacy here assumed by the
Queen, and said to be the same that was challenged and lately used by King
Henry the VIII. and King Edward the VI. may not be so understood, as to exclude
the benefit of the Interpretation here referred to. Indeed such a rigorous
Construction had been perfectly to overthrow the whole Design of the Act in
referring to it. But that very Expression is used in the Injunction it self,
from whence the Parliament took it, and therefore, is to be understood in a
sense consistent with the rest of the Injunction; and therefore, in a sense
consistent with the renunciation of that singular Opinion of Archbishop
Cranmer, how much soever it may seem to have been supposed in the words of the
Acts, and to have been therefore the private sense of the Legislators
themselves. Yet they, as well as the Queen her self, think it was never the
Legislators design (even in those Reigns, where it seems indeed to have been
their sense) to impose the belief of it on those who should take the Oath. This
must necessarily have been their sense when they refer us to the Injunction as
expressing that sense of the Supremacy which they allowed and approved. This
must make the Explication in the Injunction theirs, and consequently must make
the true design of this Act as full to our purpose as the Injunction it self. I
need not now add to this Authority, the Explication of the Supremacy by
Archbishop Usher, and approved of by King James the I. Much less the Opinions
of the generality of our Divines since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth against
that Opinion of Archbishop Cranmer, without which (as I have shown) it is
impossible for our Adversaries to prove the validity of Lay Deprivations. What
some of them have reasoned from the Case of Solomon and Abiathar is the less to
be regarded, being destitute of Principles by which the like Practice (had it
really been such as they think it was) can be proved allowable by the Doctrine
of the Gospel, and the Priesthood constituted by it; nay, being contrary to
their own Doctrine concerning the Divine Right of Administering the Sacraments.
All that can be said, is, that by defending that Right of Solomon, and by
applying it to the Case of the Christian Magistrate with regard to the Popish
Bishops, who were of another Communion, they may seem to have said things
consequently applicable to our present Case of Bishops of the same Communion.
Yet whether they would have stood by this Consequence, in Case of a Lay
Deprivation of Protestant Bishops, our Adversaries themselves cannot undertake;
and it is much more probable that many of them would not have stood by it. But
on the other side we can also say, that when they denied the Right of
Administering the Sacraments to be derived from the Magistrate, they must by
consequence, deny the Right of Spiritual Government resulting from the Right of
excluding refractory Subjects from the Sacraments, and from the Spiritual Body,
and from the Rights annexed to that Body of CHRIST himself, they must I say, by
necessary consequence, deny this Spiritual Power to be the Magistrates Right;
they must, by the same consequence, deny all Right the Secular Magistrate can
pretend to deprive of this Power which was never derived from him. Thus there
will be Consequence against Consequence. But there is this difference between
the two Consequences, that ours reaches the present Case fully and directly;
but it may be questioned whether that of our Adversaries do so. For it may well
be questioned, whether, if the Lay Magistrate may deprive Popish Bishops of
another Communion, it will thence follow, that he may also deprive Protestant
Bishops of the same Communion, as I shall show hereafter.

XXV. BUT the second Canon of the year 1603. is It is rather supposed, than
contradicted, by the second Canon.
objected against us. The words are these: Whosoever shall hereafter affirm
that the Kings Majesty has not the same Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical,
that the Godly Kings had amongst the Jews, and Christian Emperors in the
Primitive Church, or impeach in any part his Regal Supremacy in the said Causes
restored to the Crown, and by the Laws of this Realm therein established; let
him be Excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored but only by the Archbishop
after his repentance and public revocation of those his wicked errors. Here
all that is affirmed to our Adversaries purpose is only this, that our Kings
have the same Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical that the Godly Kings had
amongst the Jews. But what that Authority was, or what the particulars of it,
were, that our Church does not tell us here. Yet without an enumeration of
particulars, none can tell what particulars were intended. But these are rather
to be judged of by other passages, where the same Church tells us what that
Authority was which she thought the Godly Kings had amongst the Jews. This she
her self tells us expressly in the Article. She there tells us, that the only
Prerogative which we see to have been given always to all Godly Princes in Holy
Scriptures by God himself, is, that they should rule all Estates and Degrees
committed to their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal,
and restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil doers. If this Right of
ruling the Ecclesiastics be all that is asserted to the Prince by the
Supremacy in Spirituals, and that very ruling be only a restraining them with
the Civil Sword; these two things are so very exactly agreeable to our
Doctrine, that we can, by no means, be concerned in the censures mentioned in
the Canon. I might withal mention (what I have already insisted on) the
approbation of the Explication in the Injunction in the same Article, by which
we are excused from believing that the Lay Magistrate has any Right to deprive
Bishops of their Spiritual Power, or from believing any thing from whence that
may be solidly inferred. For why should we not interpret the sense of our
Church of England in her Canons by her sense in her Articles? Why should we
suspect she meant to Excommunicate her Members by her Canons (where no
particulars are expressed) for particularly disowning that extent of secular
Authority in Spirituals, which in her Articles, where she states the Question,
and tells us what she takes to be the Rights of Princes as expressed in the
Scriptures, she does not mention as a Right of the Jewish Kings, nor
consequently of our own? We deny not our Kings a Right of driving Bishops away
by the Civil Sword, if no more be insisted on from the Case of Solomon and
Abiathar. And no more can be pretended to be the Right of our Kings by this
Explication in the Article. This is in truth an ancient Right of the Supreme
Power, even before it was Christian. The Emperor Aurelian had it, though then a
Pagan, and afterward a Persecutor, and practiced it with the approbation of
the Primitive Church against Samosatenus. Exile and imprisonment, and
confinement to a certain place (such as that was of Abiathar to Anathoth) we
grant to be Temporal Punishments in the Power and Right of him (whoever he be)
who has the Right of managing the Civil Sword. But it is very plain, by this
Interpretation of the Queens Injunction allowed in this Article, that our
Church did not oblige to the rigor of some men's private opinions, and
particularly not to these of Archbishop Cranmer, concerning the dependence of
the Sacordotal Power on the Prince. And therefore, though there have been those
who from that Case of Abiathar, have inferred the deprivableness of the
Episcopal Power by the Lay Magistrate; there is no reason to believe that ever
our Church in that Canon intended to exclude all such from Communion, who could
not come up to the heights of these private O^^^ators. The rather this is
credible, because I have already shown that even in the times of King Henry the
VIII. and of King Edward the VI. when these Opinions were believed by the
Legislators themselves, they notwithstanding had not the confidence to impose
them. How much less were they likely to (...) under King James the (...) when
these Opinions were generally disbelieved? I am sure those Fathers who made
those Canons could not, with the least likelihood, pretend that in those Times
of the Primitive Church, when the first Christian Emperors governed, this
Opinion was believed, that all Spiritual Power was derived from the Emperor,
and was therefore deprivable by him. Yet if they did not, they could not give
this Right of depriving Bishops of their Spiritual Power to our Kings,
considering, that, in this very same Canon, they do not pretend to give our
Kings any other Rights than what were owned in the first Christian Emperors by
the Primitive Christians.

XXVI. WELL. But however our Adversaries think The Practice of the Supremacy to
our times no argument of the imposed sense of the Legislators against us.
that the sense of the Legislators as explained by the Practice is against us,
that Laymen have been permitted the use of Spiritual Censures. Such was that
Case of Cromwell. Such that of the Lay Civilians still permitted by the
Spiritual Courts, and defended by the Act of Parliament. Such the late
Commission Court, empowered to suspend and deprive the Bishop of London,
consisting of Laics mixed with Ecclesiastics, and a Lay President. But Facts
alone do, by no means, signify the mind of the Legislators, unless they be
approved and agreeable to Principles. Much less can they pretend to be Rules in
Conscience, to the Obedience of the Subjects. For Princes do many things upon
exigencies of state, which even themselves do not approve, when they are free
from those exigencies. So far they would be, even themselves, from imposing
them generally on their Subjects Consciences. And the Facts, we are speaking
of, have been so rare and discontinued, that even that is suffi^ient to show
that even the Princes themselves have done them unwillingly, and with regret,
and under the necessity of those very exigencies. I need not repeat what I have
already observed, to this purpose, in the Reigns of King Henry the VIII. and
King Edward the VI. As for the Commission Court, it is no wonder if King James
the II. took the utmost liberty that Protestant Lawyers allowed as Law. It is
rather to be admired that Protestant Lawyers should help him to an Expedient so
hurtful to their own Communion, and that upon such slender grounds as a few
Facts, which they were pleased (upon so little probability) to allow as
Precedents. The Bishop of London, then, when it was his own case, did not think
the Laymen his competent Judges in order to his suspension or deprivation from
Spirituals. And those Lawyers who had so much zeal, not as to pervert them, but
keep them equal and unbiassed between both extremes, did think his Plea, not
only equitable in conscience, but warrantable in Law. It were well his Lordship
and those Lawyers would recollect how applicable those things are to our
present case, which themselves so zealously defended then. As for the Act in
favor of the Lay Civilians, it self complains of the rareness of such Examples
then, because of the averseness of the Bishops to employ such persons on such
affairs. That is sufficient to show how much it was even then against the sense
of the Ecclesiastics, who were the only competent Judges of Right in matters
of this nature, with regard to Conscience. Since that time it has been still
more disagreeable, though the Practice has continued on account of that Act in
favor of it. Yet it has furnished the Non-conformists with an Objection, and
that such an one as has put the Defenders of the Church rather on Excuses than
Defenses. A plain token they would rather have wished it otherwise, if the Lay
Powers who had introduced this custom would have given leave. None have been
more zealous in this particular than our modern Latitudinarians, a Party which
has been of late as taking among our Lay Nobility and Gentry, as among the
Ecclesiastics themselves. Accordingly there has been a shift found, that the
censures adjudged by the Lay Civilians should be published by Presbyters, that
so the Censures themselves might seem to proceed from the purely Spiritual
Authority. The like care is taken in the Canons made in the time of King James
the I. that when a Sentence of Deprivation Can. 12^.
or Deposition is to be pronounced against a Minister, it be pronounced by the
Bishop himself, with the assistance of his Chancellor, the Dean (if they may
conveniently be had) and some of the Prebendaries, if the Court be kept near
the Cathedral Church, or of the Archdeacon, if he may be had conveniently, and
two others at the least grave Ministers and Preachers to be called by the
Bishop, when the Court is kept in other places. The less these things agree
with the Private (not, as I have shown, imposed) sense of the Legislators in
that Act, which was by asserting directly the Right of such Authorized Lay
Doctors for inflicting such Consu^es, to assert consequently the Right of the
King, though a Layman also, for being a Fountain and Original of all Spiritual
Power; the more they show the sense of our late Princes, and all that are
concerned in the Practice of these Lay Judges in Spirituals now, since these
Canons are Authorized, that this Practice as it is continued now, cannot argue
any design of the Legislators to oblige Persons who take the Oath to mean any
such ^enchroaching notion of the Supremacy. But let the most that can be, be
made of this Argument from Practice; it is notwithstanding certain that, as
none but allowed Practice can be fairly supposed to prove the sense of
Authority, so that Practice which is most agreeable to allowed. Doctrines and
Explications, has the fairest Pretensions to be taken for allowed. And such
Practice I have shown to be in favor of ours, rather than our Adversaries
Opinions, by showing that we take no more liberty than what we were allowed to
take by Authorized Explications.

XXVII. BUT there will be no need of proving Archbishop The Objection proposed,
that our present Protestant Succession seems to depend on the validity of the
Deprivation of the last Popish Bishops, which was no other than Laical.
Cranmer' s, Principles to be the Doctrine of our times, if our present
succession cannot be maintained without defending them. And that is thought to
be our present Case. For an Invalidity in the Original, must affect all those
later Orders that are derived from the same faulty Original. For if the first
Ordainer could convey no Power to the Person Ordained by him, neither can the
second, who has himself received no Power, give any Power to a third, nor that
third (for the same reason) to a fourth, nor much less to any remoter degree of
distance from the same Original. If therefore the Deprivation of the Popish
Bishops which was no other than Laical, was invalid, then their Protestant
Successors in the same Sees (yet full, if the Deprivation was invalid) were not
second Bishops, but none, by the Doctrine of St. Cyprian' s Age defended by us,
which will affect all the Titles since derived from those Successors. It is
thought to affect the Right of all who have succeeded them in the same Sees,
who deriving their Right from the first Successors then, have no better Right
than they had from whom they derived all they pretend to have, and therefore
can have none, if the others had none to give them. Nor is it thought only to
affect them, but all those other Bishops also, who have been since Consecrated
into other Sees by those who, being themselves no Bishops, could no more
Consecrate Bishops into other Sees, than keep up a Succession in their own.
Either therefore we must allow the validity of that first Lay Deprivation, or
we cannot (in our Adversaries Opinion) defend any Right in our present deprived
Fathers. For if they have any, our Adversaries think it must be founded on the
validity of that Lay Deprivation of the Popish Bishops, which could not
otherwise legitimate the Title of their first Predecessors of the Reformation.
For unless this Act of the State was entirely valid, they think their Title
must fall to the ground. And if a Lay Deprivation could vacate Sees for the
first Predecessors of our Fathers now concerned; our Adversaries think the like
Lay Deprivation may now also vacate our present Fathers Sees so as to
legitimate Successors in them. But if we should, upon that supposed Invalidity
of the Lay Deprivation of the Popish Bishops, make the first Protestant Bishops
in the same Sees incapable of receiving the Episcopal Power; then they think we
cannot assert our deprived Fathers ever to have had any Right, even before the
Deprivation. And then it will be of no consequence whether this Lay Deprivation
be valid or not. We cannot, in that Case, (as they think) pretend any Right our
Fathers can have now, though the Lay Deprivation had been as invalid as we
conceive it to be.

XXVIII. I need not here insist on the Royal Commissions The Lay Deprivations
of those Popish Bishops, who took out Lay Commissions for their Episcopal
Power, does not, by any just consequence affect our present Case.
taken out by Bishop Bonner, and as many as followed his Example, for their
Spiritual Power, in the licentious Style of Archbishop Cranmer. Yet these will
afford a sufficient reason for the validity of the Lay Deprivations of as many
as concerned themselves in such Commissions, which notwithstanding will not be
applicable to the Case of our Fathers now. For by taking these Commissions from
the King, they might in Law be supposed to have renounced the better Title they
had to their Spirituals from Christ and his Apostles. If this be true, they
could thence-forward have no more Power than what the Lay Magistrate could
confer upon them. Euher therefore they did really receive Power from the
Magistrate, or they received none. If they did receive Power from him; then, no
doubt, what Power he could give them, of that he was able, by the same Right,
to deprive them. If they received none, all that can be gathered from the
Invalidity of the Lay Deprivation, is only, that it must leave them in the same
Right in which it found them. If therefore they had no Power before the Lay
Deprivation, it is no matter whether the Lay Deprivation were valid or not. As
they lost no Power by an Invalid Deprivation, so neither, to be sure, could
they gain any by it. Having none before, they had none to be deprived of, and
therefore could have none that could oblige the Consciences of Subjects to
stand by them against even an Invalid Deprivation. But this cannot be pretended
to be our present Fathers Case. They have not, God be praised, betrayed their
better Title to their Spirituals, by taking out a Commission from a Power which
had no Right to give them. Nor did they receive their Power in Spirituals at
first from any Donation of the Civil Magistrate. That is an Opinion antiquated
now, and not likely to have been the sense of those Bishops from whom they
received their Consecration Nor is it likely that our Succession depends on any
who had, even then, betrayed his Spiritual Rights by taking out Lay
Commissions. Archbishop Cranmer did not live to the Consecrations of Queen
Elizabeth' s time. And Bishop Bonner had nothing to do with them. Nor do any,
who were concerned in the Consecration of our first Protestant Bishops, appear
in the Catalogue of those who took out the like Commissions in King Henry the
VIIIths time; as we may learn from the Collections of Dr. Yale, mentioned by
Anthony Harmer. The Act of Council in the beginning of Vid. Specimen against
Bishop Burnet p. 52, 53.
King Edward the VI: concerned such especially as were least trusted, as
appears by the King's own Paper. These were the Popish Bishops rather than the
Protestants. And the Act of Parliament made for it in the later end of the same
year may be capable of the like Interpretation. The King had then more liberty
in the execution, even of Acts of Parliament than ordinary. Nor is it probable
that any of those who persuaded Queen Elizabeth to let alone the Title of Head,
and to moderate the Supremacy it self, would take out such Commissions. They
seem generally to have been the Popish Bishops who were guilty of it. I mean
those of King Henry's Faction. Those therefore might be deprived, and their
Sees vacated by Lay Deprivations, and their Protestant Successors entitled to
them, without any Consequence that can be drawn thence to the prejudice of our
present Fathers, or in favor of our present Lay Deprivations.

XXIX. BUT we need not, as I said, insist on this. Yet The Popish Bishops were
of another Communion. And therefore needed no other Deprivation than that of
the Lay Magistrate.
for driving away, I have already acknowledged the Magistrates Right to
external force sufficient. And that was all that was requisite in the Case of
the Popish Bishops. They were then notoriously of another Communion different
from that of the Protestants. They had burnt the Protestants as Heretics, and
condemned their Doctrine as Heretical, and imposed on them forms of reception
and reconciliation to their own Communion, as perfectly distinct from the
Communion wherein they had been before. So also on the other side, the
Protestants behaved themselves as a distinct Communion. They refused their
Masses and Confessions, and lived in open defiance of the Popish Bishops and
Canons, and this by Principles. Many of them suffered Martyrdom for their
avowed disobedience, which they could not have justified, if they had been of
the same Communion. So clear it was that, even in Queen Mary' s days, each
Party looked on the other as a different Communion. This being so, it plainly
appeared that the Protestants did not own the Popish Bishops as Bishops of
their own Communion. Suppose we therefore that the Lay Deprivation as
proceeding from the Lay Power only, was as invalid and null, with regard to
Conscience, as our Principles suppose it to be; All that will follow thence
will only be, that, with regard to Conscience, they were still as much Bishops
as they were before, that is, they were still to be owned for Bishops by them
who had owned them formerly, that is, that still they were to be owned for
Bishops by them who professed themselves of the Popish Communion. But then as
the Lay Deprivation took no Spiritual Right from them which they had before; so
neither could it give them any Right in Conscience, which before they had not.
As therefore they were not Bishops of the Protestant Communion before the
Deprivation, so neither were they after it, and therefore could not challenge
any Duty as owing them from Protestants, with regard to Conscience. The
Protestants therefore owing them no Duty in Conscience, their Sees were
already, before the Deprivation, vacant in Conscience, with respect to the
Protestants; who might therefore, without danger of Schism, set up other
Bishops of their own Communion in opposition to them, as soon as they could do
it, at least as soon as the Magistrate would protect the Bishops substituted
into their Sees. All therefore that ^was requisite for the substitution of
Protestant Bishops, was the dispossessing of the Popish Bishops by force; for
which the Lay Magistrate who had the Right of forcing was sufficiently
furnished. That was exactly the Case of the expulsion of Paulus Samosatenus by
the Emperor Aurelian. Samosatenus had before that been deprived of his
Spiritual Episcopal Rights by the Synods which had condemned and deposed him.
Only, by the favor of Zenobia, who had then the possession of Antioch, he
still kept possession of the Episcopal Palace, till the Emperor was prevailed
on to interpose his own Secular Authority in dispossessing him of the House
which belonged to his Episcopal Office. So it was requisite, and very proper
for Qu^en Elizabeth to make use of her Secular Power for a Legal Dispossession
of the Popish Bishops of the Temporals annexed to their Spiritual Office. This,
no doubt, she had a Right to do as a Lay Princess. And the Effect of this
Deprivation was, that, whatever they might still pretend, as to Conscience,
they should notwithstanding be no more taken for Legal Bishops, who should be
entitled to the Honors, and Privileges, and Revenues annexed by the Secular
Laws to the Spiritual Function. And for this the Queen's Deprivation was every
way competent. The Effect, was a Deprivation only of their Temporals, things
properly belonging to the disposal of the Temporal Prince. The Cause, was also
a Temporal Crime properly belonging to her Jurisdiction, their refusing the
Duty they owed her for maintaining her Temporal Jurisdiction over Spiritual
Persons. Yet this Lay Deprivation was necessary for making the Protestant
Bishops Legal Bishops, and to entitle them, as such, to the enjoyment of the
Temporalties by the Laws annexed to their Spirituals. A Legal vacancy of the
Sees was as necessary to make way for a Legal Successor, as a vacancy in
Conscience was for a Successor with regard to Conscience. And the Magistrate
has a Right to make a Legal vacancy, though he has none to make one with regard
to Conscience, nor to discharge the Spiritual Subjects from that Duty to which
they are obliged in Conscience. And this has been always the Practice of the
Catholic Church. Bishops of another Communion, notoriously and professedly so,
were never thought to fill Sees, or to need Canonical Deprivations. The
Catholics in Constantinople and Antioch never scrupled the substituting a
Catholic Successor, whenever the Catholic Bishop deceased, though there was
at the same time another Heretical Bishop, and in Constantinople a Novatian
Bishop also, in the same See. Nor did they, nor the Catholic Emperors, concern
themselves for the Synodical Deprivation of Heretical or Schismatical Bishops
after the Heresy and Schism had formed a difference in Communion. Nor did they
think the substituting other Bishops, in such Sees, without a previous
Synodical Deposition of the Heretical or Schismatical Incumbent, to be liable
to the charge of Schism, as it would have been in Case the Incumbents had been
Bishops of the same Communion. For the Popish Bishops therefore, the Lay
Deprivation alone was sufficient, there being, on account of their difference
of Communion, no Duty owing to them from the Protestant Subjects of those
Dioceses, even Antecedently to the Deprivation. But this cannot be pretended to
be the Case of our present Deprived Fathers. Our Adversaries themselves have
acknowledged them for Bishops of the same Protestant Communion with themselves.
If therefore the Lay Deprivation prove Invalid, they cannot excuse themselves
from the same Duties which oblige them still, with regard to Conscience.

XXX. THIS Answer will abundantly clear the disparity This Doctrine agreeable
exactly to the Sense and Practice of Antiquity.
between our present Lay Deprivation, and that of the Popish Bishops in the
beginning of the Reformation. And we may the more securely rely on it, because
it depends on no private opinions of ours first thought of now, and sitted to
our present Case; but proceeds, as the rest of our Reasonings in this affair
generally do, on the Sense and Practice of unquestionable Antiquity. A new
Schism indeed, or a new Heresy, I confess, was allowed a Synodical Hearing.
And there was reason for it, because it might well be supposed not yet
sufficiently manifest whether Heresy or Schism was indeed concerned in the
Case; or (at least) whether of the two Parties, between whom the Dispute was
raised, was guilty of the Charge. But when the Case was once adjudged, and the
difference of Communion (which must necessarily follow on the pertinaciousness
of the Criminals) was once formed; then the Church never troubled her self to
inflict new Censures on every new Instance of the same Case. And there was
reason for it. From the time that they constituted a distinct Communion, she
reckoned them without, and with such St. Paul himself denies her to have any
thing to do. And it is plain that all the Church's Canons are only for
maintaining a Correspondence between the several Jurisdictions of the same
Communion, that they may not interfere among themselves. This is the reason why
one Bishop must be deprived before another can be Canonically introduced,
because till the first be deposed, the Duty of the Subjects of that
Jurisdiction belongs to him, and cannot without Schism be paid to any besides
him. But Duty was never thought owing unless in the same Subordination, which
cannot be but in the same Body, and in the same Communion. Where therefore
there is no Duty in Spirituals owing to any other, there it can be no
undutifulness to set up a new Spiritual Body with a new Spiritual Jurisdiction,
any more than in a Case of a wast. To be sure it can be no Schism where there
is no common Body that can be said to be divided by it, and where there is but
one only Government to which the Obedience of the Subjects can be pretended in
Conscience due. What need therefore can there be of a Spiritual Deprivation
where nothing is already due? Indeed what can they deprive him of, who has no
Power which can entitle him to the Duty of the Catholic Subjects of his
Jurisdiction? What such a Heretical or Schismatical Bishop may pretend over the
Consciences of his own Heretical or Schismatical Communicants, is not the
Catholic Church's Interest or Duty to intermeddle in. So in the many Sees of
Africa, wherein it appears, by the Conference at Carthage, that there were
Catholic and Donatist Bishops, the Catholics took no more notice of the
Donatist Incumbents whenever a Predecessor failed, than the Donatists did of
the Catholic Bishops of the same Sees. It was Peace and Reunion that was
designed in the Proposals that were made for discontinuing the like distinction
of Successions for the future. The like was the Case of the many Arian Bishops
in the time of Constantius and downwards. Where there were no Bishops but such,
the Catholics acted as if there were no Bishops at all. They expected no
sentence of Deprivation against them, yet acted in the mean time what they
could not have justified without such a sentence if it had been necessary.
Lucifer Calaritanus a Western Bishop had no Jurisdiction at Antioch. Yet
finding no other Bishop there but such as he judged Arian, if not in Opinion,
yet at least in Communion, as having been Consecrated by those of the Arian
Communion, he took upon him to substitute another and to assist at his
Consecration, as a Catholic Bishop may do where there is no Bishop at all. I
am not now concerned how rightly he judged so, who afterward did things to
extremes in his zeal against that Heresy. However that Example shows how far
his Catholic Principles would have warranted him to have proceeded, in Case
the Incumbent had been as bad as he supposed him to be.

XXXI. YET besides this, I may add further, that suppose If the Popish Bishops
had had a better Title, yet that could not have illegitimated Successors any
longer than their own Lives.
the Popish Bishops, on account of the Invalidity of their Lay Deprivations,
retained a Right in Conscience over the Protestants themselves; yet it will not
thence follow that the error, if any had been, in that Age, could affect the
Titles of our present Bishops. It might indeed have made the first Protestant
Bishops Schismatics, if they had been immediately before of the same
Communion. But this could last no longer than the Persons lived who were
injured by the Substitution. So long as they lived the Duty had been owing to
those who had been Invalidly deprived; and therefore could not have been paid
to their substituted Rivals without Schism. After their decease this reason
perfectly failed. The Duty to them had been extinguished with their Lives. So
that thence forward their Successors were alone. Then, there could be no
pretense of Injury to their Predecessors when their Title to Duty was at an
end. Nor could there be any danger of Schism, when the Duty was payable only to
one who had no Rival in his Claim to it. And in that Case, the Interest of
Mankind in general (which is an Argument of Right) has always allowed the Title
of the Possessor, where there is none other living who can pretend a better
Title. Nor have they ever stood upon new Solemnities of investing them with the
same honors they had before, when, upon the death of their Predecessors, they
who before had an ill Title, were judged to have a good claim afterward to the
Duty and Obedience of the Subjects. The tacit consent of all Persons, whether
Subjects or others, concerned in the Election or Investiture, and by
consequence in Legitimating the Title, was thought sufficient to give those a
good Title from that time forward who had none before. As therefore Kings, who
had at first an ill Title whilst those who had a better were living, have
continued their old Possession, (which from that time was not thought
doubtful) without any new Coronation, or Inthronization; so Bishops, who were
at first Consecrated in Schism, whilst those were living who had a better
Title, might notwithstanding continue their old Possession, upon their
Predecessors death, upon a more unquestionable Right, without (...) new
Consecration. For those Episcopal Orders which had been given them in Schism,
but had been given them by true Bishops sufficiently Authorized to give them,
though they might be Nullities at first, whilst the Person ordained was
incapable of receiving them, that is whilst he was ordained into an Office
already full, and whereof there could be but one at one time; might yet in
process of time recover their full force, as soon as the incapacity was removed
which had invalidated their first collation: That is, as soon as the Sea which
was before full, became vacant, and thereby capable of receiving a Successor.
Especially when not only the Impediment is removed, but the first Right is
ratified by all that are concerned in it; not only by the unanimous reception
of the Subjects of the Jurisdiction, now no longer divided, but united among
themselves, by this unanimous reception; but also by the Episcopal College
ratifying his Acts of Communion and Excommunication. When this is the Case, I
know not what a new Solemnity of Consecration can add to such a Bishop beyond
what he is possessed of already. His being unanimously received, makes him
already a Principle of Unity, when none can partake of the Unity of the Body,
who is not united to him. And his ratification by the Episcopal College (at
least by as many of them as, in this divided State of Christendom, profess the
same Faith, and pretend to a correspondence in Communion) must make his
Communion as much Catholic as it can be in our present Circumstances. For that
would make the Case such that none who lived within his Jurisdiction could
expect to be received to Communion by the rest of the Episcopal College without
his Communicatory Letters, and that with his Communicatory Letters they might.
The Consequence of these things must be that his Acts of Communion and
Excommunication must both the Catholic, at least as far as the Correspondence
reaches; and that all that are of his Jurisdiction must be obliged to maintain
Communion with him under pain (if they should do otherwise) of being excluded
from the Catholic Church. And then who can doubt but that GOD will own them
for his Peculiar People, and CHRIST will own them for his Members, whom the
Body of their Authorized Representatives do judge to be so? For GOD has
Authorized them for this purpose, that in things relating to the external
Discipline of the visible Body, (it not being usual for him to interpose
immediately) their Judgment may be taken for his. For this is the meaning of
his ratifying in Heaven what is by them performed on Earth, of his giving them
the Power of the Keys, and his binding and loosing in Heaven answer ably to
their binding and loosing in Earth, that he will admit into his Mystical Body
those whom they admit into his visible Body, and exclude from the Mystical
Unity those whom they exclude from that which is visible. This being true
concerning particular Bishops, may be much more securely relied on in the Case
of the Episcopal College. That the Body which is owned by them all, will be
owned by Christ for his Mystical Body. Thus it appears that the Communion of
such a Bishop owned, without a Rival, by the Episcopal College, must, on that
account, be owned for Catholic. He has therefore all already that they could
give him by a repeated Consecration. And being also known and owned to have it,
and to have it by their consent; their Consecration after this can be no more
necessary than it was for St. Peter to lay his hands on Cornelius in order to
the giving him the Holy Ghost, when he was otherwise well assured, by external
Manifestations, that Cornelius had received the Holy Ghost already. It is
indeed only the Episcopal College that gives any particular Bishop the Right of
having his censures ratified over all the Catholic Church. And the two or
three Bishops requisite for Consecrations can do it no otherwise than as, by
the Roman Laws, the two or three represented the whole College, and as the
whole College had obliged themselves to ratify what should be transacted by so
small a number appointed to represent their absent Brethren also in the
Solemnity. This is plainly the Sense of the first and most famous General
Council of Nice. They require to the making of every new Bishop the consent of
all the Bishops of the Province; and only allow that two or three shall
represent them in the Consecration, when they have the consent of the
Metropolitan, and when no more can conveniently be present. Thus it appears
that the consent of the Episcopal College was that which was principally
regarded in conveying the Episcopal Power. I might also have shown that the
Sense of the College was allowed the same force, however it was signified,
whether in Synods, or Separately and Extrajudicially. The greatest part by far
of the 300 Bishops mentioned by Athanasius in favor of himself were such as
were not at the Sardican Council, but who had given him their suffrages by
separate Subscriptions. By all which it appears, that the Invalidity, if any
had been, in the Deprivation of the Popish Bishops cannot affect our Succession
now, so long after the decease of the injured ^ersons, though we had not had
the other exception already insisted on, of our being, even then different
Communions.

XXXII. I grant indeed, upon that Supposition, it had been in If the Popish
Bishops then had the better Title; yet their discontinuance of their Succession
has made their Title worse now.
the Power of the Popish Bishops to have perpetuated the Invalidity of our
Succession, if themselves had pleased. That might have been by keeping up a
Succession down to our times of their own, which, on that Supposition, had been
the better Title. For by the same reason as the Title of their first Persons in
their Succession had been better than the Title of the first in our Succession;
their whole Succession also, which had been nothing but a propagation of that
same first better Title, had been better than ours, which had been also a like
continuation of the same Title which originally had been the worse of the two.
And therefore, as the confessedly better Title in the first Persons in their
Succession had made the first Persons in our Succession Schismatics; by the
same reason the better Title of their whole Succession had also made our whole
Succession Schismatical. But since they have let fall their Succession, and
left our Bishops, without any Rivals, in the sole possession of their
respective Jurisdictions; the same Reasoning which, upon supposition that we
had been of one Faith and one Communion, would have been favorable to them in
the Case now mentioned, will proceed against them as strongly now. Since our
Bishops have been left in the sole possession of the Diocesane Jurisdictions,
their endeavors to keep up a distinct Communion, and sometimes to set up
distinct Bishops in the same Dioceses fairly and Canonically prepassessed by
our Bishops, must make the Schism, and the erection of Altar against Altar,
imputable to them, by the Principles now mentioned. For theirs must be the
Bishops which are Consecrated into full Sees. Theirs therefore, in the
Reasoning of St. Cyprian' s Age, must be for as; must be alieni; must be not
secundi, but nulli. And therefore the Communion which has since owned them must
be divided from the true peculiar People, and from all solid Claim to the
Privileges of that People.

XXXIII. BUT to return from whence I digressed, to the (...) Settle(...) give
Right ^^ere no better ^i^ht is injured by them.
Case of our Protestant Bishops; true Antiquity was so far from allowing
defects in Originals to invalidate Successions at such a distance as ours is
from the beginning of the Reformation; that they thought it not only most
prudent, but most just, to silence such Disputes when the Persons injured were
deceased, and their Right extinguished with them, having left no Succession
behind them that might perpetuate their first Original Right. In this Case they
thought the Possession it self a sufficient Title to Right where there was none
out of Possession that could pretend a better Right. And that so as to look on
it as just before GOD, and as obliging the Consciences of the Subjects who had
it in their Power to rebel, not to do so. This seems to be the ground of
allowing Prescription by the Law of Nations sufficient to make a Cause just
that had not been so otherwise. It is indeed the Interest of Mankind in general
(which seems to have been the ground of this Law of Nations) that all
Controversies should at length have an end. And it is agreeable to the same
Interest that process of time, and such a peaceable Possession as has no Rival
that has a better Right, should be allowed as an Expedient for ending
Controversies concerning Right, and therefore for determining the Right it
self. The Mischief to the Public in disturbing a present Possession, is more
than can be recompensed by a Right that is no more than equal to that which has
Possession already. And there is no Succession in the World but, in a
Revolution of many Ages, has some unjustifiable turns which must make its
present Settlement litigious, if such distant Injuries must be allowed, on
equal terms, to do so. This therefore makes it the common Interest to allow
Prescription on such terms, for a determination of Right. And there is reason
to believe that GOD who, as Governor of the World, is determined by the
Public Interest will judge it so, and punish such as violate it, accordingly.
Nor is there any thing in the Nature of Ecclesiastical Government, as it is a
Government of external Bodies, and managed by Men of the like infirmities with
those who are engaged in the Civil Government, that can secure it against the
like Violences of ambitious and unreasonable Men who will judge too partially
in their own Case. But it is no way probable that GOD will make any Souls, but
their own, Responsible for such consequences as are by others unavoidable. Yet
such violences upon the Government may sometimes make a Breach in the due
Succession, and affect the direct conveyances of that Authority from GOD, which
is requisite for giving a Title to those Spiritual benefits to Souls, which are
the great designs of Ecclesiastical Communion. When therefore this falls out to
be the Case, there will be reason to believe that GOD, who judges himself as
much obliged by the equity of his Covenants, as Men usually think themselves
obliged by the letter of theirs, will perform what his Covenant would in Equity
oblige him to perform, notwithstanding any failings on Man's side, which, by the
common Nature of such a visible Body as he has been pleased to constitute in
his Church, are unavoidable to truly diligent and Pious Communicants. For this
being a necessity of his own making, in Constituting his Church such a Body,
when he might have made it otherwise; his equity is more concerned to provide
for the consequences of it. And there is reason to believe that he has done it
the same way as he has done in other visible Bodies of the like constitution.
As therefore by confirming present settlements where no better claim is in
view, GOD, by the Law of Nations, has taken care for the Bodies of Subjects in
Secular Societies, that they may not miscarry by ignorance of the duty justly
expected from them in the station wherein he has placed them: So there is
reason to believe that he has not taken less care for the more valuable
Interest of their Souls, that they may not fail of the Favors designed for
them, by a necessity of his own contrivance, and by them perfectly unavoidable.
And seeing he has warned us of no other, it is highly reasonable to presume he
has Secured the validity of his conveyances by the Spiritual, the same way he
has done in the Secular Government, by ratifying the present Constitution when
it is not injurious to a better Title, notwithstanding any faileurs unknown and
unavoidable by the Subjects, on account of the station which he has given them
in it.

XXXIV. ACCORDINGLY it was Observable, This is proved from the Donatist and
Luciferian Disputes.
that even the two great Factions of the Donatists (whose whole Schism was
grounded upon an Extravagant Zeal for Discipline) when they charged each other
(as it should seem very truly) with being Traditors; both of them being equally
guilty, they agreed to let the Controversy fall, and refer it to GOD, without
engaging in any farther Opt. Milev. cont. Parmenian. L. 1.
Schism upon it. Yet the Delivering up their Bibles to be Burnt was (in their
opinion at least) such an Act of Communion with the Devil, as had made the
Persons who had really been guilty of it, incapable, not only of Episcopal, but
also even of Lay-Communion; which incapacity, had it been proved, might have
made all their following Episcopal Acts questionable, and justified Schisms in
opposition to them, by the same Principles by which both those Factions
Defended their common Schism against the Catholic Church, for the pretended
Traditions of Caecilian and Felix. And in this case these early Schismatics
are the more to be regarded, because the Catholics agreed with them in it,
that such Cases being left to GOD, would not (though the Facts had proed true)
prejudice the consequent Authority and Communion with GOD, when no injury was
done, nor any Schism formed upon it. So far they were of their minds in this
particular, that it is the professed Subject of those who wrote against them,
that such Personal crimes as these which, if debated between Persons might have
given one Person the advantage over another, could not involve Posterity in the
same guilt when there was no injury committed by it. So far, I say, they were
of their mind in this particular, that they turn their Practice in this Case
into an Argument against themselves, as a professed condemnation of those
Principles on which themselves proceeded in dividing from the Catholic Church.
Not much unlike this was the Case that occasioned the Schism of the
Luciferians. The reason why they also were so very severe in disowning the
Communion of so many Catholic Bishops, was that they thought them guilty, though
not of the Arian Opinion, yet of the Arian Communion. For the Question with
many of those who opposed Athanasius, did only concern Communion. Arius and
Euzoius had, under Constantine the Great, made a pretended Recantation of their
Haeresy, and were thereupon received into Communion by Eusebius of Nicomedia
and his Party. This made that Party another Communion, though the Recantation
had been sincere, till the Bishop of Alexandria for the time being, had first
received them, because they were both of them Originally of the Jurisdiction of
Alexandria, and had been excommunicated for their Heresy by their Ordinary the
Bishop of Alexandria, who then was Alexander. For the rules of Ecclesiastical
Commerce then observed were, that no Bishop could admit a Subject of another
Bishop to his Communion, without the Communicatory Letters of his Ordinary to
whose Jurisdiction he belonged: If he did, he thereby broke the Rules of
Commerce, and thereby cut himself off from the Body of the Episcopal College,
who could no longer maintain Communion with him, by giving Communicatory
Letters to him, or by receiving any from him. This was, in the Sense of that
Age, to out himself from the Catholic Communion, and from the Catholic
Church, because the Communicants of such a Bishop would have Communion refused
them over all the Catholic Church. Such a Bishops Letters would not anywhere
else entitle them to Communion, and his Communicants could not be received
without them by the common rules of Ecclesiastical Commerce. There was also in
this case something peculiar to make the Bishop of Alexandria's Communion
Catholic. It had been ratified in the General Council of Nice. This made them
who received those Alexandrian Presbyters to Communion without the consent of
Athanasius their Ordinary, guilty of rescinding their own Act, as well as of
the rule of the general Ecclesiastical Commerce. However, because they were
received upon a pretended Recantation of their Heresy, this involved many who
were otherwise Orthodox in their Doctrine, that they also were engaged in the
Schism. Especially those, who rather Scrupled the Uncripturalness of the word
(...) than the sense of the Catholic Church in useing it. For (...) was
thought Equivalent with the Catholic notion of (...). And when they enumerated
the particulars included in the Phrase (...), they were (...) and (...) or
(...). And accordingly they used the word (...), by which, and the
forementioned expressions, they might very well mean a Son by Nature and by
Univocal Generation, not only a Factitious Son and by Adoption, which seemed to
be the most that was admitted by the first and most truly Heretical Arians.
This appears from the several Creeds of those times. And though the true Arians
had insidious meanings under those plausible terms, as Athanasius and Hilary
show; yet many of those who, by that uncanonical reception of those dissembling
Heretics, were engaged in the Heretical Communion, had meanings also
sufficiently reconcilable with the design of the Church in the Censures of
Alexander ratified by the Nicene Council, for condemning the Original Doctrine
of those two Heretics. I say the Original Doctrine, as it had been taught by
them when they began their disturbances; for we are to observe, that they did
not seem to stand by their first Prevarications. Arius himself was looked on as
an Apostate from his own Heresy by Aetius and Eunomius; so capable the Terms he
used afterward were of an Orthodox meaning. (...) allowed by the Catholics
themselves who were more intent on the sense than the word (...), as signifying
an Univocal natural Son. So, I am sure, Artemidorus expresses it. Speaking
Artem. On^ir. (...). 1. c. 14
of one who dreams of his being Born, he says: (...). For (...) includes (...)
in the first and principal place. And this Heathen Author, who lived before
those Disputes, is a very competent witness, how that Expression was used
commonly then, when there could be no design on the Dispute that was raised
afterward. Lucifer therefore taking all for Arians who had been any way
engaged in the Arian Communion, comprehended under that name a great number of
those who were notwithstanding very Orthodox in their Doctrine. He took in
those who Communicated with Arius and Euzoius, rather as Penitents than as
believing rightly. He took in also all those who had been any way engaged in
any Act of Communion with such as those were, who had never been, in their own
Judgment, otherwise than Orthodox. He took in not only those who joined with
them, not only in condemning Athanasius, but all who had received any Orders
from them, (that was the Case of Meletius of Antioch, against whom he set up an
Anti-Bishop, though Meletius was even then in Exile for his Orthodoxy) and all
who had Communicated in any Sacraments administered by Persons so Ordained. This
must indeed have included a great number in the West, where Lucifer was Bishop,
where, though they were generally Orthodox, yet, since they had been reconciled
to Valens and Ursacius on the belief of (...) (no doubt understood by those
VVestern Bishops who received it in the Council of Ariminum, in a good sense,)
there were very few remaining free from the Contagion of the Arian Communion on
some of the terms now mentioned. So Faustinus and Marcellinus plainly suppose
the Case to have been. They hardly excuse Hilary himself, hardly any but
Lucifer, and (perhaps) Eusebius Vercellensis. Into so narrow a compass they
contracted the Catholic Communion, even in the West, where notwithstanding
the Catholic Doctrine was most universally received. In this regard it was
that St. Jerome says that the whole world admired at it self for becoming Arian.
This Admiration principally belongs to the Case of those who being Conscious to
themselves of their being Orthodox in opinion, might therefore the more justly
admire at their being involved unawares in the Contagion of the Arian
Communion. In this regard St. Jerome might well Adv. Euciferian
call Hilary the Deacon (who then continued the Luciferian Schism) a new
Deucalion, in regard of the very small number which had escaped the Arian
deluge upon so severe a test as this was, of Communion. Yet it cannot be denied
that this Contagion of Communion was, in rigor, Sufficient to have made them
who had been involved in it judged as members of the Arian Communion, till they
had been reconciled as solemnly as they had Apostatized. And whilst they were
of another Communion, all their Acts of Authority were justly questionable, as
to their Validity in another Body and Communion distinct from their own. For
how could one opposite Body convey Privileges to, or act by Jurisdiction upon
another, where there was no Common Government acknowledged, no Legal Commerce
or Subordination, nothing but professed and notorius Hostility betwixt them.
And this, whatever our modern Latitudinarians may fancy, the Catholic Church
has always taken to be the Case of opposite Communions. And the generality of
the Bishops being then involved in the Arian Schism, (though in the Heresy they
were no otherwise involved than as the Schism did, by Interpretation, make them
liable to the charge of the Heresy with which they Communicated;) there was no
solemn reconciliation of them who were, by their Office, the Persons to whom
reconciliation ought Ordinarily to have been made. It was hard to expect it,
when the Bishops, who had escaped the Contagion, were so very small a number in
comparison of those who were involved in it. Yet these Practices must have
occasioned many real Nullities, if GOD had not been thought obliged in Equity
to supply such defects where no injury followed to any Person living. And the
Catholic Church, when she condemned the Luciferians for their Schism, on
account of these Austerities, and charged the Guilt of the separation made on
this account, on them who made it; plainly supposed that this was not a Cause
sufficient to justify a Separation, and therefore that such Nullities in
rigor, not in equity, did not in the least affect the next Generation, when
there was no better Title which might in justice oblige GOD to ratify is for
the good of Government, and to oblige the whole Society to do justice, under
pain, if they neglected it, of not having their Acts of Spiritual Authority
ratifyed by him, without whose Ratification they must be unavaylable. It Is
true, there might be some reason for ratifying such Nullities when the Subjects
by joining with the better Title, might secure their Interest in the Peculiar
People. But should GOD do it, when there is no other Body in which the Subjects
may secure themselves, it must only make the Subjects desperate. It would tempt
them to believe that GOD intended there should no more be a peculiar People But
how can that be reconciled with the new Covenant's being an Everlasting
Covenant? with its Gifts being without Repentance? with Gods promise never to
withdraw his mercies, nor to suffer his Truth to fail, notwithstanding
whatsoever Provocations his chosen People might be guilty of? How much less can
he do it for such faileurs as he knows before to be unavoidable by them? And
for this purpose Dr. Hody' s Collection is full. And it seems indeed the design
of the Author of it, only to show, that the Church did not unravel Old disputes
when the Persons were dead that were concerned in them, so as to make Nullities
of all that had been done on the faulty side, after the injury was ended, and
when things could not now be remedied. This was the case of St. Chrysostom, who
dissuaded his own Friends from such extremities, not whilst he was living, but
after his decease. This therefore was the fault of the Joannites, that they
made Nullities of all that was done by his Successors for so many years after
his death, contrary to the good Council himself had given them. This was the
fault of the Arsenians, that they also made Nullities of all that was done by
the Josephians for so many Years after the death of Arsenius. This therefore
being the occasion of that Collection, will show us the design of it. The
Author had no occasion to concern himself in defending the tolerableness of
unjust, much less of invalid deprivations, whilst the Persons were living; but
only in defending the tolerableness of preceding Nullities after the injured
Titles were extinct, when they could not be recalled or amended. And this will
suffice to show that, though there had been invalidities in the Titles of our
first Protestant Bishops on account of the better Titles of the Popish Bishops
of the same Jurisdictions; that cannot hurt the Titles of our Protestant
Bishops now, since their Succession has so long failed, and ours been
un-interrupted, though both had been (as they were not) of the same Communion.

XXXV. BUT withal, neither is that so certain, as They who took out
Lay-Commissions for their Episcopal Power might yet keep their better Title.
it may seem at the first view, that even they who took out the
Lay-Commissions, did thereby lose their better Title to their Spiritual
Authority received by their Ecclesiastical Consecrations. So far indeed it
might hold, as to cut all such Persons off from the confidence of pleading the
invalidity of the Lay-Deprivations, that even such a Deprivation might be
justly valid, on their principles who had owned themselves to have no Spiritual
Power but what they had received from the Civil Magistrate. Indeed that worthy
Person who was pleased to conceal himself under the assumed Part. II.. LV. p.
133.
name of Anthony Harmar, from the Processes against the Protestant Bishops in
Queen Mary's time still preserved in the Register of Canterbury, tells us that
a Nullity of Title was objected to them by their Deprivers on account of these
Lay-Commissions. So the words of that Register are: ob ^ullitatem
Consecrationis ejus, and defectum tituli sui quem habuit a Rege Edwardo sexto
per literas Patentes cum hac clausula, dum been se gesserit. This form was used
on Tailor Bishop of Lincoln, Hooper Bishop of Worcester and Gloucester, Barlow
Bishop of Hereford, and Farrar Bishop of St David's. The same Patents also had
been taken out by the Archbishop of York, and the Bishops of Chester and
Bristol, as the same Author informs us, as it should seem, out of the same
Registers. Probably the rest Ib. p. 131.
did so too after the Act in King Edwards time. But for those who had received
their Orders from their Consecrations in the usual way, antecedently to their
Patents, it is justy questionable whether any Act of theirs could alienate the
Power they had received from Christ. Much more it is questionable whether they
could do it by an indirect Act, and by way only of Interpretation, which is the
most that can be made of their Patent. It is not pretended that they did
renounce their Spiritual power received from Christ any otherwise than as their
owning another Original of that same Spiritual Power in their Patents may be so
Interpreted. And that Interpretation is only grounded on the inconsistency of
these two Originals, which makes it necessary that, if one be owned, the other
must be rejected, because they cannot be both possessed at once. But this
inconsistency is applicable both ways, and may as well make their Patents null
as inconsistent with their better Spiritual Title, as make their Spiritual
Title null, as inconsistent with their Patents. And it is not in their Power
whether of the two shall be a Nullity unless GOD intended that the Power should
be alienable when it was first given them: If it was designed unalienable, all
their Acts afterward to alienate it must have been Nullities, as being
inconsistent with the antecedent Right of GOD, as the Vows of Wives and Maids
were under the Law, when made against the consent of the Husbands and Parents.
And the will of GOD concerning the lastingness of the Spiritual Power was
manifest from the will of the Ordainers who, before those Lay-Patents, never
intended to confer Orders for any other term than that of Life. If therefore
such would take upon them to exercise their Spiritual Power independently on
their Patent, though they might contradict the designs of those who made them
take out their Patents, in doing so; yet, having indeed Authority from GOD to
do so, what they did by that Authority might expect a ratification from GOD,
and therefore must have been valid with regard to Conscience. The greater
difficulty was that of the others who received their first Authority from their
Patents before their Consecrations. These might more plansibly be thought to
receive no more Power by their Consecration than what they had already received
by their Patent. Especially if they had the same thoughts concerning their own
Consecration, as Archbishop Cranmer had, that it gave them no new Power, but
was only a Solemnity of Investiture with the same Power which they had already
a Right to by their Patent. And, if withal the Bishops who Consecrated them
had been also of the same mind, and must therefore have thought themselves
obliged to give them no new Power by the Authority themselves had received, not
from the Prince, but from Christ. But I have already showed that, even in those
encroaching Reigns, there was no Obligation laid on the Bishops, to profess
their Belief of those Impious Opinions. I have showed that, at the same time
that they were supposed in Practice, yet their Belief was Odious and Singular,
and in express terms generally decried. I have showed that the most received
Opinion even then, was that the Right of Administering the Sacraments was
derived from Christ and his Apostles, and by them given only to the Church, and
consequently that it was only given by the Acts of Ecclesiastical Consecration.
These things therefore being thus believed must also have obliged them further
to believe that whatever Power and Authority did follow from this Right of
Administering the Sacraments, could not be given by the Lay-Power, but only by
them who had continued the derivation of that Right of Administering the
Sacraments from Christ and his Apostles. These things therefore being generally
believed by the Bishops, might make them generally design the giving and
receiving the same Power in their Consecrations which had been given and
received by Consecration formerly. What then could hinder even those Bishops
which were Consecrated then from receiving it? It was consequentially
inconsistent you will say, with those Patents by which they derived a Right of
giving Orders, and of inflicting Spiritual Censures from the King. But it was
no more so, than those Patents were with those Doctrines, that all Power of
that kind was to be derived from Christ and his Apostles, who had given it to
the Church, not to the Lay-Magistrate. The consequence whereof must be, that
being mutually inconsistent, they ought to be made consistent as far as is
possible, in Practice, by Interpretation. That is, that one Duty be performed
so far, and so far only, as is consistent with the performance of the other.
But in this way of proceeding, it is unavoydable but that one of the two Duties
must take place of the other, so as to leave no place for the other any further
than is consistent with the Interest of the Principal Duty. And then there can
be little doubt, if an Ecclesiastic be Judge (and of such only I am Speaking
at present) whether of the two Duties must be judged Principal. If they be
considered as Ecclesiastics, the Church is the Principal Body for which they
ought to be concerned. Consider them also as good Christians, and as good Men,
and the same Obligation will hold still to prefer the Interests of the Church,
because they are indeed the greatest Interests in the Judgment of GOD, and in
the Judgment of Right Reason; and the most immediately and firmly obliging that
which is indeed the immediate Subject of Obligations, the Conscience. All
therefore that Persons so persuaded could promise, and which the Magistrates of
that Age acting against Principles might be Satisfied with, as sufficiently
answering his ends, was to behave themselves in reference to the Magistrate, so
as if indeed they had no Power but what they derived from him. That was to hold
their places, from whomsoever they had received them, no longer than He was
pleased they should hold them. This Promise they might make as to the
Temporalties, that they would be no longer Legal Bishops entitled by the
Secular Laws to Temporalties. Though this was a particular Hardship put upon
their Order: For as for the Secular Peers the held their Peerage by Law, not
barely at the Pleasure of the Prince. However, these conditions importing no
loss of Spiritual Authority, the Bishops might with a safe Conscience submit
to, when imposed on them by unavoidable force. They might also promise, when
they were deprived of their Temporals, to quit their Spirituals also, in order
to the qualifying another of the same Communion to succeed them without any
imputation of Schism. But a general promise of this kind could not oblige them,
when quitting their Rights might betray the Church, and make it depend
precariously on the pleasure of the Magistrate. However they, not foreseeing
this Case, and not fearing it in the Circumstances then in view, might make
this indefinite Promise, and intend really to fulfill it. And whether they did
well in doing so, or no, yet they might do it without owning the Right to
Spiritual Power to be at the disposal of the Civil Magistrate. Yet as long as
they did not think it his Right, they could not think themselves obliged in
Conscience to quit their pretensions to their Spirituals, barely because the
Magistrate was pleased to invade them. All the Obligations therefore they could
have to do it, must either have been from their Promise, or from the present
exigencies of the Case which might, in their Opinion, seem to require it. Yet
all this was consistent with an Opinion that whilst they had the Power, they
had it from an Authority Superior to that of the Civil Magistrate, wh^^h till
the Magistrate did deprive them, might make all their Acts valid as done by a
Divine Commission. It is very plain withal, that after the Patent was given,
yet the Magistrate himself took care to recommend them to Bishops for their
Consecration. Why so, unless he believed that if he had done otherwise, his
Bishops would never have been taken for valid Bishops, with regard to
Conscience? Why so, if he had not therein designed to gratify the Ancient and
Received Opinions concerning the Original of Church Power, which without such
Consecration, supposed them liable to so just Exceptions? It was not the
Magistrates fancy that Consecration gave them no new Power, that could hinder
the Bishops and the People too, who were rightly informed concerning the nature
of the Spiritual Society, from judging Consecration necessary for obtaining
that Power which is purely Spiritual. And it is being thought necessary by the
Bishops was enough to oblige the Consecrating Bishops to give, and the
Consecrated Bishops to receive, that Spiritual Power, which, in their Opinion,
could not be had otherwise then by their Consecration. And intending to give,
and receive it, what could hinder their Intentions from the usual Success, when
the same Solemnities were used by Persons equally Authorized to give it with
those who had been used to give it formerly? Nor could the Magistrate expect,
that to gratify him, they should defraud themselves of any Privileges or
Powers received by their Ancestors, and conveyed, as before, from Persons
empowered to administer the Solemnities and Rites of Consecration: Such a
Singular obsequiousness and self-denial is this, He could not I say, either in
Conscience or Equity pretend to expect, unless He had secured it in express
Terms, and exacted a particular Profession; a Profession, that might make it
inconsistent with the Bishops Veracity to give, or receive, the usual Power,
as by the same Solemnities and Authority it had been given, and received, by
their Ancestors. Rather on the contrary, the Permission of the sam^ Solemn
Rites, and the same Authority in administering them as before, without any new
Security against the usual effect, is an Argument the Prince left it to their
Liberty to intend the giving and receiving the same Spiritual Power from
CHRIST, as had been usually conveyed by the same Ministry. He therefore
contented him self with the Security given him by the Patents, that from
whomsoever they received the Right of being Bishops in regard to Conscience,
yet they should not be Bishops in Law entitled to Baronies and revenues any
longer than he pleased. This being so, it will follow that what they did before
Deprivation was valid in Conscience and in Law also; but what they did
afterward, though that might also be valid in Concsience, yet it was not to be
vaild in Law. Our first Consecrations were of the former sort, and therefore
were not the less valid in Conscience for having the accession of a validity in
Law. Thus our first Consecrations might derive a Title to our Present Fathers
in Conscience not deprivable at the pleasure of the Civil Magistrate with
regard to Conscience. GOD awaken the zeal of our late Fathers and Brethern for
asserting these Rights in Conscience which are so essential to their being our
Fathers and our Brethren, and for the Religion and Communion of our late common
Churches in these Kingdoms. And may our common LORD plead the Cause of his
distressed and deserted Spouse.

THE END.

