22th. The Doctrine of Christ's glorious Kingdom [or the New Jerusalem State]
now shortly approaching, is exceeding comfortable and very advantageous to all
faithful Christians, is manifest by the Key and this whole Work; and by the
ensuing [Paraenesis] or Monitory Exhortation, may further appear. Anno Dom.
1672.
ANd now dear Christian Brethren allow me a little freedom in this office of
love, you I mean who are partakers of the grace of God purchased by Jesus
Christ and by the spirit of sanctification wrought in your souls, whether
Episcopal (so called) Presbyterian or Independent; with sundry others upon the
same foundation, First for Unity.
many of which, through Gods especial mercy, have evidently obtained like
precious grace; to you all I speak, as such. Why do you still stand at distance
one from another? Consider, I pray you, That one Heaven (as ye all believe)
shall hereafter contain you all, when ye shall be made perfect in one; yea
moreover, I am well assured, that one Glorious Kingdom of Christ to come will
satiate all your souls as such, a long time before you can obtain the other,
viz. both souls and bodies; all whose degrees of blessedness is only to be
expected in Gods best order, and time and manner revealed in his word; whether
men take cognizance of it more particularly or less: And after that great day
of Judgment is finished, the expectation of all Saints to attain Those things
which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has entered into ths heart of man
to conceive, besides thee, O God, (...) the Evangelical Prophet [Esa.] And, O
how great things (says holy David) has God prepared, etc. But the state of
things in Christ's said Kingdom, is not altogether such, in the interim; though
very glorious, and excellent, and blessed, and suitable to that condition
(then,) when Judgment shall be given to the Saints in the world, long before
the finishing of the last Judgment. And most of you, if not all, are one in the
things, at present, that are counted essentially necessary [ad esse Ecclesiae]
for the being of the Church of Christ: how should all sorts agreeing in the
main, then also endeavor to be one in things that pertain [ad been esse] to
the well being of the same also? And I am strongly (from Gods word) assured,
that it will not be long before the Lord, in that great day which he has
foretold, will be one, and his name one; even in respect of such usual
dissentments of men in our days, and his people shall then serve him with one
shoulder: how then should all faithful Christians (what in them is) endeavor,
by all good means, for Unity with the bond of peace, as well as Truth, (though
that especially) and so to meet their mercy by the way; and, if it might be,
anticipate it, by so hastening its coming: how well would Christ (then) take it
at all your hands? Whereas, if any should so be found short of this, that they
will from such dissentments, be smiting their Brethren, (though it be but with
the tongue, when they can do no more;) how will they expose themselves at that
day, to Christ's objurgation, before Angels and Men, etc.? Unite, therefore,
Brethren, I say, Unite, Unite in one in these matters also, at least in your
spirits, and the actings of them; that may be the way, where God may supply
what you are wanting in, to bring about the business (which you so rightly and
really endeavor,) by granting his Fiat in the case. Let each sort cast off
their peculiar obstacles, and any-wayes-thwarting interests; Complying fully
with Gods Rules, that should fully guide us all therein, and They, I humbly
conceive, are very few, but sufficient: only, men must beware they mistake them
not, that they pervert them not in their use and mannagment. The first is that
of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.26. Let all things be done to edifying. viz of the
souls of Gods people; and this is a comprehensive and forcible rule and
direction, which in every constitution and counsel of men, ought much to sway
the matter, is the thing pleasing or profitable or creditable, etc.? that may
be somewhat in some cases, but the great Question in matters of such nature, as
men may order, is: But is it so for edifying? If they will not advance that end
in Gods Church, what should they do there? out if they will hinder it, why
should they be suffered in it? And then a second follows, v. 40. Let all things
be done decently and in order: which two rightly applied like our Saviors
first and second law of love, containing all the other: So may these being
rightly managed, in all such cases, regulate the counsels and actings of men
in Church affairs; but as love was the matter of both these laws (though fixed
upon distinct octjects;) so edifying is the substance and the end of both,
though the latter for the manner, ought often more necessarily to be applied
with the other, as being subordinate thereunto, in sundry respects of nature,
matter, use and end, etc. The Apostles instances which occasioned this second
Rule, seems to teach us the right use of it; the one case of decency whether
women should speak in the Church; That, by the Apostle (authoritatively) was
once and for all times, ordered negatively, as being specially guided by Gods
spirit: Let not your women speak, says he, etc. The other was a profitable
orderly settling the way of their prophesieing, that it might more tend to
edifycation; and contrary confusion be avoided, that would hinder the same: And
the Apostle seems so to subordinate the latter to the first, as if no plea of
order (or decency at least) might be approveable, but as in conjunction with
in its nature, use or end with edifycation of the Church of Christ; whereby
natural or prudential agreements, for times or places of worship, and utensels
therein, by humane and Christian qualifications, may be suitably judged of and
approved by men, [pro hic and nunc,] as it is, or ought to be, with some
Officers [quam diu se been gesserint] and so Moses's Brazen Serpent, was
approved to be Hezekiah's Nehushtan; but still by the two former rules to be
examined, especially, and necessarily by that of edifycation; for prudence and
decency, and all the other, if not qualified for edifycation, or being
contrary, are (for ought I can discern from the Apostles said ruled cases)
pleas without doors, in reference to such said constitutions or counsels of
men in the Church of Christ: Whereas, for Officers and Ordinances, and what
else is necessary, the Scripture gives many, and large instructions, and Divine
institutions, which Persons of prudent hearts and sanctified Spirits, will be
apt to improve well (by Divine grace duly sought for, and rightly applied) and
the Christian charity of others, herein (accordingly) acquiesce: But one the
other part, as any appear defective in the said respect of edifycation, or
prejudicial thereunto, they may appear to be more dangerously enjoined or
hurtfully observed, as being excentrical to the Apostle Paul's said boundaries
of them: And in that men have walked so out of these paths of Unity, Piety and
peace, what sad effects has Satan upon the corruption, blindness and intersts
of men, and still does earnestly endeavor to bring about? let every mountain
standing in the way of Union be endeavored by you to be levelled, and every
bond be broken in sunder which is not of Gods allowance: But yet may not
piously, and charitably intended encouragements, in things seemighly only good,
(but mistaken) be retained? and applied to really good improvements, which (I
supppose) they may well be judged so to have attained their end, with
advantage; True Christian Charity, piety and prudence will regulate much in
many like cases; God grant them to all sorts in these respects especially
concerned, etc.

Secondly, for Piety.
And all ye right Christianly charitable souls of all sorts, how few so ever in
these key-cold, yea chilled last days ye seem to be, you have but a little
time here to bring forth your fruits of faith and love, Let the season of your
present being, first engage you to walk closly with God; be much in private and
secret communion with him your selves; wherein you have (if your hearts be
upright in his sight) the greatest advantage imaginable with the King of Heaven
and Earth, above the favorites of earthly Princes; who sometimes mistake their
faithfullest servants, sometimes hear bad information against them, sometimes
are remote from them, or they hindered from coming to them, sometimes and in
some cases and things they cannot help, (though at Gods pleasure Kings may be
potent) yet only God himself is Omnipotent, many ways beyond thought: earthly
Princes may fail theirs, but God will never fail nor forsake his favorites; in
all times, places and companies, a good thought, purpose, expression of heart,
or word, a spiritual soliloquie, or ejaculation is very kindly taken at Gods
hand from you, who will reckon such soul actings tokens of much love and
sincerity, when sometime more weakness in greater solemnities may appear. 2. Be
much in family duties prudently contrivied, that ye may continue in them; set
your house in order for them; be not slight or fickle in them, judge not your
selves in fit grab or posture for worldly business, without necessity, till God
have his family worshipped at suitable opportunities; a frothie profession and
pretending to Religion has of late times, much more then formerly, thrust
these duties out of doors, though they seldom have had good entertainment
within, (save of some few) true piety has been long, yea ever hitherto, [Rara
avis in terris,] very scarce to be found; families were the first and usually
the best plantation of fruit trees in Gods Vineyard, keep the resolution of
Joshua, especially now, against the floods of ungodlyness; families are like to
be the best nurseries of such young plants, for many advantages, engagements,
endearments; much quickening to increase of grace in family worship, etc. and
that advantage does wonderfully help, encourage and further the public
Ministry of the Gospel, etc. thence are instilled usually, and preserved too
good principles, or patterns of wholesome words, with their improvements: the
defect whereof is now lamentable, for the want both of private and public
Catechisings. Do not all wise builders look mainly to their foundations? for
want of this, so many tottering buildings soon reel aside, to one error or
other, or are in continual danger of falling utterly, or mouldering to nothing
in Religion, etc.

But then, right Pious souls, see that your true Christianity, Thirdly for
Charity.
to help forward your good account, be outwardly manifest in your gracious
works of charity, not only to supply necessities, but to prevent evil and do
good; many poor souls that study faith and good conscience toward God and men,
have much encountering with tentations, in a low and hard condition, by reason
of the prevailing iniquities of the times, and the many ways of the practice
thereof, by the licentious, who fight so against their own outward wants, by
weapons of iniquity, using such unlawful ways, and means, and practices which
others may not, dare not, do not; yet are straightened by others sins (in such
cases) their oppressors, upon such accounts. How should the strong and able in
estate, herein in Christian compassion, help the infirmities of the weak,
especially in reference to their soul-danger thereby; or to see to the good
education of their childeren, and that their widows and orphans (chiefly by
relieved, etc. how by such charitable deeds (especially with the addition of
instructions and encouragments) might you in so doing draw others to Christ and
instrumentally save their precious souls? consider what, out of your Revenues
you can with a cheerful heart and ready hand, yearly, monthly, or weekly return
to God, in a thanks-offering, by his now many, many receivers near you, or
known to you, for the all which you have received besides; and consider,
(according to the Apostles rule) how God has prospered you the preceding week,
and let that grace of an humble, thankful, true christian charity, have its due
operation in you in her proportion; and if rents and gains will not do it as
you desire, then cut off sinful excesses in vain expenses, more closly and
barely, in too costly and curious apparel, lavishing entertainments, in
inconsideratly costly buildings, now the world is near her departure, by her
great shaking fits ceising upon her; yet these are the common sins of the
times, and breeders of men's future sorrow, and too late repentance, when a much
better and safer improvement should have been made thereof; now you may make
God your debtor, by his promise, and your selves temporally more blessed by
giving than by receiving. If men did but cast in a tenth of what they receive,
or but even of what many vainly consume, etc. into Gods treasury, for such
charitable uses, or any other like, (for the world abounds with objects of that
nature) there is no question, but they would find a better return, yea (happily)
many better returns, of that tenth which they gave, or some others out of their
estates vainly consume (and that with advantage) above all the nine parts that
they or such others detained from such offerings to God; besides the prayers,
praises and thanksgivings from men thereupon, which God will observe and
reward. Let me only add this comprehensive consideration for all at present;
That your final sentence of approbation or condemnation will, by Christ
himself, be passed mainly upon that account, Mat. 25. See Everlast. Gos. P. 19,
20.
as carrying it well or ill in that kind, to such little ones, or disciples of
his, in relieving, visiting, clothing them, (which says Christ, is done to
himself,) but if men injure and persecute them; Wh^t Mat. 25. (...) expounded.
Obs. it well.
how heavy will their judgment be? but it in them Christians relieve Christ?
they must labor to do it, for Christ's sake; in faith, in obedience, out of
love, out of thankfulness to the first giver, who made them large receivers
first, whereupon they are much in his debt, and. should endeavor much to come
out of some part of it, (for which God may discharge in full) before death
come, which cuts off further opportunity, and imprisons all unbelievers for
such debts, Dan. 4.7.
[oh that men would consider it] before the time of execution come! for then
all such interest is gone, and they leave [most likely] a curse to their
successors, entailed on their estates to consume in sin, or give them up to
serve Satan's interest, or to make them become a prey to the devourer, or a
booty to the supplanter, one way or other, etc. And such persons should in
these times lay to heart this consideration for two reasons. 1. By how much the
times are more provoking of Gods wraths; so all estates are more tottering
therefore it would be more wisdom to secure much, whilst ye may, by committing
it to Gods safe insuring hands; it may, more likely, rescue the rest, or keep
of vengeance the longer, and so more time of well doing will be allowed. Again,
Satan has great wrath, because his time is now very short, and therefore he
marches furiously with his hosts of evil men and devils to ruin all he can;
Christians should then likewise [vi and armis] with all their might give him
the repulse, by laying out themselves in their persons, possession, parts,
posterity, their all for Christ, whence two encouragements. 1. Christ will
surely give them both victory, and recompense; and the devil being resisted, as
the greatest coward, he will also flee, Jam. 4.7. 2. As the times are very bad,
so Christians help is more needful; and the rather, because we are fallen into
the dregs of bad times, when upon many weighty considerations, we may expect
Christ's coming very shortly, and the best that live now and lawfully enjoy,
plentiful estates, know not whether they or theirs shall retain [then] any of
the things which they now possess: yet let such take this consolation, that
they and their posterity being faithful will gain by that change in this world,
when one in a bed, in the field, in the mill, by the Angels will be carried in
the 4 quarters of the earth, to Christ as their arc, or as the Eagles to the
carcass, Mat. 23.28. and planted in a better soil, and much better estate, to
inherit the mercies promised to the forefathers, See Obs 20. after Tract. on
Rev. 20, 22.
etc. I pray God sanctify such as here them, by these Divine truths thus
briefly hinted; and let me to that end, offer this caution to all serious
Christians, to take heed lest (as Israel of old entered not into Canaan because
of unbelief) that their unbelief [if not their slighting of these Divine
truths] cause not Christ in displeasure to bring them late into the New
Jerusalem state at the first blested Resurrect. when, as some ancients
conceived, there will be [mora] to some, though I doubt not but all the
faithful till then, [and not only actual Martyrs] will have some part in that
state longer or shorter, it is dangerous to contemn or oppose any Divine truths
such as these are; [and as I from good ground know these to be.] As for meaner
Christians I only say this, See Satan's seven Vials. Forerunner p. 41, 42.
which is much in few words, let them walk in their general and particular
callings, wherein they are called, with God faithfully, they then will have
this strong support that he will not fail them nor forsake any of them, and to
that and consider, what is said before concerning these last times, etc. Other
improvements of these truths we briefly hinted in our Pract. picces on Gen
3.15. Rev 22.20. Jer. 3.17. etc, which with this Exhortation I leave to
Christians use and Gods blessing; praying at present, after that ancients mode
with some addition.

Domine Jesu si qua pro tennitate mea in hic scripsi, qua mea sunt, non tua,
tuipse in its ignosce mihi;omnia autem qua tua sunt, a me tam indigne, hic
prolata agnoscant etiamque (...). Amen.

(i.e.) L. Jesus, if I have in these things written any out of mine own
meaness, which are my own, but not thine, pardon thou (...) therein, but let thy
serve. also acknowledge al those things which are thine own, though here tendered to
them by so unworthy a person as my self. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Tit. p r. K for X. p. 7 r. Tohu vaboh^. Word Writ. r. 3. Vaus for 3. Zains. in
fold. leave r. reunited not recruted. builder not redeemer. veiled not railed.
in S. of Dan. 366. not 666


