A VINDICATION OF THE Deprived Bishops, etc.
PART I. Showing, That though the Instances collected in the Baroccian MS had
been pertinent to the Editors Design, yet that would not have been sufficient
for Obtaining their Cause.
1. THat the Laity should be favorable to Mistakes derogatory to the sacred
Power, Clergymen not excusable for appearing in a Cause so destructive of the
Interest of Religion in general, and of their own Function in particular,
without Reasons very evident and convincing.
cannot be thought strange in an Age wherein they generally use so little
diligence to inform themselve, or to receive Information from those who are
qualified to inform them, concerning the Rights of the Clergy: Their own
Interests are alone sufficient to make them partial in affairs of this nature,
though they were more sincerely influenced by Considerations of Religion, than
we generally find them; but that Clergymen should also ^avour them in
Encroachments on their own Function, that they should professedly patronise
Doctrines tending to lessen the Esteem of that greatest and most valuable of
all Authorities wherewith God has honored and instrusted none but them; that
they should make it depend on the pleasure of the Magistrate, which was
designed for greater and more noble Ends than the Magistracy it self; that they
should put it in his power to destroy the very being of the Church as a Society
by a secular Deprivation; that they should not only own, but teach, That none
are obliged to adhere to themselves in such a Case wherein the Magistrate is
against them, no not so much as in regard of Conscience; that they should by
this means make the greatest and most momentous Concerns for Souls subordinate
to worldly, carnal Politics, and the far less weighty Interests of worldly
Prosperity* and of particular Societies; that they should hereby make it least
capable of subsisting under a Persecution, which was the Case most obvious in
the view of our B. Savior and his Apostles, and therefore most particularly
provided for, if they took care for any thing beyond their own time: These
things, I say, would not be very credible, if they were not very notorious* One
would think none who valued the general good of Religion, and the Catholic
Church, and the Souls of Mankind, before the temporal Prosperity of any
particular State, (and it is hard to conceive how any good Man can do
otherwise,) could even wish such Opinions true, though his Wish alone were
sufficient to make them so. How then is it agreeable, that Clergymen of all Men
should be the most favorable and zealous Advocates for such Opinions, so
manifestly destructive of those greatest Interests, which they of all men ought
best to understand, and to be most zealously concerned for? How is it
agreeable, that they of all men cannot be content to let the Memory of ill
Precedents dye, but that they must allarm us with future Fears of having them
acted again, by not only abetting but also justifying them? How is it
agreeable, that they should do this in a Prospect, such as ours is, of a Laity
so little concerned for the good of Religion, and the Church; when even they
who have any Principles, have such lax ones, and so very little obliging them,
even in Conscience, to venture any thing for any particular Communion? That
their preferring their worldly Concerns depending on the Pleasure of the
Magistrate, before the greater Concerns of Souls and Eternity, is the true
Cause of it, is not to be believed, while there are any Reasons that might
induce them to it. Yet little Reasons cannot in Equity excuse, when the
Consequences ought to be so very valuable on that very account of Men's being
either good or religious. But this advantage our Adversaries have, that their
Cause is like to suffer nothing by ill Management, when it is in the hands of
such able Advocates. Let us therefore see whether all they say will amount to
Reason, and to Reason sufficient to excuse them.

The Author of this Manuscript too low to pass for an Evidence of the Facts
mentioned by him. He knew nothing of the later part of the History of Nicetas
Choniates, relating to Constantinople.
2. They pretend, and pretend with great Confidence, That nothing can justify
our Adherence to even unjustly deprived Bishops, if the Successors be not
Heretics. That this is so, they appeal to an ancient Greek MS. of Instances
collected to their hands, before any prospect of our present Case. They pretend
from this Collection, that neither the Bishops themselves, who were unjustly
deprived, made any Separation, nor any Subjects of such Bishops, on account of
any obligation of Conscience to adhere to them. Hence they collect, that these
things being the sense of the ancient Church, as often as any such Instances
appeared, ought also to be our sense who profess a Veneration for Antiquity.
And were these things so as they pretend, they would perhaps be considerable to
excuse the Practice of our present Adversaries: But all these things are justly
questionable, and far from that Evidence which their Cause requires, and
themselves pretend to: All they say is resolved into this MS. and this will do
nothing for their purpose. The Author, whoever he was, is much too young, to be
admitted as a Witness of most of the Facts enumerated by him; especially
considering we have Authors of the earlier times to speak for themselves. Nay,
he has not pretended to be a Witness on his own Credit: He has been
particularly careful to tell us his Authors, most of which are extant to this
very day. As therefore his Credit is nothing for things so much earlier than
his own Age; so neither is there any need we should depend on his Credit, when
we can have immediate recourse to his original Authors themselves. It is called
an ancient MS. and yet pretended no elder than the 13th Century. But sure the
ingenious English Prefacer cannot think Antiquity of so low a date as that is,
to be that Antiquity which we profess to imitate, or pretend to allege: Yet
neither can he prove his Author a competent Witness even for that low
Antiquity. All that appears from his quoting Nicetas Choniates, is only this;
That he could not be elder than that Century in which the Author lived who was
quoted by him: But neither does it thence follow, that he lived in the same
Age; nor can it thence be determined how long he lived after him. This mention
of Nicetas will bring him down below the Year 1205. where Nicetas ends his
History. Nicetas himself lived some while after. But our Author refers to his
History as an Authority, as being elder than the Traditions of the Age he lived
in. He neither pretends to remember the things for which he quotes him, nor to
have received any Informations concerning them from the relation of any old Men
who could remember them. But where Nicetas fails him, he shows himself
perfectly ignorant of the Affairs of that Age, which was concerned in the
History written by Nicetas. Nicetas mentions no Successor in the Sea of
Constantinople between Cosmas Atticus and Theodosius: Our Author therefore
takes Theodosius for Cosmas's immediate Successor. Nicetas does not mention the
Synods, nor the Abdications, that were in the Cases of the Patriarchs deposed
in the time of Isaacius Angelus; therefore our Author supposes there were none.
Nicetas mentions the Opposition, but not the Schisms, that fell out in the two
Settlements of Dositheus; therefore our Author takes it for granted that there
were none, and reasons accordingly upon that Supposition. These things plainly
show, that our Author did not write within any near Memory of the History
written by Nicetas; and therefore must be considerably later than the beginning
even of the XIIIth Century.

3. It will farther add to the Probability of this Observation, if it be
considered, that our Author was a Constantinopolitane, Which yet he must have
known, as a public Officer of the Church of Cp. if he had lived near him.
and in such a Station in the Church of Constantinople, as that he could not
have needed the Information of written Monuments for the Affairs of the Church
of Constantinople, that had been within the reach of a near Tradition. This has
already been observed by the English Prefacer, Mr. B. and observed from hence,
that our Author derives the Orders of the Church he was concerned for from
former Bishops of Constantinople: But for this perhaps it might have been
sufficient, that he had been of any part of the Constantinopolitane
Jurisdiction, at least of a Church which owned the Patriarch of Constantinople
for their more immediate Metropolitan; I therefore add another Argument that
will not be so easily evaded. Our Author speaking of the Synodicon, (...), p.
25.
says it was read in the Church, as every body knew. This was particularly true
of the particular Church of Constantinople: There it was that the Tomus
Vnionis, that part of the Synodicon to which our Author refers, Anastas. de
Jejux. Deipar. p. 435. Tom. 3. Coteler. Mon. Gr. Eccl.
was made, as Anastasius Caesareensis assures us. And therefore there it was
that it was ordered to be read every July annually. The Union it self
particularly concerned breaches, which had been before between
Constantinopolitane Patriarchs, and was therefore most proper to be read in the
Patriarchal Church. I add farther, that the Author seems to have a constant
fixed relation to that particular Church, as an Officer of it, and such and
Officer as that it was his particular Duty to be conversant in the Histories
belonging to it. The subject Matter of this Discourse is Historical: And the
address of is not to Readers, but Auditors. This plainly shows that it was
spoken: And of these spoken Historical Discourses we have many Instances in
this very same Baroccian MS. We have here the larger Epitome of the
Ecclesiastical History of the Arian Philostorgius, fol. 243.
which is here said to have been (...). We have also several Collections of
History ascribed to Nicephorus Callistus Xanthopulus in the same form of (...),
fol. 212, 225, 230.
out of the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius, of Theodoret, of Theodorus
Lector. This form therefore (...) seems to have been opposed to (...), as the
address to (...) is also to (...). Both together seem to imply that it was
rather a Speech designed for Auditors, than a Writing for Readers: That is,
that it was not committed to writing by the Author himself, but by the Author
only spoken; it was taken from his Mouth, and committed to writing by the
Auditors. I think there can be little reason to doubt, but that the address of
this Discourse to (...), is exactly answerable to this other form in the Works
inscribed (...). If so, then we may reasonably judge, that our Author, whoever
he was, was in the same Office in the Church of Constantinople wherein Photius
and Nicephorus were, when they also pronounced and dictated the Works which are
so inscribed to them; and that his Office was, as theirs was, particularly to
enquire into Ecclesiastical History, and to instruct his Auditors in it. As for
what Mr. B -- collects from this address, That the Tract it self was a Homily,
methinks the whole nature of the Subject might have sufficed to convince him.
He might as well have conjectured all the Collections out of Eusebius,
Socrates, Sozomen, etc. to have been Homilies, because they are also (...). But
this I believe that worthy Person was not aware of, who does not seem himself
to have perused the MS.

The use of the public Ecclesiastical Rh^tor.
4. Perhaps these Expressions may afford us some, not improbable Conjectures
concerning the Nature and Design of all these Historical Collections;
particularly Mr. Hody may be pleased to remember what himself has very well
observed in his Premonition to Malela. He has there observed a multitude of
Historians called Rhetors and Sophists, whence he well infers, that those very
Titles seem to have had some relation to their very Faculty of being
Historians. He observes farther, that there was a Rhetor appropriated to the
service of particular Churches. Such was the Rhetor of Aenus, joined with the
Ecdicus or Defensor of the same Church. And it is indeed probable that all
those Historians, who are called Rhetors and Sophists, were called so from
their bearing that Office in some particular Church. He has observed farther,
That in the Service of these Churches there were Bodies of these Rhetors, and
among them one who presided over the rest, as Samuel over the Prophets, called
(...), Magister, (as that Name was in those Ages applied to Presidents of the
Palatine Offices also,) and (...), answerable also to the Secular Campidoctores
in Vegetius, and (...). These Ecclesiastical Rhetors seem to have been one part
of the Clergy, that were maintained by the Revenues of the Foundation,
mentioned frequently in the Imperial Constitutions, particularly designed for
this purpose of studying Ecclesiastical History. The young Men therefore
designed for this study, were obliged to be Auditors of the Principal Rhetor,
who was a kind of a public Professor of Ecclesiastical History. The use of
this study for the Service of the Church, was to search into Precedents when
any Act of public Discipline required it, and very probably into Canons also,
when the Case was resolvible by written Canons. Both are made use of in this
Discourse, though the Editor has omitted all the Canons. Thus this
Ecclesiastical History was consulted for both Laws, both the written ones and
the unwritten ones, which were nothing else but allowed Practice. This
Profession therefore being found so useful for the Service of the Church, care
was taken that there might always be an Ecclesiastical Nursery, that might
continually afford Candidates qualified to supply the Chair, as often as a
vacancy should fall. That was by obliging the Master to a constant Duty in his
Function, for the Instruction of his young Students. And the Duty was either to
take a received Historian, and to abbreviate him, or to collect a multitude of
Instances in a particular Case when he was consulted, thereby to let the young
Students understand the design of their Historical Studies. But all was by word
of Mouth and by way of Dictates, to be committed to writing by the Auditors
themselves. This was the easiest way for multiplying Copies before Printing was
invented: And withal it exercised the Abilities of the Writer, in teaching him
to write truly. And indeed it seems to have been the general way of teaching.
Thus the Authors taught in the ordinary Schools, are called Centum cirratorum
dictata. And hence it is, This Office very ancient in the Church of Cp. perhaps
from the first Foundation of it by Constantine the Great.
that we have so many Homilies of the Fathers preserved in writing by their
Pupils, when only spoken by themselves, under the name of (...).

5. This therefore is an easy and obvious Account of the Words (...), and the
address to (...). Nor is it easier in it self, than fit to the Persons of those
whose Dictates we have in this same MS. Nicephorus tells us himself, in his
Preface to his History, That he had been bred up from a Boy in the Church of
St. Sophia. This is the exact Character of those young Students, who were
educated at the Charges of the Church for these Ecclesiastical Services, and
who were withal the fairest Candidates for these Masterships, whenever they
fell vacant, either by the Death, or the farther Promotion of those who
possessed them. Then it was probably to be expected, that after many years
Profession, they should draw up their Dictates into the form of a continued
History, as it is most likely all those Historians did, who are still known by
the Names of Rhetors and Sophists. And it is very probable that Nicephorus's
History was the last thing performed by him: He says himself he was in the 36
th year of his Age when he began it, and yet that he was then but young,
implying plainly, that he was old when he finished it, and wrote the Dedicatory
Epistle to Andronicus. It is also probable that Photius, who was afterward
Patriarch, had been also his Predecessor in this same Office, because his
Excerpta out of Philostorgius, contained in this same MS. are said also to have
been (...). That may, perhaps, give an account how these Excerpta of Photius
came to be inserted among the Dictates of Nicephorus. It is not unlikely those
larger Excerpta of Photius dictated from Philostorgius, had occasioned the loss
of Philostorgius himself, and that Nicephorus was therefore necessitated to use
those Excerpta for his own Text, which he was to dictate to his Pupils. The
Office it self seems to have been far antienter than the time of Photius, as
appears from the multitude of Rhetors and Sophists before him, that were
Historians: For my part, I am apt to think it near as old as the Foundation of
the Church of Constantinople by Constantine the Great. Socrates the Historian
himself has two Collections of Historical Precedents; L. V. c. 22. Vid. etiam
Sozom. l. 7. c. 19. L. VII. c. 36.
one concerning the different Customs of different Churches, to satisfy, as it
should seem, the Scrupulosity of some who scrupled the Lawfulness of Things
themselves had not been used to; the other of the Translations of Bishops from
one See to another, occasioned by a Translation, made in the 5th Century, of
Proclus from Cyzicus to Constantinople. Hence one might conjecture, that as he
might have the Materials for his History from the Dictates of his Master
Troilus, the Sophist; so he might have these Collections of Precedents, so like
to ours, from some Cases proposed and resolved by the same Troilus, and by him
communicated in Dictates to his Pupils. This is the rather to be conjectured,
because Digressions of that kind are not so usual in Histories antienter than
this Custom. Withal Socrates assures us that Troilus had the Office of Rhetor,
and that he was not the first, L. VII. c. 37.
but succeeded Silvanus in it. This was in the same Church we are mentioning,
of Constantinople. And Valesius has elsewhere observed the Habit proper to that
Rhetor, answerable to those of our Academical Professors: See his Notes on
Socr. L.VII. c. 12. It is certain, long before that time there were
Grammarians, Orators, Physicians, Philosophers, maintained on the Public for
the use of Cities, and frequently mentioned in the Pandects, at least from the
time of Marcus. Why should it therefore be thought strange, that even
Constantine himself should make the like provision for Studies necessary for
the Church, out of the Revenues himself was pleased to settle upon Churches?
And the like provision we find in the Ecclesiastical Foundations. We have
several Writers called Grammatici, no doubt because they were the Instructers
of the Ecclesiastical Grammarians: Others we have, called (...), as presiding
also over the Ecclesiastical Philosophers. It is perhaps a little more
difficult to give an account of the use of this Phrase in this MS. upon
occasion of producing a Passage of Hegesippus out of Eusebius, which is said to
be (...). But it is not probable that that Custom of the Ecclesiastical Rhetor
was near so old as the time of Hegesippus. I am sure Eusebius, from whom
Nicephorus took all he pretends concerning Hegesippus, gives him not the least
occasion to think so. It is particularly certain, that Eusebius himself had
that Passage, not from the Voice, but the Writings of Hegesippus. I therefore
rather believe, that this Passage also of Hegesippus, was from the Voice of
Nicephorus, delivered by him in Dictates to his Pupils, as many other things in
this same MS. are, out of Eusebius's Ecclesiastical History; only perhaps there
might be some particular occasion for dictating this Passage of Hegesippus out
of the ordinary course and method of his Readings.

6. I am apt therefore to think, that the Author of this MS. was the
Ecclesiastical Rhetor then in Office when the Schism happened that occasioned
it. Who that was, it is hard now to judge, This Discourse seems to have been
written by the Ecclesiastical Rhetor of the Church of Cp. then in Office when
the Schism happened that occasioned it.
because we have no Catalogues extant of the Successors in that Office: And if
we had any, it could hardly be guessed at till we can first gain some prospect
of the time wherein it was written, which is the thing into which we are at
present enquiring. And in order hereunto all that we can infer from this Office
of the Author, is that he could not live within memory of the latter part of
the History of Nicetas Choniates. I now add farther, that it seems also
probable, that he did not live at any great distance from the memory of it.
This I gather, because he ascribes the generality of the Orders of his own Time
to these five Successors in the time of Isaacius Angelus. He does not say so of
the Ignatians and Photians, nor of the Nicolaitans and Euthymians, nor of any
of those more distant Patriarchal Factions. That therefore he says it of these
latest of his Examples, the Reason seems to be to let his Auditors thereby
understand, that he had now brought down his Succession of Precedents so near
his own time, that the old Clergymen then living, though they could not
remember those Patriarchs of the time of Isaacius themselves; yet they could at
least remember, that the old Men* from whom themselves received their Orders,
did remember them, and did withal profess, that they had received their Orders
from them. This will bring our Author's time within a Century after those times
of Isaacius Angelus. So the first remarkable Schism that fell within that
distance, will most probably be the occasion of this Work, and the
Ecclesiastical Rhetor then in Office the Author of it: But of this more
hereafter.

Not by Nicephorus Callisius.
7. I confess, I was once of the mind that Nicephorus Callistus was the Author
of it: My reason was, that which is mentioned by Mr. Hody, that his Name is
made use of in most of the Works contained in this Volume, either in the
Titles, or in the Tables; and that both before and after this of which we are
at present discoursing. This made me think, that the whole Volume was intended
for a Collection of Pieces wherein he was some way concerned, and that his Name
was intended for the Title here, if the Illuminator had performed his Office,
in adding a Title to it: But upon more thorough consideration I have, I
confess, altered my Opinion. I observe this Tract is in a hand extremely
different from the other hands of the whole Volume: It is withal contrived
within a quire proper to itself, and the latter end in a little smaller hand,
that it might come within that compass. Thence it appears, that it was written
singly, not to be connected with a following Vacancy, where there might have
been room for what remained; but to be bound up with other things already
written. Accordingly what follows begins abruptly, as if the former quire had
been purposely left out, to make room for this insertion: These are Tokens,
that it was not at first designed as a part of this particular Collection. Then
it begins so near the top of the Page, that one would suspect no Title was
intended, but that the Author's Name was purposely omitted. And indeed no
Author's Name seems to have been mentioned in the Copies from whence Cotelerius
intended to have published it. Coteler. Not. ad 3 Vol. Mon. Gr. Eccl. p. 645.
Withal I doubt, that Nicephorus Callistus, who wrote when Andronicus was now
grown old in the Empire, might have been somewhat of the latest to have been
the Author of it. Besides, there are considerable Differences between our
Author and Nicephorus: Mr. Hody has observed one, if the Interposition of
Leontius between the Inthronings of Dositheus be not rather some Disorder of
our Copy of Nicephorus's Catalogue of Patriarchs. There are also several other
Differences: Our Author calls the first of the Patriarchs deposed by Anastasius
Dicorus Euthymius, and that as often as he mentions him, both in the Tract
itself, and the Summary, as several others had done before him. Nicephorus
calls him rightly Euphemius, Niceph. H. E. xvi.19, 20, 25, 26, 32.
both in his MS. Catalogue, and in his Ecclesiastical History. Our Author takes
no notice that Timotheus, the next Successor but one to Euphemius, was a
Heretic; but Nicephorus does in his Catalogue of Patriarchs, if the inserted
Censures of the Patriarchs be his: There he is called, in an interlineary Note,
(...). However in his History he takes notice of his Fickleness, Ibid. 35.
that he sometimes approved, and again openly condemned the Synod of Chalcedon.
This was sufficient to hinder him from arguing, that his orthodoxy was the
reason why his Communion was owned, notwithstanding his Usurpation. So also
from the remaining Contents of the 23d Book of Nicephorus Callistus, Ad finem
Cap. 1. L. 1. Nicephor^.
it appears that Nicephorus owned that there were Schisms in the time of Leo
Sapiens, under the Patriarchate of Stephen, the Emperor's Brother, and of
Nicolaus Mysticus and Euthymius, though it seems our Author knew nothing of
them.

8. Thus much therefore we have gained, This Author no competent Witness of the
Matters mentioned by him.
That in Matters of so great Antiquity as are here debated, this Author's Word
alone is by no means competent to be depended on as an Authority. Hence it will
follow farther, that we may now very justly put the Stress of our Cause upon
examining the Merit of the things themselves, without any relation to the
Author: And if we can show, that his Way of Reasoning is not concluding, though
the Matters of Fact produced by him were as pertinent to our present Case as
our Adversaries are concerned they should be; and also that his Matters of Fact
are far from being such as they suppose them; I cannot foresee what our
Adversaries can in reason desire more, for showing how little reason they have
to be so confident, on account of what is said by this Author.

9. First therefore, as to the Reasoning itself, Our Adversaries way of
Reasoning in this Case is neither conscientious, not prudent.
how much soever it be insisted on by our late Brethren in our present
Disputes; yet neither is it such as would be thought fit to be regarded by Men
of Conscience, nor safe to be trusted by Men of Prudence and Skill in the Art
of Reasoning. They pretend to have amassed 18 Instances, (of Bishops who did
not think fit to insist on their Right, or were not seconded by their Subjects
if they did so, when they were not deprived on account of Heresy,) out of the
History of 900 Years. Whether they did well or not in it, is not here so much
as attempted to be proved; only it is presumed to be well done, barely because
'twas done in so many Instances, and no public opposition made against it. But
if Matters of Fact so nakedly mentioned must be urged for Precedents, it will
be impossible to make any thing of this way of Arguing from History. What
History is there, that in a Succession of 900 Years, does not afford Examples
against Examples? And how can it be understood which are rather to be followed
as Examples, if no more be considered concerning them but barely this, that
they were Examples? How easy were it for an Historian, by this Way of
Reasoning, to justify, as our Brethren do, See the instances produced by the
Author of the Unreasonableness of a New Separation upon the Account of the
Oaths.
the wickedest things that can be! They prove it lawful to break Oaths, from
the Example of King Stephen, which I believe they will hardly find one ancient
Historian who does excuse it from the Charge of Perjury: I am sure they may
find several, who charge it as expressly as we do, with that very Imputation.
And can we not, in the same scope of Time, produce 18 Instances of successful
Wickednesses, of Murder, Adultery, Sacrilege, etc. committed by potent
Persons, whom it was no way safe to contradict, at least where there are no
Memorials of Opposition transmitted to Posterity? Can any Man of Conscience
think it fit, that 18 Instances on one side, in such a space of Time, should be
the Rule of his Conscience? Or can any wise Man think himself obliged to defend
whatever may be patronized by such a number of Instances?

1. Non-adherence to unjustly deprived Bishops will signify nothing to our
present Case, unless the Persons who did not adhere to them did believe them
unjustly deprived.
10. The Design of this Way of Arguing is, no doubt, to prove the Sense and
Approbation, at least, of those Churches where these Instances passed without
Contradiction; but it is manifest, that many more things are requisite for
proving that, besides naked Matter of Fact. What if in the Instances here
mentioned, the Churches did not adhere to unjustly-deprived Bishops, when the
Intruders were not Heretics? Yet many more things must be requisite to be made
out, before Application can be made to our present Case, which are not yet in
the least attempted. It must first appear, not only that the Deprivation was
indeed unjust, but that the Church, who deserted them, and adhered to the
Intruders, did also think it so: Yet this will hardly be made out, particularly
in the Case of St. Chrysostom. I believe they can give no Instances of any who
thought him unjustly deprived, but they were Joannites, and therefore separated
from the Communion of his Deprivers.

2. Nor unless they did believe them invalidly deprived, (that is, by an
incompetent Judicatory,) as well as unjustly.
11. It must appear farther, secondly, That they thought him invalidly deprived
as well as unjustly: That they know very well is Our Sense of the present Case,
on which we lay the Stress of our Cause; not only that our Bishops are
deprived for what our Laws, in the true sense of the Legislators, did never
intend should be a Crime; but also that they are deprived by a Power that can
no way pretend to a Right of Spiritual Deprivation; that is, purely by a
Lay-power, without the least pretense of Ecclesiastical Censures. This
therefore they ought to prove, That, even in Case of a purely Lay-deprivation,
those Eastern Churches did not think fit to assert their Spiritual Liberties,
against the Encroachments of the Secular Magistrate. But that seems more than
ever their Author undertook, I believe than his Cause required. I am sure,
several of his Instances did suppose Synodical Deprivations; yet if they cannot
show this, all they say is utterly impertinent to our present Dispute: For we
our selves may say, and say agreeably to our own Principles, as much as their
own Author says, and perhaps as much as he intended, if he had been living to
make Application to our particular Case. We do no more say than he, that the
Injustice of a Sentence does null or invalidate it, when otherwise the
Authority by which it is pronounced is valid and obliging. Nor do we say, that
Subjects are, even in Conscience, free to adhere to their Bishop, when the
Authority by which he is deprived, has not only a Right to conclude them, but
to conclude him also: Yet all this is consistent with the Liberty allowed by
this Author, of withdrawing Communion from an Heretic. The Reason is this,
because even the Canons of the Church, to go no farther now, allow Subjects
this Liberty to judge of their Bishop's Faith, by a private Judgment of
Discretion, and with reference to their own particular Act of Communicating, as
has been shown by their own Author himself, in the latter part of his Tract,
ommitted by Mr. Hody.

12. Yet this is not all that had been requisite for their Reasoning in this
Case: It ought also to appear, thirdly, 3. Nor unless the Bishops so deprived
did insist on their Right, and challenge Duty, as ours do.
That the Church thought her self at Liberty to deny her Adherence to an
unjustly deprived Bishop, even when he insisted on his own Right, and
challenged her Duty from her. This is the actual Case of our present Bishops;
and of this also their whole Collection does not afford one single Example: Yet
this is the only Case wherein her not adhering to him can, by any Art of equal
Interpretation, be taken to signify, that she did not think such Adherence his
due, even in regard to Conscience; otherwise the Non-payment of Debts alone,
does by no means imply a belief that they are not due. It is certain, the
Person to whom they are due may remit them, if he please; and his not
challenging them is often taken for an Argument, that he does remit them, at
least that he does not challenge Payment now: It is therefore no more an
Argument in such a Case, that the Church does not think such a Duty of
Adherence to such a Bishop really due, than that the Bishop himself does not
think it so: For it is as consistent in them, with an acknowledgment of Right,
to defer the Payment till it be demanded, as it is consistent with the Bishop's
owning it for his Right, that he does not as yet think fit to demand it. But
our Author pretends, that by his Collection of Instances it appears, no Bishop
ever challenged his Right, if the Person substituted in his own place were not
an Heretic. So indeed he says; but thence it does by no means follow, that
they had no Right, because they did not challenge it: Nor can it be thence
gathered, but that it may be prudent, as well as just, for Successors to insist
on their Right, though Predecessors, who thought it just, did yet not think it
prudent to insist on theirs. The Change of Circumstances may make so great a
Variety in the Case it self. If it be only a Personal Injury, the Mischief the
Church may suffer by the Person's defending his Right, may be more than what
she may suffer by permitting a single Act of Injustice to go unredressed: But
in our Case, our Adversaries very well know the Injury is more than personal.
They know the old Doctrines of our Church are involved in the Injustice that is
offered them: They may also know, that this New Doctrine of the Validity of Lay
deprivations with regard to Spirituals, is of intolerable mischievous
consequence, as granting to the Laity Principles, by which they may ruin us
when they please; and that this pernicious Doctrine cannot well be opposed in
this Case, but by our Bishops insisting on their Rights. And they cannot show
but when Doctrines of such consequence were concerned, the Bishops not only
did, but were also commended for insisting on their Rights. Indeed where such
Doctrines were concerned, the Ancients would have called the Adversaries
Heretics, and in that case this Author himself allows, that Bishops may judge
it to be for the public Good of the Church, that they challenge their private
Rights. Yet after all our Author's Pretensions in his Title, his Examples give
a small account of the Sense of the injured Bishops themselves concerning their
own Case, but principally pretend to tell us what others thought concerning it.
How then can our Adversaries pretend to persuade our present Bishops to wave
their Right, upon account of this Collection of Precedents, where St.
Chrysostom is expressly excepted in the very Title, notwithstanding what is
pretended from Palladius; and where withal there are so few examples observed
in the Discourse it self, of any who did so before them?

13. Yet, to let them see how far this Way of Reasoning is from proving the
thing our Adversaries are concerned for, 4. Nor unless such Non-adherence was
thought justifiable by Principles, and with regard to Conscience,
we may venture to give, not grant, what they neither have proved, nor can
prove from the Instances here alleged, that the Churches had deserted their
unjustly and invalidly deprived Bishops, and deserted them, even whilst they
insisted on their Right; I yet deny farther, That from the naked Matters of
Fact they can any way conclude, even the Judgments of those Churches, whom we
may for a while suppose to have done what our Adversaries wish they had done:
For in order to the proving the Judgment of such Churches, it will be farther
requisite, fourthly, That what they did, they did by Principles by which they
thought they could justify their Facts, at least with regard to their own
Consciences. It is certainly no breach of Charity to suppose, (what Histories
afford us so many Examples of,) that as numerous Bodies as were here concerned,
even of Persons making a great Profession of Religion, have notwithstanding
been influenced by Motives very different from what themselves professed. And
it is certain, that in this lower Antiquity, wherein this Author principally
deals, the Generality of Christians were both ignorant enough in true Originals
of our Religion, to be mistaken concerning their Duty; and withal wicked enough
to be seduced from the Practice of it, though they had never so thoroughly
understood it. So easy it was for what was done, not to have been done by
Principles, though it had been determined by the greater number of Suffrages.
Who knows not that in great Bodies the ignorant and the wicked have generally
the greatest number of Suffrages, who notwithstanding cannot be presumed to do
what they do by any solid Principles? Yet who withal knows not how few are
many times concerned in the Motions of whole Bodies; and how far what they do
is, upon that account, from being imputable to a Majority of Suffrages? I do
not now insist on the greater Numbers, who are in Duty obliged rather to follow
the Conduct of others, than to show their Opinion distinct from that of their
Conductors: Even Spiritual Guides, and those in Spiritual Authority, are not
for the greatest part the best and wisest; and yet the Nature of Societies
requires, that the fewest able and good Men should be determined by the
Majority; that is, that they who are the most likely to know Principles, and to
be influenced by them, should be concluded by those who are least skillful in
Principles, and are withal least presumable to act by Principles. And in that
case who can presume, that the Actings of such Bodies are agreeable to the
Principles of the Actors themselves? Especially who can presume it then, when
the Cases of Ignorance and Insincerity are most frequent, as they were most
certainly in many of the Instances here amassed at a great distance from the
Apostles, and in great Ignorance of the Originals of Religion; and when withal
worldly Prosperity had taken them off from regarding Principles, or being
willing to suffer for them. The very least signification of Principles, where
they are not expressly owned, is that good Men are pleased and satisfied with
what they do. But as this Reasoning does only hold in Men who are otherwise
known to be good, so from Matters of Fact alone none can gather, whether the
Actors be secretly pleased with what they do, or whether they be not really
ashamed of it.

14. Thus difficult it is to conclude Principles, even where the Matters of
Fact attested are Actions: But it is yet more difficult, fifthly, 5. Nor is it
easy to gather Principles from Non-actions: Such are not chalenging Right on
the Bishops part, or not adhering to them on the Subjects part.
Where they are not Actions but Omissions. Such are these we are now
discoursing of, whether of Bishops not insisting on their Rights, or of their
Subjects not seconding them when they did insist on them. In either Case it is
extremely difficult to gather, that pure regard to Conscience was the true
Reason of such Omissions: That is, that when any injured Bishops did not insist
on their Rights, the Reason was, that they thought themselves obliged in
Conscience not to insist on them, as being chargable with the Schism, which
would follow from the Intruders maintaining their Possession against them. And
that when Subjects did not second them in the Assertion of their own Rights,
the true Reason was, that such Subjects also did not think themselves obliged
to second them, even in Conscience. Many other Reasons might have been given in
both Cases, besides this of Conscience, which our Adversaries are concerned
that it should have been the only Reason: Many, which will by no means reach
our present Case, to prove either that our present Bishops are obliged in
Conscience by those Precedents not to challenge their Rights; or that we are
not obliged, on their callenging them, to maintain them in them. One Reason
might have been the Vnactiveness of their Temper naturally following from their
Monkish Education, which might make them willing to be excused from a Life of
Labor and Action; especially when it might withal seem to have so many
commendable Ingredients to a Mind willing to be excused, of native Bashfulness,
of Modesty, of Humility, of Self-denial to themselves, without considering on
the other side the public Interest^ that might balance them. Another might be
the great Difficulties to be expected in asserting their Rights, and the great
Uncertainty of the Event which must depend upon the Concurrence of many others,
who must all do their Duty, as well as themselves, and yet could not be
depended on. Another might be the great Danger to their Persons, as well as the
Difficulty of their Design, when they had to contest with exasperated as well
as potent Adversaries. These are the more plausible, and more pardonable
Inducements, to which might be added many more real though corrupt ones, which,
to be sure, would never be owned openly. It is needless to enumerate them
particularly, and yet not uncharitable in the general to suppose them possible,
till something appear particularly in the Lives and Principles of the Persons
concerned, to believe their Case to have been particular. It is certain all the
Endeavors of Bishops to assert their own Rights can signify nothing, unless
they who owe them Duty will stand by them in it. And we know withal upon how
ticklish Points the Motions of Multitudes do depend, even where they are well
disposed to their Duty, and are particularly satisfied that the Case proposed
is so. They also reckon upon the Difficulties and Dangers that must befall each
particular, if all cannot be persuaded to move together; and that is a thing
they know not how to reckon on. And thus whilst all expect the other should
move first, and each of them is afraid of moving singly; whilst all depend on
a few Examples, and those few are afraid of not being followed as Examples,
the Season of Motion is lost, and no likelihood of its recovery, when their
hopes of the concurrence of others is lost, and each is to act separately. All
that Principles can oblige Men to, is only to do the thing to which they are
obliged by Principles: But affirmative Precepts do not, as they say, oblige ad
semper; and therefore they are not obliged to put the Duty in Practice, till it
be prudent, or till the Circumstances with which the Action is vested make it a
Duty: And that Men often resolve on, who yet by such Delays find that what was
at first resolved on, at length becomes unpracticable. How unreasonable would
it be thence to conclude, that they never resolved on it, or that they did not
think it their Duty to resolve on it!

6. Nor do the Instances here produced prove the Sense of the Catholic Church,
but of the Greek, especially of the Constantinopolitane Church. Nor even of
that Church in the first and earliest Ages.
15. Thus very difficult this whole Reasoning is, from Instances barely
represented, to gather the Judgment and Opinions of the Persons concerned in
these Instances. And yet if this Point were gained, it would not suffice for
our Adversaries purpose: For it is farther considerable, sixthly, That the
Instances here collected rise no higher than the Fourth Century, and extend no
farther than the Greek Church; and therefore cannot pretend to argue the Sense
of the Catholic Church, nor of those Ages which are most to be regarded, not
only for their Antiquity, but their Integrity also. Suppose therefore we
should so far gratify our Adversaries, as to give them leave to believe, that
all was proved that is so much as offered at in this Collection, and proved as
solidly and as pertinently to their Cause, as themselves can either pretend or
wish: This would certainly be a great Favor, indeed the uttermost they can
hope for with regard to this Collection; yet still they must not pretend by
this Collection to one single Instance that may signify the sense of the
Western Church, or consequently of the Catholic Church in any one Age* Still
we are left a liberty, for any thing is said here, to challenge the Doctrine of
the Church, as signified by her behavior at the first and ancientest Instances
of Schism, as making for us. And this we can do with greater Certainty and
Evidence, than our Adversaries can pretend to, in their more Modern Cases.

16. We can say that, even in the Age of St. Cyprian, The Doctrine of the
Catholic Church in the earliest Ages may (for what appears from this
Collection) be on our side, and indeed is so. 1st. The whole Church then owned
no^ Power in the secular Magistrate for depriving Bishops as to Spirituals, not
even as to their particular Districts.
(which is the ancientest we know of that an Antibishop was set up against a
Bishop in the same See,) it is, 1st very notorious, that they then owned no
such Power of the secular Magistrate to deprive Bishops of their purely
spiritual Power; and that the Church, as a Society distinct from the State,
subsisted on their not owning it, even as to a Deprivation of their particular
Districts and Jurisdictions. It is notorious, and as notorious as any one
Tradirion of the Catholic Church in those Ages, (not excepting that of the
Canon of the New Testament it self,) that Christians then, and not only then,
but in all the former Persecutions that had been from the times of the Apostles
to that very Age, did own themselves bound to adhere to their Bishops, when it
was notorious withal, that those Bishops were set up, and maintained against
the Consent of the Civil Magistrate. It is as notorious also, that this
adherence of theirs, was not only Matter of Fact (which is all our Adversaries
pretend here) but a Duty owned by them as obliging in Conscience, and as the
result of Principles. This appears, not only by the unquestionable Sincerity of
the Christians of those Ages, who were generously influenced by no
Considerations, but those of Conscience; not only by their suffering those
severe Penances imposed on them, in order to their recovering the Bishop's
Communion, even when the Magistrate was against him, which no other
Considerations could recommend, but only those of Conscience: but from the
Principles themselves insisted on in the Reasonings of St. Cyprian. Such were
these: That all hopes of pardon of Sin, of the Holy Ghost, of Eternal Life, on
performance of Duty, were confined to the visible Communion of the Church; that
their visible Communion with the Church could not appear, but by their visible
Communion with the Bishop, as the Head of that Church, and the Principle of its
Unity; that who that Bishop was, to whom any particular Person owed his Duty,
was not then any otherwise distinguishable, but by the visible Districts in
which themselves lived, and to which he was therefore supposed to have a Title,
whether the Magistrate would or no. It is also as notorious, that these
Reasonings were not then the sense of private Persons; but the received sense
of Christians in general, and indeed Fundamental to that Catholic Communion,
which was then maintained wherever there were Christians. Not only every
particular Christian of a Diocese, did thus assure himself of his Right to
Ecclesiastical Privileges, by his Communion with the Bishop of that particular
District; but he was entitled also to Communion with all the other Bishops of
the World, and consequently with the Catholic Church in general, by the
communicatory Letters of the Bishop of his own particular District. For it was
by the mutual Obligation all Bishops of the World had to ratify the Acts of
particular Districts, that he who was admitted a Member of one Church, was
entitled to the Communion of all; and that he who was excluded from one; was
excluded from others also; because no other Bishop could justify his reception
of a Christian of another Jurisdiction to his own Communion, if he had not the
communicatory Letters of his own Bishop. Thus it appears, that the Obligation,
even of particular Districts without consent of the Magistrate, was then
Catholic Doctrine. Whence it plainly follows, that this Lay-deprivation, which
is all that can be pretended in the case of our present Bishops, is, in the
Principles of the Catholic Church of St. Cyprian's Age, a perfect Nullity, and
consequently that, in regard to Conscience at least, our present Bishops are
still Bishops, and Bishops of those particular Districts, as much as ever, and
the Obligations of the Clergy and Laity in those Districts, as obliging to them
now as ever.

Thence it follows 2dly that Antibi^hops consecrated in Districts, no other way
(...) than by the Power of the secular Magistrate, are by the Principles of
that earliest Catholic Church, no Bishops at all, but divided from the Church.
17. This therefore being so, that our present Bishops are, by the Principles of
St. Cyprian's Age, as obliging Bishops in Conscience to the Clergy and Laity of
their respective Jurisdictions; it will thence be as notorious 2dly, that the
Antibishops of those same Jurisdictions, are by the same Principles, to be
taken for no Bishops at all. It is plain, that Novatian was disowned as soon as
ever it appeared that Cornelius was canonically settled in Fabian's Chair
before him, and disowned universally, so universally, that whoever did not
disown him, was for that very reason disowned himself. This is as clear as any
particular mentioned in our Adversaries Collection. But we do not satisfy our
selves with that. It is also further as notorious, that he was disowned by
Principles obliging them in Conscience to disown him, and those again not
private Opinions, but Principles also Fundamental to the Correspondence then
maintained in the whole Catholic Church, as the other were that we mentioned
under the former Head. It was then a Principle, that Epist. 57. ad Antonianum,
in the Oxon Edition of St. Cyprian.
Secundus was Nullus, which will as much invalidate the Consecrations of the
present Antibishops, as it did that of Novatian. This is a Principle so
universally acknowledged, wherever there can be but one, that it needs no
Authorities to recommend it. No Man can convey the same thing twice: and
therefore if there be two Bonds for the same thing to several Persons, the 2 d
can never be thought obliging, but by supposing the Invalidity of the 1 st. So
also in all Monarchichal Districts, none can suppose an Antimonarch's Title
good, till he has shown that the first Monarch's Title is not so. Thus this
Principle needed no Authority, and yet it had all the Authority of the whole
Catholic Church of that Age. The whole Collegium of Catholic Bishops (that is
St. Cyprian's Term) gave their Communicatory Letters, not to Novatian, but
Cornelius; and received none to their own Communion on the Communicatory
Letters of Novatian, but only on those of Cornelius. And that upon this same
common Principle, that Cornelius being once validly Bishop of Rome, Novatian
could never be a Bishop of that same District without the Death, or Cession, or
Deprivation of Cornelius; and that supposing him no Bishop of that place to
which he was consecrated, he could be no Bishop at all. So far they were then
from our late Fancy of a Bishop of the Catholic Church without a particular
District. Had they thought so, they might have ratified Novatian's Acts as a
Bishop, because he had received his Power from Bishops, though not as Bishop of
Rome. Comparing the Catholic Church to a Fanum or Temple, he was Profanus, as
not being in the Temple, nor having a Right to enter into it. Comparing it to
the House in which the Passover was to be eaten by the Jews, he was Foris, not
in that House, in which alone the Passover was to be eaten. These were the
Notions of St. Cyprian, and were by him and his Colleagues understood of the
Catholic Church in general, when they all supposed Novatian out of the
Catholic in general, by being out of that particular Church of Rome, of which
he had formerly been a Member. Just as in ordinary Excommunications, they also
always supposed, that he who was by any Act of obliging Authority deprived of
his Right to his own particular Church, had also lost his Right thereby to all
the particular Churches in the World. And they also supposed Novatian to have
cast himself out of his own Body, by assuming to himself the name of a Head of
that Body, which already had a Head, and could have no more than one. And these
Notions, and this Language of St. Cyprian, were supposed and owned universally
by the whole Body of the Catholic Bishops of his Time, when they acted
consequently to them, and took them for the Measures, by which they either
granted, or refused their own Communion. Nor is it to be thought strange, that
these Notions should be received, and received universally, not as the Opinions
of private Persons, but as the public Doctrine, and Fundamental to the
Catholic Communion, as practiced, not only in that early Age of St. Cyprian,
but as derived from the Apostles themselves, and the very first Originals of
Christianity: For these were not, as private Opinions usually were, only the
result of private Reasonings; they were received as the Fundamentals of
Christianity, which were not as new Revelations generally were from the like
Notions received among the Jews, and among them received not as private
Opinions, but as public Doctrines, and Fundamental to the then practiced
Sacrifical Communion of the then peculiar People, and only thence deduced (as
other things also are, in the Reasonings of the New Testament) to the Case of
the new Mystical Peculium, and their new Mystical Sacrifices. The Language of
erecting Altar against Altar in St. Cyprian, is derived from the like earlier
Language received among the Jews, concerning the Samaritan Altar of Manasses,
against the Jerusalem Altar of Jaddus, that is of a High Priest against a High
Priest, when God had appointed but one High Priest in the whole World, and Him
only at Jerusalem. And it is also plain, that the Body of the Jews did look on
such Schismatical High Priests, and all their Communicants, as cut off from the
Body of their Peculium, and consequently from all their public Sacrifices, and
all the Privileges consequent to them. Why should we therefore think it
strange, that the Apostolical Christians should have the like Opinion of them,
who set up themselves as opposite Heads of their Mystical Sacrifices?

And 3dly, that all who profess themselves one with Antibishops so divided from
the Church were (in consequence to the same Principles) themselves divided
also. St. Cypr. Epist. 43 Edit. Oxon.
18. But this is not all. It is further as notorious, 3dly, that all who any way
professed themselves one with Novatian, were for that very reason of their
doing so, taken for divided from the Catholic Church, as well as he was with
whom they were united. Here also the reason was very evident, that he who
professed, and, by public Profession, made himself one with a Person divided,
must, by the same Analogy of Interpretation, profess himself divided, and by
that very profession, actually divide himself also, by making himself one with
the Person supposed to be divided. Nor was this reason more evident, than
universally aknowledged in the Discipline of that Age. All such Vniters with
the Schismatic, were refused to be admitted to Communion, not by particular
Bishops only (as the Case would have been if the Opinion had been singular) but
by all the Bishops of one Communion in the World.

And 4thly, that all who were United with Novatian, and by consequence divided
from the Church of the Roman District were (in the Discipline of that early Age
looked upon as themselves divided also from the Catholic Church.
19. Not only so: But it is also as notorious, 4thly, from the Practice and
Discipline of that Age, that all whom they looked upon as united with Novatian,
they consequently looked on as divided from themselves. To be sure in the first
place, those who had any hand in his pretended Consecration, which were
principally and particularly reflected on by Cornelius in his Epistle to Fabius
of Antioch. Nor would his People be received to Communion by any Catholic
Bishop on the Communicatory Letters of Novatian, and they could expect none
from Cornelius whilst they were divided from him. Thus all his Subjects came to
be involved, as well as himself. But that which was highest of all, was, that
even Bishops were supposed to have divided themselves from their Brethren, if
they communicated with him; that is, if, according to the custom of that Age,
they either gave communicatory Letters to him, or received any to their own
Communion on the like Communicatory Letters received from him. This appeared
plainly in the Case of Martian of Arles, who was, on this very account, denied
the Communicatory Letters of his Brethren; and would, no doubt, have appeared
also in the Case of Fabius of Antioch, if he had proceeded so far. And this
does plainly suppose, that such Bishops also had cut themselves off from
Catholic Communion by their own Act. Especially according to St. Cyprian's
Principles, who makes every Bishop in his own District, supreme and accountable
to none but God; and therefore obnoxious to no superior Jurisdiction. And by
this means it also appeared, to have been more than a private Opinion in that
Age, when even no Bishop could be permitted in the Communion of his Brethren,
if he dissented from them in this particular. Thus, to make application to our
present Case, all the Bishops will be involved, who Communicate either with the
Principal Schismatics, or the Schismatical Consecrators. And this will also
take in, by the same Principles, all Communicants with such Bishops. For when
the Bishop was refused Communion, the effect of such refusal was, that none
should thence forwards expect to be received to the Communion of those who had
refused him, on his Communicatory Letters; and no other Communicatory Letters
could be hoped for, whilst they continued in Communion with him.

20. And then, 5thly, It is also as notorious, on the same Principles of St.
Cyprian's Age, And 5ly, that all who were (on these Principles) thought divided
from the visible communion of the Catholic Church, were also, (on the same
Principles) thought deprived of all the Invisible benefits, of Church Communion.

Vid. St. Cyp. de Unitate Eccl. Ep. 49. Edit. Ox. Ep. 52.54.55.


that such Schism from the visible Communion of the Catholic Church, was also
supposed to deprive the Person so divided of all the invisible Benefits of
Church Communion. God was supposed obliged to ratify in Heaven, what was done
by those whom he authorized to represent him on Earth. He avenged the Contempts
of his Ministers, and would not be a Father to those, who would not own his
Church for their Mother, by paying her a Filial respect. They were not to
expect any pardon of their Sins: They could not hope for the Holy Ghost, who
dissolved the Unity of the Spirit: They were incapable of the Crown of
Martyrdom, whatever they suffered in the state of Separation. This is the
result of many of St. Cyprian's Discourses on this Argument: And indeed it is
very agreeable with the Design of God, that they who cut themselves off from
the Peculium, should by their doing so, lose all their pretensions to the
Rights and Privileges of it. Not only so, but that they should also incur all
the Mischiefs to which they were supposed liable, who had lost their Right of
being Members of the peculiar People. Accordingly as they believed all Persons,
at their first admission into the Church, to be turned from Darkness to Light,
and from the Power of Satan unto God; so upon their leaving the Church, or
their being cast out of it by the judicial Act of their Superiors, they were
supposed to return into the state of Heathens, to lose the Protection of those
good Spirits who minister only to the Heirs of Salvation, and again to relapse
into their former condition of Darkness, and being consequently obnoxious to be
infested by the Devil, and his Powers of Darkness. And that this was so,
appeared by several ordinary Experiments in those earlier Ages, not only of the
Apostles, but that also of St. Cyprian, who has many Examples of it in his Book
de Lapsis. And this confinement of the Spiritual Privileges of the peculiar
People to the External Communion of the Church, as it was Fundamental to their
Discipline, so it was rational consequently to their other Principles. God was
not thought obliged to confer those Privileges, but by the Act of those whom
himself had authorized to oblige him: But Dividers were supposed not to belong
to that Body to which the Promises were made; and ambitious Intruders into
other Men's Offices, could not in any Equity pretend to have their Acts
ratified by God, from whom they could not be supposed to receive any Authority,
when they did not receive it by the Rules and Orders of the Society established
by him. These things were then believed, and believed universally. Indeed
nothing but an universal Belief of them would have maintained that Discipline,
which was then observed in the Church; could have obliged them generally to
suffer, as they did then, the severest Inflictions from the Magistrate, rather
than incurr the much more feared Displeasure of their Ecclesiastical
Superiors. When we are also of the same Mind, and alike influenced by
Principles and Regard to Conscience; then indeed, and then alone, we may
pretend to be a Posterity not degenerous from the great Examples of those
glorious Ancestors: Then it will not be in the Power of Acts of Parliament to
drive us from our Principles, and bring a Scandal on our Religion: Then where
our Bishops follow Christ, we shall follow them, and it will not be in the
Power of the Worldly Magistrate, or the Gates of Hell it self, to prevail
against our Church, and to dissolve the Union between us: Then Magistrates
themselves will be more wary of involving Consciences on occasion of their
little Worldly Politics; at least they will not pretend Religion, and the
Religion of that very Church which suffers by them for doing so. May we live at
length to see that happy day! However it will hence appear how impossible it
will be to excuse our Adversaries present Case from Schism, if it be tried by
that Antiquity which we do indeed profess to imitate and allege.

21. These Doctrines of the Catholic Church in St. Cyprian's Age, were also
Doctrines of the Catholic Church in the Age of Optatus and St. Augustine.
Now in this Case I am discoursing of, I have purposely selected the Instances
of St. Cyprian's Age rather than any other, not only because they are the
ancientest, indeed the first we know of, of one Bishop's invading another's
Chair not vacant; but because we have withal in him the most distinct account
of the Sense of the Church in his Age of such Facts, and of the Principles on
which they proceeded in condemning them. He had occasion given him to be so
distinct by two Schisms, one of his own Church in Carthage, where Felicissimus
was set up against himself, another (that I have principally insisted on) of
Novatian set up against Cornelius in Rome. On these Occasions he has written
one just Discourse, besides several Epistles. But these Principles were not
singular and proper to that Age; they descended lower, and are insisted on by
Optatus and St. Augustine in their Disputes with the Donatists, whenever they
dispute the Question of their Schism, without relation to their particular
Opinions.

22. Till our Adversaries can disarm us of the advantage we have from the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church, signified on occasion of these earliest
Instances of Schism in St. Cyprian's Age, their Authors Collection of later
Instances, were it never so pertinent to their purpose, can do them no Service.
And now what can our Adversaries gain, though we should grant them all they
can ask concerning their Collection, till they be able to disarm us of these
earlier Authorities, neither mentioned, nor perhaps so much as thought of, by
their Author? Till they do so, we have all the Advantages against them that our
Cause does need, or we desire. They give us a bare Collection of Facts, without
any other Evidence of the Principles on which they were transacted than the
Facts themselves: We give them here a contrary Fact of Persons of
unquestionable Sincerity to Principles, and not only so, but the Principles
themselves on which they proceeded, acknowledged by the Persons themselves.
They give us Facts of the Greek Church only: We give them one, wherein the
sense of the whole Catholic Church appeared, not of the Greeks alone, but of
the Latins also. They give us those of Modern, of Barbarous, of Divided Ages,
wherein the great Bodies of the Eastern and Western Churches were divided in
Communion, the Eastern Churches particularly, (within which their Instances are
confined) into Nestorians, and several subdivided Sects of Eutychians; who yet,
if they had been more unanimous, were otherwise no very competent Witnesses of
Apostolical Tradition, not only in regard of their Age, but their Corruptness,
their Unskillfulness, their Credulity: We here have given them the sense of the
Church, in an Age wherein her Testimony is every way unexceptionable, wherein
she had certain means of knowing the Truth, and withal valued it as it
deserved. Even there we find the Principles now mentioned universally received,
and universally received as the grounds of that universal Catholic Communion,
which she had received by an uninterrupted Tradition from the Apostles to that
very Time. Even there, I say, we find them received, where nothing could have
been received universally that had been an Innovation. In so short a time it
was hard to bring in Variations from the Primitive Rule, and harder yet that
all the Churches could have been unanimous in them, if they had been Variations
as Tertullian reasons in his Prescriptions; especially when there was no
Universal Authority received over the whole Catholic Church that could induce
them to it. From the Time of Trajan, the Succession of our Savior's Family
failed in the Church of Jerusalem, to which all particular Churches paid a
deference. From the Time of Hadrian, there could be no pretense for that Church
above others, when it consisted not of Jews, but Greeks and Romans. What was
there therefore that could make them unanimous in Variations, and Variations of
such Importance as this had been? They had then no General Councils: And the
absolute Supremacy of particular Bishops in their proper Districts, is by none
maintained more expressly, and more zealously than by St. Cyprian, with
particular regard to all other Powers, that in later times have pretended to
oblige Bishops; that is, to Councils, and the Bishop of Rome. This Catholic
Communion, grounded on the common Interest of all the Bishops, to have all
their Acts of Discipline in their particular Dictricts, ratified over the whole
World, might have brought in other things that were consequential to these
common Interests. But there was nothing antecedent that can be imagined, that
could have brought in this Catholic Communion of those times, among such a
multitude of absolute and independent Societies, as the Churches were then, if
it had not been brought in from their very first Originals. And yet these
Notions we were speaking of, were Fundamental to that Catholic Communion it
self, as managed in those earlier Ages. Let them therefore make their uttermost
advantage of those Instances, which our Adversaries call Precedents, in later
Ages. This is however plain: If they be not found inconsistent with these
earlier Instances, they can make nothing for their purpose: If they be; yet
none can doubt, but that later Deviations, how numerous soever, are to be
overruled and concluded by the Precedents of these first and earliest
Instances, not so much as mentioned by their Author.

23. Yet after all, though we should admit that this Author had been
successful in all that he has attempted; 7ly, This Author himself allows a
Separation in Case of Heresy. And with that our Adversaries are chargeable,
1st, as they do not only separate, but justify their Separation by Principles.
we may yet justify our adherence to the deprived Bishops, and our Separation
from their opposite Altars, and justify it too by the Doctrine of their own
Author: For, 7thly, Even he permits a Separation where Orthodoxy is concerned,
and expressly excepts this Case, from the number of those which he pretends to
confute. An Heretical Bishop he calls a false Bishop, a false Teacher; and
tells us that they who separate from such, do not divide the Unity of the
Church by Schism, but endeavor to free the Church from Schisms and Divisions.
These are his own Words in the Conclusion of his Discourse. I easily foresee
this Charge will seem new and surprising to our Adversaries; and yet I cannot
see how they can secure themselves against it. St. Augustine observes, that
Schisms generally end in Heresy: That is the natural consequence of defending
it as our Adversaries do, by Principles. A single Act of Vndutifulness to
Superiors will in course pass away with those who are guilty of it; so that
Posterity will not be concerned in it: But when it is defended by Principles,
it turns into false Doctrine, and Doctrine of that pernicious Consequence, that
the Church is obliged to take notice of it, as she will be faithful to her
Trust, in securing her Body from the like Divisions for the future. Thus the
Donatists took the first occasion for their Schism, from the pretended personal
Faults of Caecilian and his Ordainers. This, whilst it was a particular Case,
went no farther than that particular Schism: But when it turned into a general
Doctrine, that personal Faults were sufficient to justify Separation; then it
laid a Foundation of frequent Schisms, as often as any Criminals got into
Places of Trust, and either Evidence was wanting, or themselves too powerful to
be contested with: Then it concerned Ecclesiastical Governors to condemn this
Doctrine, that encouraged even Men of Conscience to divide designedly and
frequently. And when that Doctrine was thus condemned by the Church, and was
notwithstanding maintained by the Donatists as a Principle on which they
subsisted as an opposite Communion, it then became a Character of a Party to
maintain it, and from that time forward the Donatists were reckoned among
Heretics, as well as Schismatics: For this was the true Notion of Heresy in
those Ages, as contradistinct from Schism: Both of them supposed a Division of
Communion, or tended to it. But that Division was called Schism, which only
broke the Political Union of the Society, without any difference of Principles;
as when Thieves or Robbers transgress their Duties without any pretense of
Principles authorizing them to do so. So whilst Resentment alone was the reason
that made Subjects separate from the Communion of their Ecclesiastical
Governors, or whilst Ambition alone made any to invade the Office of his
Bishop, and to erect an opposite Communion; this was Schism properly so called
as contradistinct from Heresy. But when the Schism is patronized by Doctrines,
and justified as well done, and consistently with Conscience; such Divisions,
besides their being Schismatical, were Heretical also in the sense of the
Ancients, and such Doctrines, as Characteristical of a distinct Communion, were
properly called Heresies. On this account the same Doctrine of the Original
Identity of Bishops and Presbyters was no Heresy in St. Hierome, who
notwithstanding kept Communion with the Bishops of the Jurisdictions he lived
in; and yet was Heresy in A^erius, when upon account of that pretended
Identity he presumed to pay no more Duty to the Bishops of the respective
Jurisdictions, than he would have done to single Presbyters. This is the most
agreeable account of the Heresies, not only in Philastrius, but in other more
judicious Collectors of Catalogues of Heresies. And it is very agreeable with
the Notion of that Term among the Philosophers, from whom the Christians
derived it. All Notions that were proper and characteristical to particular
Schools among them made Heresies, not those which were received in Common among
them. Answerably whereunto those Differences only of Opinion made Heresies in
the Church, which were the Notes of different Communions, not those which went
no farther than Speculation.

24. I am very well aware how surprising this will be to those who, upon
Popular Opinions, Separation on account of Opinions, is by so much the less
excusable if the Opinions be not Fundamental.
have been used to believe no Opinion Heresy that was not against
Fundamentals. But if they will for a while lay aside their Prejudices, they
will possibly find this as slightly grounded as many other Popular Opinions
are. The very distinction between Fundamentals and Non-Fundamentals, is not,
that I know of, ever taken notice of by the Primitive Christians, either in the
same or in equivalent Terms. And if a Person will needs make a breach on
account of an Opinion, it rather aggravates, than diminishes his Guilt, that
the Opinion is of little consequence: His own Will is more concerned in it;
that is, his (...); and he is therefore more a Heretic, and as Heretics were,
more self-condemned, Tit. 3.2 if, even in his own Opinion, the Matter for which
he separates, be not of any considerable Importance. Even a Truth, and a Truth
that has great Evidenct of its being so, may make a Heresy, if it be no way
conducive nor disadvantageous to the good of Souls; and yet the Person who
maintains it, will by no means endure Communion with those who are of another
Mind. He might have more pretense of Zeal, though mistaken, if the Mistake on
the Church's side did indeed concern Souls, and seemed, at least, of dangerous
consequence to them. When he has not even that to pretend for himself, who can
impute his breaking on such accounts to any other Original than an assuming
Imperiousness of Temper, and a love of Contention, which we generally
acknowledge to be the principal Ingredients of Heresy? Certain it is, that
such a breach for Opinions, though true, yet of no consequence, is highly
culpable, and destructive to that Unity, which Christ designed for his Church,
and the more culpable for that very reason, that the Opinion is of little
consequence. Yet it cannot properly be called Schism, which is only a breach
like those which fall out frequently in secular Affairs, when Men fall into
Parties, on account of a Temper ungovernable, or ambitious, without any proper
difference of Opinion and Doctrine. And it being no Schism, what can we call it
in the Discipline of the Church, if it be not Heresy?

Such Opinions then begin to ^e Heretical, when they cause an actual Separation
as the Latitudinarian Opinions do now in our Adversaries.
25. These Opinions therefore which are not otherwise Heretical on account of
the Nature of the Opinions themselves, do then begin to be Heretical, when they
begin to be characteristical of distinct Communions. And that they do, not only
when Men designedly separate from others on that very account because they are
not of the same Opinions; but also when they venture on such Practices on
account of their singular Opinions, wherein others cannot communicate with
them, for that very reason because they cannot join with them in those their
singular Opinions. Then plainly the differing in such Opinions, makes a
difference of Communion unavoidable; and therefore the Opinions themselves, in
such a Case as this is, are Signals of different Communions, which will come
under the charge of Heresy, as contradistinct from Schism, in the Notion now
described of the Primitive Church. Thus; had St. Hierome proceeded as far as
Aerius in the Practice of his Opinion concerning the Original Identity of
Bishops and Presbyters, and had thereupon broken himself off from his Duty to
the Bishop of the Diocese, and by that means either made or countenanced a
Schism, which he had never countenanced but on account of this Doctrine of his
which he held in Common with the Aerians, that Doctrine had then been Heresy
in him, as well as the Aerians. So also Opinions do then begin to be
Treasonable, when they are actually productive of Treasonable Actions: Thus
Latitudinarian Opinions in the Church, do always weaken or dissolve the
Obligation in Conscience to maintain the Church as a Society in a time of
Persecution from the Civil Magistrate; yet till that Case fall out, and when
Interest lies on the Church's side, they often still keep one Communion who are
for such Opinions, and may continue in it while there are any other Inducements
to keep them in it besides those of Conscience Only it may perhaps be fit to be
considered whether it be prudent to trust such Persons with the Management of
the Government of the Church, who have no Obligation of Principles or
Conscience to maintain it as an independent Society, or to suffer for it, that
is, indeed who are never likely to maintain it in that very Case which was most
in our Savior's and the Apostles v^ew; that is, of a Persecution. But when
they actually divide that Communion which they were never obliged in Conscience
to maintain, if they took the utmost liberty their Latitudinarian Principles
would afford them; and when their lax Principles are the very grounds of their
dividing the Communion without any remorse of Conscience for doing so; when
they are hereby emboldned to do those things which inevitably cause a breach
from those who cannot follow them in these very Principles: This is the Case
wherein these Principles are Characters of a distinct Communion; and therefore,
by the Reasoning now mentioned, become Heretical: Especially the Principles
being withal false, not only in the Opinion of those from whom they have
divided themselves; but also of our earliest purest Ancestors, even those of
the Apostolical Age it self.

26. Yet I deny not but that in this Case of Heresy, there is also regard to
be had to the momentousness of the Opinion it self. 2. Even as He^^sie
sign^fies an error in Fundamentals. The Church's being a Society is a
fundamental Doctrine.
Whoever sets up or abets a Communion opposite to that of the Church, on
account of Opinions, is, as I have shown, in the Judgment of the Primitive
Church, an Heretic; and is the more, not the less so, if the Opinions be also
frivolous. But for such Opinions the Church would never have driven him out of
her own Communion, if himself had been pleased to have continued in it. Her
Judiciary Censures ought, no^doubt, to be confined to Opinions Fundamental and
of great Importance; especially, if an internal Assent be required, and that
under pain of Excommunication. Yet let not our Adversaries flatter themselves
as if they were secure from the charge even of this Notion of Heresy, as it
signifies an erring, even in Fundamentals also. I know very well, Men have
hitherto considered the Church rather as a Sect, than as a Society; and have
therefore usually had no regard to the Doctrines Fundamental to it as a
Society, if they did not withal concern it as a Sect, and Antecedently to its
being a Society. But there seems very little Reason for their doing so, if they
will be pleased impartially to reflect on it. It is very true, its Notion as a
Sect is antecedent to its being a Society, because it is a Society into which
Men find themselves obliged to enter by the Doctrines they must be supposed to
believe, if they own it as a Sect. But even thence it appears, that the
Doctrines which concern it as a Sect, do withal make it necessary it should be
a Society. These two Considerations therefore are by no means to be separated.
Nay it hence appears, that the Doctrines constituting it as a Sect, do also by
a near, and unavoidable, and evident Consequence, make it a Society. Thus
therefore the Fundamentals of its being a Society, will be included in that
System of Doctrines which concern it as a Sect. And then what Matter is it that
one of these Notions is antecedent and the other consequent? Thus much at least
will follow, that there is no subverting it as a Society, without subverting it
also as a Sect; because those very Doctrines which make it a Sect, do also
consequently oblige it to be a Society. For my part I believe those Doctrines
of the Trinity and Incarnation, which all who believe any Fundamentals proper
to the Christian Religion as revealed by God, do reckon among Fundamentals, not
to have been revealed for Speculation only, but purposely to oblige Men to
unite in it as a Society. The Unity in Trinity, which is the principal thing
insisted on in the Doctrine of the Trinity as revealed in the Scripture, was
purposely to let Men see the Extent of the Mystical Union to which they were
entitled by the External Union with the visible Church, that by partaking in
the Orthodox Communion, the (...) mentioned by St. John, they had also a (...)
with the Father and the Son, 1. John 1.3. For it was manifest they must also
partake of the Spirit, because he who had not the Spirit of Christ was none of
his. It was therefore supposed that by partaking of the Trinity we are made one
Mystically, and that by being united visibly to the Church, we are entitled to
that Mystical Union. So whoever is united visibly to the Church is thereby, if
he be not wanting to himself in due Conditions, united also Mystically to the
Trinity; and that whoever is divided externally from the Church, is thereby
also dis^united from this Communion and Union with the Trinity. And what more
prevailing Inducements could be thought of to oblige Men to keep in a Society?
So also the design of the Incarnation was, by Christ's taking upon him our Body
and our Flesh, to make us also one Body and one Flesh with him, thereby to
entitle our Bodies to a Resurrection; but then our being one Body and one Flesh
with him, depended on our being Members of the Church, which is called his
Body, his Flesh, his Bones. We were to be baptized into this one Body, and
become one Body by partaking of one Bread. Which plainly show that all the
benefits of the Incarnation are derived to us by our partaking of the
Sacraments, and therefore by our adhering inseparably to them who alone are
authorized by God to administer them. Thus plain it is that those very
Fundamentals of our revealed Religion as revealed, are revealed and designed
for this purpose of making the Church a Society. How can therefore our
Adversaries make these Doctrines Fundamental, if this be not Fundamental also,
that the Church was by God designed to be a Society?

27. This at least is certain, that we are entitled to all the Benefits of our
Religion, It is at least fundamental a^ to us, and as to all Benefit we can
pretend to by being Members of the Church.
by our owning the Church not only as a Sect, but as a Society also; and that
though we believe all its Doctrines as it is a Sect, yet if we be divided from
it as a Society, that Belief alone will not secure us a Title to any of the
Benefits of our Religion. Excommunicates, however Orthodox in their Opinions,
were never supposed, in the Discipline of the Church to have any actual Title
to the Benefits of Religion, if they persisted wilfully in that state of
Excommunication. The same I have already observed concerning the Case of
Schismatics, on the Principles of the early Age of St. Cyprian. Hence
therefore it appears, that this Notion of the Church as a Society, whatever it
be in it self, is at least Fundamental as to us, in order to our partaking of
any of the Benefits of Religion: That is, indeed it is Fundamental to all
intents and purposes that we can think worthy our Enquiry. Without this, the
other Notions, if any be, will never be beneficial to us. So that whatever
those other Notions may be in order of Reasoning; yet this Notion of the Church
as a Society must be Fundamental to them in order to their being beneficial;
that is, as far as we have any reason to concern our selves for them. These
things ought certainly to be taken for Fundamental as to the Discipline and
Censures of the Church. She ought certainly to be most concerned for those
things that are most influential on the Interests of Souls; and those are so
whose Belief is most beneficial and their Dis-belief most hurtful to those most
valuable Interests. I cannot therefore see why she should not think Doctrines
of this kind Fundamental, and reckon them among those Fundamentals on which she
ought to lay out her principal Care. If therefore she ought to excommunicate
for any Errors at all, certainly she ought in the first place to do it for
Errors so destructive of all Obligation to her Communion it self, and of her
Authority of Excommunicating; that is, indeed so destructive to all that power
she has either for the preservation of Truth, or the prohibition of Error in
general. And if she ought not to inflict her Censures, at least these highest
of them, for any Errors but those which are Fundamental; it will plainly
follow, that Errors of this kind must be reckoned for Fundamental ones. Our
Adversaries would have Errors in Fundamentals punished, and punished as a
Spiritual Crime by a purely Spiritual Authority; but they do not, in the mean
time, seem to be aware how Fundamental this very Notion of the Church, as a
distinct and spiritual Soceity, is to its having any Authority, or Power to
punish, so much as spiritually. All they can do as a Sect, is only to reason
with Heretics concerning their Errors, and all the means to reduce them are
those reasons which can no farther prevail with them than as they may seem
convictive in the Judgment of the Heretics themselves. But on that account
they stand on even Terms with the Heretics, whose Reasons ought likewise to
take place with the Ecclesiastics, so far as they also are in Conscience
convinced by them. A true Authority, and a Power of punishing refractory
Persons by excluding from Communion, do Fundamentally suppose a spiritual
Society over which they are to exercise this Authority, and from which
Delinquents are to be excluded by spiritual Censures and Excommunications. How
can they therefore avoid reckoning those Errors from being Fundamental ones as
punishable by a spiritual Authority, The Intruders cannot be defended to be
valid Bishops, but by Principles fundamentally destructive of the Church, as a
S^ciety distinct from the State in a time of Persecution.
which ruin Fundamentally that very Authority by which such Errors are to be
punished; which destroy the Society on which that Authority is grounded
Fundamentally?

28. If h^r^fore Errors that destroy the very Being of the Church, as a Society
be Fundamental, I cannot for my part foresee how our Adversaries can ex^u^e
their Anti bishops, and all that own them, by Principles, from erring
Fundamentally. Their being Bishops supposes such Doctrines as, if they be once
admitted, make it impossible for the Church to subsist as a spiritual Society
whenever the State is pleased to persecute it. They cannot Possibly be supposed
Bishops of those Dioceses to which they are consecrated, till it first be
supposed that their Predecessors are validly deprived, and consequently that
the Sees are vacant in Conscience. If it should prove otherwise, the Clergy and
Laity of those some jurisdictions, will still be obliged in Conscience, as much
as ever, to adhere to their Canonical Bishops till they be Canonically
deprived, and to disown such Intruders as are put over them, not only without
any Canonical Procedure, but without any Authority also that can obl^ge in
Conscience. The only Principle therefore on which they can pretend that their
Rival Bishops have lost their Right, as to Conscience, must be the Power that
even the Lay-Magistrate has to deprive Bishops even with regard to Conscience.
If therefore they will defend their Schism by Principles, it will be necessary
that they defend this Principle also, without which it is not possible that it
should ever be defended. They have no Ecclesiastical Judicatory, Just or
Unjust, that they can so much as pretend in this Case And the defending this is
that which will increase their Guilt, and will add to their Charge of Schism,
the aggravation of Heresy also. For in order to the asserting such a Right as
this to the Secular Magistrate, it will be necessary to assert that the
Authority of the Church, even as to Spirituals, is, in Conscience the Right of
the Civil Magistrate. If it should not be so, then the Subjects of the
respective Dioceses may still be at liberty in Conscience to adhere to their
deprived Bishops. And if they may, they must, because then all their former
Obligations in Conscience will still hold as obliging as ever: For it is
impossible that those antece^ent Obligations in Conscience to adhere to their
spiritual Superiors can be dis-annulled, or diminished by a Power that can
pretend no Right in such Matters with regard to Conscience. But if we grant
this Power to the Magistrate, this will perfectly overthrow the Church as a
Society distinct from the State, and perfectly disable it to subsist as a
Society in a time of Persecution. For when the Magistrate persecutes it, it
cannot then subsist as a Society without a Government, and a Government
obliging in Conscience, and not derived from the persecuting Magistrate. But if
the Right of that spiritual Government be in Conscience the Magistrate's Right,
it must be an invading the Magistrate's Right to pretend to it when he expressly
forbids it. And if so, how can spiritual Governors in such a Case pretend to
it? How can they pretend to a Right that is none of their own, consistently
with Conscience? How can their pretending to it with ill Consciences, oblige
their Subjects to adhere to them on account of Conscience? Nay how can it, even
excuse them in Conscience for not adhering rather to him whose Right it is
supposed to be, and that even in Conscience? No Necessity whatsoever can excuse
a Sin, much less lay an Obligation in Conscience on Subjects to abett it, least
of all lay an Obligation on God to ratify such Acts of Authority as must be
supposed no better than Usurpations. And yet all Acts of Ecclesiastical
Authority in a time of Persecution can signify nothing if they be not such as
may oblige in Conscience, and such as God, as well as Men, is obliged to
ratify, Thus it had been Sin in the Romans to set up Cornelius (as plainly
they did) not only without the Consent, but against the Will of Decius. It had
been Sin in him, and not in him only, but in all the Bishops of his Age, to
pretend to any Districts in the Roman Empire. It had been Sin in them to
exercise Authority in Districts not belonging to them. Thus the Church had been
perfectly dissolved, as a Society at least, within the Roman Empire; unless we
can suppose a Notion of a Society without Governors, without Districts,
without any lawful Exercises of Authority. And yet the Bishops of those Ages
never thought themselves obliged in Conscience, to go out of the Roman Empire
to retrieve the Power which is pretended to belong to them as Bishops of the
Catholic Church. And very probably it had signified nothing to have done so.
They could have gone into no civilized inhabited Countries, but they must have
expected Magistrates who could pretend to the same Right, as well as De^ius,
and who were as much disposed as he, to use their Right to the prejudice of the
Christian Religion. What therefore would our Adversaries have advised the
Christians of those Ages to have preserved themselves in a Society? Would they
have had them retired into unoccupied wildernesses? But how could they make
Societies there where there were no numbers of Subjects, requisite to make a
Society? Plainly therefore, the Catholic Church had then been dissolved as
Societies, if these New Principles had been maintained in those earlier Ages.
And these same Principles do still put it as evidently in the Power of the
Civil Magistrate to dissolve the Church as a Society within his own Dominions.
For how can a Church continue a Society where Bishops are in Conscience
deprived of their spiritual Authority, and where Subjects are also absolved
from their Obligations in Conscience to obey them? And this is also a
dissolving the Catholic Church as to such, as live in such Dominions, and as
to any Benefits they can derive from the Catholic Church also. For Subjects of
particular Districts are no otherwise received into the Catholic Church, than
as they derive a Right to Communion with all Churches in the World, by their
being admitted Members of the Churches of their particular Districts. And they
are also deprived of their Right of Catholic Communion, when they are
Excommunicated by the lawful Authority of their particular Districts I cannot
therefore see how our Adversaries can excuse themselves herein from erring
Fundamentally if the Church's being a Society be admitted for a Fundamental.

29. If there be degrees of Fundamentals. This sort of Errors fundamental in
the highest degree.
I should think the Fundamentals concerning the Church as a Society to be of
the greatest consequence, and therefore Fundamental in the Highest degree. The
Church is indeed obliged to keep the (...), the (...). These are the
Expressions by which our Adversaries themselves, I believe, conceive the
Articles themselves call Fundamental to be signified But she is obliged to keep
them as a (...) as a Trust committed to her. How so? by avoiding Disputings* by
stopping the mouths of Heretics, by rebuking them with all Authority, b^
rejecting and avoiding, not their Doctrines only, but their Persons also, when
they prove incorrigible. Now these things plainly suppose Governors invest^d
with spiritual Authority, and a Communion, from whence incurable Heretics are
to be rejected. So that in order to the keeping these other Fundamentals, the
Church as a Society is supposed antecedently as a Condition that alon^ can
qualify her for having such a Trust committed to her. This No^ion therefore as
antecedent must be Fundamental to those other Fundamentals, and therefore
Fundamental in a higher sense than those things can be whose security is
superstructed upon it. And accordingly the Damage to the Public in subverting
these Notions of the Church as a Society* i^ proportionably greater than that
which follows from the denial of other particular Articles which are commonly
taken for Fundamental. He that denies one of the other Articles may yet believe
all the rest, and zealously defend them and that by Principles too against all
other Heretics. But he that denies the Church as a Society invested with a
spiritual Authority, does as eff^ctually contribute to the ruin of all the
other Fundamentals at once, as he does to the ruin of a H^use who subvers the
Foundations of it. It brings in impunity for Heresy ^n general and suffers
Heretics still to hope as well in their separate Sects, as if they were in
(...) Communion I^ l^aves them destitute of even any Presumptions that might
oblige them ^o judge in Favor of the Church's Doctrine, as the safest Error,
if it should prove one It does by this mean^ reduce the trial of the Cause to
the Reasons themselves, and their native Evidence, and put^ it in the Power of
assuming Men to pretend greater Evidence than either they have, or they really
believe. And things being reduced to his pass, it is more God's Providence*
than the security of Principles, that hinders any Heretic who disputes any one
of the other Articles, from questioning all the rest.

Our Adversaries are wholly the Cause of this late Breach, and have shown
themselves neither kind to us, nor careful of themselves, in it.
30. I am sorry our Adversaries Case affords Ma^ter for so heavy Accusations:
But they may by this time understand how naturally the Cause affords it, if we
will judge impartially, as we must do, if we will judge either solidly or
justly; if we will judge as no doubt, the Righteous Judge of all the World will
at the Day of the General Judgment And what can our late Brethren, either of
the Clergy or Laity, say for bringing things to this melancholy Prospect?
Neither is the Change ^light, to which they have made themselves obnoxious by
this Unhappy Schism; nor is the Evidence slight, by which this Charge may be
^roved against them: And yet they have wholly been the Aggressors in ^his whole
Affair. We are exactly where we were* exactly where they left us. So little can
they pretend that we have contributed to this Division. We hold the same
Doctrines that we did, that themselves did, formerly. We adhere to the same
Bishops themselves have owned for Bishops till now. Nor are we otherwise
divided from them, than as they have divided themselves, by erecting New Altars
against the Altars themselves have hitherto acknowledged Lovers of Unity would
be as much grieved for Breaches in the Mystical Body as living Members when by
any violence they are divided from the Body Natu^al. The little concern the
Harlot showed for the controverted Infant, was to Solomon an Argument, that she
was not the Mother of it. And how comes it to pass they can divide themselves
from us with so little remorse, if ever they were living Members of our common
Mystical Body? Do they not tempt us to reason as St. John did, 1 John 2.19.
tha^ they never were ours by Principles when they can so easily leave us? Have
they lost all Reverence for their so lately celebrated Fathers? Have they lost
all Brotherly Love and Compassion to their Brethren? And all for no other Crime
than Constancy to our Common Principles. And can they still pretend a Zeal to
our Common Religion for doing so? These, they will say, are our Opinions. But
Lovers of Unity would be afflicted for Violations of it, whoever were the
Occasions of it. Lovers of Unity would not willingly grieve their Brethren,
much less would they do that, which, even in the Opinions of their Brethren*
might occasion a Breach of Unity. if there were otherwise no great Necessity
for doing it. Least of all would they do it, when they knew those Princip^es to
be Principles of Conscience, an^ of a Conscience firm and steadfast to the true
Public, Spiritual Interests of the Church. So far they must be from accepting
Promotions, when they must be purchased at so dear a Rate as that of a Public
Schism. But I wish these Opinions of ours were no more than Private Opinions, I
h^s now app^ared that they were the sense of the who^e Catholic Church, in
those Ag^s which all ought to reverence, who will pretend to Reformation, and
which is to be the Standard of Catholic Unity. Yet let them regard us as
little as they please, methinks at least they should have some regard to the
Public In^erests even of their own Church* And yet both the Intruders and
their Consecrators proceed on those Principles, that put it in the Power of a
Popish or Schismatical Prince to dissolve it when they please. They cannot
justify what they do without supposing a Vacancy in the Sees to which the new
Promotions are made; nor can they suppose such a Vacancy without allowing the
validity of a State depriva^ion, even with regard to Conscience. Suppose
therefore a Popish Prince with a Popish Parliament should turn their Principles
against themselves, and deprive all our Bishops with one Act of State; I cannot
see what these Fathers can pretend to secure their Church as a Society, and as
a Communion, in opposition to them. They must then no longer pretend to
Dioceses in England. They must not pretend to any obligation of their
Protestant Clergy and Laity to stand by them, even in Conscience. They must
therefore never pretend to Communions ^n those Dioceses, which are plainly
Exercises of spiritual Authority in them. Nor can they then justify, or even
excuse, any Assemblies for Religion, when forbidden by the Civil Magistrate,
who is only supposed, by these Principles, to have also the Right to that
spiritual Authority by which alone they can be justified. And are these the
ways to secure our Religion against Popery? No open Persecutions whatsoever can
ever ruin us so eff^ctually as these Doctrines will, if ever we receive them.
Doctrines of our own will break our Union among our selves more than any of our
Adversaries open Violences.

Transition.
31. Thus I have shown that our Author's Reasoning is not concluding for our
Adversaries purpose, though his Matters of Fact had been as pertinent ^s our
Adversaries conceive them to be. I now proceed to the Examination of the Matter
of Fact themselves, and shall endeavor to show that even they are not
pertinent to our Adversaries Case.

A VINDICATION OF THE Deprived Bishops, etc.
PART II. Showing, That the Instances collected in the Anonymous Baroccian MS.
are indeed not pertinent to the Editors Design, for vindicating the Validity of
the Deprivation of Spiritual Power by a Lay-Authority.
1. THE Use that our Adversaries make of this Collection of Instances, which
they call Precedents, The Use out Adversaries make of this Collection, is in
all likelihood very different from the Design of the Author.
is to show that our present Bishops are obliged to acquiesce in their unjust
Deprivation, and that their present Clergy and People are not obliged to stand
by them, if they think fit to insist on their Right, and challenge their Duty
from them. These things they conceive clear from these Instances, that neither
unjustly deposed Bishops did challenge their Rights, nor their Clergy and Laity
assist them in chalenging them, if the Bishops substituted in their Places were
of the same Faith with those who were deprived. But undoubtedly these
Reasonings can never pretend to hold any farther than as the Instances here
mentioned were parallel to the Case of our present Bishops. If the Cases be
different, and different in so remarkable a Circumstance, as will make a
difference of Reason also; it will not follow that our Bishops now are obliged
to do as those did then, though we had been better assured than we are, that
what was done in the Cases here instanced was justifiable, and on other
accounts than bare Matter of Fact, argumentative, and fit to pass into a
Precedent. And for my part, so far I am from thinking the Case the same, that I
believe their Author himself never intended it should be so. Our Adversaries
make application of his Instances to a Case, wherein not only the Deprivation
is unjust, but the Authority itself is null and disobliging; that is, of a
Lay-Deprivation as to the purely Spiritual Authority of our Bishops. But in all
likelihood this neither was no^ could be the Design of this Author, to make a
Collection of Precedents for Submission to a lay and invalid Deprivation; much
less in such Circumstances as ours are, wherein Men are so prone to make ill
Interpretations of such Submission, to the justifying such Invasions for the
future, and the Ruin of the Church, as a Society distinct from, and
independent on the State.

The Design of the Author of this Discourse is to be known from the Occasion of
his writing it.
2. To show that this was not his Design, it will be convenient to enquire into
the Matter of Fact, which gave occasion to their Author to draw up this
Collection of Precedents and Canons: For from thence it will appear how much he
was obliged to prove, that he might make his Collection pertinent to the Case
undertaken by him; and whether the speaking home to that Case that was then
before him did, by any way of rational Consequence, oblige him to say things
applicable to our present Case, to which what he says is applied by our
Adversaries. This I shall the rather endeavor, both because it will be
acceptable to the World to know the Occasion of Writing this new published
Discourse, and because it is not so much as a^tempted by either of the worthy
Editors, which yet was an omission of very ill consequence, as to the
Reasoning: For how was it possible to judge of the Reasoning of their Author,
whilst as yet the case was unknown against which the Reasoning was designed by
him? And in order hereunto we have gained a Point, in discovering the Time of
the Author, and thereby the true Age of this Discourse. This will confine our
Enquiry within a narrower Compass, wherein we are to expect the Case that gave
Occasion for it: Indeed it is the only token we have for knowing it, the
Author having given us no Historical Account of the Persons concerned, in the
Discourse itself.

The Schism which occasioned this Discourse seems to have been that between the
Arsenians and Josephians, in the Reign of Michael Palaeologus.

Niceph. Gregor. Lib. 4.


3. The Original therefore of the Schism which occasioned this Discourse, is, I
believe, to be derived from the Reign of Michael Palaeologus, the Father of the
elder Andronicus, under whom our Author wrote. I mention nothing now of that
elder Schism wherein Nicephorus of Ephesus was set up against Arsenius,
mentioned by Pachymeres: That Quarrel was ended on Arsenius's Restitution; and
therefore could have no Influence on the Discourse written afterward. The
second Schism therefore is that which is to our purpose; and it was thus:
Theodorus Lascaris had left a young Son behind him, called John: Of him, by
that time he came to be ten Years of age, Michael began to be jealous, and to
secure himself puts out his Eyes. This the then Patriarch, Arsenius was very
much displeased at, and excommunicated him for it. The Emperor bore it for a
while, and wore a penitential Habit, hoping within a while to be restored: But
finding at length no hopes of it, this made a Grudge between him and the
Patriarch; so that the Emperor was resolved to lay him by. What then? Does he
deprive him by his secular Authority? No such matter. Gregoras observes, that
(...), etc. Gregor. lib. 4.
he did not take the course his Power would suggest, nor use it openly. There
was no such Power so much as pretended to by the Lay-Magistrate, even in those
late and degenerous Ages. He pretends indeed a frivolous Cause against the
Patriarch; yet he makes not himself the Judge of it, but a Synod. However he
gained his Point; the Synod did as the Emperor would have them, and deposed
the Patriarch. This being done, they translate Germanus from the Sea of
Adrianople to that of Constantinople; which revived a Dispute about
Translations, first started, as Georgius Pachymeres tells us, by Joseph who
succeeded him, and occasioned a like Collection of Instances as this is, which
we have still preserved in the same Baroccian MS. There we have also the
Synodical Proceedings concerning the Translation of Germanus, which gi^es us
the time of it, that it was in May, the Year of the World, as they then
reckoned, 6773; that is, in the Year of our Lord as we now account, 1266. But
Germanus, not being able to endure the Envy and Odium of coming into Arsenius's
Place so injuriously vacated; retires after two years, Arsenius being yet
alive. Pachymeres says, that the Emperor was also underhand very active in it.
Upon this Arsenius stirs again, but in vain; Joseph was, by the Emperor's
Interest, again set up against him. Thi^ was about the time of the Eclipse
which Gregoras mentions in May, in the year of the World 6775. that was the
year of our Lord 1268. Pachymeres is more distinct, and tells us, that Germanus
resigned about September. Arsenius upon this acts authoritatively, and deprives
Joseph; for so we find it pleaded elsewhere by the Followers of Arsenius, in
the same (...). Gregor. lib. 5.
Gregoras. This was a Chalenging of his Right, upon the Vacancy, and had this
effect with those who thought him injured, that they would no more own the
Communion of Joseph; so that from that time forward the Schism began. This is
certain, that when Michael afterward endeavored an Union with the Latins, in
the Council of Lions, in the year 1274. both Parties opposed it with great
Zeal; Joseph himself so far, that he was deposed for it, and Beccus set up in
his Place: And yet though both Parties united against the common Adversary,
they would not do so among themselves. They still avoided each (...). Gregor.
lib. 5.
others Communion as much as they did that of the Latins. Thus things
continued in that Reign, though both Parties were persecuted by the Emperor,
who did all he could to force them both to his Union of the Council of Lions.
At length he dies, and then all things return: Beccus retires, and the
Schismatical Exiles of both parts come home. This must have been in the year
1284. if Gregoras date it right, in the year of the World 6791. Phrantzes and
Pachymeres agree with him; only Puchymeres adds, that it was the 11th of
Scirrophorion. This Possinus misunderstands, when he thinks it was December;
but Scirrophorion in the Table of Hesychius, where he describes the
Signification of those old names of Months, in the use of the modern Greeks is
August: And so the Matter is clear, and the other Note given by Pachymeres,
that it was the Parasceve agrees exactly. In that year the 5th Cycle of the Sun
the Dominical Letters BA, the 13th of August is dominical exactly. And so the
number of his Years of Reign answer exactly. P^^chymeres says, that he began
his Reign the 1st of Hecatombaeon; that is, in Hesychius, September; not
January, as Possinus would have it: According to which beginning his Reign from
September. 1. 1260. he must have reigned 24 years, except 20 days, as Pachymeres
says he did. Then Joseph returns, and enjoys the Patriarchal Throne for a time,
and they who had owned him before, own him still, and communicate with him: But
the Arseniate (so they were called, and opposed to the Josephiat^,) return with
their old Animosities, and would not own him upon account of his former
Deposition by Arsenius, who was by this time some while dead, and could not
head them; yet they would not communicate with Joseph, though he had now no
Rival to be opposed to him. The Death of Arsenius was the next year after the
Union of the Council of Lions, on the 30th of Gamelion, in the Language of
Pachymeres; i. e. on the 30th of March, 1275. On the other side the Josephiatae
pleaded, That Arsenius had been canonically deprived in a Synod, (...). Gregor.
lib. 6.
There was also a third Party, which charged both these, no doubt, Joseph then
living, with new Canonical Accusations. This obliged Joseph again to recede,
both for Peace sake, and because indeed he was by this time superannuated for
his Charge: Thus he left the two Parties engaged, and soon after dies himself.
The new Emperor Andronicus did not think fit to let the Throne lie vacant at
so dangerous a time as the beginning of a new Reign; he therefore pitches on
Georgius Cyprius, an eloquent and learned Man, and fit for the Place, and
immediately invests him with what he could give him, the Crosier, or Pastoral
Staff, according to the Custom then generally received for some Ages, both in
the East and West. This enabled him to perform those Patriarchal Offices only
which required not Priesthood, as Gregoras expressly observes; so careful they
were then of avoiding these present Invasions on that sacred Function. The
Reason he deferred his Consecration for a time, was purposely that he might get
him consecrated by Persons no way concerned in the Schism between the Arsenians
and Josephians, nor in the Union attempted by his Father in the Council of
Lions, as wisely foreseeing that it would make the whole Consecration
questionable, in a Time when that whole Design was so unpopular and abominated;
and a short time afforded him Persons fit for his purpose. Within a while the
Bishop of Mozula came on an Embassy from his Master the Despote of Aetolia, and
a little after him another Bishop of Debra in Macedon, upon another occasion.
These, I suppose, were therefore free from any Contagion of Latin Communion,
or of the Schism, because they had not been liable to his Father's
Jurisdiction: But he pitched rather on the Bishop of Mozula, as being a
Suffragan of Constantinople; for Mozula was subject to Naupactus, Naupactus to
Constantinople; whereas Debra was under Justiniana prima, exempted by
Justinian: Him therefore Andronicus prevails on, first to consecrate a Monk,
called Germanus, Bishop of Heraclia, whose ancient Right it was to preside in
the Consecration of the Patriarch; then with the Bishop of Debra to assist the
so consecrated Bishop of Heraclia in the following Office, when there should be
need of them. This being done, they then proceed to the Consecration of
Georgius or Gregorius, for the modern Greeks especially do often confound those
two Names; and being only a Reader before, they first ordain him Deacon, then
Presbyter, before they all joined in making him Patriarch. Thus all the Caution
was used that could be, to prevent the Schism that might follow, if his
Consecration had been exceptionable in the Opinions then received; and all was
no more than necessary, as did afterward appear. This did not hinder but that
his former Familiarity with Becus, and Metochita, and Meliteniota, was objected
to him; and even that inferior Order of Reader, which he did not receive then,
he was said to have received from Latinizers. How true these Objections were is
not material to our present Design: This at least appears, how prone they were
then to make them, and how little occasions served for those who were so
predisposed to receive them. The Patriarch thus made, Endeavors then were used
to reconcile the Arseniatae and the Josephiatae: Accordingly an Expedient was
thought of suitable to the Superstition of the Age, and the Tales formerly
invented by the Legendaries. On the great Sabbath, that is the Saturday before
Easter, two Libels were received, each containing the Sense of the Party that
delivered it; one of the Followers of Arsenius, the other of those of Joseph.
These they cast into a Fire prepared for the purpose, expecting (according to
the Fancies of our Saxon Ancestors concerning their fiery Ordeal) that the
Libel which was more pleasing to God should escape untouched: But the Event
was, that the Fire destroyed them both, and the Controversy still remained
unresolved, whether was in the right. However it was thus interpreted, that the
making Parties was generally displeasing. This sufficed at present to unite
them among themselves, and with their present Patriarch. And to sweeten the
Arseniatae the more, it was granted them, that the Body of Arsenius should be
honorably received into the City with a solemn Procession. The Easter that
this Union was transacted in could hardly be sooner than that of the year 1285.
And the great Sabbath was April 13. according to the Computation of Isaac, a
Monk near this time, that we may not suspect any alteration in the Paschal
Account between this time and his. But the Union then made does not seem to
have held long, possibly no longer than the time of this George of Cyprus. In
the time of Nipho of Cyzicus we find the Arseniatae out again, Niceph. Gregor.
Lib. 7.
(how long before we know not) and by him reconciled on very honorable Terms,
and then apostatizing again: This was about the year 1315. Thus fickle they
were, for so many years together after the Death and honorable Amends made to
the Memory of their Arsenius. However the prospect of Things in our Author's
View when he wrote this Discourse, I take to have been that of the year 1285.
which I have been now describing.

4. It gives indeed so clear an Account of the whole Design of this Discourse,
This Case of Arsenius is very like that of St. Chrysostom, which our Author
thought principally to deserve Consideration.
that we can hardly doubt but that this was indeed the Case that occasioned it.
That the Author excepts St. Chrysostom's Case, as affording matter for a
particular consideration, seems to imply that this Case was particularly
insisted on by the Adversaries with whom he was concerned. And indeed the Case
of Arsenius was so very like that of St. Chrysostom, that it cannot be thought
strange that the Arsenians should reason from that Case as a Precedent. St.
Chrysostom excepted against the Synod ad Quercum that deposed him, that his
notorious and professed Enemies, Theophilus, Acacius, Severian, and Antiochus,
presided in it: So did Arsenius against the Synod that deposed him, that the
Emperor had convened it, and influenced it, with whom he had a known
Difference on occasion of his late Excommunication. The Synod ad Quercum
admitted not this Exception of St. Chrysostom, but condemned him for
Nonappearance, without any Examination of the Merits of his Cause; and the
same way this other Synod also proceeded in the Case of Arsenius, that he also
had no Hearing concerning the Particulars objected against him. In the Case of
St. Chrysostom, not only the Eastern Joannites, but all the Bishops of the
West renounced Communion with those who had proceeded so unjustly in Censuring
him without ever hearing his Defense; and this not only while St. Chrysostom
himself was living, but for many years after his death, till an honorable
amends was made him, as far as was possible; that is, not to his Person, but
his Memory. That was, not only when his Name was received into the
Ecclesiastical Dip^ychs, thereby owning him to have dyed, in Right, as Bishop
of Constantinople; but when his Body was brought back, and received into the
City by a solemn Procession of the then Bp. Proclus, the Emperor himself
assisting at the Ceremony. This was, as Socrates tells us, in the 16th
Consulship of the younger Theodosius, (in the year 438.) and in the 35th year
of the Dishonor done him, which seem therefore to be reckoned from the Synod
ad Quercum, where he was first deposed, which was the year before he was
banished Constantinople. He was not banished till the 30th of September. in the
year 404. for they usually allow him only five Years and some odd Months for
his Bishopric, which began Febr. 26. in the year 398. and therefore must end
in 403. and the time of that former Synod ad Quercum, which probably was the
reason why Socrates began his Account from thence. No doubt the Arsenians also
had this Example before them, when they procured the Two Translations of the
Body of their Patron; the first from the place where he dyed to the Monastery
of St. Andrew in the City, in the beginning of this Reign of Andronicus; then
from the Monastery to the Church of St. Sophia, in the later Concordate made by
the Patriarch Nipho of Cyzicus, in the year 1315. For so St Chrysostom's Body
also had been interred in the Church of the Apostles, built by the Emperor
Constantine the Great, and where himself was buried also, no doubt the
principal Church of the City then, till this of St. Sophia was afterward built
by the great Justinian; so careful the Arsenians were, that their Patriarch
Arsenius should not fall short in any Punctilio of the Honor that was done to
the memory of St. Chrysostom.

5. And from hence we understand the Reason why our Author is so particularly
careful to observe, that past Invalidities in Succession, The Arsenians also
gave our Author occasion to observe, that past Invalidities in Ordinations did
not use to be insisted on rigorously.
did not use to be critically examined, but left to God, not even by the
dividing Persons themselves, when they were so long past that they could not be
remedied, and were withal not injurious to the Rights of any Person living.
Thus he observes, even in the principal Case of St. Chrysostom, That
Severianus of Gabala, and Acacius of Beraea, though they were accused to Pope
Innocent, (that is the true Notion of So (...), Can. 15. of the Synod under
Photius, here produced in the later part of this Discourse, under the Title of
AB (...), is an Accusation to a Synod. The Translator does not seem to have
understood the Importance of this Phrase, neither in his Latin nor English
Version, nor the Annotatour on the English. The Latin Translation seems to
imply, that Severianus and Acacius personally appeared before Pope Innocent,
which no History owns them to have done The English, that they were called in
question by him* which (if meant juridically) could not be true, when he after
exercised no Censure on them, either of Condemnation, or Absolution. The
Annotatour understands it of Discovery; but what needed that when the Fact
itself was notorious? The Notion of Accusation solves all. So also in the N. T.
Acts 24.1. and 25.2. (...) is to accuse or infor^ against; which is a proper
Authority for this purpose, because most of the Ecclesiastical Terms were
designedly taken from the Scriptures.
(...),) were notwithstanding not censured by him, but permitted to the divine
Vengeance, when their Fact was now too late to be redressed. The like he
observes concerning Pope Caelestine's approving of Atticus and his Successors,
in his Epistle to Nestorius. These are Arguments ad homines, even from the
sense of those who were the principal Separators, on Account of the Injustice
done to St. Chrysostom; for such were the Bishops of Rome: And he is frequent
in his Observations of this kind; a sign that the Schismatics he had to deal
with were rigorous in Retrospection, and unraveling what had been done since
the injurious Deprivation; and this the Arsenians did insist upon. Arsenius
himself, upon his Restitution after his first Expulsion, expressly ratified all
the Orders that had been conferred by the Intruder, Nicephorus of Ephesus: And
in the Reconciliation made by Niphon of Cyzicus, one thing granted them was,
(...). Gregor. lib. 7. p. 183.
That the Clergy should submit to a Penance of forty days Suspension; no doubt
as an Acknowledgment that their whole Ministry was in Right unlawful as far as
it had been received in the Schism. And this seems to have been the reason why
Gregoras censures the Arsenians, as having that design of advancing their own
Party to all the Preferments of the Church. That was a consequence of their
vacating all the Places that had been filled since the Intrusion, and
invalidating their Orders; they thereby left none qualified to fill their
Places but themselves.

6. But our Author expressly excepts the Case of Heresy, as that alone which
could justify a Separation. There was also in this Schism an occasion for the
Author to add his Exception of Heresy, and his Limitations of that exception.
The Heresy then in view, in the sense of the Greeks, was no doubt the
Doctrine of the Latins, which they called Heresy, and with which they had
been allarmed since the pretended Union at Lions. This Exception therefore the
Author could very truly and prudently admit, and urge against both the dividing
Parties, that neither of them could charge the other with Latinizing, or
pretend that as a Cause for their Separation. Joseph had suffered in that Cause
as well as the Arsenians, and was forced to retire, and Beccus was set up
against him, because he would not comply with the Emperor in that Matter: Yet
in the latter end of his Discourse he adds out of the Canons two prudent
Limitations of this Case, even of Heresy: One is, that he requires that the
Heresy should have been antecedently condemned by the Church, lest otherwise
private Persons should be left at Liberty to separate for whatever themselves
should be pleased to call Heresy: Another is, that the Heresy so condemned
should be openly, and in the Face of the Church owned by the pretended
Heretic, that no public Separation might ever be permitted, without public
Evidence of the Cause on which the Separation was to be made. I cannot think
these Limitations were made precariously, but in prospect of a Cause then in
view, that might have suffered by the Consequence of this Concession, that
Heresy at least would justify Separation, if these Limitations had not been
interposed: And I can think of no Cause so likely as that of George of Cyprus,
who was now made Patriarch. We find by Gregoras, that notwithstanding the Care
that was used that his Consecration might have no Ingredient of any Authority
derived either from Latins, or Latinizing Greeks, yet he lay under some
suspicion of that very Charge, which was then so very odious. His former
Familiarity with Beccus, and Metochita, and Meliteniota, in the time when the
Union was rigorously urged by the Emperor, made him suspected of having
imbibed their Doctrine. At least his inferior Order of Readership, which was
now not given him, but supposed, they did not know but it might have been
derived from Latinizers. But these Limitations secured his Case from justifying
any Separation that might follow from these Jealousies. He might hold some
Opinions in Common with the Latins, if they were not condemned as Heresies by
his own Church. And particularly Gregoras observes, That in that Union of Lions
the (...). Gregor. lib. 5.
Faith was not meddled with; I believe he means the Article concerning the
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son. And this being free, there were not
many of those which they called Errors of the Latins, which they could
pretend had been condemned as erroneous in the Faith. This even Beccus himself
might have pleaded, as well as George, that he had not expressly professed that
Doctrine of the Latins which the Greek Church condemned for Heretical; but he
could not excuse himself as George could do, from at least Communion with
those whom they called Heretics: At least the other Limitation would bring
George off, that they only suspected him to maint^in the Doctrine of those
with whom he had been so familiar, not that even his Adversaries could pretend
that he had owned them openly, or taught them in the public Ecclesiastical
Assemblies. If this was the Occasion, this Collection could hardly have been
made before the Synod of A^ramittium, which being about the time of Easter,
could not have been sooner than the next Year to that wherein Andronicus
succeeded; that is, the Year 1285. Nor is it likely to have been sooner, if
this Author wrote it when himself was Rhetor. Georgius Logothetes Acropolita,
whose Chronicle we have, was Rhetor in the time of Arsenius. Germanus, who was
set up against Arsenius, put Manuel Holobolus in that same Office* perhaps the
same whose Notes are extant in MS. on the Ar^ Dosiadis. Holobolus was very
hardly used by Michael the Emperor for his Aversion to the Latins, as
Pachymeres tells us: Nor was he, that we know of, then put out of his Place.
But whether it was he that was continued, or that was restored at the beginning
of Andronicus, we cannot judge till we have more light from History. This at
least seems probable, that this was the time of Writing this Discourse: Before
this time there was not such Occasion for this Exception, and these Limitations
of this Exception of Heresy, as there was now. It is certain the Author was a
Constantinopolitane, and wrote on occasion of a Constantinopolitane Schism, and
wrote withal about this time, and could hardly have avoided mentioning this
Schism, on one side or other, if he had written after it; and there is neither
any Schism, nor any time of this Schism, so fit for it as this. Withal we know
that an Union did follow upon it; who knows how much this Discourse of the
Public Rhetor might have contributed to it?

7. If therefore I have guessed right at the true occasion of Writing this
Discourse, the Author, whoever he was, This Case did not oblige our Author to
justify the Validity of a Lay-Deprivation*
had no Occasion from his Design to speak to our present Case, of an invalid
Deprivation, as to Spirituals, by a Lay-Authority. The Case of Arsenius was
plainly managed by a Synod; so also was that of St. Chrysostom, so much
insisted on by them, and pleaded as a Precedent of a parallel Case. The Secular
Power, in both Cases, concerned themselves no farther than in executing the
Synodical Decrees: Particularly Michael Pal^ologus was so far from encroaching
on the Church's Power, that Gregoras observes expressly, that he would not use
the Power he had in his hands to right himself; so far, that he owned the
validity of Arsenius's Censure against him, that he submitted to it, and wore a
penitential Habit, and proffered any satisfaction that the Patriarch would
impose upon him, and that nothing seems to have hindered the Reconciliation, but
that Arsenius did not yet think fit to come to Particulars; so far, that he was
once minded to have surrendered his Imperial Sword to the Patriarch, till
finding Arsenius willing to accept of it, he suddenly snatched it back* and
refused to stand to it; so far, that even after Arsenius was deposed, he never
was at ease in his own Conscience, till he was absolved from those Censures by
another Patriarch; that he scrupled the Validity of an Absolution from
Germanus, because of his Translation from another See, and was thereupon very
desirous underhand, as Pachymeres informs us, to oblige him to resign; that
when that Resignation was made, he then rested not till he had the Absolution
solemnly pronounced by the Patriarch Joseph, after a public and solemn
Acknowledgment of the Crimes by which he had incurred those Censures, in the
Face of the Church. What Occasion therefore could this Author have to justify
the Validity, or the Obligation in Conscience to submit to a Lay-Deprivation?
The Case before him not requiring it, he could have no Temptation to undertake
it, but to gratify the Emperors; but even that cannot be pretended here: The
Emperor principally concerned never challenged such Power to himself, no not in
Conscience, though he was under such Temptations to enlarge his Pretensions to
the uttermost. And the Emperor Andronicus, under whom the Discourse was
written, was not so much as under any Temptation to challenge more than what
was, in the Opinions of that Age, believed his due, and showed himself
displeased with the Proceeding of his Father's Reign.

Nay, our Author could not justify the Validity of a Lay-Deprivation, if he
would be true to the Canons here produced by himself, but omitted by the
Editors. For Presbyters to disown their Bishop not synodically deprived, is, by
the Doctrine of these Canons, Schismatical.
8. There was therefore on this account no occasion that might oblige our Author
to speak to our present Case of a Lay-Deprivation. That is not all: I add
farther, That our Author could not justify this Case, if he would be true to
the Principles advanced by himself in this very Discourse. The Canons that are
omitted would have made this Matter very clear, if the Editor had thought fit
to have taken them in. They plainly mention no other Case of a Bishop's being
deposed, but that of his being deposed by a Synod: But this negative Testimony
will not, perhaps, satisfy our Adversaries; they farther say, such Things as
are utterly inconsistent with their owning any Deprivation to be valid that is
not Synodical. The Canons of the First-second Synod, here produced, (so it was
called, because it was twice convened, like the (...), or Quinisext, which made
the Canons ascribed to the 5th General Council, though the Bishops who made
them were convened some while after the 5th Council:) These, I say, are very
home and decisive to our purpose, and such as our Adversaries can by no means
stand by. It is there decreed, that if any Presbyter or Deacon shall dare to
fall away from his Bishop, before a (...), Conciliary Judgment of his Case;
nay, before a (...), (the Judgment alone was not sufficient, unless it
proceeded to a definitive Sentence.) If, I say, such a Person either leave his
Bishop's Communion, or leave his Name out of the Diptychs, and do not mention
it in the Ecclesiastical Offices; he is to be deprived of all his sacerdotal
Office. Not only so, but all that follow him, if they have any sacerdotal
Office, are to be deprived as well as he; if they be Laymen, they are to be
exmunicated, till they quit the Communion of the Schismatics, and return to
that of their own Bishop. No other Sentence or Deprivation is here allowed of
to excuse a Separation, but a Synodical one; till that be had, the Fathers who
made this Canon, look on all the Separation that is made as no better than
Schism. And is not this exactly our deprived Father's Case? What Synod can our
Adversaries pretend that has, I do not say sentenced, but so much as judicially
heard them? What then can they say that, by the Doctrine of this Canon, may
excuse their present Separation from being schismatical? Will they say they are
guilty of no Separation? But erecting another Altar opposite to the Altar of
their own Bishop is Separation, not only by the Doctrine of the Cath. Church
of St. Cyprian's Age, but even of their own Author himself. So it appears from
the Canons of the Apostles, and of the Council of Antioch here produced by him,
which use this very Expression of Erecting Altar against Altar. And it is
notorious, that all who have used this Phrase, have ever included this Case of
setting up a Bishop against a Bishop within the same Jurisdiction: The very
first occasion of using it was taken from a Case exactly parallel among the
Jews, that of setting up a High Priest against another High Priest, within the
same Peculium. So also by the Doctrine of the same Canons produced here, it is
schismatical to omit mentioning the Bishop's Name in the Ecclesiastical
Diptychs: The Design of those Commemorations in the Diptychs, was plainly to
own them as Bishops of those particular Districts. Thus Cyril of Alexandria
argues against Atticus, that the receiving St. Chrysostom's Name again into
the Diptychs, would be an owning him a Bishop, who had been deprived of his
Bishopric, and consequently a reversing the Sentence of Deprivation that had
been pronounced against him. Thus it appears, that it was the same thing to
receive a Bishop's Name into the Diptychs of a particular Diocese, as to own
him for a Bishop of that Diocese; and to leave his Name out of the Diptychs of
a particular Diocese, was also the same thing as thence-forward to disown his
Episcopal Relation to that particular Diocese. And accordingly with us, who
have not now that Custom of Ecclesiastical Diptychs, owning Men for Bishops of
such Dioceses, is the same thing as receiving their Names into the Diptychs,
and disowning them for Bishops of those Dioceses, will also be the same as
excluding them out of the Diocesan Diptychs. Particularly the Case of those
Clergy in the deprived Dioceses will fall under the purview of that Canon, who
omit the deprived Bishops, and mention the Intruders, in those Prayers where it
is customary to mention their diocesane Ordinary. And now what can our Titulars
say for themselves, upon the Principles of this their so celebrated Author? Do
they own the deprived Bishops to have still a Title in Conscience to their
Dioceses? How can they then at the same time pretend themselves to have a Title
also, and that in Conscience? How can they in Conscience justify their
Invasion of those Thrones, to which others are acknowledged to have a Right in
Conscience? Do they therefore, to make way for their own Right, deny that of
their Predecessors? But their very doing so forfeits all the Rights they can
pretend, not only to the Dioceses, but their other (...). Can. 13. Synod. A* B.
sacerdotal Offices, by the Doctrine of this Canon, till they can prove what in
our Case they cannot so much as pretend, that their Predecessors have had a
(...). Ibid.
complete Conciliary Hearing, and a Conciliary Deprivation. This Canon
therefore reaches the Titulars themselves; and not only them, but the (...).
Ibid.
Clergy also of the respective Dioceses who shall own or follow them, they are
also liable to the very same Sentence of Deprivation. The (...). Ibid.
Laity also of the same Dioceses that shall own them are to be excommunicated,
and not received again till they disown all Communion with our Titulars, who
are here called Schismatics. This will take in all their whole Bodies, at
least in the deprived Dioceses.

So it is also, by the same Canons, for Suffragan Bishops to disown their
Metropolitan, without the like Synodical Deprivation.
9. The next Canon of that same Synod here produced goes farther yet, and takes
in the Case of all the other Bishops, who shall be guilty of the like
Undutifulness to their Metropolitan, in leaving his Communion, or not
mentioning his Name out of the Diptychs in the Li^urgical Offices. And this
Canon also is as express as the former, in assigning the Case wherein such
Omissions and Defections are allowed as justifiable. No other Judgment is
allowed as competent in this matter, but that of a Synod, the (...), as here
again the Fathers express it, If any Bishop do fail in his Duty to his
Metropolitan before it, he is by this Canon to be (...). Can. 14. ib.
deprived. And what can our late Fathers say for themselves, if they were to be
tried by this Canon; they can as yet no more pretend a synodical Deprivation of
their Metropolitan, than of their other Brethren; yet they have taken upon
them to disown him, as well as their otherwise equal Brethren: They have taken
upon them to meet in a Convocation, without his Presidency or Permission; and
would, no doubt, have acted in Matters of great Importance to the Church, if
they could have agreed among themselves. This was a direct Invasion of his
Right by the Nicen^ Canon, which makes the (...), the Ratification of what is
to be done in such Assemblies, to be the Prerogative of the Metropolitan; yet
this they did, before they could pretend so much as a Lay-Deprivation. They
have since proceeded farther, and made new schismatical Bishops, not only
without his Leave, but against his Will: This is also expressly against the
Nicene Canon, which allows not even a Majority of the Provincial Synod to do
it, without the Metropolitane's Consent for one, though the Bishop so made had
not been schismatical. Yet they have not stopped here; they have presumed to
set up his own Dean against him, they who have sacredly promised Subjection to
him as his Suffragans; him who was under the same canonical Obligations and
Promises too, as an immediate Member of his Diocese. And I need not tell him
how scandalous this Case of breaking Faith was in the ancient Cases of Arsacius
of Constantinople, and Flavianus of Antioch, not only to discredit their
Persons, but to justify a Separation from them; though I do not think that
Case alone sufficient to justify it where the Scandal was not injurious to a
better Right, than that of him who was in possession: But in the Case before us
I cannot imagine what they can pretend to avoid this Canon. I do not urge these
Canons, as Laws particularly obliging us, by whom they were never particularly
and explicitly received: Yet if I did urge them as obliging without explicit
Reception, perhaps the particular Reasonableness of the Canons themselves would
bear me out in it. The Law of Nations obliges all particular civil Nations,
though it be not taken into their Codes of written Laws, and therefore not
ratified by express Reception. The Reasonableness of the Things themselves, and
their Necessity for Maintaining Correspondence, are alone sufficient to oblige
all Nations who will correspond with others, and correspond justly. So the Case
is here: The securing Subordinations already received and settled, are so much
the Interests of all Churches, and these Expedients are so manifestly necessary
for maintaining those Subordinations, that they do as little need explicit
reception to make them obligatory in particular Churches, as the Laws of
Nations do to make them also obligatory to particular Nations. For my present
Design it is sufficient that these Canons do at least express the Sense of the
Eastern Church, and of this Collector, who produces and owns them as
Authorities. Hence at least it follows, that that Church and this Collector
owned no Validity in Deprivations of Bishops that were not synodical, when
without this they account all refusals of Duty schismatical, whatever other
Deprivations could be pretended in favor of such Refusals. How was it then
possible for this Collector to plead Precedents for even excusing Duty on such
Deprivations, which he did not think sufficient to excuse them? How could he
call Facts of this kind Precedents, and reason from them to a Church which had
by her Rules and Canons so expressly condemned them?

10. But Mr. Hody did not think this latter part, This unpublish'd Appendiz
asserted to the Author.
where the Canons are, to belong to the Discourse published by him: Nor will I
charge him with any designed Disingenuity in suppressing them, though they make
so manifestly against the Cause espoused by him. I only desire that his
Omission may not prejudice them who shall be pleased again to consult the MS.
The Thing it self gives no occasion that I can see for suspecting it to belong
to any other Author. The Hand is manifestly the same with that of the Part
already published; and this Hand is manifestly different from those which are
either before or after: It follows also without any new Title, without any
Footsteps of any that had once been legible, but now defaced, and grown
illegible; without any the least convenient distance left for a Title, if the
Author had intended one. But these things are not unusual with the unskilful
Librarians, where notwithstanding the Works themselves so injudicially
connected are very different. I grant it, nor would I insist on these things,
if there were any great Evidence in the Matter itself to the contrary; but
unless we will allow our selves a liberty of breaking off arbitrarily and
unaccountably, and leaving out whatever displeases us in Manuscripts, we must
at least allow these things to pass for Presumptions, where there is no
contrary Evidence: And that is all that need be granted us in this matter. The
subject Matter of this Appendix is so far from affording Arguments for
suspecting it as part of another Work, that it adds rather farther Evidence,
that it was really from the same Author, and with the same Design. The Canons
are to the same purpose of opposing the Schisms now mentioned, as well as the
Historical Precedents: Both of them together do clear the sense of the Church,
as well from her written Laws in Words, as from her unwritten ones of Custom
and matter of Fact. And what could be more proper than to join these two
together? Indeed the Facts alone would not be so argumentative, without the
Canons; for they are not bare Facts, but approved Facts, that are fit to be
admitted as Precedents. And what Facts are approved by the Church, we can most
securely judge by their conformity to her written Laws. Besides, this was the
Custom of the Ecclesiastical Rhetors, to give in their Evidences of both kinds
concerning the Questions wherein they were consulted: So Troilus the Sophist
mentions a Canon as well as Examples, relating to the Case of Translations, if
he were the Author of that Collection, made use of by his Disciple Socrates, as
I believe he was. So here in the same MS. in the Collection fitted to the Case
of Germanus of Adrianople, intruded into the Throne of Arsenius, besides the
Collection of Troilus, there are added many more Instances, and express
Testimonies, out of the Decretals of the Popes, Callistus and Anteros, which in
the Discipline of that Age were equivalent to Canons. It should seem that,
during the time the Latins possessed Constantinople, some Latinizing Greek
translated Isidore Mercator's Forgeries, which from that time were taken for
Law in the Greek Church, as they had formerly been in the Latin. This is, I
think, the first time we find them mentioned by the Greeks: We do not find that
their Canonists, who wrote a little before, ever take any notice of them; not
Zonaras, nor Alexius Aristenus, nor Balsamon; yet Balsamon does mention the
Donation of Constantine, which I believe was translated from the same
Collection of Isidore's Forgeries, a sign that even then the Greeks began to
look into them. But methinks the latter end of the Canons of our Appendix
should put this Matter out of doubt: There it is explained and limited what had
been so often inculcated in the former Discourse, concerning the Liberty which
had been allowed of Separating in the excepted Case of Heresy. Our Author here
produced his Authority for what he had said as to that Case, that his Auditors
might understand, that (in a Case of so great importance) he did not presume to
give them any singular Opinions of his own, but that he instructed them in the
received and allowed Doctrine of the Church of Constantinople, to which they
were all related. Withal he thereby warned them of the Cautions necessary in
the Practice of that Doctrine, that they might not break the Peace of their
Church in the Case then proposed. Who sees not how naturally this coheres with
the former part of his Discourse? It is indeed so natural, that I once thought
them to be the Author's own Words, till I was convinced of my Mistake, by
comparing them with the Canon itself, from whence he took them. But it was
somewhat better for his purpose, that he should express his Sense in this
matter rather in his Church's Words than his own. And it must have been a
wonderful chance, if any Scribbles of a Librarian could have light on so fit a
place, and so apposite to the precedent design of another Author, who thought
not of them. He that can believe it, may next believe the Epicuraean
Hypothests, That the World was made by such a casual Concurrence of undesigning
Atoms. All that is pretended to the contra^^* is only that this Collection of
Canons follows the Summary subjoined to the former Collection. But this is too
conjectural a Proof to be opposed to the Evidences now mentioned: yet How do
they know but that this very Summary is the Author's own? It is in as large a
Hand as the rest of the Discourse itself; it is not in red Letters, as the like
Summary is in the Fragment of Philippus Side^es, in this same MS. where it was
added by the Librarian: And it is not unusual for Authors to add Arguments and
Abstracts of their own Works; so did Pliny to his Natural History; so did
Gellius to his Noctes Attioae; so has the Anonymous Chronologer under Alexander
Severus; so has Gildas and Nennius in the later and more barbarous Ages; and
What should make the Librarian think that fit to be done in another Man's Work,
that might not also make the Author himself think so too? But for our present
purpose I am not concerned, whether this Summary was drawn up by the Author, or
the Librarian; if the Librarian thought fit to insert it into the Text, (as
plainly he has done,) this was the properest Place for it, This Collection
therefore can be no Authority for our Adversaries, neither as to the Sense of
the Author, nor of the Church he was concerned for.
before any other part of the Discourse intervened that was upon another
Argument, not of Facts but Canons.

11. Thus I have shown that our Author was neither obliged by the Occasion* of
his Writing, nor could consequently to his own Principles, design to give us a
Collection of Precedents for withdrawing Obedience on a Lay-Deprivation, or for
a Cession in a Person so invalidly deprived. And now methinks this might excuse
me from descending to a particular Examination of the Facts produced by him,
which our Adversaries are pleased to call Precedents: For what if in the
History of so many Centuries as are here accounted for, there might be found
some Instances wherein Christian Emperors were partial in favor to
themselves, and challenged more Power than did really belong to them? And what
if Christian Bishops for Peace sake submitted, not waving the Right, but
bearing the Injury? What and if the Clergy and Laity did sometimes, as they do
now, fail in their Duty of adhering to them? It is yet sufficient for our
present purpose, that this was no designed Collection of such pretended
Precedents; that therefore if any of these Facts should prove so, that was
beside the Meaning of the Author; that his Authority ought not to be concerned
for them; that neither his Judgment, nor the Judgment of the Eastern Churches,
can ever recommend such Facts for Precedents, which were so disagreeable to
their Rules and Canons. If therefore our Adversaries will make Precedents of
those Facts which were condemned by this Author, by the Doctrine of those very
Churches where they were committed, this is plainly reasoning otherwise than
they can justify by any Authority: For what Authority can it be that they will
insist on for making such Facts pass for Precedents? Is it that of the Eastern
Church? But her Doctrine will not allow our Adversaries to disown our deprived
Bishops, or to set up Antibishops against them, on account of such
Lay-Deprivations. Is it the Authority of this Collector? But he owns these
Doctrines for the Doctrines of his own Church, which are so inconsistent with
our Adversaries Practices. Or, Is it, lastly, the Authority of the Princes
themselves, who were concerned in the Facts here enumerated? But it is certain
Princes do many things which they never do so much as pretend to justify by
Principles: And yet it is withal certain, that no other Facts but such avowed
ones ought in reason to pass for Precedents; and for knowing what they do
avowedly justify, no better Expedient can be found, than to appeal to the
Doctrine of the Church that was owned and protected by them, which they took
for the Guide of their Consciences. Thus it will come to pass, that if any of
the Facts here mentioned should prove for our Adversaries purpose, yet seeing
they could not be well done, as to the Consciences of the Persons concerned,
our Adversaries must not presume them well done, but prove them so
independently on the Persons, before they can make Precedents of them, and
reason from them as Authorities; and then what will they gain by this
celebrated Collection, when it will leave them to the Trial of the Merit of
their Cause as much as ever?

The Case of Meletius in Antioch.
12. However to gratify them as far as we may, let us now descend to
Particulars. The first is that of Meletius, who was set up in the Throne of
Antioch, while Eustathius his Predecessor was yet living; yet he was owned as
Bishop of Antioch by St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom. But Eustathius was deposed
by a (...). Socr. l. 1. c. 24. (...). Soz. l. 2. c. 19.
Synod, perhaps of Bishops secretly favoring Arius, but not as yet declared an
opposite Communion. The Synod indeed charged him with Sabellianism; but it was
no otherwise than as they who favored Arianism used to charge the Catholics
in general; nor did the Catholics understand it otherwise. The chief Pretense
of depriving was a Crime of Life. False indeed it was, but of that the Synod
was to judge, though they judged corruptly. His only Remedy had been to have
appealed to another Synod; but that he did not think fit to try: Yet till he
did so, the Throne was fairly vacated, and he could pretend no Right in
Opposition to Meletius, who was also set up by an Ecclesiastical Authority. The
Canons of Antioch made after his Deprivation, but before the Translation of
Meletius, and urged afterward against St. Chrysostom, and since received into
the Codes and Canons of the Universal Church, allowed him no Remedy but that of
another Synod, and that a more numerous one than that which had deprived him.
Had he so much as attempted it otherwise, he had been cut off by that same
Canon, not only from all hopes of Restitution, but from being admitted to a
Trial of the Merits of his Cause. I will not now call in question his being
alive after Meletius was set up, because it is expressly attested by Socrates
and Sozomen, and among others by Nicephorus in his MS. Catalogue of Patriarchs;
especially so remarkable Passages in History depending on it, that of the
Banishment, not only (...) himself, but of Evagrius (whom he had consecrated
Bishop of (...) by the Emperor Valens. This had been enough for our purpose,
though the synodical Deprivation had not been chargeable against him, that he
lay hid, even after the liberty he had of returning from his Exile by the Edict
of Julian; that he did not appear to challenge his Right; that they of Antioch
did not know that he was in being to challenge it. This had made the Throne
itself a Derelictum; this made Meletius a Possessor bonae Fidei, and
sufficiently excused all who paid Duty to him. Undoubtedly Lucifer Calaritanus,
who set up Paulinus in opposition to Meletius, whose return from Exile was then
expected, would never have done it, if he had any thoughts or hopes of the
Return of Eustathius. Eustathius was not only as orthodox as Meletiu^ himself,
but was free from the Charge brought against Meletius, that of an Arian
Ordination. Meletius therefore being thus secured against the Title of
Eustathius, nothing could then be pretended against him, but his receiving his
Power from Arians. But their Heresy was (...) so manifest, when he was brough^
unto Antioch by them; all that (...) required from him was to subscribe the
Creed of Selencia, drawn up Sept. 27. 359. the year before he was translated to
Antioch* and that expressly condemned the Sea the Creed in Socr. l. 2. c. 40.
Anomaeans, and laid aside both Words, that of (...) as well as (...), as
unscriptural: Nor did the Catholics so much insist on the word (...), where
they could otherwise be satisfied, that no ill sense was intended in avoiding
it. This was the only Reason that could make any orthodox Person join with the
Arians in bringing him to Antioch, who otherwise owned no Communion with them,
when they once declared themselves. And as soon as they who brought him to
Antioch owned themselves Anomaeans, as they did soon after, Meletius never
prevaricated, but protested openly against them. And why should that be made an
Exception against him, that he was made Bishop by them who, after they had made
him so, declared themselves Arians? This was looked on as a rigor in Lucifer,
by his Fellow ^onfessor, Eusebius Vercellensis, and Athanasius, and the
generality of the Catholic Church: And if he was guilty of no incapacitating
Heresy at his first coming in; if he owned the Catholic Faith publicly
before the Consecration of Paulinus, and had been a Confessor for it; if even
those who gave him his Orders had not yet declared themselves Arians, nor a
distinct Communion, when they gave them; what Reason could there be to question
his Title before Paulinus was set up against him? If there was none* the other
Consecration being into a f^ll See, must have been schismatical. Thus we see
how agreeable it was to the Canons and Discipline of the Church, that St. Basil
and St. Chrysostom should own the Communion of Meletius in opposition to
Paulinus. It does not appear that ever they did so in opposition to Eustathius:
Yet even in this Case it is observable, that all those Catholics who never
from the beginning communicated with Meletius, and who joined with Lucifer and
Paulinus (...) him, owned other Reasons besides Heresy sufficient to justify
the^^ ^^^paration from him. They did not, they could not charge him with that
after (...) had publicly declared for the Nicene Faith; they never charged
him, as we can our present Intruders, with Injury to any other Person, whom
they supposed to have a better Title to his Throne, neither to his Predecessor
Eustathius, nor much less to Paulinus, who was consecrated after him* The only
thing they charged him with, was the Original Invalidity which they supposed in
his Consecration by those who afterward declared themselves for So Socrates
concerning the Meletians, (...). Lib. 2. c. 44. So elsewhere Paulinus, the
Rival of Meletius, pleads against him: (...). L. 5. c. 5.
Arianism. And could they believe a lawful Power necessary to confer a Title,
and not as necessary to take it away? Rather Laws are favorable to
Possessours, and require more to take away an Office, than to keep one in
Possession whom they find so. They therefore who were so difficultly reconciled
to Meletius's being Bishop, purely on account of the original Want of Authority
in them who made him so, must by the same parity of Reasoning much more have
disliked the Deprivation of our present Bishops, on account of (...) Want of
Authority as to spirituals, and to Conscience, in them who have deprived them.
However (...) a clear Instance against our Adversaries, and against the
Collector himself, of Catholics who owned, and owned by Principles, that
Orthodoxy alone, without a good Title, was not sufficient to excuse
communicating with him whose Title was thought deficient: For this was their
Opinion concerning this Case of Meletius, that he was indeed orthodox, only
having an original Defect in his Title, they thought themselves on this very
acccount obliged to forbear his Communion. How could they then have thought it
safe to communicate with Bishops ordain^^ into See^ not otherwise vacated than
by an originally invalid Lay-Deprivation of their Predecessors?

13. The next Case is (...) of St. Chrysostom. Of St. Chrysostom in
Constantinople.
It is indeed the first in the Summary subjoined to it; probably because it was
the first in the Church of Constantinople, for the use of which this Collection
was originally designed: Or, perhaps rather because that other Case of Meletius
was produced only as another Evidence of the Opinion of the same St.
Chrysostom. This is the Case which the Author is largest upon, as deserving
the particular consideration mentioned in the Introduction to it: The reason I
have now given, because it seems to have been most of all insisted on by the
Arsenians, as most apposite to the Instance for which they were concerned. But,
1. This Deprivation was synodical, and by two different Synods, the former that
ad Quercum, that deprived Saint Chrysostom for not pleading, but questioning
their Jurisdiction upon an Appeal; the other that of the following year, which
denied him the Liberty of Pleading upon the (...) of Antioch, for coming in
again, not without a Synod, but by one (...) they pretended less numerous than
that which had deprived him formerly* So far is this from our present Case.
And, 2. Even as to the abetting this holy Person's Case, as to the In^ury done
him by an otherwise competent Authority, far the greater part of the Church was
concerned against the Design of this Collector, if to the Eastern Joannites
(...) the unanimous Consent of all the Western Churches: They separ^^ed from
the Communion of his Deprivers notwithstanding their ack^^wledged Orthodoxy;
and that not only while Saint Chrysostom was living, but after his Death
also, till an honorable amends was made to his Memory. This, how clear soever
it was against our Author's general Remark in his Preface, and elsewhere; yet
he neither denies nor pretends to answer, a^ if he were conscious to himself he
could not do it: Only he prevents a farther consequence drawn from it by the
Arsenians, for unravelling all the Orders derived in a Succession from the
^njurious Intruders, after the Person was dead who had been injured by the
(...). This also is none of our (...) wherein the injured Bishops are (...)*
yet even concerning that very Case, he words his Observation ^o as to own that
they might* if they pleased, have called in Question ^he present Orders derived
from the Intruders. He says indeed that the Church did not call in question the
Orders given by Arsacius nor Articus, thoug^ Atticus, besides his Intrusion,
was guilty also of what this Author himself owns to have been a Persecution
against the Joannites; so far he is from condemning even their Separation on
this account. He says that A^ticus and Sisinius were commended by Pope
Caelestine, though they both of them derived their Succession from that same
Intrusion; and though the Bishops of Rome were the most zealous Advocates for
St. Chrysostom. He says the same Flaw descended to Proclus also, St.
Chrysostom's Disciple, and the Friend and Reconciler of the Joannites: Nay, to
Nestorius also, the Heretic, who gave occasion for assembling the Synod of
Ephesus; yet the Synod questioned not eve^ (...) Orders, on account of the
original Defect, if the Persons who had received them did not partake in his
Heresy; but that they did not do it he imputes to their not being willing
(...), plainly implying, that in rigor of Justice they might have done it. He
says, that even Severianus of Gabala and Acacius of Beraea, the principal
Architects of the Injustice to St. Chrysostom, though accused to Pope
Innocent, yet suffered no canonical Censure for it; not that they deserved
none, but that the Pope referred them to the Divine Vengeance. Still he
confesses that the Case deserved Vengeance from God, even where none was
attempted by Men. And in the end of the Discourse he says, that, excepting the
Case of Heresy, the Church never made (...). If the Case he reasons against be
strictly Justice, how can he reason from these Precedents universally, without
regard to Circumstances, that even strict Justice is never to be exercised? Yet
he could make no universal Observa^^^^, even in his own Cases, that Right was
never to be defended. He does not observe it concerning St. Chrysostom
himself, though his Editors observe it for him: He could not observe it as the
sense of the more numerous Joannites, who defended his Right whether he would
or no, and at last ca^^ed the Cause against his Adversaries, that his Name was
at length received into the Diptychs, and that he was thereby owned to dye
Bishop of Con^^antinople, notwithstanding the two conciliary Deprivations. The
only Observation therefore that he does or could make truly, was, That a^ ^he
Successions were not scrupulously inquired into, that depended on the Authority
of the Intruders. Those were left to God, on a Presumption grounded on their
Possession with at least a disputable Title. But that is a Case we are not
concerned for at present.

Of Flavianus.
14. The third Case is that of Flavianus, deposed from the same See of
Constantinople by Dioscorus, against whom our Author supposes Anatolius to have
been set up, whose Consecration was notwithstanding never questioned, because
of his Orthod^^y. But this Deposition our Author himself owns to have been
conciliary, though by a Synod very infamous, afterward stigmatized by the name
of (...), or Latrocinial, for the Violence used in it. Then it appears not,
that ever Flavianus did in the least submit to that Synod itself: He had before
appealed, and his Appeal was then depending when they murdered him. Then for
my part I can see no reason to believe that Anatolius was set up against him,
or placed in the Throne before it was empty by the Death of Flavianus. Victor
Tununensis makes Anatolius set up under the following Consuls. Possibly it
might be because the first News of his Promotion came to Africa under those
Consuls. That second Synod of Ephesus was called the 1st of August, under the
Consulship of Asterius and Protogenes, for the Year of our Lord 449. But their
first Meeting was not till the 8th of that same month, or the 15th of Mesori,
in the Language of Dioscorus. Certain it is, that it was after this time that
^^^vianus was deposed and murdered: But we have not so distinct an account of
the Actions of this Council, repeated in the Council of Chalcedon, as to be
able to ascertain the time particularly. Pope Leo's Epistles help us best to
judge of it; only we must allow him the time to receive his Information. Leo
tells us that Flavianus had suffered many things in an Epistle dated September.
29. Ep. 42. in Edit. Pasch. Quesnel.
Perhaps he was before that deposed: For the same day the same Leo wrote
another Epistle to the Emperor Theodosius, for a Council in Italy, probably on
the account of Flavianus's Appeal upon his Deposition. Ep. 43. Quesnel.
In another Epistle of October. 13. he warns Anastasius Thessalonicensis, that he
should not consent to the Condemnation of Flavianus. Ep. 45 Quesnel.
In another of October. 15. he is very earnest that no Successor should be
ordained into his Place. In another of the same date he has these words
concerning Flavianus, Ep 47. Quesnel.
in quo utique omnium Domini Sacerdotum Reverentia caeditur, and universa
corporis Christi Membra pulsantur. These seem to be the Kicks he received, as
some say, Act. Council. Chalced. Evag. l. 2. c. 11. Nicephor. Eccl. Hist.
xiv.47. Zonar.
from Barsumas the Monk, other from ^ioscorus himself; probably enough from
both of them, of which he dyed within three days. That he dyed of Kicks the
Synodicon owns; and that he dyed in their Hands by whom he should have been
carried into Exile, we have the Testimony of Prosper, an Author of that Age; so
that he could not reach the place of his Banishment, as some other less
considerable Authors conceive: And very probably those Violences to Flavianus's
Person, and to the other Bishops also, to oblige them to subscribe his
Condemnation and Deprivation, were the Reasons that made Hilarus fly from
Ephesus: So the Violences must, in all likelihood, have been offered before he
left the place; and he might bring News, if not of his Death, yet that his
Bruises were such as would in all probability prove mortal. This might be the
Reason why, among the Letters of this latest date there are none to Flavianus
himself. Leo might not think it fit to write Letters that were not likely to
reach him alive, but would be exposed to the danger of falling into the hands
of Enemies. This I think is the latest date of any Epistle written by Leo that
mentions Flavianus as yet alive. And very probably the News of his imminent
Death stopped him from proceeding any farther: So Nicephorus xiv.40. Thus it
appears that the last mention of Flavianus supposes that he had, as yet, no
Rival set up against him. Plain it is, that they did not set up Anatolius at
the same time that they deposed Flavianus; and it is not likely that there was
any long respite between his Deposition and his Death. Flavianus certainly was
murdered before the breaking up of the Synod, whilst Dioscorus had yet his
Guards about him: And it seems to be the dissolution of the Synod that breaks
off the course of Leo's Letters, till the following Year. As for Anatolius
himself, we have no Actions of his that give us any reason to suspect that he
was in Office before the Year assigned by Victor. The first thing it concerned
him to take care of for settling his Communion with the West, was to put out a
Confession of his Faith, according to the Custom of tha^ ^ge: The rather,
because of the late suspicion on account of Eutyches, who had lately been
cleared by Anatolius's Friends. This he indeed delayed; possibly to see what
effect the Letters of Valentinian and Placidia would have with his Emperor
Theodosius. Nor did Leo receive his Confession till about Easter, of the year
451. Before that time it is probable Theodosius had put Chrysaphius to death,
which obliged Anatolius to take this course when he found the Eutychian
Interest declining, and that it would be no longer able to support him. Yet the
first Complaint against him for not doing it is in an Epistle of Leo to
Pulcheria, bearing date July 20. 450. We should in all likelihood have had
earlier ones, if Anatolius had succeeded, as our Author fancies, whilst
Flavianus was yet living, in the year 449. The best Testimony we have that
assures us that Anatolius was preferred under the Consuls of the year 449. is a
Fragment of Theodorus Lector, preserved in the 2d Nicene Council, which
Baronius did not think of. And particularly it is observed by Zonaras, that
Dioscorus concerned himself in that which did not belong to him, the making of
a Bishop of Constantinople: But the Reason Zonaras gives why he did so, and why
he recommended his own Apocrisiarius to the place, shows that it must have been
after the Death of Flavianus. That Author tells us, that it was the Fear
Dioscorus was in that put him upon it: He therefore suggests to Chrysaphius,
the Author of all these Mischiefs, that he would persuade the Emperor to name
Anatolius to the Throne of Flavianus hoping thereby to gain two Points, (as the
same Author observes,) very necessary to his ill Designs: One was, that
Eutyches might be continued in the Constantinopolitane Communion, to which he
had been restored; another was, that he might thereby prevent any accurate
Enquiry into the Matter of Flavianus. Plainly it appears by this Account of the
Affair, that the Fear Dioscorus was in was that of being called to Account for
this Murder* which being the Cause, must therefore be antecedent to his
Interposition for a Successor. This is certain* it was not proper to interpose
for ^ Successor, till they had first deprived Flavianus: And those Bruises
being given him at the very time of his Appeal, which was immediately upon his
Deprivation, it thence appears, that there were only three days respite
between his deprivation and his death; which is by much too short a time to
write from Ephesus to Constantinople, and to receive a Return; so impossible it
is that Anatolius could have been set up before the death of Flavianus, or that
he could have made any Cession to Anatolius, as our Collectour fancies. He did
not withal consider how unlikely it was that Flavianus should pay any
Deference to Anatolius at that time* on that very account which himself excepts
from any Obligation to such deference, that of Heresy. Anatolius himself was
at that time j^stly suspicious of it, as coming in by Eutychian Interest; nor
did he, till some time after, do any thing to purge himself from that
Suspicion. Nay, we are told, that at the very time Dioscorus designed him for
the Place, he communicated with Eutyches. Nay more, that Dioscorus recommended
him for that very reason, that he might thereby continue Eutyches in the
Communion to which he had restored him: How therefore could Flavianus yield to
Anatolius? How could our Author, if he had done it, commend him for it, and
plead his Fact as a Precedent, so contrary to his own Principles? Yet if our
Author's Observation prove mistaken, and Anatolius did not succeed till after
Flavianus's Death; his whole Reasoning will fail him, will at least fail our
present Adversaries, for obliging wrongfully deprived Bishops to a Cession of
their Title to schismatical Usurpers. All the ground he has to think Flavianus
was then alive when Anatolius was possessed of his Throne, is only Guess, not
any competent historical Testimony. He refers us, in the end, after this
manner, to the Acts of that second Ephesine Synod; I suppose as we find them
still extant in the Council of Chalcedon. But there we find nothing concerning
the Consecration of Anatolius; not so much as whether Dioscorus and the Synod
were any ways concerned in it, or whether it was done before the Synod was
dissolved: So far we are from learning thence that he was set up before the
death of Flavianus. He might think it more to his purpose what he has observed
out of the Epistle of Pope Leo to the Emperor Marcianus, where that Pope
pretends, that it was the Orthodoxy of Anatolius, (no doubt as signified by his
Confession of Faith, which he had at length received from him*) that hindered
him from enquiring too scrupulously into his Ordination: But the delays he used
before he sent that Confession, made him justly liable to Suspicion* together
with his Personal Interest in the Eutychians, though he had otherwise received
no Consecration from them. And the uttermost that can be conjectured from hence
was, that he had received his Orders from their hands, not that he received
them whilst Flavianus was yet alive, much less that Flavianus himself had made
any Cession to him on account of his Orthodoxy. Thus the Case had not been like
ours, of a schismatical Invasion of a Right, to which another had a better
Title, but of a Title defective indeed, (in regard of the Authority from whence
it had been derived,) but not injurious: That is, it had been a Case like that
of Meletius, and Catholics would have been here as much as there divided in
their Opinions concerning it. If the Council of Chalcedon did not enquire
concerning it, yet Leo certainly thought he might lawfully have done, it when
he upbraids his not doing it as a Kindness to Anatolius, in his Disputes with
him concerning the Canon made in that Council of Chalcedon equalling the Sea of
Constantinople to that of Rome.

15. I come now to the Time of Anastasius Dicorus. And here our Author has
several Examples; In the time of Anastasius Dicorus, 1. The Instance of
Euphemius.
the first is of Euphemius, whom he calls constantly Euthimius, both here, and
in the Summary, as also Eutychius, and Cedrenus, and Metaphrastes do, such
other Authors as himself; and not only they, but also the Fathers of the VII^^^
General Council, Act. 6. Nicephorus Callistus does constantly call him
^^phemius, both in his extant History, and in his MS. Catalogue of Patriarchs.
But as little as Anastasius loved this Euphemius upon old accounts, yet he
durst not depri^e him without a Synod; no, though his immediate Charge against
him was a secular Crime, that of his being pretended to have favored the
Emperor's Enemies the Isaurians. This is like what is now pretended against
our present H. Fathers; yet it is certain he had a synodical Deprivation: So
(...). Theod. Lect. L. 2. (...). Theophanes.
Theodorus Lector and Theophanes tell us expressly. It was indeed by (...), of
the Bishops then in Town, whose Authority though it was questioned for the
greatest Affairs (as appears in the 4th Action of the Council of Chalcedon, and
the Dispute of Maximus with Pyrrhus,) yet was often made use of in such
occasions as these, and was by the Canons of the Church sufficient and
obliging, till a greater number of Bishops could be persuaded to restore him.
Till he could get such a Number to do it, it was the Duty of Euphemius to
acquiess in the Deprivation, and to communicate with his Successor; and it will
be our present Bishops Duty also to do so, when this can be proved to be their
Case. And indeed I know no other Evidence of his communicating with his
Successor, but that he did not set up a Communion against him.

2. Of Macedonius.
16. In the Case of Macedonius the Emperor's Rage did somewhat precipitate him;
he had him forcibly seized, and sent immediately into Banishment, without so
much as the Formality of a Trial: The rather so, because he feared the People
would not endure it, such a Zeal they had for Macedonius, and the Cause
defended by him. Afterward he bethought himself, and got an Assembly that did
his business for him: They took upon them at the same time the Persons of
Witnesses and Accusers, and deprived him absent and in exile; and when they had
done so, they notify the Sentence to him by Bishops and a Presbyter of
Cyzicus: So Theophanes tells the Story. No doubt it must have been a Synod that
proceeded after the received way of Synods, in notifying their Sentence by
ecclesiastical Persons. However our Author says, that he communicated with his
Intruder Timotheus: So he might possibly interpret Macedonius's Exile and
submitting to it, as he seems to have done that of Euphemius, in relation to
the Case of Macedonius. In this case, certainly it neither could have been
true, nor could he have any good Testimony for him to believe it so. When the
Bishops came to notify the Sentence to him Macedonius, Theoph. and Niceph. E.
H. xvi.26.
asked them, whether they owned the Council of Chalcedon? And when they durst
not answer him positively, he asked again, Whether if the Sabbatians and
Macedonians had brought him the like Sentence, they would think him obliged to
acquiesce in it? Is not this a plain Exception against their Authority as
Heretics, for not receiving that Council, and a Protestation against their
Sentence as null and invalid, and a disowning any Obligation in Conscience to
submit to it? And what needed Timotheus to fly into that Rage against the Name
and Memory of Macedonius, if what our Author says had been true, that
Macedonius owned any Communion with him? Why should this same Timotheus refuse
to officiate in any sacred Place, till he had first defaced the Pictures, if he
found any, of Macedonius? Theod. Lect. 2. Niceph. xvi.26.
Why should he prosecute Julianus only for being his Friend? How came it to
pass that when the Emperor sent forth his Edict, for subscribing the
Condemnation of Macedonius, Theoph.
together with the Synodical Letters concerning the Consecration of Timotheus;
the more constant Adherers to the Council of Chalcedon would subscribe neither
of them, and even the weaker would not subscribe the Deprivation of Macedonius,
which notwithstanding in consequence subverted the Succession of Timotheus?
Theod. Lect. l. 2.
Why should Timotheus bring up the use of the Nicene Creed more frequently than
Macedonius had done, purposely to draw odium upon Macedonius, if there had been
Communion between them as our Author would persuade us? What needed then all
those Persecutions and Violences against the followers of Macedonius, but only
to force them to the Communion of Timotheus? Theoph.
Why did Juliana, as an Assertor of the Council of Chalcedon, Theoph.
refuse the Communion of Timotheus, if it was not manifest that the difference
was such as broke Communion? Theod. Lect. l. 2.
Why should the Prefect of the Studite Monks refuse to receive Consecration
from him who had condemned the Council of Chalcedon, if it had not been
notorious that he had condemned the Council, Theoph.
and was therefore an Heretic, and of another Communion from them who owned
that Council, in defense of which Macedonius had been banished? He did indeed,
to please them, Anathemize those who had Anathematized that Council; but when
the Emperor expostulated with him concerning it, he pretended to mean his
Anathematism against those who received the Council: So true he was to his
Heresy. One would admire whence it was that our Author came by that good
Opinion he had of this Timotheus, as if he also had been a Catholic; and the
3d Catholic Bishop of Constantinople, who had been deprived by Anastasius.
Neither of these things were true, nor affirmed by, I believe, any one good
Historian. Our MS. Catalogue of Patriarchs, by Nicephorus Callistus, has either
Marginal or Interlineal Censures of the Patriarchs, whether Orthodox or
Heretical; in all likelihood, according to the received Opinions of the Time
and Church where these Observations were made. There in an interlineal Note,
over the place where he speaks of Timotheus, we find him called (...). It is of
no great consequence to our purpose, whether this Note was from Nicephorus
himself, or some Constantinopolitane Librarian; either way it will show the
received Opinion of the Modern Constantinopolitanes. So also in the Iambicks
concerning the Patriarchs published before the I Volume of the Byzantine
Historians, Timotheus is with some Indignation called (...), by which we see
how unworthily our present Rhetor expressed himself on this occasion, even with
reference to the sense of his own Church. The only occasion of his Mistakes,
that I can think of, is that he injudiciously followed the Authorities of
Flavian of Antioch, and Elias of Jerusalem, as related by Cyrillus
Scythopolitanus his Author, and a very good one in these Matters. That Author
says indeed, that those two Patriarchs assented to the Synodical Letters for
Timotheus, though they would not to the other Letters that came with them
concerning the deprivation of Macedonius. Theoph.
This, I suppose, gave him occasion for his good Opinion of Timotheus, that
those great Men, afterward such Sufferers in the same Cause, as yet rejected
not his synodical Letters. Our Author was very well aware, that if they owned
the Communion of an Heretical Successor, their Examples must have been faulty,
and could not be pleaded as Precedents by his own Principles; and it seems he
was not aware how notorious it was, that this was indeed the Case of Timotheus.
But their Behavior herein was exactly the same with the Behavior of those
whom Theophanes censures as weak; so far he is from our Author's Opinion, in
making it exemplary: And it is plain Macedonius and Timotheus differed not only
as Rivals of the same See, but also as Heads of different Communions: How then
was it reconcilable to any Principles, to own Timotheus without disowning
Macedonius? Only the receiving Timotheus might, as for a while it did, keep
them in their Thrones.

Euphemius, Macedonius, Flavianus, and Elias, were so untrue to Principles,
that it ^s not easy to gather from their Facts what even themselves thought
agreeable to Principles. Evagr. III.31.
17. The Truth is, these Men were all so fickle and untrue to Principles for a
long time, that it is impossible to gather from their bare Facts what they did
consequently even to their own Principles. Euphemius himself, though he
afterward declared himself Synodically for the Council of Chalcedon, yet came
in at first upon the Henoticon of Zeno: So also was his Successor Macedonius at
first brought in on the same Condition of owning the same Henoticon: So
Theodorus and Theophanes. Accordingly the Emperor's Instruments got from him a
Confession of Faith, mentioning neither the 3d nor 4th Councils; upon which his
People of Constantinople deserted him till he returned to own the Council of
Chalcedon: so we are told by a Coaeval Monument of that Age, an Epistle of the
Palestine Monks to Alcyso in Evagrius. How could Euphemius then own his
Communion, even by our Author's Principles, as of an Orthodox Successor? This
was about the end of the Year 495. Cedrenus tells us, he again relapsed to his
Henoticon in the 8th Year of the same Emperor Anastasius, that was about the
Year 499. After he again declared for the Synod of Chalcedon, with that Zeal,
as that he Anathematized Flavianus and his Legates for declaring against it.
This was the 19th Year of Anastasius, if we may trust Theophanes concerning it;
that is, about the Year 510. Not only so, but a little before his Expulsion;
that is, in the 21st Year of the same Prince; that is, after the beginning of
April, 511. Celer again prevails on him to receive the Henoticon, aad to omit
the 3d and 4th Council as he had done formerly, though he presently retracted
it, and was therefore immediately banished: Nor was Flavianus of Antioch more
constant than he. Immediately on his coming into the Sea, no doubt the bigoted
Emperor made him speak home to his Cause, before he would permit him; and
accordingly Victor Tununensis tells us, that in a Synod of Constantinople,
under the Consuls of the Year 499, (if he be more to be trusted here, than
usually he is, in assigning Years,) he condemned the Tome of Leo, and the
Council of Chalcedon. After this Cyrillus Scythopolitanus says, he joined with
Macedonius and Elias in defending the same Council. Again in the 18th Year of
the same Reign, that is in the Year 509, he declares as high for the Eutychians
as themselves could wish: Theoph.
He condemns the Council of Chalcedon; He condemns the Confession of two
Natures in our Blessed Savior; He condemns all the Persons concerned in the
Disputes concerning the tria Capitula, who had been absolved in the Council of
Chalcedon, and the Council that absolved them. And the next Year he was
condemned himself for condemning them, as we have seen, by his old Friend
Macedonius. But he recovered himself again, and again provoked the Emperor, who
therefore assembles the Council of Sidon, purposely to overthrow the Council of
Chalcedon, and to depose Flavianus and Elias from their Sees: This affrightens
them both, and they send Saba to intercede for them to the Emperor, with
flattering and trimming Letters. Thus Flavianus escaped that Storm, and the
Council of Sidon was dismissed without doing any thing against him: This was in
the Year 512. Immediately he returns to his old Orthodoxy, which puts the
Emperor out of all Patience, when he received the News from Sotericus and
Philoxenus, that by these pretended Submissions he had made him dismiss the
Synod so fruitlesly. Cyril tells us the hard (...) and (...).
words the Emperor used concerning it, which I am loath to translate. Hereupon
he orders his Informers to use what means they thought fit to get him out of
his place; they then repair to Antioch, and with some Bribes set the Rabble
upon the Bishop, and force him once more to Anathematize the Synod of
Chalcedon, and then send him into Exile. These are the express words of
Cyrillus, which Baronius is willing to understand of an Endeavor to force him,
but without Success. So I would also have been willing to understand him, if he
had not frequently been guilty of such Apostasies. But here particularly it
appears, that the Endeavors were successful, from the express (...). Theoph.
Testimony, and the very Reason Theophanes gives why they banished him
notwithstanding his Compliance; that is, because he anathematized that Council
with his Mouth only, not with his Heart: But perhaps Elias, the great, the
blessed Elias, as our Author styles him, was more true to Principles. He was as
frail as the rest, and as little resolute in resisting any force that the
Exigence of his Affairs brought him under. No doubt he came in first, as all
must have done who were preferred by that Emperor, by Promises for opposing the
Chalcedon Council; but he soon recovered, and joined first with Euphemius, then
with Macedonius and Flavianus, in defense of it. After he relapsed again, and
condemns it again before the banishment of Macedonius, and went so far, that
his Example was made use of by the Emperor to persuade Macedonius to follow him
in it: So Theod. Lector and Theoph. But when Macedonius was banished, he
received the communicatory Letters of Timotheus, but would not those concerning
the Deprivation of Macedonius. This again provokes the Emperor against him:
Accordingly the Synod of Sydon was called with full design of condemning the
Council of Chalcedon, and banishing him. Then he wrote the (...), Vit. Sab. n.
52.
mentioned by Cyrillus. Baronius indeed endeavors to bring him off, by
observing from the Letter of the Palestine Monks to Alcyso, that Elias
pretended something to have been added to his Letters in relation to his
condemning the Doctrine of two Natures in Christ: And to prove this Elias
produced a Copy of his own Letter he had kept by him, wherein there were no
such Words. Cyrillus has nothing of this: But be that as it will, it seems
however clear, that he was very express in condemning the Council of Chalcedon,
and that his Expressness in that particular, with the Intercession of Saba, was
that which secured him against the Council of Sidon. As Flavianus then owned
only three Councils, taking no notice of the Council of Chalcedon; so Elias did
indeed mention it; but so as withal to signify that he did not receive it. So
Theophanes; and not only he, but his great Admirer Cyrillus explains what he
meant by the flattering and trimming Words, made use of by him in his Letter to
the Emperor: Ib. 52.
He tells us the very Words of his Letter, as the Emperor himself signified
them to Sabas, that he did not approve of what was done in Chalcedon, for the
Scandals that followed thereupon: And when he refused to receive Severus to his
Communion, he tells us again, that the Emperor sent his trimming Epistle from
Sidon as an Evidence against him, professing that he did not own the Council of
Chalcedon; Ib. 56.
nor does he in the least signify that Elias had any thing to say to it that
could satisfy him: He intimates the contrary, when he calls them (...), Shifts
and Artifices of Evasion, to serve a present Turn; so little Reasoning there is
from such Men's Facts as these, where there is nothing more than the bare Facts
themselves to recommend them for Precedents. No Facts can certainly be allowed
for Precedents, that are not agreeable to Principles, and how can we presume
Facts to be agreeable to Principles, merely because they are theirs, who are
known so frequently and so easily to vary from the Principles themselves
profess, and own for Principles? We see they corresponded with so notorious a
Heretic as Timotheus, which is more than ever our Author's own Principles
would have allowed them, rather than hazard their Places: Why should we then
wonder if they had corresponded with Schismatics, even such as themselves took
for such? Why should our Author presume such correspondence allowable, because
allowed by them, who did so many things not allowable even by their own
Principles? I do not willingly detract from the Merits of these Excellent
Persons for what they did afterward; but there is no reason, that their
Repentance at last should commend the Prevarications they were guilty of
before, and make them pass for Precedents.

18. Besides these, The Deprivation of Elias, Bishop of Jerusalem, in the same
Reign, how Synodical.
our Author produces another Example in the same Reign, that of Elias himself:
He also was at length deprived, and John was set up against him; yet both of
them were owned by Theodosius, and Sabas. They owned John for their Bishop, and
yet the compassion they had for Elias's Case appeared by the visit they made
him in his Exile. Accordingly our Author appeals to the Dyptichs of the Church,
which mention both of them with Honor and Respect. The Expulsion of Elias from
his See to his place of Exile was managed immediately with that violence which
was ordinarily used by the Emp^ror Anastasius in most of his undertakings:
Olympus did it with a Guard of Soldiers; yet certainly the Emperor's sending a
Copy of Elias's Dissembling Letter to be shown at the doing of it, was not
without a particular design. Had he thought his own Authority sufficient for
it, his own satisfaction alone had been sufficient; and so Assuming and
Imperious a Temper as his was, would not have condescended to give others an
account of his proceedings; especially where withal there was no form of a
Judicial Process, where these Letters might have been produced as Legal
Evidence. I need not produce the many Testimonies of that Age, as well as
others, concerning the Incompetency of his Secular Power for a Spiritual
Deprivation: The actings of this Emperor himself do sufficiently show, that
himself was sensible, how little his Lay-Authority would signify in such a
case as this was, without a Synod. What made him else take that pains to
assemble the Synod of Sidon, purposely with a design of Deposing Flavianus and
Elias? What made him in such a Rage, when by their prevaricating Letters they
had eluded that Synod? What made him after he had driven away Macedonius from
Constantinople by plain force, afterward to order a Synodical Judgment and
Censure of his Case, but that himself did not, before that second Judgment, as
Theophanes observes, look upon him as Deprived even when he was in his Exile?
But by this sending the Letter of Elias, he seemed only to execute the Synod's
Judgment concerning him, which had certainly Deprived him, if he had not eluded
them by that Letter. His Exposing therefore that Letter seems to have been to
show, that he was not now the person whom the Synod continued in their
Communion, but that person rather, whom they had designed to Condemn, and
Deprive. Thus he might very well believe this present Act to be only an
Execution of that Synod's design, and so not chargeable with any Invasion on
the Sacred Authority. I am not now concerned to justify this reasoning, as
Solid, and Concluding; it is sufficent at present to observe, how probable it
is, that it was at least the reasoning of Anastasius; That alone will
sufficiently overthrow the Consequences from it, as a Precedent to invade the
Sacred Power. It thence appears, that without this Interpretative Application
of the Synod's design, the Fact had not been justifiable, even by the
sentiments of him that did it: How then can it be pleaded as a Precedent? It
shows withal, that with this Interpretative Application here was a Synodical
Deprivation, which might validly deprive Elias of his Right, in the Opinion of
those who judged the Interpretation reasonable.

Elias was in reason obliged to yield to John, though not on the Account of his
Orthodoxy.
19. But whether the Deprivation was valid or not, no doubt Elias, by his own
Cession, might ratify that Ordination of John, which otherwise had been
invalid and unobliging: And this Cession might be known by his not-challenging
his Right, and by his not-taking it ill at their hands, who owned his Rival for
their Patriarch, and by the Friendly behavior of his Rival to him in
continuing his Name in the Ecclesiastical Dyptichs, if he was not afterward
restored, but then continued, as our Author supposes: Otherwise this form in
the Jerusalem Dyptichs, mentioned by our Author, of wishing the Memory of Elias
and John perpetual; like that in the Tomus Vnionis in Constantinople, seems
rather as if it were brought in after their deaths, to accommodate some
differences, that might have been formerly between Parties, that had been made
on their Accounts. Indeed I know no mention of any express Cession in any Good
Author, unless we may be allowed to conjecture it from some such Reasonings as
those now mentioned. But what if we should grant them that he yielded his Right
to John? This single instance will not suffice to justify the Author's
Universal Observation, that it never was insisted on by any, where the
Successor was not an Heretic; it will not suffice to show, that he thought
himself obliged to it by Principles, who in many other things acted so
disagreeable to Principles: It will not thence appear, that he did do it out of
fear, when by challenging his Right and by persuading his People to withdraw
from the Communion of his Successor, intruded by the Emperor, he must have
provoked him who was so easily provoked, to new Severities against him. Indeed
he could not expect Duty from his own Subjects, who had countenanced so many
Intruders, even Timotheus the Heretic, and approved so many Revoltings of
Subjects in the injurious deprivations of his Brethren. And can our Adversaries
with any reason make these Actions pass for Precedents, to which he was
necessitated by the consequence of his own past Behavior, and the Exigency of
his Cause? I am sure, he had no great reason to think his Flock secure under
the Conduct of so Fickle a Successor. John had departed from his Principle,
when it was not his fear, but only his Ambition, that could induce him to it;
in order to his getting into the place, had promised both to anath^matize the
Council of Chalcedon, and to Communicate with Severus. Cyrillus Vit. Sab N. 56.
And that he did not stand to his promise the reason was manifest; he feared
that if he had done so, that his Clergy and his People would not stand by him:
Still it does not seem to have been his Conscience that kept him right, but his
Ambition. That very soon appeared when afterward he was imprisoned for this
Violation of his former promise: He then as easily repeats the promise, as he
had formerly broken it; only he pretended, that he might not seem to perform it
unwillingly, it was fit he should first be set at liberty. When he had thus
wheedled the Prefect, and got his Guard of Monks about him, that he no longer
feared him; he then does as the Monks, not as the Prefect would have him, and
anathematizes Severus and Sotericus, and all who would not receive the Council
of Chalcedon. Then he frightens away the Emperor's Prefect; and the famed
Sabas, and Theodosius, with their ten thousand Monks, were as active as any in
it. If these Men's actions were counted exemplary then, yet I am sure, they
would not have been thought so in the first, and purest* Ages of our Christian
Religion. Well might Cyrillus call them (...). But Christianity was too far
degenerated, when these were counted Titles of Honor in such pretenders to
Mortification, and Renouncers of the World. Our present Holy Fathers have more
of the Primitive Spirit of Christianity, than to think themselves obliged to
follow such Examples.

20. Our Author now directs from the Throne of Constantinople to that of
Jerusalem: Maximus, Bishop of Jerusalem, was in all likelihood not deprived by
Acacius, Bishop of Caesarea.
and from the time of Anastasius to that of Great Athanasius: so it should seem
this Example occured to his memory. He tells us therefore; that when Athanasius
was Condemned in the Synod of Tire* he fled to Maximus of Jerusalem, and was by
him restored by a Synod convened by him, where he Decreed for (...) and
repealed the Synod of Tire* This, the Author says, provoked the Bishop of
Caesarea against him: He must mean Acacius, the Ringleader of the Arian
Faction in those parts. Acacius then, he says, gathers a Synod against Maximus,
and deprives him, and sets up Cyril against him, who at that time professed
Arianism. Afterward Cyril declares for (...), and then Maximus and he was
reconciled, and owned the same Communion: So our Author. But very little of
this story is true, even as to matter of Fact; and yet if it had been all so,
it is nothing to our Adversaries purpose. Very little of it is true, as to
matter of Fact. First, at the Synod of Tire, it is certain Athanasius did not
fly to Jerusalem, but to Constantinople to make his Case known to the Emperor
himself. It had been at that time in vain to have had recourse to Maximus, who
in that very Synod of Tire had given his Suffrage against him. He did indeed
see his Error afterward, but it was many years first: Athanasius was condemned
in the Synod of Tire, in the year 335. But the time when Maximus convened his
Synod, and declared for Athanasius, was in the year 350. when at the
Interposition of the Emperor Constans, Athanasius was released from his
Banishment. Then Maximus did indeed declare for him, and that Synodically. But
all that we can find Acacius did against him, was to upbraid him with his
inconsistency, and by his contrary Vote in the Synod of Tire. Socrates indeed
does elsewhere imply, That when Cyril was brought to the Throne of Jerusalem,
Soc. II.38.
Maximus was driven from it; and he is, I believe, the only ancient Author near
those times that does so much as imply it. Theod. II.26. in Chron. Eusebius.
co^tin.
Theodoret is very express in making Cyril's Succession after the death of
Maximus: so also is St. Jerome, who lived nearer the remembrance of that Fact
than Socrates himself. He tells us, That before the Arians would admit Cyril to
the place, they obliged him first to renounce his Orders of Presbyter, which he
had received from Maximus; and that, when he was in, Heraclius also, who had
been taken by Maximus himself for his Successor, was by Cyril also obliged to
degrade himself to the Order of Presbyter. We have in the same See of Jerusalem
a very ancient instance of a Bishop who brought in his Successor. So Eusebius
tells us, Narcissus did Alexander, a Bishop of Cappadocia; -- who also adds,
that that Election was ratified by a Divine Testimony. But who can believe that
Maximus would have brought in a Successor, if himself had been deposed and
dispossessed? Who can think he would have actually have made him Bishop, if
himself had not been so actually? The whole occasion of the mistake seems to
have been, not that Maximus himself was removed to make way for Cyril, but
rather Heraclius who had been substituted by Maximus. For this was indeed a
case sometimes questioned in the Discipline of the Church, whether a Bishop
might be allowed to Substitute his own Successor: The Records of the Church of
Jerusalem are in these times very intricate and difficult. When Cyril himself
was banished by the Arians, we have the Names of three persons who filled his
See in the interval before he was restored. Among them there is one Heraclius,
possibly this very person who took the advantage of Cyril's Deprivation for
recovering his Right which was conferred on him by Maximus. And as to the
dispute concerning the Privileges of their Sees* Theodoret, who gives us the
most distinct account of this matter, tells us it was started in the time of
Cyril, who was deprived after by Acacius, among other causes, for this also of
maintaining the Privileges of his own See. It is very true, Jerusalem, though
it had the Title of a Patriarchal See, yet had no Patriarchal Jurisdiction till
the Council of Chalcedon, but was subject to the Metropolitan of Caesarea.
Even the Council of Nice which owned it for Patriarchal, did notwithstanding
reserve to Caesarea the Privilege of being the Metrapolitane. But the Honor
of Maximus's Age, and of his having been a Confessor in the Persecution (which
in that Age was very great) made no doubt the Adversaries of his Cause have
notwithstanding a great veneration for his Person. These reasons ceased in
Cyril, who was at first set up by Arian Interest, and with him his Competitors
of the same Faction did therefore think they might be more bold. Accordingly
then it was that those Controversies fell among the Arians concerning (...),
which broke them in pieces among themselves, as Epiphanius assures us, Epiph.
Her. LXXIII.
who lived in the nearest memory of them of any Author now extant that mentions
them. And Eutychius one of the principal Rivals of Cyril in these disputes, had
been a Disciple of Maximonas, (so Epiph^nius calls Maximus the Predecessor of
Cyril;) and therefore seems to have had a great veneration for his Memory, and
was therefore unlikely to have started this dispute in his time. In that
dispute Cyril was so far from acknowledging any Superiority in the Bishop of
Caesarea, that it seems he challenged a Right of filling the Sea himself, and
contested it with that Eutychius, Bishop of Elutheropolis: But that seems to
have been after the time of Acacius, after his second Restitution. His first
Contest was with Acacius himself of Caesarea, and Patrophilus of Scythopolis,
the same persons who are supposed to have been concerned in the Deprivation of
Maximus: And that the Deprivation of Cyril by Acacius, was by some mistake
taken for a Deprivation of Maximus in favor of Cyril, we have reason to
conjecture from The phanes himself: He, though he follows our Author's Opinion,
(probably on the same Authority of the Life of Athanasius, which was elder than
Theophanes,) yet places it as the Truth required he should, not at the time of
the entrance of Cyril, but at the year of his Deprivation, and the Succession
of Hilarion, whom he makes his immediate Successor. What can thence be clearer
than that it was the Deprivation of Cyril, not his Promotion, that was here
performed by Acacius; especially when we are withal as^ured that those
disputes, which occasioned this Deprivation, concerning Prerogative, were
started first in the time of Cyril? All that the Adversaries of Maximus and
Athanasius did, on this restoring of Athanasius by Maximus in the Synod of
Jerusalem, was (as Socrates himself observes) only (...), to jeer Maximus for
it, that he himself should restore him who had voted against him in the Synod
of Tire. How came he here to forget his carrying on his resentment farther
afterward to the Deprivation of Maximus? How comes he here not to mention at
least the anger of Acacius as well as his jeerin^ if he had resented this Synod
of Maximus, and the determination o^ it, as an invation of his Prerogative; if
this had been the cause why he afterward deprived him, if his ground for
saying so had not been rather mistaken conjectures, than express and positive
Authoritties? So little ground he had for believing that Cyril was set up
against Maximus. Has he therefore any express Testimony for the Communion
between Maximus and Cyril, as Anti-Bishops of the same See? No, not so much as
in his Celebrated Life of Athanasius it self; neither as we have it extant at
present, nor as we have the Sum of it in Photius. Phot. Cod. 258.
He only seems to guess at that, as he has done at other things now mentioned,
from presuming the matter of Fact, that they both at once pretended Espiscopal
Authority in the same District, and yet had both their Names continued in the
Ecclesi^stical Diptychs.

The Life of Athanasius no good Authority. The D^privation of Maximus, if true,
had not been for our Adversaries Purpose, because Synodical.
21. In truth, the Credit of all our Author says to his own purpose, is wholly
resolved into that Life of Athan^sius, which is vouched for it. In the Appendix
to the Paris Edition we have two Lives of that Great Man, one by Metaphrastes,
the other by an unknown Author, elder perhaps than Metaphrastes: Both of them
own this Tale, that Maximus was deposed by Acacius. If either of them was the
Life read by Photius, that of the Anonymous Author was the more likely of the
two. Metaphrastes was manfestly too late for him; otherwise the Excerpta of
Photius do better agree with Metaphrastes. Photius takes no notice of the Notes
of Time which are frequent in the Anonymous Life, though he otherwise uses to
take particular notice of such things in the Authors on which he makes his
Observations. But in making two Tyrian Synods, wherein the Cause of Athanasius
was debated, he better agrees with Metaphrastes. Perhaps therefore there was a
third Life seen by Photius, and interpolated, after his manner, by
Metaphrastes, which perished after the interpolation, which also mentioned this
pretended Deprivation of Maximus by Acacius. Yet even that Elder Life also, by
the account of it in Photius, seems to have been such a Life of Athanasius as
Hierome Savier's Gospel was of our Savior: The several Forgeries and Mistakes
of his Predecessors are taken in, and his own added to them. Here we are told
of Athanasius's acting the part of Bishop while he was a Boy, and that
Alexander the then Bishop ratified what he did in that sportive Personation,
though he would have it believed that the Children were Serious in what they
did. But how could they be Serious in taking upon them Exercises of an
Authority that did not belong to them? This in all likelihood he had from the
Greek Translation of Ruffinus's Addition to Eusebius's History, by which
Socrates confesses he had been seduced in several things concerning Athanasius,
before he consulted the Works of Athanasius himself. Here we also read the Tale
of Athanasius's absconding for several years with a young and beautiful Virgin:
This seems also to have been taken from the truly Monkish Historia Lausiaca of
Palladius. Here we find also the two Councils of Tire against Athanasius; one
the true one, on the Tricennalia of Constantine the Great; the other in the
time of Constantius, where the Case of Arsenius was debated, which we are
certain could be no other than fictitious from the certain accounts Athanasius
himself has preserved us of the whole affair: But perhaps it was thought more
convenient for connecting the actions of Maximus, for which this Author would
suppose him deprived by Acacius. Many other instances might, no doubt, have
been observed, if we had leisure to compare this Legend with the undoubted
Monuments of Athanasius and his coaeval Authors. Photius himself who saw and
read that Life, gives but a mean account of it. I mention not his Censures of
the Style of it; that we are less concerned for at present. He says, there were
also several things new in the Historical inf^rmations of it. And new indeed
they must be which had no ancient Historical Monuments to be vouched for them.
So little reason there is to believe the matters of Fact true from whence our
Author reasons in this case: For it is manifest that eldest Life mentioned by
Photius, must have been the Original of this other Life, whatever it was that
was mentioned by our Collector. Yet had they all been a^ true as they wish they
were, our Adversaries would gain nothing by them: Here are Synods concerned in
all the particulars of this account, the Synod of Tire for depriving
Athanasius, the Synod of Jerusalem for restoring him and a supposed Synod also
for the supposed deprivation of Maximus, accordingly taken in by the modern
Greeks, with several other fabulous Synods, into their Synodicon, first
published by Pappus and Justellus, then taken by Labbee into his volumes of
Councils. But what is that to the case of our present Fathers, whose
deprivation cannot be pretended to have been Synodical?

22. Our Author's next instance is in Eutychius, deprived of the Sea of
Constantinople by Justinian, The Case of Eutychius under Justinian.
in the year 564. because he could not assent to the Apthartodocitae, who
thought our Savior's Humane Nature incorruptible. Yet our Author says, he did
not separate from the Communion of John, who was set up against him. But
neither is this for our Adversaries purpose. Justinian did indeed here behave
himself with as much transport on this occasion as his Predecessor Anastasius
had done in the Case of Macedonius. He first sends Eutychius into Exile;
Eustath. Vit. Eutych. ap. Sur. Apr. 6.
then he tries him by an Assembly of Episcoporum and Principum. Eustath.
Bishops and Princes. What the Greek word was here we know not; nor therefore
can we determine whether the Princes were Corepiscopi, or Prefects of
Monasteries, who by this time began to take upon them in affairs relating to
Ecclesiastical Cognizance, as having very considerable Ecclesiastical Bodies
under them, who would be concluded by their suffrages. Certainly they were
Ecclesiastics: For in the Synods of those times, though there were present
Secular Persons to represent the Emperor; yet they never used to vote: Only
they took care that all things should be fairly managed, and made their reports
to the Emperor accordingly. And indeed the Secular part of the deprivation had
already been performed, in sending the Patriarch into Exile. Nor was it
requisite by the Lex Regia (as it was called) in those times, that the Emperor
should have any concurrence of Council for affairs of this nature. It was
therefore undoubtedly a Synod, and is owned for such in the Greek Syn^dicon.
And accordingly they send their Summons to Eutychius by persons of their own
rank, Bishops and Princes, which was the way of Synods, not of Imperial
Councils. Yet Sed Vir Sanctus Episcopis and Principibus qui Consessus mandato
nuncium attuler^nt: Ad quem (inquit) accedi^is? and quem me vocatis? Illi
veritate coacti responderunt, ad Dominum Nostrum and Patrem. Quibus ipse
rursum, Quis est, inquit, iste Dominus and Pater vester? Venimus, inquiunt,
(tanquam occultis quibus dam verberibus vapularent) ad Patriarcham Nostrum
Dominum Eutychium. Patriarcha Ego, inquit ille, Patriarch^ Dei Gratia sum, nec
a me quisquam hominum tollet hanc Dignitatem. Quis est ille, quem meo in loco
collocastis? Quibus verbis cum illi respondere non possent, victi reverterunt
ad ^os a quibus missi fuer^nt. Verum idem Conventus iterum and tertio contra
Canones eum vo^avit. Sed ille semper congruenter respondit, Si Canonicum,
inquiens, Judicium constitutum est, detur Mihi Clerus meus, and Ordo
Patriarchatus, and veniam, defendamque m^, and Accusatorum meorum u^^r
Testimonio. Haec illi responsa, cum accepissent, nihil consent^neum facientes,
sententiam contra ipsum tulerunt ipsis Judicibus dignam. Quam tamen Beatus Vir
antevertens subjecit omnes Poenas Canonicis, donec resipiscarent. Eustath. ib.
Eutychius received them so as still to own himself for their Patriarch; which,
as yet, even the Legates themselves could not deny. Only he pleaded, that if
they would proceed judicially with him, he ought first to be restored to his
full Patriarchal Power, and then he promised, that he would make his defense.
This was so fair, that even the Legates themselves had nothing to except
against it. It was thus supposed on all sides, That the Emperor's deprivation
was perfectly invalid, and could not make him cease to be Patriarch, as to
Conscience. And it is withal supposed, that however the Assembly now convened
had Power to do it, if they would proceed judicially. But how fair soever the
Patriarch's proposal was, the Synod could not rescind the Emperor's Act without
his own consent; and yet being resolved to gratify the Emperor, they summon
the Patriarch thrice, and then depose him for nonappearance. Herein consisted
the Injustice of their proceedings against him, without hearing, and in Exile.
Hereupon he disowns their whole proceeding as not judicial, by inflicting
Censures on his Deprivers. Where then is his not disowning John, on which our
Author's, on which our Adversaries Argument is founded? Our Author's general
Argument for it, from his finding both their Names in the Patriarchal Dyptichs
of his own time, seems to be all he has to say* for his frequent confident
assertions in matters of this kind; yet that is very fallacious: Many Names
were afterward restored, which had been formerly excluded from the Dyptichs;
and Successors generally were obliged to ratify the past acts of their
Predecessors, how questionable soever the Authority was by which they acted,
unless they would unravel things as the Arsenians did, for whom we are not
concerned And this indeed was all that could be gathered from their continuing
their Names in the Dyptichs, that they did not question all they did for the
time past. This is certain, that their being barely continued in the Dyptichs,
is no Argument that even their Successors, who continued them in the Dyptichs,
did therefore think them fit to be Communicated with, because we find many
there who were Heretics, at least, in the opinion of their Successors*
especially if they ever renounced their Heresy, though they were never
solemnly received again into the Church from which their open profession of
Heresy had divided them. And particularly, this must in all likelihood have
been the case in the subject matter of which we are at present discoursing: For
did Justinian drive out Eutychius for not consenting to his Heresy concerning
the Incorruptibleness of CHRIST's Humane Nature? And can we doubt but that he
took care, at the same time, that his Successor should consent to it? Would he
not endure one in Possession, whom he found so, that would not gratify him in
his new opinion? And could he admit another into possession that would not do
it? If therefore John, his Successor, complied with the Emperor, (as there is
very little reason to doubt but that he did,) this instance can by no means be
serviceable to our Author's design: He ought not then to presume that Eutychius
did communicate with his Successor, if he will not (as certainly in Charity he
ought not) presume any thing concerning him but what became him: Or if the
matter of Fact appeared true beyond Presumption, he ought not to argue from it
as a Precedent. The case of Communicating with Heretics is not commendable,
nay, is expressly excepted by our Author himself from the Rule wherein he thinks
it obligatory to continue Communion; and therefore (with him at least) can
never make a Precedent.

23. The following instance in the beginning of the same Reign of the Great
Justinian, of Anthimus deposed for Heresy by Pope Agapetus, Anthimus deposed
in the same Reign by the Ecclesiastics, against the Will of the secular Power.
in the year 536. was not designed by our Collector for any thing wherein our
Adversaries are concerned; our Author supposes him a Heretic, and deposed
therefore justly: Nor does he pretend any Cession, but what was forcible. He
therefore neither did, nor could reason from his Example for persons deposed
unjustly, to oblige them to yield their just Right to an Orthodox Successor. It
was wholly designed for the other Question, wherein we are not concerned, to
show that even his Orthodox Successor, Menas, did not unravel the Ordinations
performed by Anthimus before he was deposed. Only thus much is observable for
our purpose, that the Lay Power had not the least hand in it, any otherwise
than as they executed the Decree of the Ecclesiastics in it, and thought
themselves obliged in Conscience to do so in affairs of this nature. Theodora,
who was joined with Justinian in all public forms, was Anthimus's Patroness,
and did all she could to keep him in the Office to which she had promoted him:
And Justinian himself, who was sufficiently uxorious, was very unwillingly
brought to comply with that which was so vehemently opposed by her. That which
determined him, was only the Authority of Agapetus and his Synod: And they
determined him in a time when his affairs were very prosperous; when therefore
they had no other inducement that could bring him to it, but a conviction of
their Right for dealing in such matters, and of his own obligation, even in
Conscience, to be determined and concluded by them.

The Cases of Sergius, Pyrrhus Paulus, and Petrus, not to our Adversaries
Purpose. Theophan.
24. As little also to their purpose are the four following examples of the
Monothelite Bishops of Constantinople, Sergius, Pyrrhus, Paulus, and Petrus:
And as little did our Collector intend them to serve the purpose of our present
Adversaries. None of these were deprived: Even Pyrrhus himself needed no
deprivation: He left his Omophorion behind him, though at the same time he
protested not to abdicate; but only to give way to the fury of the Rabble. But
his leaving the Omophorion behind him, not out of forgetfulness, but design,
was in truth, as much an Interpretative abdication of his Office, in the Sense
and Practice of that Age, as it was a deprivation of any Palatine Office, when
the Emperor sent for the Zona or Cingulum, which was then the Ensign of such
Offices. And so it was plain Pyrrhus foresaw it would be understood, when he
thought to elude that Interpretation of it by this Declaration of his design in
it. So it was understood in the case of Eutychius, when his Omophorion was not
taken from him, Eustath. in Vit. Eutych.
that his Right was providentially contintued to him. So that it was a
Protestation against Fact, and therefore null in it self, when he made use of
this Symbol of Surrendry, notwithstanding to pretend that he did not surrender.
In all likelihood he designed to be understood to have surrendered when he did
it to gratify them who were for having him deprived of his Office, and who
were therefore inclinable thus to understand what should be done to gratify
themselves. And thus in all probability he hoped to avoid too severe a scrutiny
into the Murder of the Emperor then charged upon him, when he thus prevented a
Synodical Trial by a seeming voluntary Surrendry: And with what ingenuity could
he disown what he knew would, and what he desired should be understood to be
his meaning? At least this was sufficient for them to presume his Place vacant,
and to fill it up without a formal Sentence against him. However when the
Heresy is once condemned, and it is withal notorious that the persons own the
Heresy, our Author himself requires no act of Authority to justify a
Separation: Nor could he think Heretics unjustly dealt with, in having
Canonical Censures pronounced against them; nor to be qualified for Communion
with their Successors, without renouncing their Heresies; which none of these
did but Pyrrhus, who notwithstanding returned to his Vomit: Nor would he ever
make the Actions of Heretics argumentative as Precedents. The Action therefore
that he reasons from here, is only that of their Catholic Successor George,
and the sixth General Synod of Constantinople, who did not scruple the Orders
of so many of his Heretical Predecessors: But this is, as I said, a question
wherein we are not concerned.

25. The next Example is of Callinicus deprived (or rather driven from his
Throne) by Justinian Rhinotmetus, Callinicus punished for his Rebellion: His
communicating with Cyrus uncertain; but his Cession very probable.
who set up Cyrus the Recluse in his stead: Yet neither did Callinicus, as our
Author reports, separate from the Communion of Cyrus, nor did the Church ever
question the Ordinations that were made in the time of the supposed Usurper.
Here I confess no Synod appears, by which Callinicus was deprived: But what
need was there of a Synod to deprive a Rebel Bishop, who had forfeited his Life
to his Master for assisting his Enemies, Leontius and his Fautor, and exciting
the People to dethrone him? Lampad. Mel. H. pars 3. p. 24. Aen^as Syl. in
Decad. Blond. lib. 10. p. 180.
The Emperor took away his sight, and sent him to Rome, as King Solomon did
Abiathar to Anatoth, when he might justly have taken away his Life; nor can it
be imagined that such a Bishop would stand upon his Right to his See, who had
none to his Life, and whose ignominious blindness justly incurred, did in a
great measure disable him from the exercise of his Office, Volat. fol. 247.
and render him base and con^emptible to his Flock. If we never read that any
of the Greek Emperors, who were so served by their Enemies, ever off^red to
resume the Throne* but acquiesced under their misfortune; we have reason to
presume that a guilty Bishop so served by his Sovereign, would never after
pretend to his Chair, but quit all manner of claim to it by Cession, or
Resignation; and then it is no wonder, if ha^ing divested himself, he did not
refuse to communicate with his Successor Cyrus* and that the Church did not
question Cyrus's Ordinations, when they had no reason for it. But whether
Callinicus did, or did not refuse Communion with Cyrus, is uncertain; none of
the Historians say any thing of it, and I have showed that our Author asserts
things precariously, and often speaks more than he can prove.

26. The next Collection is of a Succession of Iconoclast Patriarchs, Germanus
abdicated.
whom this Author takes for Heretics, from the time of Germanus to the second
Nicene Council; that is, for the space of fifty six years, according to his
computation. He begins his account from the expulsion of Germanus in the year
730. and the second Nicene Coun^il was in the year 787. So his account will
hold, reckoning only the interval, but leaving out the extremes. In this space
he obser^es, that the Orders must generally have been derived from Iconoclasts:
So that even the Orders of Tarasius and his Brethren, who acted in that
Council, must generally have been affected by them. Yet so far was that Council
from scrupling such Orders* that they admitted the Orders even of those who
were to be Iconoclasts, when they could pevail with them to renounce what they
called their Heresy. This also plainly concerns not us, but the Question
disputed by this Author with the Arsenians; nor are we concerned for the
Deprivation of Germanus though it was not Synodical. There was no need it
should have been so; for he expressly (...). Niceph. Patr Hist (...). Cedren.
(...).
abdicated; perhaps unwillingly: But that cannot prejudice the validity of the
thing when done. Multitudes of such Resignations there have been, both of
Princes and Bishops, the validity whereof was never questioned by Men of the
severest Principles; especially where the unwillingness was not total, but such
as was consistent with conditional willingness. Such a willingness I mean as
Men rather chose, than they would abide the Consequences which were otherwise
to be expected, in case they should prove refractory. This none, that I know
of, allows to be sufficient in Conscience to absolve a Man from an obligation
he has brought upon himself in such a case of unwilling, if I might call it,
voluntariness. And this was manifestly the case of our Germanus: He thereby
freed himself from any farther trouble from the Emperor.

The Schism of Theodorus and Plato an Encroachment on Episcopal Authority in
general, and nothing to our Case.
27. The next Case concerning Theodorus and Plato, with their Monks, withdrawing
from the Communion of two Patriarchs, has no relation to our case, though it
was very opposite to that of the Arsenians which occasioned the Discourse. No
doubt the Author's design herein was to let the Monks see that they meddled with
what did not belong to them, when they took upon them for matters of Discipline
to separate from the Diocesane Communion to which they were related. This Pla^o
and Theodorus, with their Saccudiote and Studite Disciples, were guilty of,
when they presumed to separate from their two Patriarchs, Tarasius and
Nicephorus, for keeping Joseph in their Communion, who had married Constantine
the Emperor to the Nun Theodote, when he had forced his Empress Mary into a
Nunnery. Accordingly they were condemned for it in a Synod of Bishops and
Abbats, when they made their second separation from Nicephorus, and driven from
their Monasteries and the City, as Theophanes tells us, though our Author
mention nothing it. The Bishops therefore forced them to recant all the
Invectives they had used against the Patriarchs, not that they thereby intended
to defend Joseph, but to assert their own Authority, as the only competent one
in Affairs relating to Communion, against these Monastical Invasions. St.
Ambrose told the Great Theodosius, that his Purple did not entitle him to the
Priesthood, which yet was not more true of the Purple than of the Cowl. Thither
therefore relates what our Author observes from the Patriarch Methodius, that
if Theodorus had not recanted, he had not been received to Communion. He
observes farther, from the Testament of the same Methodius, (probably in
imitation of the Testament of Nazianzene,) that he prescribed, that whenever
the Studites were received as Penitents, they should only be received to
Communion, not to their Sacerdotal Dignity. So in the Synodicon drawn upon the
occasion of these Schisms, and ordered (as our Author observes) thenceforward
to be read in Churches, those Invectives against the Patriarchs are not only
recanted, but anathematized. Nay, Theodorus was therein declared not to have
done well in his Separation, and that the Schism was on his part, whatever was
the occasion of it. And the reason is given exactly agreeable to the Principles
of Ignatius, and St. Cyprian, that Tarasius and Nicephorus were the Church.
Whence it plainly followed, that Theodorus and his followers cast themselves
out of the Church, by their being divided from their Patriarchs. This very
Synodicon is mentioned in some fragments of this Work of Nicon here referred
to, and in a Discourse of Anastasius Caesareensis, both published by
Co^elerius. And Anastasius is very particular in distinguishing it from the
Nomocanon: He tells us that it consisted only of three Synods, two relating to
Faith, and the third to Marriages; probably all of them relating to this case.
And thus we understand why our Author excepts only the case of Heresy, wherein
it might be lawful to separate from the Bishop. He speaks of persons subject
to Episcopal Jurisdiction, acting by themselves without a Bishop to head them;
for so did Plato and Theodorus, with their Monks: And so nothing but Heresy
could excuse their Separation from their Ordinary, by the Principles of the
Catholic Church; for the guilt of Schism will wholly be imputable to such
Subjects who separate from their Ordinary for any other cause but Heresy.

28 And to this Case agree exactly the Canons omitted by Mr. Hody. That Case of
those Monks very apposite to the Arsenian Schism, which was also abetted not by
any Bishop, but only Monks: In such a Case nothing but Heresy could excuse
Separation.
They also speak of Monks and Laity separating from their respective Ordinary,
without any Episcopal Authority. So the Synod called AB expressly; by which we
understand that the Presbyters and Deacons mentioned in the former Canons, in
reference to the Case here particularly designed, were understood of Monks, and
such persons, destitute of Episcopal Authority: And very probably these
Encroachments of the Monks on the Sacerdotal Authority, were the real occasion
for the Synod AB to make that Canon. The Monks of Constantinople were, at that
time, admitted into most debates where Religion was concerned. We have seen
that they made a part in the Synodi (...), against Eutychius in the time of the
Great Justinian, and now in the time of Nicephorus against the Schismatical
Studites. We see they had a part in the electing their Bishop, by the
opposition Theophanes tells us this same Theodorus with his Studites made in
the Election of this same Nicephorus. We see they were consulted by Michael
Curopolates concerning his War against the Bulgarians, and that they over ruled
him against his own inclinations* on account of the concern Religion was
supposed to have in that Affair: Nor was it amiss that nothing should be done
without the consent, at least, of so great and so numerous bodies of persons
devoted to the service of Religon. And this consideration it was that brought
the Mitred Abbats also in the West into their Synods, and into their
Parliaments: But then this only gave them, in the Original design of it, a
Power of interposing and interceding, like that of the Tribunes among the
Romans, not of invading the Sacred Sacerdotal Power; but among the Romans this
Power of interceding being granted first, encouraged the Tribunes afterward to
aspire farther to give Laws even to the Senators themselves. So it succeeded
with these Monks: the devotedness of their State made them to be looked on
somewhat above the ordinary Laity; and some Sacerdotal Acts were indulged them
for the Government of their own Members, but no doubt at first with the consent
of their Ordinaries, to whom they were at first all subject. Thus they had
Power of suspending their own Monks from the Communion: Then they challenged
the Power of Consignation in the Bishops absence; this was done first in Egypt,
as Hilary the Deacon observes in the Commentaries which go under the Name of
St. Ambrose. There were the most numerous bodies of Monks, most remote from
Bishops, and therefore the most inclinable to these Sacerdotal Encroachments.
Thus we see there was occasion for asserting the Sacerdotal Rights against them
in the times of the Patriarchs, Nicephorus and Methodius: For so far the Schism
of these Studites continued, as appears from the Observations our Author has
made from the Writings of Methodius. It is also plain that the Monks were the
greatest part in the Schism of the Arsenians, principally regarded by our
Author: So it appears from several passages in Georgius Pachymeres. He tells
us, that many of the (...). Georg. Pa^hym. lib. IV. c. 10.
Monks and Laity divided and kept their separate Assemblies: And the Emperor
Michael in his Oration against the Schismatics describes them so, as that we
cannot doubt but that the Monks were they who were principally intended by him.
He says, they were such as by their course of life had been inured to (...),
etc. Pachym. lib. IV. c. 11. ve^ba Michaelis.
Corners and Secrecies, that they were clothed in (...). verba Michaelis I^p.
ubi supra.
Sackcloth. So Joseph in his Oration to Germanus, where he persuades him to
resign, represents the (...), etc. Verba Josephi ad Germanum, ap. ^und Pach. l.
IV. c. 18.
Monks as the principal Adversaries with whom he had to deal on this occasion.
And the Names Pachym. IV.18, 19. again. (...). Idem IV.28.
mentioned in this Cause are generally either of Monks or Nuns: Such were
Hiacinthus and Ignatius Rhodius, and Martha and Nostogonissa; and the Ib.
Pantepoplene Monks (so called from their Monastery) were the most violent
against Joseph and those who sided with him. And now we understand that they
were not any Latitudinarian dwindling notions of Schism (such as our
Adversaries fancy) that made our Author allow of no cause but Heresy to
justify a separation: These were perfectly unknown, even to that lower
Antiquity in which our Author lived. The Persons he had to deal with were such
as had no Bishop to head them: A^senius himself was dead now for some years
before our Author made this Collection, and he has substituted no Successor,
nor was there any Bishop of the Party to make one, if even that might have been
reconcilable with any Rules of Ecclesiastical Discipline: And Joseph also was
dead, at least had expressly abdicated, before Georgius Cyprius was set up, in
whose time we suppose our Author to have written: So that neither of the
Schismatics had Bishops to head them. And then I shall easily grant, and grant
upon the Principles of St. Cyprian, and the Church of his Time, that in a Case
of Separation of Subjects from Bishops, the Charge of Schism can never lie
against the Bishop directly* indirectly it may, as an Union with a rightful
Bishop does make the Accusation of Schism chargeable against another Bishop,
unjustly pretending to the same Jurisdiction: Or as the only Bishop of a
particular District, if he cut himself off from the Episcopal Collegium, does
thereby make it impossible for them to hold Communion with him who would hold
Communion with the whole Catholic Church, and with the Episcopal College: But
where there were no Bishops with whom they could maintain Communion, whilst
divided from the Communion of the Bishop of their particular District, there no
Charge of Schism could be brought against such a Bishop, neither directly nor
indirectly: And therefore the only pretense such Dividers can have for
defending themselves, and laying the blame on the Bishop, must be not by
charging him with Schism but Heresy. Thus our Author may be rightly understood
to allow no excuse for Separation in the Persons with whom he had to deal, but
only that of their Bishop's being a Heretic.

29. And now our Author's Sense being rightly explained, This Case turned
against our Adversaries of the deprived Dioceses.
we are so far from being concerned in what he says, as that indeed we need no
other Principles but his to charge our Adversaries with the Schism of the
present Separation. Whilst we have Bishops, and those unexceptionable, to head
us, we can wave the Charge of Heresy, and yet insist upon that of Schism
against our present Intruders: But I cannot for my Life foresee what the Clergy
and Laity of the deprived Diocesses can say for themselves, for deserting their
Bishops, whose Title was formerly owned by themselves, by this their Author's
Principles. What is the Heresy they can charge their Bishops with? Yet that is
the only Cause here allowed them to excuse their Separation; and it is indeed
the only Charge that can be brought by Subjects against their Incumbent
directly: As for an indirect Charge in favor of other Bishops, our Adversaries
Case is exactly the same with that of the Studites, or Arsenians, and they
cannot pretend to it. They have no other Bishops to whom they can plead an
Obligation against their old Incumbents. It is plain their antecedent
Obligation lies in favor of their deprived Fathers: They cannot deny them to
have had once a good Right to their Duty, and they can give no reason allowable
by their Author how they might lose it; neither that of notorious Heresy, nor
the other of Synodical Deprivation. They cannot deny but their new Invaders
found the Diocesses possessed by just Acknowledgments of Right in their
Predecessors, and those acknowledgments ratified by Vows of Canonical Obedience
in the Clergy, and of the Duty incumbent on them as Members of such owned
Societies in the Laity also. Thus it cannot be difficult to determine where the
Duty is still rather obliging, that the indirect charge of Schism lies against
the Intruders for erecting Altars against Altars already possessed; not against
the Possessors, who were put in vacuam possessionem (as the Law calls it) by an
unquestionable lawful Authority. Will they therefore pretend the greater
obligation lying on them to own the Episcopal College, than to own any
particular Bishop? This they might have pretended, if any Synodical Deprivation
of persons Authorized to Act in Synods had gone before: That might indeed have
cut off the Incumbents from their Union with the Episcopal College, and
continued the Invaders in their Union with the same College, and so have
obliged all, as they are bound to prefer their Union with the College before
their Union with any particular Bishop, to withdraw from the Communion of the
Incumbents. Now even this very charge lies in favor of our Brethren, and
against our Adversaries. Our deprived Fathers must still be supposed to retain
their Union with the College, till there be some Act of the College to deprive
them: And so the Invaders of their jurisdictions must, by their doing so, not
only divide themselves from the Bishops whose Right is invaded by them, but
from the whole Episcopal College also. This would have appeared clearly as to
Fact, if the old practice of Communicatory Letters had still been observed: The
Invaders could not have been received to Communion by any other Bishop of the
whole World, without the Communicatory Letters of the Incumbent not Synodically
deprived; and if any particular Bishop had done otherwise, even that Bishop
had, by his doing so, cut himself off from his Union with the whole Episcopal
College. Thus we see how this Precedent of condemning these Encroachments of
the Studite Monks does not in any wise affect Us, but our Adversaries.

The next instances to another Question considered by the Author, but not to
Ours.
30. Our Author next observes, that for 26 years together during the Reigns of
Leo Armenus, Michael Traulus and Theophilus, till Theodora managed Affairs
during her young Son Mich^el's minority, the Patriarchs were all Iconoclasts.
His account, no doubt, begins from the year 815. and the second of Leo Armenus,
wherein Theodotus Melissenus, the first Iconaclast Patriarch, was brought in
upon the expulsion of Nicephorus: And it ends with the expulsion of Joannes, or
Jannes (as they call him for his conjuring practices) by Theodora in the year
842. in the beginning of her Administration of Affairs. That space was not full
27 years: for Theodotus Melissenus was brought in April the 1st. and John was
expelled not long after the 30th. of January, on which Theophilus died. The
design of this Observation is only to take notice how it would affect the
Constantinopolitane Succession, long before the times of Arsenius and Joseph,
if even such deriving Orders from Heretics were rigorously enquired into; for
such the Icon^clasts were esteemed by our Author. But this is not the Question
for which we are concerned at present.

31. His next Example is therefore in the Case of Ignatius and Photius. But to
judge exactly how far either of them had Right, Ignatius challenged his Right
against Photius, though no H^^retick.
our Author should have distinguished the times and the several degrees by
which this Dispute proceeded. The first Deprivation therefore of Ignatius, I
take to have been on November 23. 858. precisely: And here was indeed no Synod,
though I know the Synodicon published by Pappus and Justellus pretends one: But
Pope Nicholas in his 10th. Ep. where he gives an account of his Roman Synod,
owns nothing in the Deprivation of Ignatius, but the Violence and Terror of the
Emperor, plainly therein reflecting on the Vncanonicalness of it. Again, his
words in his Ep. 13. to Ignatius himself are these: ab Imperials Potentia
absque ulla Canonica Auctoritate tua pulsus Ecclesia, etc. which he insists on
as an Argument for invalidating their whole proceedings against him. So also
Anastasius Bibliothecarius in his Preface to the Eighth General Council,
speaking of the same Ignatius, says, that he was praejudicialiter expoliatus.
By which, in all likelihood, he means, that he was robbed of his Throne
antecedently to any form of judicial Proceeding. The Author therefore of the
Synodicon himself, owns that he was driven away (...), meaning, I suppose, the
Secular (...), as distinguished by that word from the Ecclesiastics. He
therefore calls it (...), a simple Synod; probably because they were only a few
Bishops and Monks that concerned themselves in this matter, without any
Synodical Formalities, not even those of the Synodus (...)* Bardas therefore
the Caesar, who was the Author of it, did now all he could by hard usage to
force him to abdicate. It plainly hence appears, that even he did not think the
Emperor's Power sufficient for it: Yet he was wicked enough, and prejudiced
enough on that side to have believed it, if the Casuistry of that Age would
have afforded him any countenance in it. But they had not then the confidence
to allow actions of that nature to pass for Precedents: Yet all the rigours
they could use to him, could not prevail with Ignatius to quit his Right. How
is it therefore that our Author can have the confidence to say, that he did not
divide from Photius, nor persuade the People to divide from him? How could he
possibly claim his Right, but that he must at the same time challenge the
Clergies and Peoples Duty, as obliged in Conscience to adhere to him, and to
own him as their only lawful Pastor? How could he do that without obliging
them to leave and disown Photius? We have therefore here one of our Author's
own Precedents so far from making for his Cause, that it makes directly against
him. Ignatius thought it lawful to challenge his Right against a Successor
whom even himself could not charge with Heresy. And this invasion of
Ignatius's Throne, was censured as Schismatical in Photius, by the generality
of the disinteressed Judges of that Age. Pope Nicholas the First, in the Name
of the Western Church, charges it directly with that very imputation of Schism.
And even the Eastern Bishops themselves (...). Constant Porphyrog. continuat.
Theophan. Lib. IV. N. 31.
threatened Bardas, that they would never own another Bishop, and that they
would break themselves off from the public Assemblies, till they were partly
wheedled, and partly terrified from what they had resolved on. And whatever
their Practice was, this very threatening is an argument of their Judgment in
the Case, that Photius and his party had been the Schismatick^, though
themselves had made the Separation. Our Author himself observes, how ordinary
it was in those Ages to call Photius (...) and (...), an Adulterer and Invader
of the Throne; and those Phrases do at once signify his want of Right, and the
violences used by him in coming in against the consent of Ignatius: Nor has he
any thing that I can find* to prove that Ignatius kept Communion with Photius,
but only his old argument from the pretended Dyptichs of his own time, which
has already been answered. Thus the Case was, at least, till the Synod wherein
Ignatius was deposed, and Photius confirmed. But what needed a Deposition, if
Ignatius had already yielded his Right, as our Author would persuade us? What
needed a Synodical Deposition, if that by the Imperial Authority had been
thought sufficient?

When Ignatius was deposed Synodically, he could not challenge the Duty till he
was restored Synodically.
32. The Friends of Photius discovered their Consciousness of his want of Right;
First, by the violence used to the person of Ignatius to force him to
surrender; then by diligence used by them, when they found their endeavors
with Ignatius unsuccessfull, to get a Synod that might deprive him of his
Right, whether he would or no: Yet the difficulties and delays they met with in
procuring a Synod, and corrupting the Suffrages of it, are also arguments of
the opposition they met with in their main Cause, even in the East, even among
the Greeks themselves, where the Authority of Bardas was most significant; for
it was some years before chey could effect their purposes that way, not till
the latter end of the year 860. The Auhor of the Synodicon, besides his former
Synod makes two more, the former in Blachernis, the latter in the Church of the
Apostles. This I take to be the A B Synodus, wherein Ignatius was Deposed, as
the Commentators expressly tell us. And the two Sessions of that same Synod in
different places, as it gave occasion for them to give the Title of A B to
their Synod it self; so it also seems to have been the occasion why this
injudicious Collector of the Synodicon should make two Synods of it. The latter
of the two was that wherein the Pope's Legates were either forced or bribed to
sign the Condemnation of Ignatius. I am apt to think that the true occasion of
convening a second time the same Bishops before they were departed to their
several Homes, was the unexpected arrival of the Legates, that they also might
conciliarly confirm what had been done in the Council before their arrival. If
I guess right, their former sitting must have been immediately before the
arrival of the Legates: and indeed it seems to have been so. The Pope was
surprised at the proceeding against Ignatius, and charges Photius with breach
of promise, in meddling farther in that matter than he had pretended he would
do. And he says, he sent his Legates not to determine any thing concerning the
Cause of Ignatius, but only to enquire into it, and to make report to him of
the success of their enquiry: And if we may believe his Adversaries account of
this Affair, Photius had pretended that Ignatius had resigned, and this, it
should seem, they reckoned on; which could not have been, if this decision of
Ignatius's Case had been long before: Even that pretense argued his
Consciousness that what had been done before against Ignatius, would never be
thought sufficient to deprive him of his Right in Conscience, as soon as the
falsehood of this pretense should be discovered. This therefore put him upon a
Conciliary Trial of Ignatius, in that former meeting wherein Ignatius was
personly present: But Ignatius pleaded what Pope Nicholas also pleaded in his
behalf, that he ought to be restored to his Possession, before they could, by
the Canons, bring him to a Trial. This Photius's Council would by no means
admit of, but proceeded their own way, pretending to give him a fair thorough
hearing, and deprived him. However, knowing that his Plea was indeed allowable
by the Canons, they thought their Cause would require all the confirmation that
could be got by the Legates, and the reputation they would gain by having the
Western Communion on their side. If this therefore were so, the time of these
Synods, or Meetings rather of the same Synod, will best appear from the time of
the arrival of the Popes Legates. The Letters Pope Nicholas sent with his
Legates going to Constantinople, Ep. 2. Nicola^ ap. Labbaum.
bear date September. 25. Indict. 9. So it must have been the latter end of the
year 860. before those Legates could finish their journey: And when they had
reached Constantinople, they were 100 days there before they could be prevailed
on to ratify the Deposition of Ignatius so contrary to the instructions they
had received from him that sent them. This must necessarily bring it to the
beginning of the year 861. before the 18th. of March, Nicholas had received the
news of their prevaricating, Ep. 5.
and wrote again what he thought fit upon that occasion. But when the Suffrages
of a Council were once gained, what Arts soever they were that were used to
gain them, Photius had then some appearance of Right, till Ignatius could
relieve himself by Another and a Greater Council. That was a lawful way allowed
him of recovering it, by the very Canons. However Photius could, in the mean
time, plead this Canon hence produced by our Author, in favor of himself,
which before he could not, that none ought to separate from himself thus
Synodically settled, nor to join with Ignatius thus Synodically condemned, till
himself were condemned, and Ignatius resettled, by a greater and more numerous
Synod. And to add the greater Authority to their own Synod, they boasted of the
same numbers that was in the Council of Nice, as Pope Nicholas observes in his
Answer to them. This was a plausible Artifice ^o the Superstition of that Age.

Pope Nicholas with his Western Synod were not sufficient to deprive Photius of
his Synodical Right, in the opinion of the Eastern Church.
33. Pope Nicholas therefore, no doubt, made all the interest he could to get a
Synod that he might oppose to this Synod of Photius. He knew his Authority
alone would never be admitted for it without a Synod, and such a Synod as the
Canons required: And though he allowed no Superstition for the number* yet the
Antiochian Canon, which by this time obtained in both the Eastern and Western
Churches, required, that the Synod that must restore Ignatius, must at least be
more numerous than the Synod that deprived him. No Synod therefore could serve
his purpose, but such a one as must have had more than 318 Bishops. This, I
suppose, made it some time before he could condemn Photius, or restore Ignatius
with such a Synod. Pref. ad Council. VIII.
Anastasius tells us, it was in the 11th. Indiction: That must have been,
either in the end of the year 862. or the beginning of the year 863 Till then,
at least, how good soever his Title was, yet the guilt of Schism had been
imputable to Ignatius, if he had made a Separation, or intruded himself into
his own Throne before a Synod had restored him. Nay* by the Antiochian Canon he
had forfeited all pretensions of having the Merit of his Cause considered, if
he had challenged any Duty from his Clergy and People before a Council had
restored him. But when Pope Nichol^s had restored him in the Roman Synod, and
deprived and anathematized Photius, with them who look^d upon that Restitution
as an Act of Superior Authority, Ignatius was then restored to his full Right,
and Photius was deprived even of that Right ^o which a Canonical settled
possession had entitled him* And from that time forward, if Ignatius had
^^^^enged the Obedience of his Clergy and Laity, and withdrawn them from the
Obedience of Photius, the guilt of the Schism had notwithstanding not been
imputable to him but ^hotius. But these Principles do not even in that Ag^*
seem to have been the sense of any more than the concerned part of the Western
Church The Council of Constantinople when they decreed that Constantinople
should be next to Rome, did never seem to ^nderstand it of p^oper jurisdiction,
but only of Precedence in place: Afterward ^he Council of Chalcedon decreed
equal Privileges to the same S^e, because it had an Emperor, and a Consul* and
a Senate, which were no more consistent with a subordinate jurisdiction in the
Bishops than in the Emperors, the Consuls, and the ^enates. None ever pretended
at that time that the Emperors, the Cons^ls, and the Senates of new Rome were
properly subject to the Emperors, Consuls, and Senates of old Rome, in rega^d
of jurisdiction: And the Canon concerning Appeals made in that same Council o^
Chalcedon wa^ utt^rly inconsistent with any such jurisdiction; that allows to
recourse for such Appeals beyond the Sea of Constantinople. I know very well,
Pope Leo's Legates disowned both these Canons, and so have the Latin
Collectors generally, who reckon no more than 27 Canons as made in that
Council: But the 16th Action of the Council showed that they were the genuine
sense of the Council, and at least of the Eastern Empire, and the Eastern
Churches: And so it descended down to the times of Ignatius and Photius, of
which we are discoursing. By the judgment therefore of the Eastern Bishops of
those times, who were the most competent Judges of that Eastern Dispute; and by
the other Canons of the Church which required, that Judgments concerning
matters of Fact (such as this was) should be decided in the same place where
the matter of Fact had happened, the Synod by which Ignatius was to be
relieved, must have been another, and that a greater Synod in the same
Constantinople; and till he could get such a Synod on his side, himself had
been responsible for the Schism that must have followed on his claiming his
Right: Nay, the Antiochian Canon made him forfeit his Right, if he claimed it
in such a way as this was: And it is plain by the Pope's Letters to the Emperor
Michael, that the Emperor did not allow the Pope's Authority in this Case; nor
do we find that Ignatius made any stir upon it, till he was restored
Conciliarly in the same place where he had been deprived. This seems therefore
to have been the state of that Dispute, if Nicholas proceeded by way of proper
Jurisdiction; if he had proceeded on the Principles of the Primitive Church on
the supposition of Equality, then he could no otherwise have obliged the
Eastern Bishops, than as the Bishops or Provinces that sided with him were more
numerous than those that were against them: For this is all that had been
reasonable in that case, that where Peace was absolutely necessary, and yet
could not be had without Cession on one part, there it was also necessary that
the smaller part should rather yield to the greatest. But whether Empire had
more Bishops or Provinces is needless now to determine: The rather, because it
does not seem to have been thought on, or insisted on, in the Disputes of that
Age. It is sufficient for our purposes, that, in the sense of the Eastern
Bishops, and by the Rules of the Eastern Discipline, (which Ignatius was to
stand by,) this Roman Synod was no competent Authority, and therefore left both
him and Photius in the same condition wherein it found them. But in this whole
Dispute the Emperor's Authority is never urged, but that of the Synods that
appeared on the one side or the other. And the Roman Synod was so little
regarded by Photius and the Bishops of his Party, that they also condemned Pope
Nicholas. This was in the latter end of the Reign of his Patron Michael, Nicet.
vit. Ignat.
after Basilius Macedo was now made Caesar; that is, after the 26th of May 867.

34. In the latter end of that same Year, Sept. 24. The restoring of Ignatius
by Basilius Macedo, was not very fair, by the Principles of his own Church.
Michael was murdered. This Photius upbraided Basilius with, and excommunicated
him for it. This makes Basilius immediately dispossess him. We are told that he
did it the very next day after his Succession: However the Emperor himself did
not look on his own dispossessing him of the Patriarchal Palace as any Decision
of the Question concerning his Right. The worst Interpretation we can make of
it is, that he followed his own Resentment in the Case, (as several Authors say
he did,) or that he followed the Precedents of Anastasius Dicorus, and the
great Justinian, who, as we have seen, first deprived their Patriarchs before
they judicially condemned them. This could hardly have been made a Precedent by
him, if he himself had not been under a present and a great Resentment, if he
had not followed them in their Passion, as well as in the Fact that proceeded
from it. It becomes us rather to put the best Interpretation we can on the
Facts of those who are deceased, whose Lives did otherwise not make them
obnoxious to have the worst things presumed concerning them. The rather in this
case, because there was another Reason as consistent with the Design of
Basilius, and much more agreeable with his Honor: Ignatius when he was before
the Synod of Photius pleaded, that he ought to be restored to his Possession,
before he could be obliged to answer to a synodical Judgment: This Plea
therefore being canonical, ought to have been admitted by the Synod that
deprived him; the putting him therefore into a present Possession, even before
a new synodical Trial, was no more than what ought to have been done by the
Synod itself; and their proceeding irregularly could not therefore prejudge
against the Canons that required it, nor hinder the putting it in practice as
soon as the violence was over that occasioned the Violation of those Canons.
Yet it was so to be understood, as not to prejudge any thing concerning the
Merit of the Cause. Otherwise, instead of doing Ignatius a Kindness, it had
done him a Prejudice by the Rules of Discipline then received in the Eastern
Church; he had thereby made himself really obnoxious to the Apostolical Canon,
which Photius had no color to charge him with before: Can. Apost. 30.
That Canon was then received in the Eastern Church, and made it a new Cause of
Deprivation, if any Bishop did forcibly intrude himself into a present
Possession by the assistance of the Secular Power. So far that Eastern Church,
whose sense our Adversaries pretend to gather from these instances, was from
acknowledging the lawfulness of Bishops obtruded by the Secular Power, that
with them it rather prejudiced a good, that advantaged a suspicious Title.
This, by the way, it were well our Adversaries would think of, how it affects
the Case of our present intruders: The rather, because it does not only deprive
them of the benefit of this argument from these Eastern Precedents, but may
also be urged against them wherever these Canons have been received, as these
first fifty have been generally in most, even of our Western Collections.
However, that the Emperor did not look upon his own actings as decisive in this
Case, appears from hence, that he ordered both Parties to send their Legates to
the Pope, to inform him thoroughly of the matter of Fact; and that withal he
convened a pretended General Council for a final decision of the Dispute. I
rather suspect that he ascribed more to the determination of Pope Nicholas,
than either the Doctrines of his own Church, or his own Preingagements, would
fairly allow of, and that he might therefore look on his own putting Ignatius
in Possession, as an executing the Decree of the Roman Council. Plainly he did
more herein than several of his own Party did like: First, he preferred the
Judgment of a foreign Italian before that of a Domestic Council. This was what
was opposed, not only by his Predecessor Michael, but also by his Successors in
the Eastern Church to this very day; nay, what himself after repealed in the
Synod of Photius in the year 879. Then he preferred that elder Synod of
Nicholas in the year 863. before the later Synod of Photius, (that third of his
against Pope Nicholas and his Synod, as the two former had been against
Ignatius,) which had been celebrated in the very year wherein himself
succeeded; that is, in the year 867. between the 26th of May, whereon Basile
was made Caesar, and September. the 24th, whereon Michael was murdered. He seemed
to obviate this by calling this other Synod, which now passes for the Eighth
General Council with the Latins, as if it had been to repeal that later
Constantinopolitane Council Synodically. This was in the year 869. but no
liberty was reserved for a fair hearing of things in this Council. Ignatius had
before that, immediately upon his return into his place, done all that ought to
have been reserved for the Synod, if any fair dealing had been intended; he had
deposed and excommunicated his Rival: Not only so, but he had nulled the Orders
of those who had been ordained by him, and excommunicated those who had
communicated with him. Nay, the Bishops were all obliged before hand to stand
to the decisions of the Pope's Council, which it appears in the very beginning
of this, they neither thought consistent with the Honor of their own Church,
nor were they willing to be concluded by, if the Emperor would give them
liberty. And Photius was immediately, before any Conciliary hearing, condemned
and anathemetized, and Ignatius owned before any Repeal of the later Council of
Photius. Thus this unfair way of promoting even a good Title, did rather injure
than advantage it: The rather, because Basile had, in all likelihood, obliged
himself but a little before to maintain that Synod of Photius. Photius
pretended Basil's Subscription to his own Synod; and his Adversaries themselves
confess he did so, and do not disprove what he pretended: And we know it was
generally received in those times, that what was subscribed by the Augusti, was
subscribed by the Caesar's also. Here therefore, I doubt, we can hardly be able
to excuse this Prince from a transport of resentment, perhaps not even Ignatius
himself, that made them do things so little for the Honor of their own Church,
and in Favor of a foreign Power, rather than fail of compassing their ends. I
doubt it was their consciousness of their weakness at home, that put them upon
these straits: The Cause was within a little while after carried against them
by the Photians, and so continues to this very day. This Council was repealed
in the time of this very Emperor. The Doctrine and Creed of Photius concerning
the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father alone, was also restored. And
this advanced the Dispute from a charge of Schism alone, to a charge of Heresy
also, in the opinion of this Author: Those servile notions also of allowing
even pretended General Councils a Power only of ratifying, not of debating the
Predecisions of the Pope, have been generally disowned, and looked upon as very
odious in all the Emperors who have endeavored to restore them. This the two
Palaeologi, Michael and John found to their cost; the one in the Council of
Lions, in the year 1275. the other in the Council of Florence, in the year
1437. nor do the numbers of those who are mentioned in this Latinizing Synod,
either of those who had still sided with Ignatius, or of those who were here
received upon their revolting from Photius, seem sufficient to have carried the
Cause on that side by equal management; especially considering that the later
would, in that Case, have given their Suffrages against them. And who could
look upon this as a fair Decision, with regard to Conscience, that was so
manifestly contrary to the sense of the greater numbers of their own Church,
which ought alone to have been owned for the competent Judge in Causes between
her own Members?

Photius's Title was good after his Restoration upon Ignatius's death;
especially after his General Council.
35 Here therefore Ignatius injured his good Cause by this way of defending it,
and gave Photius new advantages against him: However he found no farther
opposition from him, during his own Life. Ignatius died October. 23. 878. and
then Photius was restored by the same Emperor that had before excluded him: Yet
with no such inconsistency as our Author fancies. He that was an adulterer and
an invader whilst the true Husband was living, might now be a Husband and just
Possessor after the true Husband was deceased. Probably the Emperor himself,
when his Passion was over, might think himself obliged in Conscience and Honor
to make him this honorable Amends for his past irregular and unequal
proceedings against him; though I know Nicetas, who was an Ignatian, pretends
other Arts whereby he regained the Emperor's favor: And indeed we have
Photius's Cause conveyed to us with no small disadvantage: His Adversaries at
that very time suppressed his principal Writings on that Subject; they seized
and burnt his Original Papers, before any Copies could be transcribed; they
have afterward had it in their Power to suppress many of his other Works,
whilst the Empire of Constantinople was in the hands of Latins or Latinizing
Greeks; and they have since had it in their Power to hinder the Printing of as
many of them as have not fallen into the hands of Protestants. This, no doubt,
must needs have proved very prejudicial to a right understanding of his Cause,
that we have very few assistances for understanding it, but from his professed
and very inveterate Enemies. However it was, Photius, on this restitution, had
now no longer any Rival that could pretend a better Title: So that now they had
nothing plausible to pretend for themselves that they would not own him.
However it appears from this Nicetas, that the Ignatian Party still retained
their old resentments, when even Ignatius himself, if he had been living, had
less to say for himself than formerly, and his followers had yet much less to
say for themselves now than he had. The next year therefore after hi^ new
restitution, that is, in the year 879. Photius calls a General Council wherein
he is confirmed by Pope John's consent, his Legates b^ing present, and the
Eighth General Council in the Latin account expressly repealed, this being
received in stead of it by the modern Greeks to this day; wherein the second
Nicene is received among the General Councils as the Greeks do still receive
it; wherein the Creed of Constantinople is received without any mention of the
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, nay, with Censures against
Innovators of it; and wherein, lastly, Censures are threatened against all who
would not submit, and own Photius for their lawful Patriarch. These are the
principal particulars here decreed, as appears from the fragments of this
Council first published by Dr. Beveridge from Oxford MSS. most of them from
Beccus, a zealous Latinizer, though Baronius is willing to call them in
question, for not being mentioned by later Men than Beccus. And the Pope's
Legates assent to all, and as to that particular of obliging all to submit to
Photius, the Pope had given them particular and express Orders, in his Letters
and Instructions still extant: So that now the Ignatians could no longer
pretend any Patronage of the Roman Church to countenance them in their Schism
And to sweeten them the more, it was also here expressly stipulated, that there
should be no indecent reflections on the Memory of Ignatius. The Pope was
gained by his finding the Emperor bent on it, and by the beneficial agreements
made with Photius in order to it: He obliged Photius to quit his Right in the
Bulgarians, a grant which his Predecessor could not gain even from Ignatius,
who had been so much obliged by him. He obliged him also to quit the Communion
of some of his own Excommunicates* as himself also disowned the Schismatics
from Photius. And this probably went far toward the uniting the Ignatians,
when the exasperating severities were laid aside, and there was now no Rival,
nor considerable Authority to head them. And this, in all likelihood, was the
reason, why, notwithstanding their former heats, they are nevertheless both of
them mentioned honorably in the Synodicon. It was in course to be expected
concerning Photius, because he was the last in Possession, and because his
Disputes with the Latins started on that occasion, obtained afterward so
Universally, that his sense is the sense of the Greek Church to this very day.
And though Ignatius's sense be now as generally deserted, yet the union of the
Ignatians did necessarily require a decent behavior to his Memory, which was
now no longer difficult to be granted, when he was now no longer capable of
being a Rival. Thence forward therefore Photius seemed to have enjoyed more
quietness till the year 886. and the Succession of Leo Sapiens, which is the
last time we find him mentioned in History.

These instances of Ignatius and Photius, neither servic^able to the design of
our MS.
36. And now in this whole History thus represented, there is nothing that, if
fairly understood, will make for the purpose, either of our Author, or of our
Adversaries. Our Author pretends that they neither of them separated from each
other's Communion, as thinking each other Orthodox, and that they did not
scrupulously enquire into each other's Ordinations: But it is very strange he
should so much as pretend it, when the contrary is so very notorious. What
account then can they give of all those Severities and Persecutions which are
mentioned of Photius against the Ignatians, if not to force them to his
Communion? What needed all those violences to Ignatius's person, to force him
to sign a form of Abdication, if he abdicated willingly, and thought himself
obliged to do so, because his Adversary was not a Heretic? Why then did
Photius in his two Synods deprive and excommunicate and anathematize him? Why
did he endeavor to reordain the persons ordained by Ignatius? And when the
Emperor would not endure that, why did he use the (...). Nicet. vit. Ignat.
Art Nicetas tells us of, of seeming at least to do it, by buying Sacerdotal
Habits, and sending them, already blessed, as Presents to the Parties
concerned, if he were so well satisfied, as our Author would persuade us, of
his Predecessor's Ordinations? This Photius did upon his restitution to the Sea, after Ignatius's death, when there was no danger from Ignatius that might
exasperate him, when there was no apparent reason but Principles of Conscience
that might induce him to it. But the World has been sufficiently inured to
believe hard things concerning Photius: Perhaps Ignatius, the Holy Ignatius,
behaved himself with more temper, and more agreeable to our Author's fancy: He
would, in all likelihood, have done so, if he had been of our Author's Opinion.
But if we will choose rather to learn matter of Fact from History what he did
do, than from fancy, what we may think he ought to have done, as, no doubt, we
ought to do, how much soever he differed from Photius in other things, yet he
was perfectly of his mind in this, and seems no less to have Rivalled him in
his Zeal in it, than he did in his Chair. His unwillingness to resign as our
Author and our Adversaries would have had him done, has been already observed:
Photius indeed pretended he did resign; and Hadrian's Eighth General Council
seems to speak suspiciously, when they tell us that, if he had done so, he was
notwithstanding not obliged to stand to it. It is certain he did not stand to
it, and if ever he did yield, that it was fear, not our Adversaries Opinions of
Charity and Conscience, that made him do so, that made him think himself
obliged to do so; so far from that, that as soon as his Conscience was at
liberty to hear sedate reasonings, he thought himself obliged to do the
contrary. This brought upon him those Deprivations, Excommunications, and
Anathematisms, in the Synods of Photius. And can we still believe that there
was no breach of Communion on the part of the Ignatians? What needed then those
violences which they were freed from as soon as they could be prevailed on to
Communicate with Photius? Why do the Council. Genesis 8. Act. 5, and 6.
Legates of three Eastern Patriarchs, boast that they had never owned nor
communicated with him from the beginning, if it had not been notorious that the
firm Ignatians had, from the beginning, not owned his Communion? Why then did
(...). Nicet. ib.
Ignatious, immediately, upon his restitution, excommunicate not only those who
had been Ordained by Photius, but those also who had ever so much as
Communicated with him? Is it not plain from hence, that Ignatius's Party did
separate? That he himself exacted it as Duty from them that they should do so,
and so was accessory to the Separation? That he did (...), use the Summum Jus
of enquiring into the Ordinations of Photius? And what will then become of our
Author's general Observation, that none was ever known to do so? Why did the
Ignatians still forbear the Communion of Photius, even after the (...). Nicet.
ib.
Death of Ignatius, if they had not been used to do so before, when they had
more pretense for it? If Ignatius had not persisted in that same mind, even to
his very Death? Besides, our Author was not aware that the Dispute at length
came to that which he thought Heresy, at least which he was bound to think so
by the Doctrine of his Greek Church in that Age wherein he made his Collection;
I mean, Photius started the Dispute concerning the Procession of the Holy Ghost
from the Son. Then he must have thought them obliged by Principles to separate,
and could never argue from their Actions as Precedents, if they were not
agreeable to Principles. It is very true that Photius's Doctrine was not
thought Heretical then. This appeared even in the Latine's Eighth- General
Coumcil. Some desired to be excused from anathematizing him on that account,
that they thought none ought to be anathematized but Heretics. And the Council
it self, though it obliged them still to anathematizi him, yet did not do it
upon account of any Heresy wherewith they thought him chargeable. However this
makes his Case more opposite to our purpose, because it is notwithstanding sure
that Ignatius did not therefore think himself obliged to yield to him. What can
be clearer to this purpose than the words of Ignatius, as he is personated by
Theognostus, one who was very well acquainted with his mind? (...). Libel.
Theognost. ex Persona Ignatii, initio Concilii 8.
Had this Adulterer, says he, been of the Church, I would willingly have
yielded to him. But how shall I make an alien from Christ a Pastor of the Sheep
of Christ? Plainly therefore he thought Schism as well as Heresy a sufficient
reason of challenging his Right against him. And Photius was charged with
Schism antecedently to his being set up against Ignatius, for joining with
(...). Ep. Nicolai Graece verse. de suo Concilio Romans ante Synod. 8. Graec.
Gregorius Syracusanus, who had been Excommunicated by Ignatius. So little do
these instances make for the design of our Author.

Nor of our Adversaries.
37. Nor are they much more pertinent to the design of our Adversaries. None of
these Deprivations were any farther regarded than as they were Synodical: I
mean, they were not till then thought sufficient to disoblige their charge from
their obligations to adhear to them. Bardas and Photius did both hope at first,
to extort an Abdication from Ignatius: But when they found they could not
succeed that way, they never thought themselves secure, till they got him
deprived Synodically. So it was also in the Deprivation of Photius, after he
had been Synodically confirmed: Though it was in favor of one who had a better
antecedent Right; yet the Emperor Basile excuses himself from having any hand
in it, otherwise than as he excuted the decree of Pope Nicholas's Synod,
whereby Photius had before been deprived and excommunicated. So he tells us in
the Synod, that he had done nothing in it by his Cum nulla penitus Imperiali
manu and Potentia, ut quidam parvum vel magnum effecerim. Neque enim ut
Sacratissimus Patriarcha ad proprium regrederetur Thronum, Imperii mei opus vel
excogitatio facta est. Sed multum ante Sanctissimus and Beatissimus Papa
Nicolaus quae circa eum erant perfectissime discens, Synodice decrevit reddi ei
jus proprii Throni, and anathema cum tota Romanorum Ecclesia pronunciavit
contra resistentes hujusmodi Decreto atque Sententiae. Hic autem nos olim
sciente* and paventes judicium anathematis promulgati, obsecundare Synodico
judicio Romanae Ecclesiae necessarium duximus, and hujus rei gratia reddidimus
ei proprium Thronum. Act. 6. Synod. 8.
Imperial Hand or Power. For it was not, says he, the work or contrivance of my
Imperial Station, that our most Holy Patriarch should return to his own Throne.
But long before, the most Holy and Blessed Pope Nicholas, having fully informed
himself concerning the Case of Ignatius, had decreed Synodically, that the
Right of his own Throne should be restored to him, and with the whole Roman
Church had anathematised all such as should resist that Decree and Sentence.
Here therefore being before informed of these things, and dreading the Judgment
of the promulgated Anathema, we thought it necessary to obey this Synodical
Judgment of the Roman Church, and for this cause we restored him to the
Possession of his own Throne. So far were even Princes, in that Age, from
pretending any Right to intermeddle in such matters without the Leave, nay
without the Authority of the Church to warrant them in it: and so little were
they then ashamed to own themselves Executioners of the Church's Canons in
Affairs properly relating to the Church's Right. None who is in earnest with
Religion, can in the least doubt, but that the interests of Religion are
incomparably both Nobler and Greater than the interests of any Worldly
Politics: Even the Secular Magistate himself cannot deny but that his Soul,
which is benefitted by promoting the interests of Religion, is of more
importance, even to him, than his Secular Empire. And why then should poor
Mortals be ashamed to own their obligation to make their Worldly Power
subservient to ends so undeniably Nobler and Greater than those of their
Worldly Power? But so trifling are the Reasonings of those who call this being
Priest-ridden, when they are examined seriously, that it is no wonder they
should look upon it as a principal Art of recommending them by Bantering, and
avoiding Seriousness.

38. Our Author's next instance is in the next and last Deprivation of Photius
which he tells us was by Leo Sapiens, Photius abdicated before the Succession
of Stephanus.
in favor of his own Brother Stephanus substituted in his stead: Yet the
Successor being also Orthothodox, he observed that no Schism followed upon it.
And indeed we do not find any matter for a Synodical accusation objected to
Photius by the Prince himself, who is said to have deprived him, not any of
those immoral practices wherewith he had been formerly upbraided by his
exasperated Adversaries: Much less does any Synod appear that gave judgment
against him upon such allegations; nor could he pretend, as his Father Basile
had done, that he only executed a former Synodical Deprivation for fear of the
Anathem^ he might incur if he did not do so. Photius had now no Rival who could
pretend a better Tittle, in favor of whom those Synodical determinations had
been made: And he had since been restored in a General Synod, later than that
which had deprived him, and wherein all the defects were supplied which had
been objected formerly. Here he had the Suffrages of the Eastern Patriarchs:
Not only so, but even of the Papal See it self, which had before been most
implacable against him. I know Baronius fancies that there was afterward a
breach between Pope John and him: Nor is it unlikely, that John did indeed
resent the retaining Bulgaria from him* the recovering of which was the
principal inducement which had brought him to that condescendence. This I take
to have been the reserved Case, when he afterward disowns his confirming what
his Legates had done, if they had in any thing gone beyond the Orders he had
given them. Nor is it unlikely also but that, on occasion of that resentment,
he might use some threats and hard expressions, that might have been so
interpreted by the Authors that gave Baronius occasion for this conjecture: But
there is no likelihood at all that those resentments ever proceeded so far as
an open rupture; otherwise we should certainly have had some mention of it in
so many following Epistles written by John himself afterward. Whatever he
thought, he seems, at that time, to have thought it seasonable to suppress his
resentments, as finding himself opposed by a greater interest than that of
Photius. Photius therefore does not indeed seem to have been deprived
Synodically; the reason given for it is, That Leo resented what Santabarenus
had done against him in his Father's time, in making a difference between them,
and thought Photius the principal hindrance that kept him from his designs
against Santabarenus. This was a reason in State likely enough to have been the
occasion why Leo would endeavor to get Photius deprived: But it was not a
reason likely to have been owned openly, and to have been produced before a
Judicatory. He could hardly for shame have owned a resentment for things so
long past; much less could he have charged Photius with favoring Santabarenus,
when Santabarenus himself had not yet received an open Trial. However, it is
certain that the Emperor himself was the cause that the place was vacated; and
in this Historians agree: only they do not tells, whether it were with his own
consent, though forced to it by the Emperor, or whether the Emperor pretended
to do it by his own Authority, without any consent of Photius. But what the
Historians have not informed us of, that his great Adversary Pope Sed de Photio
quidem ita vos s^^i^sistis: illas vero Imperatoris literas cum legissemus,
^asdem a vestris procul abesse comperimus. Ita ^nim se habebant, quod Photius
quietam vitam ^l^git. Quapropter in dubitatione versamur. Multum enim interest,
abrenunciasse, and expulsum esse. Stephan. Ep. 2. ad Episcopos Oriental.
Stephen the Fourth has, and that from the Letter of the Emperor himself who is
said to have deprived him. By that Letter it appears, that the Emperor did not
so much as pretend Force on his own part, but a voluntary Resignation on the
part of Photius: So that as yet we have not one instance, that ever any
Lay-Power did ever pretend to a Power of depriving Bishops as to their
Spiritual Authority, though we could not have known it in this case, had it not
been for this occasional mention of it by Pope Stephen. The Case may therefore
have probably been the same in other examples, where we read of Depositions by
Emperors, where we are not so happy to light on a particular account of them.
Here there are other circumstances that make it probable that this Cession was
voluntary: Photius was treated very respectfully even after his Deprivation, as
appears in the Trial of Santabarenus, which would not have been, if he had
stood out to the utmost; so it was this willingness of his Cession that
hindered Pope Stephen also from proceeding to his designed severities against
him: Besides, Stephanus his Successor had been his Pupil, and Educated under
him, and therefore unlikely to have accepted of his Office without his leave;
nor do we find that he ever afterward endeavored again to get into it, though
Stephanus did not long enjoy it: And therefore going off willingly, he had
thence-forward no pretense to disturb his Successors; the Schism had been his,
not theirs, if he had gone back from his own agreement, and either resumed his
Throne, or withdrawn the Peoples Duty, which had been already quitted by him.

The Breach between Nicolaus Mysticus and Le^ was in the ^ear ^06. against
Baronius.
39. The next Example is in Nicholas, deprived by the same Prince Leo Sapiens,
for opposing his fourth Marriage. Against him Euthymius was set up; yet so, as
our Author says, that neither Nicholas himself withdrew from his Communion, nor
taught the People to do so. Nay, so, that when he was restored to his Throne by
Alexander the Brother of Leo, he did not so much as question the Orders given
by Euthymius, because the persons ordained were Orthodox, and the person who
Ordained them was himself also Orthodox. So our Author. The time of this
Ejection of Nicholas is somewhat intricate: It could hardly have been where
Baronius places it, in the year 901. The surest grounds we have for discovering
it, is from the Age of Constantine Porphyrogennetus: It is certain he was born
before his Mothers Marriage, which made immediately the breach between his
Father and the Patriarch. Not only so, Nicholas also Christened him; so that as
yet he was in Possession of the Patriarchal Throne. This it seems he
condescended to, on condition the Marriage should not go on: However, within
three days after, Thomas a Presbyter performed the Solemnity, and was thereupon
Excommunicated by the Patriarch. Constantine was Christened on the (...), our
Epiphany, Jan. 6. So his Mother Zoes Marriage was on the 9th of the same
January. Leo Gram.
That immediately caused the breach, and from that time forward the Emperor
formed his Party for depriving the Patriarch. And Cedrenus tells us that they
did it on the beginning of February. The anonymous Continuator of Theophanes
and Leo Grammaticus, are more particular yet in fixing it to the first day of
that Month. Script^res post Theoph. vi^. Leon. Sap.
These are more to be regarded than Baronius's Author, Joannes Curopalates, who
would have it to have been on the beginning of January. Constantine was Crowned
on Pentecost, and then Euthymius officiated: thence is appears that Nicholas
was dispossessed before Pentecost. But Constantine could not have been
Baptized, nor Crowned before the year 906. At his Uncle Alexander's death he
was seven years old, as we are assured by the Continuator of Theophanes, and by
Leo Grammaticus, the best Authors of those times. Alexander died on June the
6th, the first day of the week, and the first Indiction, as the same Authors
tell us. These Notes show it could not have been the year 912. as Baronius
would have it, but that it must have been on the year following, 913. So also
it is agreed that he was thirteen years old when his Father-in-Law Romanus
Lacapenus got to be joined in the Government with him* This appears by Leo
Grammaticus to have been in that year wherein the Feast of the Annunciation,
March the 25th, fell on the 5th day of the week, which must have been on the
year 919. The same appears from the death of Constantine in the year of the
World 6468. Indict. 3. November. 9. All these Notes concur in the year 959. not
in the year 960. wherein it is placed by Baronius. This was in the 54th year of
his Reign or Life, for there is no great difference between them. And this
number is made up of the three several Periods of his Reign, 13 wherein he
Reigned with his Father, and Uncle, and Mother; 26 wherein Romanus was joined
with him, and 15 more after the Deposition of Romanus. These numbers reckoned
backward from the year now mentioned, can go no farther than the year 906.
wherein therefore Nicholas must have been deprived. Nicholas himself tells us,
that it was in the Pontificate of Sergius, Nicol. Ep. ad Anast. ap. Baron. an.
910.
which is not by any means reconcilable with the Chronology of Baronius. This,
by the way, for the time of this Example.

40. However, it does not appear that Leo acted herein only by his Secular
Authority. If there be any heed to be given to Eutychius, It is very probable
that Nicholas was deposed by a Synod.
he tells us of something like a Synod, that sided with the Emperor against the
Patriarch. He says the Emperor had with him Legates from the Patriarchal Sees,
to whom were joined several of the Bishops then in Constantinople, who were for
his Marriage. These were somewhat more than the (...). And whether they were
enough or no, to secure the Emperor and his Priest from the Censure of the
Patriarch, and for continuing them in Communion; yet certainly they had been
sufficient, according to the Customs of those Ages, for the Deprivation of a
Patriarch; if there had not been particular reasons to suspect whether, in a
Question so much disputed among the Bishops as that was, the Majority would
think themselves obliged to be concluded by them. And it was, upon their
joining with the Emperor, that, as Eutychius tells us, the Deprivation
followed, though Eutychius be not indeed express in telling us whether they
were particularly concerned in the Deprivation. But neither have we reason to
doubt, but that the Emperor would rather choose to deprive him Synodically than
otherwise, if for no other reason, at least for this, that he might therefore
clear himself from the odium of making himself a Judge in his own Cause: The
rather so, because we know he endeavored to transact the Dispute amicably, and
with due deference to the Ecclesiastical Authority, which shows him unwilling
to use his Power, if he could have avoided it; and because withal he had a
Synod ready convened, who were likely enough to second him in it. For why
should we suspect them unwilling to concur in the Deprivation, when they had
concurred in allowing the Marriage that had occasioned it? And there are
circumstances which confirm the likelihood of a Synodical Deprivation,
independently on the Authority of Eutychius. Nicholas himself owns the
concurrence of Pope Sergius's Legates against him, who were for dispencing with
the Marriage. It seems therefore that Leo had sent for them before the
Marriage, and the breach occasioned by it; otherwise they could not have
reached Constantinople before the Deprivation of Nicholas. Thus therefore it is
certain, that at that time there were present the Legates of at least one of
the Patriarchal Sees. And why should we suspect but that, in a Controversy of
so great importance, when he sent for the Legates of one of the Patriarchal
Sees, he sent for all the rest? But so it was, those Legates could only
undertake for the sense of those Patriarchal Jurisdictions that were
represented by them. It is by no means likely that he would neglect the fifth
Patriarchal Church to which himself was particularly related. In all
probability, the same time that he sent for the Legates of the Foreign
Patriarchs, he ordered matters so, that upon their arrival they should be met
by a Synod of Bishops of his own Dominions, that so he might have the sense, if
not of his own Patriarch, at least of his own Patriarchal Church. This made an
appearance of the Whole Church, and of a General Council, when he could pretend
to the sense of all the Patriarchates, and is withal certain that he
endeavored to draw the Bishops of his own Dominions to his Party, and that his
endeavors were successful with many of them: And this difference of Opinion
that was between them, was that which occasioned the following Schism. Then
withal we know that he charged the Patriarch with a Crime, as the ground of
the Deprivation; that was of Lying and Perjury. Probably in the agreements made
between them before the breach, to which it is probable that the Parties
concerned had Sworn, that the pretended Violation of those Oaths was that which
the Emperor charged with Perjury. Thus as there was a Judicatory, so we see
likely materials to ground a judicial Process. And why should we doubt but that
as he made this Synod Judge of the Marriage it self; so that he also allowed
them to pass their judgment on this Canonical Accusation? So little likelihood
there is that this Case can serve the purpose of our present Adversaries,
However our Author is mistaken when he thinks a Schism did not follow upon it.
concerning a Lay-Deprivation.

41. However our Author says that Nicholas did not thereupon separate from the
Communion of his Rival-intruder. Nay, farther, that when he was afterward
restorded in the time of Alexander the Brother of Leo, in the year 912. he did
not disanull the Orders given by him. B^t that a division of Communions
followed on this injurious Deprivation is certainly evident in the History of
that Age, if any thing be so. The words of the Collector of Jus Graeco-Romanum
are very express, (...). Gr^^. Romans Part* 1. Lib. 2. p. 104.
that there were Schisms among them, and much disturbance. I need not mention
the like Testimonies of the Historians in a Case so undeniable. These were the
Schisms which occasioned the famous Tome of Union, which made the third part of
the Synodicon here referred to, and which is still preserved in the now
mentioned Collection. So the Continuator of Theophanes and Joannes Curopalates
say, that it was here that the Metropolitanes were united who had been divided
by Nicholas and Euthymius. But perhaps this breach of Communion was rather from
the Followers of Nicholas, than from Nicholas himself. So our Adversaries might
possibly pretend* Ap. Baron. An. 917. Numb. 4.
if we had not still extant an Epistle of Nicholas himself to the Bishops who
were out of Communion. This makes it plain, that they were out of his Communion
also when he was again resettled in his Patriarchate. So unhappy our Author is
in his design, that even in his own Collection he has given us another instance
of that which he would needs persuade u^, and persuade us from this very
Collection, that it never happened. For here we have another Case, when a
separaration of Communion was made for vindicating a Personal Right in one who
had been injuriously deprived, even against an Orthodox Successor: (...).
Annal. Simeon. Logot. inter Scriptores By Zantinos post. Theophan.
For Euhymius was so far from being gui^ty of any other properly-called
Heresy, that he was Orthodox even in the point here disputed of, which in that
Age was called Heresy, even in preserving the Canon, which Nicholas had been
so zealou^ for, against fourth Marriages. Leo the Emperor, when he had gained
his point, was not contented with the liberty himself had taken, but wou^d have
carried the matter farther: He endeavored also to set forth a Constitution
whereby fourth Marriages should have been permitted to others of the Lai^y
also* so hi^ Predecessors Valentinian the elder* and the Great Justinian, had
done in like Cases of doubtful Marriages practiced by themselves. No doubt they
looked upon it as a thing discreditable, if themselves should take a liberty
that might not be allowed to others of the Laity. But this Euthymius also
opposed, as Nicholas had done before; and with such success that it did not
pass. This he did by his interest in the Ecclesiastical Council requisite by
the customs of those times for passing Constitutions that were Ecclesiastical;
Our Author does here, as well as elsewhere presume there were no Schisms where
really there were Schisms, only on the Testimony of the Tomus Vnionis.
as there were Lay Councils requisite for the Constitutions that were purely
Temporal. All therefore that Euthymius had done to gratify the Emperor, was
the same which had been granted by the Legates of Pope Sergius at the expulsion
of Nicholas, not to justify the matter of fourth Marriages in general, but
only to dispense with the Emperor's particular Case.

42. Nor has our Author any express Testimony for denying the Schism which here
fell out so contrary to his own Principles, at least as to matter of Fact.
Zonaras is his Author from whence he took his Case, and to whom he refers us
for it, but he has nothing to countenance our Author's Observations upon it. He
neither tells us that Nicholas did communicate with Euthymius, nor that he did
approve his Ordinations. These things are our Author's Inferences, not from
him, nor from the Dyptichs, (as our Editors fancy,) but from the Acclamations
at the passing the Tomus Vnionis.: These Acclamations he therefore takes for
the sense of the Church, because in his time they were read every year, on the
month of July, in the Ecclesiastical Desk. We do not otherwise find any entire
public Catalogues of the Patriarchs preserved in any Ecclesiastical Dyptichs
in our Author's Age; and our Author mentions none but those who were mentioned
in that Tomus Vnionis, as we have it now extant: There we find all the Names of
those whom our Author reckons as still Honorable in the esteem of the Church
of his own time, and that in the forms alluded to by our Author. Our Author
says an Anathema was pronounced against all things that had been written or
spoken against Tarasius and Nicephorus: p. 25, 26.
He means by Plato and Theodorus, and their Saccudiote and Studite Monks. And
this very form he expressly quotes, not from the Dyptichs, but the Synodicon, as
it is also quoted from the same Synodicon in the fragments of Photius's Eighth
General Council, first published by Dr. Beveridge; and accordingly we find it
in the Tomus Vnionis as still extant in the Collection of Jus Graeco-Romanum:
For this Tomus Vnionis concerning Marriages made a third part of the Synodicon,
Anast. Caes. apud Cotelerium Tom. 3. Monumentorum Graec. Eccles. p. 432, 433.
Nico ib. p. 443.
as we are assured by Anastasius Caesareensis, published by Cotelerius. This
Synodicon our Author supposes every Man to know, that is in his own Church of
Constantinople. For it was read publicly in the Desk in the Patriarchal
Church, as Nico tells us, one of our Author's witnesses, in a fragment of his,
preserved by the same Cotelerius. Nay, it was read annually, not on the first
Sunday of Lent, as our Editors fancy, but in the month of July, as we are
assured by Balsamon. Our Author again proves the Honor the Church had for
Photius, and Ignatius, and Stephanus, and Antonius Cauleos, from those words
which he therefore supposes to be the public words of the Church, May the
Memory of Ignatius, p. 29, and p. 30.
Photius, Stephanus, and Antonius, the most holy Patriarchs, be everlasting;
and whatsoever has been spoken against Ignatius, and Photius, and Stephanus,
and Antonius, the most holy Patriarchs, let it be Anathema. These words are
also produced from the same Synodicon in the fragments of Dr. Beveridge, and
are also the very words of the Tomus Vnionis. Thus therefore our Author
reasons, that because all these persons are honorably mentioned by the Church,
therefore they all died in her Communion, and therefore could not have been out
of Communion with each other. And as from that mention of Ignatius and Photius
in the Tomus Vnionis, and the Synodicon, our Author gathered, that they were
not out of Communion with each other, against the express Testimonies of
coaeval Historians to the contrary; so, in all likelihood, it was the same
reasoning that made him presume the same concerning Nicholas Mysticus and
Euthymius; they were as expressly mentioned in the Synodicon as the others,
though our Author is not himself so express in taking notice of it. And why
should he otherwise refer us for their story to Zonaras, who mentions nothing
of their keeping in each other's Communion, if he had not presumed this as
notorious as the other, from the so often formerly mentioned Synodicon? The
reason was obvious why he did not repeat this, because he says every body knew
it, and he had mentioned it so often before. We must remember, he spoke these
things to his Pupils in the Patriarchal Church, in the very Place where it used
to be read annually; but this Reason would not have held for his concealing any
other Evidence, that had neither been so evident to his Auditors, nor so
expressly and so frequently mentioned by himself on other occasions.

43 But neither our Author, nor our Adversaries, The Acclamations of the Tomus
Vnionis, to which our Author so frequently refers, were no^ elder than the year
995.
have hitherto considered how incompetent this Testimony of the Synodicon was
for proving what they design to prove by it. Dyptichs indeed might have been
presumed from the Times of the Persons mentioned in them, if nothing had
appeared to the contrary, because the Names conveyed by them were in course
entered into those Dyptichs whilst the Persons were living, and in Office, if it
had then been the custom to continue Names in them after the Death of the
Persons concerned in them: This had been at least a Presumption that they had
dyed in Communion with the Church, and with each other; and that whatever
Differences might have risen between them whilst they were living, that might
have occasioned an Expunging them; yet that those Differences were reconciled
before their Death, when both Parties were thus communicated to Posterity,
without any Blemish on their Reputation; but the Case was quite otherwise in
the Tomus Vnionis, and the Synodicon: The Tomus Vnionis was made on a
particular occasion of a Difference, and that a difference in Communion, which
might have proceeded to the uttermost Extremities before the Union was at last
agreed on. Thus it can by no means be taken for an Argument that the Persons
concerned in it had not been formerly divided, but rather the contrary: For if
there had been no d^vision in Communion before, what need had there been of
their Uniting, which was agreed on by both Parties in the Tomus Vnionis? Not
only so, but this Tomus Vnionis was agreed on at some time after the Persons
principally concerned on both sides were dead; and at that distance that can
give it no security from being mistaken, as to Matter of Fact. Thus all that
can be gathered from it is, that the Church at that distance was in Communion
with both, as far as the dead are capable of Communion with the living; that
is, by an honorable Commemoration: But it cannot thence be gathered, that the
Persons, when living, were ever in Communion with each other; the contrary may
rather be presumed, where their mutual Communicating cannot be made out by
express and positive Testimony. Thence it appeared, that the Differences in
Communion proceeded farther than the lives of the Persons who begun them:
Whence it will rather follow, that those Beginners of the Divisions persisted
in them to their Deaths, unless Evidence may be produced to the contrary, that
may over balance this Presumption. From D^ Quesne's Gloss^grae^.
Our Editors tell us, that this Synodicon was first agreed on in the Year 842.
in the beginning of the Reign of Michael and Theodor^. Had it been so, that had
been some while after the Deaths of Tarasius and Nicephorus; but they give us
no Authority for it: Nay, it was impossible it could have been so. The Tomus
Vnionis, and that part of the Synodicon we are speaking of, do wholly concern
fourth Marriages. And how could that Union be made before the Divisions that
occasioned it? That Question was not started till the Time of Leo Sapiens, and
the Patriarch Nicholas Mysticus; that is, as we have already shown, not before
the Year 905. accordingly the first passing of this Bill of Union was not
before the Year 920. in July, the 8 th Indiction, in the Year of the World, as
they reckon, 6428. in the time of Constantine Porphyrogennetus, Sim. Mag. Ann.
n. 18.
and Romanus Lacapenus; some make it the year following: And from this former
time of passing it in the Month of July, the custom of reading it annually
seems to have been derived, and that was appointed for the Month of Reading it.
But it seems the Differences revived again, and there was a new Synod for
restoring the same Union; that was in the Reign of Basile and Constantine. The
Basile who had a Constantine for his Colleague, could be no other than he who
for distinction sake was called Bulgaroctonos, from his Victories against the
Bulg^rians. To his Time belong the Patriarc^s, who are said to have presided in
this second Synod: Johannes Curopalates makes it to have been Sisinnius; but
the Words of the Synod it self, as we have them extant in the Jus Graeco
Romanum, show that it was his Predecessor Nicholas, not Mysticus, but
Chrysoberges: They are both of of them Patriarchs of this Reign, and probably
both of them presided in this Synod, Nicholas in the beginning, and Sisinnius
in the end of it. If this Conjecture be right, we shall thereby gain the Year
of it exactly: It must have been the year wherein Nicholas dyed, and Sisinnius
succeeded him. This will conveniently enough suit with the Insertion at the end
of that Tome, which the Editor has printed in a smaller Character, and called a
Scholion, no doubt because he found some such note of Distinction in his MS.
What follows from that place to the end, seems to have been added in that later
Council, wherein this Tome of Union was decreed. The Author of that Scholion,
as it is called, speaks plainly of those Times as if they were his own: In
regard that the Words do very well fit the Persons of the Fathers of the
Council themselves: They there reckon from the first starting of the
Controversy concerning fourth Marriages, to that part of the Reign of Basile
and Constantine in which that Synod was held; that is, as I have shown, to the
year of the Death of Nicholas Chrysoberges, and the Succession of Sisinnius,
ninety years: This will sufficiently fix the Year of this second Council. The
beginning of this Dispute was when Leo the Wise first designed his fourth
Marriage, which must have been in the year 905. In the very beginning of the
year 906 the Nuptials were solemnized, and Matters were so far advanced, that
the Patriarchal Legates were now at Constantinople, and sided with the Emperor
against the Patriarch, which could not have been, if the Matter had not been
debated, and they sent for in the year before. Thus the 90 years will end
exactly in the year 995. and the Death of this Nicholas is by Johannes
Curopalates placed in the 8 th Indiction, which concurs with the former part of
that year before September* But however though the Union was perfected under
Sisinnius, yet the Decree, as we have it now, was made before the death of
Nicholas. That appears from the Acclamation there mentioned in the Council* not
in the form used by them to the deceased, but that which is there appropriated
to the living. Their Acclamations to the dead are to wish their Memory
everlasting: Their Acclamations to the living are to wish them many years. This
was the old form first taken up in the times of the Heathen Emperors, and from
thence deduced to the Christians; and in this form the Acclamations in this
Council run to the living Emperors and Empresses, and the other Patriarchs of
this Synod, and so to our Nicholas among the Patriarchs. And to this later
Synod belong all the Acclamations subjoyned to the Tomus Vnionis: That is clear
from hence, that even Nichlaus Mysticus, in whose time the former Synod was
held, is here celebrated with the Acclamations of the dead; and not only he,
but all his Successors between him and our present Nicholas Chrysoberges. So
little reason there is to think strange that the Predecessors of that elder
Nicholaus Mysticus should be mentioned in the same form. Thus we see how little
reason there is for this inference, that the heads of these dividing Parties
must therefore, when living, have kept Communion with each other, because their
differences were at length accommodated so long after their deaths, and because
the Church which lived, The Case of ^osmas Atticus in the time of Manuel
Comnenus.
as well out of the Memory as the concern of the first heats, pleased at length
to take up forms grateful to both Parties, in honor of those who at first
began the differences.

44. The next instance is of Cosmas Atticus, deposed unjustly from the same See
of Constantinople by the Emperor Manuel Comnenus. Yet he, as our Author tells
us, neither made, nor taught any division of Communion from them who had
injured him. But it is certain this Deprivation was not made by a Lay-Power,
but Synodically. The Synod is expressly mentioned by those who mention the Case.
Nicetas Choniates, to whom our Author refers us for the Story, tells us
expressly; that the Patriarch (...), etc. Nicet. Chon. l. 2. n. 3.
excommunicated the Synod that assembled to deprive himself, for their
frequenting the Palace, and their manifest (...), accepting of the Emperor's
Person, in the Judgment they had given against him. The like expressions there
are also in So Cinnamus also makes the proceedings to have been done by the
(...), by which I understand the Metropolites who in that Age concluded their
Suffragan Bishops, Cin. l. 2. n. 10.
Cinnamus, intimating that this Deprivation was decreed Conciliarly. Nay,
Allat. de con^. Occid and Orient. Eccl. l. 2. c. 12.
Leo Allatius has preserved and published the Synod it self, by which we know
the year, and day of it. Thence it appears, that Cosmas was deprived on the
26th of Feb. which fell in the 10th Indiction, and the year of our vulgar
account 1147. But our Author says, that Cosmas himself neither divided, nor
countenanced any division on his own account. But how comes our Author to know
that he did not so? His Author Nicetas Choniates says no such matter. And he
has here neither Dyptichs nor Conciliary Acclamations from whence he might
either gather, or presume it. His Author particularly is so far from owning it*
that he tells us expressly of his excommunicating the Bishops of the Synod; that
is the constant notion of the word (...) in the Ecclesiastical Canons, as it is
opposed to (...), as that signifies a Deprivation of an Ecclesiastical Dignity:
And the Crimes he objects against them, were such as had been particularly
censured in the Canons and Constitutions of the Church of that Age: They had
provided against Bishops appearing frequently at Court, and against Partiality
in the Ecclesiastical Judicatories. Thus he avoided their jurisdiction over
himself as being themselves Criminals, and responsible for their breach of
Canons antecedently to their sitting in that Synod: And he insisted on his own
Right to put the Canons in execution on those who were Subjects of his own
Jurisdiction. But our Author understands his Author Choniates so, as if
Cosmas's sealing up the Womb of the Augusta from having any Male Children, had
been an argument that his resentment proceeded no farther; and that he
otherwise owned their Authority, and submitted to the Deprivation. But the word
which the Interpreter of Nicetas, and from him the Interpreter of our present
Author, translates by execration, the English Interpreter by denunciation, is
(...), and signifies the infliction of (...), (that is the proper
Ecclesiastical Term for Ecclesiastical Penences) upon the Violaters of the
Canons. This is exactly agreeable to the person he had acted in the now
mentioned Excommunication of the Bishops who deprived him: This was as plainly
an Exercise of his Patriarchal Authority over the Emperor and Empress, as the
other was over his Suffragan Bishops. How then can it be an argument of any
difference to their Censures? Of any obligation that he thought lay on him, in
Conscience, not to separate from their Communion? Our Adversaries may perhaps
fancy that our Author had some other Testimony for Cosmas's not separating,
than that of Choniates: For my part I cannot think he had any other, but that
he gathered it, not from the words of Choniates, but his own inferences. He
says in the Summary that Cosmas was succeeded by Theodosius. These could hardly
be the words of any other Summist than the Author himself, who had not, in his
Tract, so much as mentioned the Name of Theodosius: Yet he could not have made
Theodosius his immediate Successor, had he consulted any other Catalogues of
Patriarchs: But Nicetas Choniates took no occasion of mentioning any other
Patriarchs between Cosmas and Theodosius; and Theodosius he does indeed mention
toward the end of this same Emperor, Manuel. Thence our Author had an occasion
likely enough to lead him into this mistake, that Theodosius was that immediate
Successor with whom he supposes that Cosmas still maintained Communion: But it
is certain that there were many Patriarchs and many years too between them; and
therefore it must also be as certain, that our Author could have no express
Testimony, that Cosmas did continue in the Communion of The dosius. These
Answers hold on the supposition that Cosmas was deprived unjustly: Yet there is
reason to question whether that was indeen his Case. It is sufficiently clear
that the Synod charged him with the Bogomilian He^esie, for favoring Nipho,
who had been censured for it Synodically in the time of his Predecessor: Nor
does Nicetas bring any thing in his defen^e to prove that he was not guilty of
it. Nay, he owns that he had an excessive favor for the Heretic, without the
least distinction made between his Person and his Heresy: This at least is
certain that he was a Heretic in the Opinion of the Synod that deprived him.
And how then could he continue in their Communion? How could our Author
justify his doing so, when himself acknowledged that a precondemned Heresy,
such as this was, did oblige to separate from Communion? How can he commend
them for doing so, or reason from their Practice as a Precedent, when by his
own Principles it was not allowable?

45. As to his instances in the Reign of Isaacius Angelus, In all the
Successions under Isaacius Ange^us, the Throne was validly vacated.
we have a very imperfect account of them in History. We have now no other
Original Author of those times that gives any distinct account of that Reign,
but our Author Nicetas Choniates. Thus we do indeed know as much as our Author,
and no more; for Nicetas is slighter in these matters than they deserved. In
the Deprivation of Basilius Camaterus, he tells us the charge laid against him,
was that he had suffered Women who had been made Nuns against their Wills, to
resume their Secular Habit, and to return to their Secular way of living. This
was an Ecclesiastical Crime, and therefore proper for an Ecclesiastical
Tribunal. And the next instance of Nicetas Mu^tanes, who was cast out merely
for his Old Age, (...)* Nicet. Cho^. l. 2. vit. Isac. Ang. n 4.
without any Accusa^ion, and yet against his Will, seems to imply that Bazilius
had Accusation which Nicetas had not. This Accusation, if it had any thing
peculiar in it from that which was used in the Case of Nicetas, must have been
such wherein the Emperor did not judge as he did in the Case of Nicetas. And
what Judicatory then can we suppose it to have been before whom it was brought,
if not a Council? However Nicetas (will our Adversaries say) was deprived by a
Lay Power, without any Accusation, at least before any other Judge besides the
Emperor himself. Suppose it was so, yet that will not prejudice the Right of
his next Successor, nor make him Schismatical, nor warrant any Separation, even
by our Principles: Before he came in the Sea was validly vacated; if not by the
Deprivation, yet by the Cession, however involuntary, that followed upon it.
That he did at length (...). Jur. Gr. Romans Part 1. p. 303.
Surrender, we have the express Testimony of the Author of the Catalogue of
Patriarchs that is subjoyned to the Jus Graeco-Romanum. Thus the third of the
Patriarchs under the Emperor, was brought in by a good Authority. The Question
then can only be, whether his Place was as fairly vacated for his Successor, as
his Predecessor's had been for him. And indeed it was so, and by the same way,
not of a Conciliary Deprivation, but of a voluntary Surrendry. So we read in
our MS. Catalogue of Patriarchs by Nicephorus Callistus (...). So the Author of
the Catalogue in the Jus Greco-Romanum assures us, where we read expressly
(...). The last Case is that of Dositheus; and here the Emperor showed a piece
of Art that did not very much become him. Balsamon, the famous Canonist, was at
that time Patriarch of Antioch; Him therefore Isaacius consults, as a person
whose Authority was like to go far in influencing the Bishops; and the Question
he proposes to him, was that which has so frequently been controverted in the
Greek Church, concerning Translations: And to incline Balsamon to be favorable
in the Case, he makes him believe, that his design was to translate the
Canonist himself from Antioch to Constantinople; whether this influenced him,
or not, is uncertain: However the event was such as the Emperor desired, that
the Patriarch gave his opinion in favor of Translation. We plainly see hereby,
that the Emperor did not pretend absolute Power, but only the execution of the
Canons. When therefore he had thus gained his point, he immediately orders the
Translation, not of Balsamon from Antioch, but of his Favorite Dositheus from
Jerusalem to Constantinople. The Bishops finding how they were imposed on, make
head against him, as a Person for whom they never intended the favor of a
Dispensation: But he got Possession of the Throne, though he held it only for
nine days; then he was (...), etc. Niceph. Callist. MS. Catalog. Patriarcharum.
cast out again by the Schism that followed upon it of the Archbishops and
Clergy from him: So our MS. Nicephorus Callistus in his Catalogue expressly.
Here we see a withdrawing of Communion from a person who wanted a good Title,
without any pretense of any Heresy maintained by him: But the Emperor was very
much bent on having Dositheus in that Employment, and at last prevails; but not
by our modern way of using his force, but by the Consent of so many of the
Bishops as were sufficient to make a (...). Jur. Gr. Romans p. 303.
Synod in favor of him. This perhaps our Author might not know, because his
Author Nicephorus had nothing of it: However we have as good Authority for it
as our Adversaries can pretend from their Author's silence in it. Our Author of
the Catalogue of the Patriarchs subjoyned to the Jus Graeco-Romanum, is very
plain and full in it; and he was perhaps a little elder than their anonymous;
for he concludes his Catalogue with the first Patriarchate of Joseph, in the
Reign of Michael Palaeologus. However, Dositheus did not enjoy the place long:
(...) Catalog. in Jur. Gr. Romans
Some few years are mentioned in the Catalogue with the Jus Orientale; but the
number was not legible there. The Greek Catalogue in the first Volume of the
Byzantine Historians, is something more particular, and tells us of two years.
With the help of this information, we may possibly gather a more distinct
account out of our Manuscript Catalogue of Nicephorus, which had otherwise not
been so easily intelligible, that it was not two full years; for so Nicephorus
in his Catalogue has it, (...), -- the number of the months and days are
wanting which must have made up near another year. But by that time Nicephorus
says, the Schism was risen to that height, that he was the second time
deprived, and finding his former Throne of Jerusalem filled, he abdicated both
Thrones, as well that to which, as that from which, he had been Translated.
Thus it again appears in an instance so near our Author's Age, that there was a
Schism in this case, where notwithstanding our Author's reasonings does
necessarily oblige him to suppose there was none; by which we may easily
perceive how unaccurate his Informations were, even in matters so ^ear his own
memory. He seems to have known no more of this whole affair, than what his
still extant Author Nicetas Choniates told him, and he did no^ think fit to
take notice of the Schisms that occasioned both these Deprivations of
Dositheus: Yet even Nicetas mentions (...), separate Assemblies. Here was
plainly a Schism, not on the pretense of any objected Heresy, but on account
of an original defect of Title. They reckoned the Emperor's Translation as
nothing, and the Church's consent to it as nothing, because the Question had
been proposed insidiously. All that Balsamon and the Bishops influenced by him
had granted, was, that in general the Canons of the Church aganst Translations
were dispensible, where the Church was pleased with the Person, so far as to
think that he particularly deserved a Dispensation with her general Rules; only
the Application of the Canon to Dositheus, was the Emperor's Act, which we see
was not allowed him by them who made the Separation. Had the Translation been
valid, and by a sufficiently obliging Power, their Duty had necessarily
followed upon it, and they could not have been at liberty, even in Conscience,
to dispute it, after a Synod had consented to it, and after a Possession with
two years settlement. But by the Schism we have reason to believe that the
numbers of the Synod that consented, were less than of those who had never
consented from the beginning; otherwise they had been concluded by the
Synodical Act. Or else the only reason that could be for excepting against the
Synodical Suffrages, must have been, that the Emperor's Authority was thought
too influential on those public Meetings. Every way it appears how little the
Secular Power was regarded, even in those late times of Isaacius Angelus, when
his Authority, though seconded by a Synod for applying the Dispensation to
Dositheus, was not thought sufficient to oblige an absent Majority dissenting
from them, even with regard to Conscience, when even in such a Case as this,
the Cause was at last overruled by those that separated, and carried for them.
This plainly shows how little these practices of Isaacius were approved of by
the generality of the best Judges of his own time, when they durst express
their thoughts concerning them with any freedom. It was, in all likelihood, the
unpopularness of these Invasions of the Liberties of the Church, that gave his
Brother Alexis a great advantage against him, which ended in his Deprivation.
Even (...).
Nicetas himself, from whom our Author takes these things, does not mention
them without a severe Censure. How then could our Author reason from them as
Precedents? How could he pretend the Authority of Nicetas for a reasoning so
different from the Sentiments of Nicetas?

46. It was therefore no such admirable matter, if it had been true, Therefore
it had not been strange if no Schism had followed it.
if there had been no Separation between these five Patriarchs of this Reign,
succeeding each other in so short a time. It is not true, that they were
deprived purely at the Emperor's pleasure. It is not true, that their Places
were invalidly vacated. All of them were either deprived Synodically, or
abdicated. There is no need to dispute how unjustly or corruptly the Synods
proceeded in depriving them, nor how unwilling themselves were in their
Abdication. Even an unjust Synodical Sentence was, by the Canons, sufficient to
vacate their Places, till they could be remedied in another and a greater
Synod, which none of them ever had. And even an involuntary Abdication, if
Formally and Canonically made, was sufficient to cut them off from any
pretensions to their former Rights. They had therefore, in these cases, no
pretense left to vindicate their Rights by a Separation, or to question the
validity of the Acts of Successors, who were brought into Sees so validly
vacated. And why should it be thought so admirable that they did not make
disturbances where they had, by the Canons, no tolerable pretense to do so? Why
should they be thought Precedents for our present Holy Fathers who are neither
deprived Conciliar^y, nor have made any even involuntary Abdication.

Mr. Hody's Exhortations to yield for Peace's sake, more justly applicable to
his own Fathers than ours.
47. Thus upon the whole, it has appeared that our Author's Instances, as they
were never designed so neither do they make for our Adversaries purpose. Our
Adversaries pretend, that unjustly deprived Bishops never vindicated their
Rights by a Separation. And we confess we cannot make the contrary Observation,
that unjust Possesso^s were always so modest and so resigned to the Church's
Peace, as willingly to surrender the Usurpations. Will they therefore make them
Precedents in this particular? So indeed they may if they can have the
Consciences, if they can find in their Hearts to do so. But are they not in the
mean time ashamed to tell us that good Bishops have been willing to part with
their Rights rath^r than they would break Communion, when their own Fathers
will rather break Communion than make Restitution? It were easy here to retort
all Mr. Hody's Exhortations upon his own Intruders; I am sure he can give no
Arguments why good Men ought to surrender Rights for Peace sake, but what will
proceed more cogently for surrendering Usurpations. But we have many new
Topics that we can justly use to his Fathers, which he cannot pretend to use
to ours: We have the Right and Duty which was owing from his to ours before the
encroachment, and which his own reasoning does not pretend not to be owing
still: We have their Sacred Vows of Canonical Obedience, for securing that
Right and Duty where no Worldly Power can force them to it, which no other
Power in the World can dispense with, but that for whose Interest they were
imposed: We have the dreadful imprecations implied in all such Oaths as an
obligation for performance. Methinks our adversary Bishops should tremble at
the consequence, if God should no otherwise help them, than as they have
performed their Duties to their respective Ordinaries and their Metropolitan.
Their great Plea of the Public Good we can beter pretend than they, if they
will allow that the Eternal interests of Souls and of Religion, are more to be
valued in a Public Account than Worldly Politics: And this is methinks a
concession for which we need not be beholen to any who own themselves
Christians. And certainly it is more for the public good of the Church that
Subordinations should be preserved, than that any particular person should be
made a Bishop by offering violence to them. It is more for the public good of
Religion, that the Glorious Passive Doctrines of the Church should be
maintained in opposition to Worldly Interests, than that they should seem
prostituted to serve them. It is more for the public good of Religion, that
the Credit of the Clergy should be maintained, than that they should enjoy the
benefits of Worldly Protection. It is more for the public good of Religion,
that the Independency of that Sacred Function on the State should be asserted
by challenging their Rights, than that by yielding them the Lay-Power should be
owned to have any Power of depriving us of the comfort of Sacraments in a time
of Persecution. It were easy also to show, that the Doctrines and Practices,
in defense of which our Holy Fathers have incurred this Deprivation, are more
for the Interest even of the State, even of the Civil Magistracy, than those
which are likely to obtain upon their Cession. Even the State cannot subsist
without Obligations of Conscience and the Sacredness of Oaths, and these can
signify nothing for the security of any future Government, if they must
signify nothing for the time past. Or Faith.
It is not for the Interest of the Public to secure ill Titles in their
Possession, and thereby to encourage the frequency of ill Titles and frequent
Subversions of the Fundamental Constitutions, and all the Public Miseries that
must follow on such Changes; especially in a Settlement where all the care has
been taken that was possible, to preserve it by obligations of Conscience. And
certainly Mr. Hody will not say, that our invalidly deprived Fathers are
obliged to submit to the wrong that is done them, where there are not public
considerations that may make amends for the private injuries. But if Mr. Hody
will needs live rather by Precedents than Rules; yet where will he find even a
Precedent for his own Case? For (...), in ^ead of (...).
Good Men indeed have been willing rather to part with their own Rights, than
they would violate the Church's Peace. So did St. Gregory Nazianzene, so St.
Chrysostom, so the African Fathers: But where will he find a Mediator for Peace
on any good account, who did as he does, who only addressed his Exhortations to
the injured Persons to part with their Rights, not to their Injurers to restore
them? How can he hope to persuade those Persons against whom he shows himself
so manifestly partial? His own Instances of Mediation are all against him.
Clemens Romanus did not persuade the injured Presbyters, but the Schismatics,
the Invaders of the Rights of the Presbyters, to submit and quit their
Interests in the Party that sided with them. I know Dr. Owen as well as Mr.
Hody, has fallen into the same mistake, to think they were Presbyters who are
here exhorted by St. Clement; but it is strange such Learned Men should fall
into such a mistake, if they had considered any thing of the design of the
Epistle. The persons with whom he had to deal, Clem. Romans Epist. ad. Corinth.
were (...). n. 3. which are unlikely Characters of such as were Presbyters by
Office. They were such as are supposed to oppose the Presbyters in general, n.
1.44, 47, 57. In opposition to them St. Clement insists on the example of
Military Subordinations, n. 37. Who sees not from hence that they aspired
beyond the Rank and Station assigned them in the Church? He insists on the
Sacredness of the Sacerdotal Function, n. 32, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, And he warns
them particularly, that Laics were to be restrained within the Duty imposed on
the Laity, n. 40. implying plainly that the Schismatics were Laics, and had
nothing to do with the Sacerdotal Function. He makes it such a Rivalling the
Priesthood, as the Israelites were guilty of when God convinced them of his own
Choice of Aaron, by the miraculous Blossoming of Aaron's Rod, n. 43. This was
evidently of persons pretending to the Sacerdotal Office when they had no Right
to it. He says the Apostles foresaw the same Aemulations for the sacred Office
under the Gospel, and secured it from being invaded by deriving it in a
Succesion, out of which it could not be received, n 42, 44. To what purpose
could that Discourse tend, but to restrain such Invasions in the Schismatics
he had to deal with, supposing withal that they had no pretense to it on
account of that Succession? It is to the Head^ of those Schismatics that this
Author speaks in this place, n. 5^. Nay, in the very words produced by Mr.
Hody, where the Apostolical Author personates them, saying, they would do the
things enjoined them by the Multitude, so that the Flock of Christ might live
in Peace with the Presbyters appointed over them. So that in this very place
they are opposed to the Presbyters. Only the word (...) is unhappily translated
Plebs, which made Dr. Owen fancy he had got a Testimony for his Lay
Congregational Authority, and perhaps made Mr. Hody think they were not
themselves Plebeians who were to receive the Commands of the Plebs. But the
Greek ((...)) signifies no particular Rank of the Ecclesiastics, but takes in
the whole (...) with the Presbyters, in opposition to the smallness of the
number of the Schismatics, who were (...) n. 1. (...), n. 47. And as little to
his purpose is the other Author produced by Mr. Hody, Dionisius Alexandrinus.
He also addresses his exhortations, as became a just Mediator, not to
Cornelius, but Novatian; to the Invader, not to him who had received the
injury. If he will therefore be true to his Authorities, let him persuade his
Usurpers to do Justice to the persons injured by them. They are said to excuse
themselves from the odium of the Schism, by pretending they were forced into
their Chairs: But they who had the Spirit of our Ancestors would not have given
the occasion for a Schism for any violence. St. Cyprian counts it as glorious
to die, if the Cause should require it, for Unity, as for the Faith. Nor do our
Laws force any to accept of Bishoprics, though they indeed force them who are
to Elect and Consecrate them; and they have had some good Precedents of those
who neither would be, nor have been forced into Schismatical Thrones: God
reward then for i^. Had all followed their examples, the Schism at least had
been avoided, which is that which truly Christian Souls can bear with the least
patience. But though the first Trial be past, Mr. Hody's Dionisius has found an
expedient for them yet, by which they may satisfy the World whether they deal
sincerely in pretending unwilli^gness. That is, by now resigning what they tell
us they were forced to^ 48 May all at length return to a love of Unity, and an
abhorrence of carnal Politics! May they do it whilst God is yet ready to
accept it at their hands, A pathetical Conclusion.
and before it be too late for securing their own greatest Interest! May they
do it whilst they have yet an opportunity of satisfying the World by not
gra^ifying Flesh and Blood in it* whilst they may in some measure retrieve the
Honor of Religion, and prevent the Ruin of innumerable invaluable Souls, for
which they must otherwise be responsible! May they do it whilst it may be in
their power to make some Amends for the Scandals given by them, without which
their very Repentance cannot be acceptable to God, nor beneficial to
themselves; before they provoke God to farther and severer Inflictions on our
beloved Countries, and to deprive us of that Religion for which they pretend so
great a Zeal! When shall we again return to our former Communion, and to our
former glorious Passive Doctrines, and to our much more glorious Practice of
them, in suffe^ing for a good Conscience? When shall we on both sides instead
of Vpbraidings and Reproaches remove all just occasion of Reproach, and return
to a noble Emulation, who shall do most for a solid lasting Peace by
Principles? We have had Principles more contributive to Union tha^ all our new
Projects of Comprehension, without uniting Principles; But what can Principles
signify, if we will not be true to them, if we will fall from them as often as
they pinch us? We desire no hard things from them as Conditions on their side
for a Reconciliation: We only desire the same Terms from them on which we were
united formerly, the common Doctrines of not only ours, but the Catholic
primitive Church; the Preservation of our sacred Ecclesiastical Rights, our
Duty to our H. Fathers, which is not their Invaders Interest to deny, before a
just conciliary Deprivation, and the same innocent Offices in which we formerly
communicated. And what can they pretend to yield for Peace, if they will
scruple Concessions so very just and reasonable; if they will not restore the
old Terms, which may be done without any thing that can properly be called
Concession? These things if they will grant us we shall all return into their
Communion with Joy; and they will also have reason to partake in our Joy* for
our having vindicated their sacred Rights against future Encroachments. But the
least we can ask, or they can grant, is to gratify us in the matter of our
present Dispute, That they will not invade nor maintain injurious Possessions;
that they will not by doing so cut themselves off, by their own Act, from
Communion with us.

The End of the Second PART.
The CANONS in the Baroccian Manuscript, omitted by Mr. Hody.
(...).

(...).

The 31 Canon of the holy Apostles, instead of the 32.

If any Presbyter, contemning his own Bishop, shall hold a separate Meeting,
and erect an opposite Altar, having nothing wherewith to charge the Bp. in
Matters of Or Faith.
Piety and Justice, let him be deposed, as an ambitious Affector of Government;
for he is an Usurper. So also as many of the Clergy as shall join with him
shall be deposed, and the Laics excommunicated; but all this after the 1st,
2d, and 3d Admonition of the Bishop.

(...).

(...).

The 6 th Canon of the Synod of Gangra.

If any Man hold a private Meeting out of the Church, and despising the Church,
shall presume to perform the Offices of the Church, the officiating Presbyter
not being thereunto licensed by the Bishop, let him be anathema. For (...), in
stead of (...).


(...).

(...).

The 5 th Canon of the Synod of Antioch.

If any Presbyter or Deacon, despising his own Bp. has withdrawn himself from
the Church, and set up an Altar in a private Meeting, and shall disobey the
Admonitions of the Bp. and will not be persuaded by him, nor submit to him,
exhorting him again and again, he is absolutely to be deposed, and ought no
longer to he treated as a curable Person, neither as one who can retain his
Honor; and if he shall persevere to make Tumults and Disturbances in the
Church, he is to be turned over, as a seditious Person, to the secular Power.

(...).

(...).

The 15 th Canon of the same Synod.

If any Bishop, accused of any Crimes, be condemned by all the Bishops of the
Province, who have all with one accord denounced the same Sentence against him,
such a one by no means ought to be judged again by others, but the concord^nt
Sentence of the Provincial Bishops ought to remain firm.

(...).

(...).

The 10 th Canon of the Synod of Carthage.

If any Presbyter, being puffed up against his own Bp. shall make a Schism, let
him be anathema.

(...).

(...).

The 13 th Can. of the Synod of Constantinople.

The Devil having sown the Seeds of heretical Tares in the Church of Christ,
and seeing them cut up by the Sword of the Spirit, has betaken to himself a
new way and method, viz. to divide the Church by the Madness of Schismatics:
But the holy Synod being also willing to obviate this Strategem of his, has
decreed as follows; If any Presbyter or Deacon, under pretense of accusing his
own Bp. of any Crimes, shall presume to withdraw from his Communion, and not
mention (...) in the holy Prayers of the Liturgy,




