A REPLY TO Mr. Baxter's Pretended Confutation of a Book Entitled, Separation
of Churches from Episcopal Government, etc. proved SCHISMATICAL. To which are
added, Three Letters written to him in the Year 1673, concerning the
Possibility of Discipline under a Diocesan Government, (which though relating
to the Subject of most of his late Books, have never yet been Answered.)

By HENRY DODWELL, M. A. and sometimes Fellow of Trinity College near Dublin in
Ireland.

I sent them not, nor commanded them; therefore they shall not profit this
people at all, says the Lord.

Jer. 23. 32. Reader, take heed of believing words of reproach against
Adversaries, when Interest and Siding has made men partial.

Mr. Baxters Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet, p. 81. London, Printed for Benj.
Took at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1681.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, Dr. WILLIAM LLOYD, L. Bishop of S. Asaph.
My dearest and most honored Lord,
I Am not a Person who ever had any design on Patrons, and am therefore little
used to this Ceremony of Dedications, being withal sensible how insignificant
it is in many other regards. But I cannot satisfy my self if I should omit
this occasion of a Public Acknowledgment of those many Favors I have received
from your Lordship, ever since I had the happiness to be personally known unto
you. I will not trouble you with an Enumeration of the Particulars, I know you
had rather do them than hear of them. But I have several peculiar Reasons for
this Address: The Possibility of Discipline in a Diocesan Jurisdiction is a
Subject nearly concerning your Lordship upon your new Promotion, and I hope
your Lordship will let Mr. Baxter see from your own experience, that it is as
practicable in a Diocese, as in his Worcestershire Association. He allows no
preeminence of one Minister above others, in order to the forming such
Associations for great and generous designs, but what results from the
difference of Talents. But certainly where, besides this preeminence in
Talents, there is also a preeminence in Office too; where besides these gifts
and qualifications of a Person to persuade his Brethren, there is also an
antecedent obligation incumbent on them to hearken to his persuasions, it
cannot choose but add considerably to the efficacy of such his persuasions,
both to engage them at first, and to hold them together when they are once
engaged. This assistance therefore I hope for from your Lordship, that you will
help me to convince him from his own Topic of Experience, and that you will
give him an experiment of his own Age and Country, that he may not still
complain of being remitted to Ancient and Foreign Precedents.

Besides, you have given me hopes of an assistance in the Dispute it self, by
Publishing a Discourse concerning the Ancient Church Government in these
Islands. You will there let him see his great mistakes in our ancient Irish,
and Scottish, and British History, concerning the Palladian and Anti-Palladian
Bishops, as he is pleased to distinguish them; and not only his mistakes, but
Seldens and Blondells, and the most accurate Antiquaries of the contrary Party.
I am glad that I have given the occasion of it, by which I hope I shall do the
World service, though I cannot by any thing of my own. I have no more to say,
but to return my heartiest thanks for it, and remain,

My dearest Lord, Your Lordships most obsequious obliged Servant, HENRY DODWELL.

The Contents of the whole Book.
Contents of the Reply.
Mr. Baxter's disingenuous dealing with my Person. A Defense of my self. 1, 2.
Why I am unwilling to recriminate. 3. An account of the Publication of these
Letters. 4. His endeavors against me cannot in reason be called a Confutation,
as the word Confutation signifies either an Answer to my Proofs, or a Disproof
of my Answers. 5. Nor as it may signify a Disproof of my principal Conclusion,
by proof of Truths inconsistent with it. 6. Nor as it may signify a Disproof
of what is said in defense of my Principal Conclusion, though without
particular application. 7. His invidious consequences, concerning the multitude
concerned in my Principles, do not prove the Principles themselves false. 8.
Not proving them false, the unkindness of the application will be rather his
than mine. 9. A Defense of our English Succession from Aidan and Finan, etc.
10. His Hypothesis concerning God's giving Ecclesiastical Power immediately,
drawn out into several Propositions. 11. This is the only likely way of
justifying our Adversaries Ordinations. Their Similitudes will not do without
it; not that of a Husband over the Wife; not that of the Power of a Corporation
conveyed by Charter. 12, 13, 14. Two things permised before a particular Answer
to that Hypothesis; 1. That at least it must be granted, that the reasoning of
my former Book will hold, on supposition that Ecclesiastical Power is given by
God, not immediately, but by the interposition of the Ordeiners. 15. 2. That
this Hypothesis is not agreeable to the Notions of any Party that owns any such
thing as Ecclesiastical Power; but only of Enthusiasts, who utterly deprive
the Church of any such Power, or of being a Political Society. 16, 17. The
mischievous consequences of this Hypothesis. 18. Authority does not necessarily
result from true qualifications. It is not agreeable to the sentiments of
Mankind to think so. Not in Supreme Power. 19. Not in Subordinate. God suits
his Establishments in Government to the sentiments of Mankind. 20. It is not
agreeable to the Principles of Ecclesiastical Government in particular. The
Rights of God not alienable without a particular and express consent. 21. The
Right of Forgiving offenses least alienable of all other Rights. 22. Less
alienable by a Governor (which is the person God assumes here) than by any
other person. 23. This Hypothesis not agreeable to Authority. The Scripture
account of extraordinary offices being grounded on Gifts not favorable to our
Adversaries. 24. Much less pertinent to the Scripture account concerning
ordinary offices. The Independency of gifted persons on the ordinary Governors
expressly opposed in the Scripture. 25. The Scripture constantly supposes Man
instrumental in giving ordinary Ecclesiastical Authority. 26, 27. It is no
dishonor to the Holy Ghost to suppose him given by Men instrumentally. 28.
Want of Gifts does not invalidate Ecclesiastical Authority when once given. 29.
Gifts for Preaching not essential to the Ministry. 30. Application to the
forementioned Hypothesis. 31. Arguments of Mr. Baxter 's Self-conviction.
Conclusion. 32.

Contents of Letter I.
What sorts of Disputes are, upon a virtuous account, to be blamed in
Dissenters; and what way of managing them is commendable. 1. A short Account
and Defense of the Preface to my Letters of Advice. 2. A short Defense of the
Possibility of Discipline in a Diocesan Government. 3. The Epistles of Ignatius
not questioned by all the Presbyterians. 4. My thoughts concerning the Reasons
of Nonconformity mentioned in Mr. Baxter's Letter. 5.

Contents of Letter II.
Introduction. 1. Quest. 1. Whether the Bishop be bound to discharge his whole
duty in his own person? Or, Whether he may not take in the assistances of
others? That he may, granted by Mr. Baxter. Quest. 2. waved by me. 2. Mr.
Baxter's reasons do as solidly disprove a possibility of Secular Discipline
under a Secular Monarch, of a Precinct as large as a Diocese, as of Diocesan
Discipline. 3. Secular Monarchs as well responsible for the miscarriage of
particular Subjects as Bishops, and their charge is as great. The Persons,
Crimes, and Laws, belonging to the care of the Secular Governor more numerous
than they which belong to the Ecclesiastical. 4, 5. So are the necessities to
be provided for by the Secular Governor. 6, 7, 8. An Objection prevented. 9.
Mr. Baxter's first answer refuted. The Government of a Diocese may be
administered without any more than three Orders. 10. The Church may for
prudential reasons constitute new Officers, though not Orders. 11. Mr. Baxter's
second answer refuted. Personal Capacity as requisite in a Prince as in a
Bishop. 12. An Objection prevented. 13. Mr. Baxter's third, fourth, and fifth
answers refuted. 14, 15. His sixth answer rejected. 16. What I mean when I make
the decretory power of Government proper to the Supreme, and the Executive
only to be communicated to inferior Governors. 17. The decretory power of
Government does not necessarily include personal or particular Exploration. 18,
19. His seventh answer considered. Good men need Government as well as others.
Their mistakes more dangerous to Government than the mistakes of others. 20.
Mr. Baxter's Objection in favor of me. His first answer refuted. 21. His
second answer refuted. Declaration is no act of power. 22. The unbecomingness
of Doctrines, so disparaging to Ecclesiastical Authority, to Mr. Baxter as a
Curer of Church-divisions. 23. The first Reformers at length sensible of the
necessity of Church Authority to Peace and Discipline. 24. Mr. Baxter's
uncandid character of a Prelatick Christian. 25. The use of external coercion
in Religion is not to make men only dissemblers. 26, 27, 28. No Discipline to
be expected without a coercive power somewhere. 29. The liberty desired by Mr.
Baxter inconsistent with the Principles of the Ignatian Episcopacy, so much
recommended by himself on other occasions. 30. Inconsistent with the discipline
of the Church described by Tertullian and Firmilian. 31. Inconsistent with that
of S. Cyprian. No reason why Mr. Baxter should desire to disown them from being
parts of his Cure, who do not observe Rules of Discipline. 32. My second
Argument for the Possibility of Diocesan Discipline from the actual experience
of former times. 33. The notion of a Church for no more than are capable of
personal inspection of a single Presbyter, not proved to be of Divine
Institution from Acts 14. 23. 34, 35. His second and third answer refuted. The
distribution of particular Cures to particular Presbyters, (from whence it
comes to pass, that one Diocese includes many such Societies as are fitted for
personal Communion) is more convenient than their governing the same multitudes
in common. Very probably as ancient as they had settled places of Meeting. How
ancient in the Churches of Rome and Alexandria. 36. How vigorous
notwithstanding discipline was at that very time at Alexandria. 37. His fourth
answer refuted. 38. His fifth answer refuted. 39. His sixth answer refuted. 40.
His seventh answer refuted. The ancient Cities of the Roman Empire that had
single Bishops more generally as great and populous as now. 41, 42. The
Ecclesiastical Government of those Cities proportioned to the Civil. 43.
Whether our Diocesan Office be a driving men to sin? 44, 45, 46. His eighth
answer refuted. Great Cities then had great numbers of Christians. Instanced in
the Churches of Jerusalem, Samaria, Antioch, Antiochia Pisidiae, Thessalonica,
Beroea, Ephesus. 47. These were Churches in all likelihood designed by the
Apostles themselves as precedents for others. The multitudes of Christians
every where in the Roman Empire in the time of Tertullian. 48. Instances of
other Churches very numerous besides Rome and Alexandria, Neocaesarea,
Carthage. The passage of S. Cyprian concerning his Contribution explained. 49,
50. The ancient numerousness of Christians proved from Pliny 51. The
possibility of their meeting in the same Assemblies. 52. Several ways how
greater numbers might communicate from the same Altar, than could ordinarily
meet in the same Assemblies. 53. S. Patrick's Dioceses not equivalent to our
modern Parishes. 54. My Argument from the numerousness of the Church of Rome in
the time of Cornelius. His answers refuted. 55. His endeavors to give an
account how the Clergy then might have been numerous, though their People had
been few. 56. His first five answered. 57. His sixth. 58. His seventh. 59. His
eighth. 60. His ninth. 61. His tenth. 62. No Instance of Mr. Baxter's notion of
a Church of a Society under the Cure of one single Priest, but only in those
two Churches of Rome and Alexandria, so much disowned in this very matter by
himself. 63. Ulphilas Bishop of the whole Nation of the Goths. Whether an
Arrian? 64. Frumentius Bishop of the Indians, and Moses of the Arabians. The
Christians of both more numerous than our single Parishes. 65. His first answer
refuted. 66. His second answer refuted. 67. A Conclusory Exhortation. 68.

Contents of Letter III.
Reasons of delaying this Answer. 1. Endeavors to prevent his displeasure. 2.
Advices then against some Intimations of his of publishing our Letters. 3. My
unwillingness to differ from him in any thing tolerable. 4. The Charge of
SCHISM briefly stated against them. 5. A pathetical Application of all that had
been said to Mr. Baxter. 6.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. Line 9. after Baxter read has. p. 12. l. ult. dele Parenthesin. p. 14.
l. 27. tell. p. 16. l 9. dele rather. p. 17. l. 7. actual. p. 42. marg.
Separat. proved Schismat. p. 59. l. 28. dele the note of Interrogation. p. 60.
l. 24. whither r. why then. l. 26. officers. marg. Proleg. p. 67. l. 2. (...)
r. (...). p. 76. l. 4. were. p. 86. at the last Break I only note Sect. XXXII.
p. 100. l. 27. difformity. p. 102. l. 9. dele are touched. p. 103. l. 11.
profaneness and l. 18. l. 23. after Presbyters a Colon. p. 108. l. 6. knew. p.
130. l. 9. kind. Whole. p. 145. l. 18, 19. blot out of the Text Dr. Stilling
fleet's, and put in the margin Dr. Stilling fleet's Irenic. p. 179. l. 17.
either is actually. p. 187. l. ult. change the Parenthesis into a Comma. p.
199. l. 9. believe it. p. 201. l. 6. strangness. p. 202. l. 16. determining. p.
211. l. 19, 20. (...). p. 212. l. 6. (...). p. 214. l. 15. (...). p. 215. l. 7.
(...). p. 224. l. 9. maintained? p. 228. l. 8. (...). p. 236. l. 9, 10.
Cyzicenus. p. 249. l. 25. a City. p. 251. l. 14. contradistinction. p. 252.
Anastarius, l. 18, 19. Tatieus. p. 253. l. 19. can. p. 254. l. 18. (...). p.
256. l. 26. maintenance. p. 257. l. 20. (...). p. 268. l. 19. you may. p. 274.
l. 9. dele is. p. 275. l. 5. urbis, quaesissetis quib. l. 23. dele note
Interrog. l. 26. oppressed. p. 276. l. 10. Presbyter; marg. (...). p. 284. l.
5. credible, l. 7. dele was. p. 285. l. 14. credible. p. 291. l. 19. dele one
or. p. 293. l. 1. ad l. 21. (...). p. 296. l. 22. Bishop; p. 308. l. 3.
indispensable. p. 310. l. 11. 46. p 313. l. 10. be. p. 321. l. 8. their, l. 20.
Frumentius. p. 322. l. 10. Homoeusians. p. 323. l. 24. would. p. 324. l. 15.
more, in Constantius's time especially. p. 326. l. 13. Mavia, l. 17. that,
though. p. 327. l. 16. excuse a Separation for the want. p. 331. l. 15. in case
of an ext. p. 332. l. 19. that, l. 27. cases you would. p. 334. l. 8.
inquisitive.

A Reply to Mr. Baxter's pretended Confutation of my Book OF SCHISM.
Contents.
Mr. Baxter's disingenuous dealing with my Person. A Defense of my self. 1, 2.
Why I am unwilling to recriminate. 3. An account of the Publication of these
Letters. 4. His endeavors against me cannot in reason be called a Confutation,
as the word Confutation signifies either an Answer to my Proofs, or a Disproof
of my Answers. 5. Nor as it may signify a Disproof of my principal Conclusion,
by proof of Truths inconsistent with it. 6. Nor as it may signify a Disproof
of what is said in defense of my Principal Conclusion, though without
particular application. 7. His invidious consequences, concerning the multitude
concerned in my Principles, do not prove the Principles themselves false. 8.
Not proving them false, the unkindness of the application will be rather his
than mine. 9. A defense of our English Succession from Aidan and Finan, etc.
10. His Hypothesis concerning God's giving Ecclesiastical Power immediately,
drawn out into several Propositions. 11. This is the only likely way of
justifying our Adversaries Ordinations. Their Similitudes will not do without
it; not that of a Husband over the Wife; not that of the Power of a Corporation
conveyed by Charter. 12, 13, 14. Two things premised before a particular Answer
to that Hypothesis; 1. That at least it must be granted, that the reasoning of
my former Book will hold, on supposition that Ecclesiastical Power is given by
God, not immediately, but by the interposition of the Ordeiners. 15. 2. That
this Hypothesis is not agreeable to the Notions of any Party that owns any such
thing as Ecclesiastical Power; but only of Enthusiasts, who utterly deprive
the Church of any such Power, or of being a Political Society. 16, 17. The
mischievous consequences of this Hypothesis. 18. Authority does not necessarily
result from true Qualifications. It is not agreeable to the sentiments of
Mankind to think so. Not in Supreme Power. 19. Not in Subordinate. God suits
his Establishments in Government to the sentiments of Mankind. 20. It is not
agreeable to the principles of Ecclesiastical Government in particular. The
Rights of God not alienable without a particular and express consent. 21. The
Right of Forgiving offenses least alienable of all other Rights. 22. Less
alienable by a Governor (which is the person God assumes here) than by any
other person. 23. This Hypothesis not agreeable to Authority. The Scripture
account of extraordinary Offices being grounded on Gifts not favorable to our
Adversaries. 24. Much less pertinent to the Scripture account concerning
ordinary Offices. The Independency of gifted persons on the ordinary Governors
expressly opposed in the Scripture. 25. The Scripture constantly supposes Man
instrumental in giving ordinary Ecclesiastical Authority. 26, 27. It is no
dishonor to the Holy Ghost to suppose him given by Men instrumentally. 28.
Want of Gifts does not invalidate Ecclesiastical Authority when once given. 29.
Gifts for Preaching not essential to the Ministry. 30. Application to the
forementioned Hypothesis, 31. Arguments of Mr. Baxter's s;elf Conviction.
Conclusion. 32.

Baxter in a late Book of his bestowed one whole Chapter on the Confutation of
my Schismatical Book (so he is also pleased to call it) of SCHISM. I wish with
all my heart he had confined himself to my Book, The true and only way of
Conc. part 3. chap. 9.
and forborne unbecoming, as well as undeserved, Insinuations concerning my
Person. I mean particularly those Suggestions concerning Communion, which most
oblige me on the account of conscience to take notice of them; and which
notwithstanding can hardly be discussed, without what I am otherwise so averse
to, some consequential Reflection on him. He has indeed put me in hopes of some
amends for it. If he perform it, it will be well for his own sake. For my part
I do not intend to depend This I had written before I had seen the Admonion
prefixed to his Church History, where he pretends to make me the amends he had
promised, but still leaves it as a dispute what I really am, to be determined
not from his Testimony, but from my Book. We had at his own nomination referred
the form of his Purgation to the excellent Dean of Canterbury, to whom I had
expressly given warning of such slippery forms, from some trial I had of him
both in Discourse, and in a Letter; but he never consulted him. By this it
appears how little reason I had to depend on him. However I am glad he has
acquainted the Reader with the true reason of these disingenuous Suspicions
concerning me, that he has referred him to my Books. He cannot mean my two
Books designodly against the Romanists, but only the last of Schism. Upon
which the Controversy will be reduced to this short issue; They who will have
the defense of Ecclesiastical Authority to pass for Popery will judge me a
Papist; but they who will take the estimate of Popery from what the Laws and
Church of England has condemned under that name, will find no shadow for so
base an Accusation. I am heartily content to abide this trial; but Mr. Baxter
had deal more sincerely, if he (who is, on other occasions where there is no
need, so offended at others for not explaining terms not understood by the
parties in different senses) had been here as careful to warn his Reader, that
this was all he meant by the name of Popery. He cannot but know, that the
Commonalty, to whom he would make me odious by this insinuation, mean far
different and worse things by it, than the bare defense of Ecclesiastical
Authority free from any of the Romish Encroachments and Usurpations.
on it. I know how ordinary it is for the Nonconformists to asperse that same
Religion, which has been settled here by those Laws and Legislators, who first
excluded Popery, with that same odious Name, against which those Laws and
Legislators were deservedly so zealous. We know how very lately they have again
been endeavoring it, and even at a time when themselves pretended a cordial
union among Protestants so very necessary. I know particularly how Mr. Baxter
has been guilty of it in his Book of the Grotian Religion. I know how
Moderation in the Disputes of Christendom is apt to be so miscalled by these,
who so much pretend themselves to Moderation. What difference is there betwixt
that which was decried as Grotianism in those excellent persons Bishop Bramhall
and Doctor Pierce; and that which is so much applauded as equal and candid
dealing in Monsieur le Blanc, Mr. Baxter himself, and as many of that Party as
have affected the praise of being Men of Healing Principles? I know how the
defense of Order, and Discipline, and Ecclesiastical Power, is apt to be so
miscalled by them. And far be it from me that I should endeavor to purchase
their good word or opinion, by deserting such Causes as these, let them call
them by what odious names they please. For others who are more equal Judges, I
think I have as much to say to clear my self from the imputation of Popery, as
Mr. Baxter himself has, or can have. I mention not my Education from the
beginning in the Communion of the Church of England, and never varying from it.
I mention not my Renunciation of Popery when I was made Fellow of the College
of Dublin, which he seems willing to asperse, because I had once the honor to
be a Member of it. I mention not my Books against Popery, Considerat. of
present concernment.
in one of which I have endeavored to prove, that the Doctrines of the Church,
as well as the Court, of Rome are treasonable; which let any equal person think
what service it could do them, by one who must be supposed only to dissemble
himself of another Communion. I mention not the Witnesses of my Life in those
places where I have spent the greatest part of it.

communicating with the Church of England, and none other, will with equal
Judges, who will allow any possibility for Protestants to clear themselves from
the imputation of Popery, when charged on them in times of ill design, Part 3.
Chapter 9. Sect. 32.
be a sufficient Purgation, notwithstanding his Cavils to the contrary. If my
mind should change, (as at present I foresee no probability that it ever will)
I hope in God that greater Fears than those I have from him, shall never force
me to dissemble. At present I intend, that this shall not fright me from any
reasonable Candor to Papists, as well as other Adversaries. And this methinks
a Peacemaker, and a person of that Catholic temper to which Mr. Baxter does
so pretend, should not be angry at, Terms of Conc. part 2. chap. 5. sect. 39.
who can himself (when he thinks fit) give a just Character of what he thinks
commendable in them. But I am weary of such Personal Subjects, in which the
Public is so little concerned; and I am not willing to make this slander look
too like a matter of real dispute by too sollicitous a defense. All I shall say
further for my own vindication in this matter is, that I challenge the justice
of them that know me, and that I claim the charity of those who do not, till
they have better information, than the Surmises, rather than Arguments, of this
otherwise good man in his passion. I dare stand by an Authority which he cannot
well decline; it is his own against himself in this very Book wherein he has
traduced me. Part 3. Chapter 2. Sect. 11.
Himself has observed how ordinary it is to charge even just moderation in
Disputes wherein the Papists are concerned with Grotianism; no doubt out of a
consciousness of his own guilt, for I believe he is himself the principal (if
not the only) Author of the charge of Grotianism to the Sons of the Church of
England. Part 1. Chapter 13. Sect. 2.
Himself has also observed how not only the common gang, but even learned men,
yea and zealous religious men are to be suspected in their evil Characters, and
Reports of those that they are speaking against as Adversaries. And he says, It
grieveth him to think how little most Adversaries in this case are to be
believed. So that without disparagement to his acknowledged zeal and
religiousness, the impartial Reader has from himself a sufficient warning to
suspect him in this matter.

evil for evil. I have in truth a just Reverence for his Devotional Labors,
and the benefit that many Souls have received by them. I have a Reverence for
his public designs of charity, and particularly for that of endeavoring the
Peace of Christendom, and am sorry that my agreeing with him in it, (which I
hoped might have been an endearment) has in the event proved an occasion of
offense. I have withal a Reverence for his years, and am unwilling that the
defects of his Age and Controversial Writings, should impair any of that Credit
his former and Devotional Writings have justly gained him. On these accounts I
most willingly pass by his other personal Reflections on me, which my
Conscience will permit me to take no notice of. I pass by even his
disrespectful mention of our primitive Forefathers, of Bishops as Bishops, and
Clergy as Clergy, and even of those to whom in his Episcopal Ordination he
must have promised Canonical Obedience antecedently to the Covenant. I pass by
the Imperfections of his way of reasoning used generally in his later Writings.
I pass by whatsoever may concern his person, as far as my cause will give me
leave. I cannot deny, but some of these may justly forfeit him that reverence
which his other Performances have deserved. But besides my own unwillingness to
take advantage even of just Forfeitures, I have other prudential reasons to
forbear such a subject. They administer no occasion of promoting useful
Knowledge; they are neither likely to be received by others, nor to benefit
himself, as proceeding from an Adversary.

cause it self I find so little said, as that I had thought to cast my self
upon the candor of our disinterested Readers. But remembering that a subject
which was wanting here, was given me formerly in these Letters which passed
between us some years since, upon the Publication of my Letters of Advice;
remembering that the same things which had been objected then, are still
objected anew in this, and his other late Books, without Since my writing of
this I find Mr. Baxter once referring to the second of these Letters in his
Church History; but he has added nothing that I find against what had here been
argued, excepting his account of the small numbers of the Church of Alexandria
from Mr. Clarkson; which I should here have considered, if that as well as the
rest of the design of his Church History, had not been already undertaken by an
excellent and learned Friend, from whom I hope the World will shortly have an
account of it.
the least notice of those Answers which had been so long since returned to
them; considering withal, that that subject was new, and not, that I knew of,
considered professedly in any modern Discourse; I thought it not unseasonable
to take this occasion of publishing them, the rather because they may serve as
an Answer to the greatest part of the Argument of his Book; and because what
new matter is here urged, might conveniently enough be included in a Preface.
But because I had desired him not to publish any thing without common consent;
Let. 3. sect. 3.
and because I wanted the Copies of his Letters, which I (being to keep the
Originals) did therefore not transcribe, but yet could not now come at, because
they were in Ireland, and are mislaid since my departure; and because I was
willing to take leave to correct what I thought amiss in my own Letters, yet so
as to do him no wrong by doing so; I therefore craved his concurrence and
assistance in the Publication. But he lest me to dispose of my own as I thought
fit. I have accordingly taken the liberty to expunge some things personal, and,
but very rarely, to add what might better clear my own sense; but was in both
as cautious as I could be, not to misrepresent him to his disadvantage, and the
rather because I wanted his own Originals. I have always endeavored rather to
answer his sense than his expressions, whenever I thought his expressions were
not so much for the advantage of his cause. But if any suspect otherwise of an
Adversary, I am content, and shall be glad that what I say may pass for a Reply
rather to his cause than his person; that he be charged with nothing but what
he owns again in this Book, or will own again when there is occasion. I know
not what himself can desire more in order to my dealing fairly.

Confutation of my Book, I wonder what it is that any indifferent person can
indeed mistake in it for a Confutation. Part 3. chapter 9. sect. 20.
I have given a Summary of my whole design in the beginning of it; (I wish he
had transcribed it where he pretends to give an account of my Design and
Doctrine.) It had certainly been no disparagement to him, to have allowed me
for a fitter Interpreter of my own mind than himself) I have digested it into
the several Propositions whereof it consists, See the Summary at the end of
this Reply.
in the natural order wherein they follow each other, with reference to the
several Chapters wherein they are proved, by which the Reader may readily
inform himself, Ibid. sect. 29.
whether I only beg, and do not prove, so many things as this reverend person
pretends begged and not proved by me. And every Chapter has, in the Contents, a
general Analysis of the proofs contained in it. I did prevent all the Answers I
know of, not only in his Disputations of Church Government, and in Voetius,
but in all others that either I had read or could foresee, though I did not
think it needful to make an endless Application to every particular Author that
had written on the subject. Whoever will not believe me let him try, after he
has once thoroughly acquainted himself with my principles. And what has he done
against all this that may deserve the name of a Confutation? Has he answered
the proofs, I do not say of my whole Work, but of any single proposition, I
think I might say, of any one single Argument in it? For my part I cannot find
one single Instance, and let the Reader judge between us. But it may be by
Confuting he does not mean Answering, but Disproving. Has he therefore
disproved any Answers on my part, that might either be given consequently to my
principles, or which were expressly given by me? Whoever had designed the
Improvement of Knowledge, would have endeavored the prevention of such
Answers, as might have been made by my principles; but I have not had the
favor to have those taken notice of, which were particularly and expressly
given. Part 3. chapter 9. sect. 12.
The Opinion of those who make Episcopacy and Presbytery not different in order
but degree, and the Case of a desolate Island, Ib. sect. 11.
are still urged and urged as Arguments, as confidently as if nothing yet had
been said concerning them. Yet I had considered the former in a whole Chapter.
Chapter 23.
Concerning the later I denied what he said, Chapter 28. sect. 29, etc.
and gave my Reasons of denial: yet has he not been pleased to take any the
least notice either of the denial or the disproof. He tells me that I call men
often to Catholic Unity, and never tells them what it is, or how it may be
known; yet even this I made the subject of a principal part of a Chapter. Chapter
27.
By which the Reader will judge, Part 3. chapter 9. sect. 19, 20.
who it is that provokes to write the same things over again. And now when
neither Proofs* are answered, nor Answers disproved, how can that properly be
called a Confutation?

disproof of my conclusion, though without any particular application to my
Principles. And if this must pass for a Confutation, why may not my Book,
though written the former of the two, be called a Confutation of his, as well
as his a Confutation of mine? For if my conclusion must therefore be supposed
false, because inconsistent with what he has proved true; why must not his be
for the same reason supposed false, because inconsistent with what I have
proved true also? But yet even in this way of of Confutation, of disproving
falsehoods by proving truths inconsistent with them, it ought to be considered,
whether all the Answers that may be given in defense of my principal Conclusion
be proved false, as well as the Conclusion defended by them, though their
Phenomenon were not particularly accounted for? Or at least whether his
disproofs be of themselves more certain or more evident to us, than those
Arguments by which I had positively proved it? If neither of these can be
pretended in his case, with what Justice can he call his Performance a
Confutation? And not now to enter into the particular merit of his cause, let
us see whether his disproof will endure a trial by even these presumptions. He
says, that Church Power is given immediately by God, and therefore may be had
rather where it is not received by the Ministry of Men, nor can be diminished
by any intention of theirs from whom it is received. This he proves from two
Similitudes, that of the Power of a Corporation given by the Charter, (which
was expressly considered by me, Chapter 20. sect. 21.
if it had been his custom to take notice of any Answers) and that of a Husband
over the Wife. Suppose I shall at present be so kind, (and he must indeed
acknowledge it for a kindness) as to let his Similitudes pass for Arguments;
yet who can be so extremely partial, as to think them comparable with those
used by me, deduced a priori, from the nature and first original of
Ecclesiastical Power? Wise men value any Arguments whatsoever before
Similitudes. How much more such as these, which are acknowledged to be, in
their own nature, the strongest of all Arguments?

defense of my principal Conclusion false, as well as the Conclusion it self?
Has he proved that our title to the benefits of the Gospel does not depend on
the actual promise of God? or that our title to his actual promises is not to
be derived from our Interest in his Covenant? or that our legal Interest in the
Covenant is not obtained by the Seals? or that the validity of the Seals does
not require Authority in him who presumes to use them? or that the same Reasons
which made this Authority necessary for this validity of the Seals, will not
hold now (as well as they did in the days of the Apostles) and for ever? Does
he deny any of these things? can he in the least pretend to have disproved
them? Do any of his Arguments reach them either directly, or by any clear and
necessary consequence? Can he defend his Brethrens Ordinations or Sacraments
administered by them who never received Episcopal Orders? If he have done none
of all these, nor so much as attempted them, what will become of his pretended
Confutation?

do, or attempt these things, I cannot conceive how he can pretend to prove my
Doctrine false. All that he endeavors is to make it popularly odious. That is
the tendency of all those odious consequences which he deduces from it,
concerning my unchurching and unchristening such multitudes of Christians and
Churches. The consequences are of his own deducing. I undertake not to judge
where I am not thoroughly informed in the matter of fact. But what if these
consequences should really follow? will he thence conclude my reasonings false,
because multitudes are concerned in the consequences of them? This also was an
Objection prevented and accounted for in my Preface, Pref. sect. 11, etc.
if he had thought himself obliged to speak to Answers in his Confutations. But
does he not know that this very same Objection was made use of by the Heathens
against Christianity, and by the Romanists against the Reformation, that if
either Christianity or Protestancy were the only true way to Salvation
exclusively to others; then much the greater number of Mankind or Christians
must have been out of the true way of Salvation? And can he deny that the
matter of fact was true, that there was indeed a time when Heathens were more
numerous than Christians, and Romanists than Protestants? Will he therefore
grant that Christianity and Protestancy were not the only ordinary true means
of Salvation? I know he will be far from saying so. But yet he is not sensible
how much himself is more concerned in the Consequence of this Discourse than I
am. He that in his Diocesan Ordination must have promised Canonical Obedience
to his Ordinary, cannot renounce our Diocesan Communion as Diocesan, without
some charge of sin, greater than the sin of breaking his Promise of Canonical
Obedience. And if this sin agree to Diocesan Communion as Diocesan, then
certainly it must be not only a single act of sin, but a state of sin; and
such a state of sin as all will acknowledge destructive of Salvation, so
agreeing to Diocesan Communion as Diocesan, it must agree to all Diocesan
Communion whatsoever. And if all Diocesan Communion as Diocesan be destructive
of Salvation, how much more uncharitable will he prove than I, if to maintain
principles from whence consequences will follow, which will prove hurtful to
faulty persons, must be thought uncharitable? How few are those Protestants
that want Episcopal Ordination (who can alone seem chargeable with the
consequences of my Discourse) in comparison of the whole Greek and Latin
Churches, and those other Foreign Protestants also, as well as those of our own
Dominions, which will be concerned in the consequences of his? I might here
declame as tragically as he does, and retort a great part of his own Discourse
upon himself, if I were desirous to take advantage of this Topic against him,
not so much to prove his Doctrine false, as to expose it as odious. If he will
say, that he has notwithstanding charitable thoughts concerning the persons of
many, who differ from him in principles of their own nature destructive of
Salvation: Abate his affection to his party, which makes him (as his matter
requires) speak inconsistently; and I think I shall allow as much candor and
charity to the persons of Dissenters, as he can rationally, and with any
consistency with any, even his own, principles.

consequences are no just argument to prove the principles false from which
they follow; it will then follow further, that in order to the confutation of
my principles, he ought not to content himself with deducing these
consequences, without more distinct application to the principles themselves;
it will follow, that even the odium of such consequences is irrational and
sinful, and therefore not at all regardable in conscience, whatever it may in
prudence. No truly conscientious persons can be offended at just consequences
from principles whose truth is not proved questionable, especially where
positive reasons have been produced for them. And therefore whoever are so,
must for that very reason, at least in this particular, be presumed not to act
conscienciously, or consequently to be regardable on account of conscience; It
will follow, that till he do answer more distinctly to my principles, the very
unkindness of the application will be rather his than mine. For till he weaken
the proof of my principles, I shall have reason in all equity to presume them
true. And if he draw Inferences unfavourable to them from unconvicted
principles, it will be he, not I, that must be responsible, at least for the
application. If therefore he will not make them less concerned than it is their
Interest to be in case of real danger, let him first secure them from the
danger by a conviction of my principles; which when he does, he will have me as
well as them indebted to him for the Obligation. Till he do so, certainly plain
dealing and a fair warning is the most real office of Friendship, that can be
shown in case of danger. I wish I may, by this intimation, prevail with
whosoever shall hereafter trouble themselves to answer me, not to satisfy
themselves with invidious clamours, and evasions of a direct Answer to my
principles. A direct Answer would better become them, as Lovers and Enquirers
of truth, rather than Votaries to a Party; would more tend to the satisfaction
of conscientious Dissenters; would afford a better subject for useful
information.

particulars, there are only two that I can know of, in which indifferent
Friends do think me concerned. One is, that he says, and says it more than
once, that the Generality of our Saxon Bishops derive their Succession from
Aidan and Finan, who (says he) were no Bishops, as Bede and others fully
testify. So that he says, Premonition. Terms of Conc. p. 11. chap. 5. sect 23.
and Church History.
The denying the validity of the Ordination by Presbyters, shakes the
Succession of the Episcopal Church of England, and proves it on that
supposition interrupted. I know not how it becomes him, who himself pretends
Episcopal Ordination, to discover his Forefathers nakedness, Part 3. chapter 9.
sect. 4, 13
if it had been true that is here suggested. But not to expostulate with him
concerning the unkindness herein showed to his Ordainers, what benefit can he
do his own cause by this Objection? Would it follow, that his Brethren have
Succession because we had failed of it? Would it follow, that Succession is not
necessary, because none could justify their Claims by it? Would it follow,
that the Right of Ordination must in course be escheated to the Presbyteries,
or the People, or the Magistracy, in case no Right could now be made out by
Derivation from the Apostles? If Succession be still necessary for the validity
of Orders, as it may be notwithstanding this Argument, till he answer the
Arguments produced to prove it necessary; all that he can expect by using such
Arguments as these will be, not to satisfy us, but to prove us as faulty as
themselves; not to quiet the consciences of those who should be afraid of
Sacrilegious Ordinances, but only to make them despair of ever being quieted.
And therefore this is an Answer, if at all fit to be insisted on, yet not till
he had attempted a more particular Answer.

But, God be praised, we have no need to be concerned for this Objection: Bid
is so far from denying Aidan and Finan to have been Bishops, as that he
expressly affirms the contrary. Bid Hist. Angl. III. 3, 5.
Oswald King of Northumberland sent to the Elders of the Scots for a Bishop;
Antistes is the word in Bede's Latin, and Biscop in the Saxon of Alfred.
Accordingly he receives Pontificem Aidanum as the Latin, or Biscop as it is
again in the Saxon. When this Bishop was come, he has an Episcopal Se^ provided
for him; so Bid most expressly, Veniente igitur ad se EPISCOPO, Rex l^cum Sedis
EPISCOPALIS in Insula Lindisfarnensi, ubi ipse petebat, tribuit. Again,
Monachus ipse EPISCOPUS Aidanus. He elsewhere tells us the very time when he
was made Bishop, Ib. c. 5.
accepto gradu EPISCOPATUS quo tempore eidem Monasterio Segenius Abbas and
Presbyter praefecit. Where the Saxon also gives him the Title of Bishop, though
it omits the particularizing of the time when he received it. He therefore also
gives an account of the reason why his Monastery pitched on him particularly as
a person fit for that Employment. He tells us, that thereupon they judged him
dignum Episcopatu, that accordingly illum Ordinantes ad praedicandum miserunt.
^. 6.
Again, he is called Reverendissimus Antistes, (Biscop in the Saxon) and
praefatus Episcopus. The same Title is very frequently given him, cap. 14, 15,
16, 17. and l. 4. 23, 27. l. 5. 23. so frequently, as that I do not know
whether it be worth while to transcribe each particular Instance, and the Time
of his Bishopric distinctly noted. So also in his Epitome at the Year DCLI,
Aidanus Episcopus defunctus est. So extremely little occasion he had of even
mistaking in this matter from Bid himself. Nor could he have much greater from
those others to whom he refers us, who must have taken what they had from Bid,
if they had any Authority. The Saxon Chronicon transcribes the very words of
Bede's Epitome, and at the same Year. The like Agreement there is in those who
took from him at a greater distance, Simeon. Dunelm. in Collect. Seldeni.
Turgotus, Simeon. Dunelm. in Collect. Seldeni.
Simeon Dunelmensis, Malmesb. de gest. Angl. l. 3. de gest. Pontif. Angl. l. 3.
Malmesburiensis, Huntingd. Hist. l. 3.
Huntington, etc. if any be yet further curious.

Nor is Bid and his Transcribers less clear in the case of Finan. Bid Eccl.
Hist. II^. 17
Bid is most express. Immediately after the death of Aidan, he subjoyns,
Successit vero ei in Episcopatum Finan, and ipse illo ab Hii Scotorum insula ac
Monasterio destinatus, ac tempore non pauco in EPISCOPATU permansit. Concerning
the Baptism of Peada Son of Pendan, L. 3. c. 21.
King of the Middle Angles and the Mercians, Ibid.
Baptizatus est ergo a Finano Episcopo. Duma also (mentioned by Mr. Baxter) was
sent as Bishop of that new Colony of Christians, ordinatus a Finano EPISCOPO.
L. 3. c. 22.
Sigbercht King of the East Saxons was baptized by the same Finan, Baptizatus
est a Finano EPISCOPO. And when Cedd a holy person was invited by Sigbercht for
the Conversion of his People, he took occasion to make a visit at Lindisfarn,
the Seat of the Northumbrian Bishops, propter colloquium Finani EPISCOPI, where
he was made Bishop by Finan, vocatis ad se in Ministerium Ordinationis aliis
duobus EPISCOPIS. Qui, accepto gradu Episcopatus, rediit ad provinciam, and
majore autoritate coeptum opus explens, fecit per loca Ecclesias, Presbyteros
and Diaconos ordinavit, etc. We see here how punctual Observers of the Canons
these Scottish Bishops were, notwithstanding our Adversaries would fain persuade
us, that themselves were ordained by Presbyters, because the Monks of the Isle
of Hii (though Bishops) were subject to their Abbot, though only a Presbyter
as to the Rules of their Monastic Discipline, for the sake of their first
Founder Columba, who never exceeded the Order of Presbyter.

But Mr. Baxter would do well to let us know what use they could have had of
Bishops at all, See Bishop Bramhalls Vind. of the Church of Engl. c. 9. Bishop
Pearson Vind. Ign. l. 1. c. 10.
if it were not to perform some office, for which no Superiority of their
Presbyter Abbot in the Monastery could qualify them without Bishops. And what
either then, or ever was taken for so unseparable a Right of Episcopacy as
Ordination? If therefore they were willing their Presbyter Abbot should, for
the sake of Columba, have all the Honor of which a Presbyter was capable, and
yet thought it necessary to have Bishops also for their Ordinations; is not
this a plain Conviction, that they thought this Office of Ordination not
performable by single Presbyters? And how had it been an unusual Order, as Bede
expressly says it was, that Presbyters (if such only had been meant by the name
of Bishops) should have been subject to the Abbot, who was also a Presbyter?
But to fancy that the Offices of Bishops and Presbyters were confounded in
those later Ages of which we are discoursing, (whatever they were in the
Apostles) is indeed a fancy so extravagant, as Mr. Baxter could hardly have
been guilty of, if he had been either so ingenuous or skilful in Church History
as he would fain persuade us. But so far were those ancient Scots from invading
this Right of Episcopacy, that as to Ordination they strictly observed even our
present Canons. Three Bishops were at the Consecration of a Bishop, who when he
was thus consecrated, and not before, had that greater Authority of ordaining
Presbyters and Deacons, which it hence appears was not allowed to any under
Bishops. But to return from whence I have digressed, Finan and Aidan are both
of them expressly said again to have been Bishops, and not only so, but the
Cathedral Church of Finan is mentioned again by Bid: L. 3. c. 25.
Interim Aidano EPISCOPO de hac vita sublato, Finan pro illo gradum
EPISCOPATUS, a Scotis ordinatus ac missus acceperat, qui in insula
Landisfarnensi fecit Ecclesiam EPISCOPALI Sedi congruam. c. 26.
Again, concerning the Dispute between Wilfred and Coleman, Facta est autem
haec quaestio Anno Dominicae Incarnationis DCLXIV, qui fuit annus Oswi Regis
XII, EPISCOPATUS autem Scotorum, quem gesserunt in provincia Anglorum, annus
XXX, siquidem Aidanus XVII annis, Finan X, Coleman III, EPISCOPATUM tenuere.
Yet after all it is very well known, that our English Succession, even in the
Kingdom of Northumberland, was not derived down to us from Coleman, the last of
those Scottish Bishops, but from Wilfrede a Saxon who succeeded him. I wish he
would not write such things of such consequence, and so often, with such
confidence, without once consulting his Authors. As for his other Authors, he
would oblige us to tell us who they are, that could know any thing concerning
those times, but what they must have from Bid as well as we.

other particular is that which does indeed look most like reasoning and
principles, of any thing that is said by him in his whole Book. And I shall
endeavor to show him all the fair dealing I can, in representing what he says
to the best advantage. The Sum therefore of what he says seems most
conveniently reducible to these Propositions.

1. That the power of the Ministry is grounded on the gifts and qualifications
of the person immediately; so that whoever has those gifts and qualifications,
has thereby an essential right to the power; and he that bestows those gifts,
does thereby bestow the power; and they who cannot bestow them, cannot
consequently dispose of the power.

2. That God alone has the disposal of these gifts, and disposes of these gifts
immediately, has never empowered men to confer these gifts, but only to
examine and declare them; which Declaration does not make but find them
qualified, and consequently empowered, before any humane interposition.

3. That even in the Apostles times these gifts and qualifications were not
ordinarily given in Ordination, but supposed to be antecedent to it; as appears
from that gift of Prophecy and discerning of Spirits, by which they were
enabled to judge who were fit to be ordained; which must have related to gifts
and qualifications not given by the Apostles, but by God immediately. And that
if any gifts and qualifications were super added in the very act of Ordination;
yet they were extraordinary, and therefore not to be expected by Successors,
especially not at this distance of the Age we live in.

4. That these gifts being given by God immediately, and this power being thus
necessarily consequent to these gifts; even the designation of the particular
person is from God, as well as the investing him with the power. So that all
that the interposition of men can do in this matter, cannot be to give any
power to the person to be ordained that he had not before; but only to judge
of it in order to acceptance, as to its exercise. The judgment of the person
himself will be necessary in order to his own acceptance. The judgment of the
Senior Pastors ( not in order to the investing them by Ordination by delivery
with the power, Part 3. c. 9. sect. 7. p. 75
as Mr. Baxter speaks inconsistently with his own Principles, who acknowledges
no power given by the act of Ordination, for I am willing to consider his Cause
free from the inconveniences of his management; but) either as they are the
ordinary Representatives of the people in accepting, and such as are first to
propose whatsoever is to be proposed to the people, even in affairs wherein
their suffrages are not ultimately concluded by their Representatives, or as at
least the Solemnities of Acceptance are to be transacted by them. The judgment
of the people also, as they are the Objects of his Ministry, and as they are
supposed on that account to have the original right of Acceptance.

5. That the way to know what persons are by God invested with power, and with
what power they are invested, is by the Scriptures. There he is supposed to
have described the gifts and qualifications, which when Pastors and People find
in any man, they must be supposed to be obliged to accept him. And there he is
supposed to have described that power, which himself gives by giving him such
gifts and qualifications.

6. That this power being thus given by God immediately, without any humane
interposition in the giving it, but only in the accepting it; consequently the
extent of this power must be known by enquiring, not into the mind of the
Accepters, but of the giver of it; and the mind of God the giver is to be known
only in the Scriptures.

7. That the extent of this power being thus to be gathered from the
Scriptures, as private persons are not obliged to think their Governors
Expositions truest, but may with reason and conscience differ from them, (there
being nothing requisite for the understanding of the Scriptures, that is
capable of being known by the Clergy, which learned Laics are not as capable
of knowing also;) so private persons may believe themselves invested with a
power from the Scriptures, which their Superiors neither gave them, nor
believe to be the sense of such Scriptures, either that themselves ought to
give it as authorized by God to do so, or that God will himself give it
immediately.

8. That persons authorized have not only power to believe what they take to
be the sense of the Scriptures, though different from the sense of ordinary
Ecclesiastical Governors; but also to practice their different sense, at least
so far as their Authority extends. And therefore if a Bishop or his whole
Presbytery, whether in irregular or regular Assemblies, do deny a Presbyter any
part of his Office, which indeed they never gave him, neither by any invalid,
nor on these principles by any valid, act of theirs; he may notwithstanding use
and exercise it as given him by God immediately.

9. That every person for himself, as he is as capable of understanding those
Scriptures, which describe the extent of the power as any others, though
Superiors; but yet is more conscious to himself of his own integrity, in using
means to the best of his abilities, and following his own convictions, than any
others; so for the gifts and qualifications, which by this Hypothesis confer an
immediate title to the Office, he can much better judge than any others,
because they are things more within his own cognizance than they can be of any
others. So that in order to his own practice, he must on these principles be
obliged in reason, and conscience, and prudence, more to rely on his own
judgment, than on that of any others.

10. That this power being immediately from God, he is to presume that what God
did once give, that he intends still to give till he declares his pleasure to
the contrary. This Observation will both make Scripture-precedent (which is the
utmost they can pretend concerning the power of Church Officers, described in
Scripture as in a Charter) an Argument now, and will excuse them from the
extreme difficult task to which their ordinary management does oblige them, of
proving it obligatory on other principles. For grant it never so mutable in its
own nature, yet even mutable Determinations oblige till the Legislators
pleasure be known for an actual change. But supposing this power to have been
immediately from God, without any so much as interposition of men; supposing
therefore (as has been showed on these principles) that it must appear to us by
an express word of God, such as may seem express to us without humane Authority
even in the exposition of it; supposing that no such express word of God is
ever to be expected for the future: it will follow, that what is left
determined any way in the Scripture, must for ever be as secure from an actual
change, as if it had been of its own nature immutable. But if the power it self
be given by men; then if they will prove it immutable by the men who give it,
they must endeavor to prove it either from the nature of the thing, or the
continuance of the same reason and circumstances of its first institution, or
some express command of God in Scripture, that they should not actually change
it; which yet would not prove an invalidity, but only an irregularity in their
doings, supposing the power not to come from God immediately, but by their
mediation; which would be much more difficult for them to prove than than they
are aware of. Whence it will further follow,

11. That all that others can do, whether Bishops, or Presbyters, or People,
cannot be either to give any power, or to inform any person that he has power,
which he had (though he knew it not) antecedently to their Declaration; or to
hinder him of the exercise of that power which he has, and may know that he has
independently on their Declaration: and therefore can be only to judge for
themselves in order to their own acceptance. So that if they refuse him, that
cannot in conscience hinder him from either finding, or proselyting others that
will accept him. And in the mean time he may exercise that power where he can,
and exercise it to the full extent of it, as far as himself conceives it to
extend, because he must on these principles be supposed to have it, and to know
he has it, whether they accept of it or not.

Baxter, nor Mr. Humfrey, nor any other that I know of, that has undertaken
this Hypothesis; and I believe some things, which when they see how
consequentially they destroy all Ecclesiastical Order and Government,
themselves will then perhaps be willing to disown. But I am confident nothing
has been added, but what has been for the advantage of the Argument, and what
is consequential and agreeable to the main Hypothesis; and for that they must,
whether they will or no, be responsible till they are pleased to disown the
Hypothesis to which it is consequent. Certainly it is much more defensible than
the bare Simile's of the Husbands power over the Wife, or of the power conveyed
by an Original Charter to all succeeding Posterity. It Is true indeed, that no
compacts of the Wife with the Husband can diminish that Right which was never
given him by any Compact of hers, for that very reason, because God never left
her at her liberty, whether she should be subject or no, but only to choose the
person, to whom she was in particular to pay Subjection. But certainly my
Reasoning will hold, if Ecclesiastical Power be properly given by the Mediation
of those Ecclesiastical Persons, who minister in the Act of Ordination. And
that it is not properly given by them is only begged by that Similitude, but
proved only by the Hypothesis now mentioned. But as for Charters, the Instance
is very unhappy to their purpose. They cannot, I believe, give an Instance in
any Humane Charters, where bare qualifications, though acknowledged, and
acknowledged by them who have power to invest them in office, are thought
sufficient to invest them without some further act of them who have power to
invest them. They cannot give an Instance where the Acts of such acknowledgedly
qualified, but not invested, persons are thought valid in Law, or the Acts of
persons lawfully invested, though confessedly less qualified, are not thought
valid, a plain sign that their Investiture does properly confer such power.
They cannot give an Instance of any power settled by Charter, where upon a
faileur of all who are by the Charter empowered to dispose of Offices, that
power must devolve to those who are not by the Charter empowered (on foresight
of such a case) to dispose of them, and where such a Charter is not thought in
Law to fail by becoming unpracticable, till the supreme unaccountable Power be
pleased again to interpose concerning it, which is the very case impugned by me
in the Nonconformists. They cannot give an Instance of any Humane Charter, that
ever allows any person empowered, to extend his own power by a private
exposition of the Charter, against the sense of all the visible supreme Powers
of the Society; and not only to challenge it (on such an account) but to
practice it also; or that does ratify such practice when attempted; or that
does not look on it as invalid as well as irregular. Yet this is also their
Case, who arrogate this power of ordaining others, against the sense and
permission of all their supreme visible Governors.

granted very confidently in this Hypothesis, which they will find extremely
difficult to prove when they are put to it. Where can they find such a Charter
for the power of Presbyters in the Scriptures as they speak of? Where can they
find their power described in any professed Constitution concerning it? They
may indeed some actual practices of Presbyters there; but will they call that a
Charter? Will they make all actual practices obligatory for ever, and
unalterable by the prudence of succeeding Ages? Are not many actual practices
grounded on circumstances? Are not many of those circumstances obnoxious to
great mutability? Are not ordinary Governors the competent Judges of their
actual change? If any practices be grounded on unalterable reasons, it will be
by those reasons that they must become unalterable, not from their being barely
actual practices, not from their being barely historically mentioned in the
Scriptures. And what is that reason that makes such a just proportion of power
immutably due to the Office of Presbyters? Yet when all is done, it is not
reason but writing that makes a Charter. Where do they find men plead Charters
in humane affairs upon so weak pretenses to them? And where is it that reason
is admitted to prove the right of an actual practice of power? Reason does
indeed prove it fit that men should have that power given them which is
reasonable. Does it therefore follow, that they actually have that power which
it is reasonable they should have? If they actually have it not given them, by
those who had power to give it them, that is sufficient to prove their practice
of it an Usurpation, and utterly invalid as to all intents and purposes of Law.
But for matter of fact I do not see but that this supposition concerning the
inseparable connection of the power of Ordination with the office of a
Presbyter, will rather ruin than advance their Cause, as I have accordingly
retorted it in my former Book. Since it is certain, that this power of
ordaining others was not given to the first dividing Presbyters, it will follow
plainly that they were not made Presbyters at all, if the power of Ordination
be essential to the office of a Presbyter. And then their succession will fail
as well on account of their want of true Presbyters, as of their Presbyters
wanting the power of Ordination.

succession on account of their first Ministers not receiving this power of
Ordaining others, from the Bishops who ordained them, but from the invalidity
of that act by which they derived their Orders to their Successors, supposing
they had indeed received a power of Ordination. Supposing they had it, yet they
could not exercise it but in lawful Assemblies, which none but the Bishops as
Presidents of the Presbyteries had power to indict; nor yet even there,
supposing all Presbyters equal, could they carry it but by plurality of
suffrages. And therefore the generality of their later Ordinations being
performed by single over-voted persons, without the consent of the greater part
of those Presbyteries of which they were originally Members, and out of lawful
Assemblies, must on these accounts be not only irregular but invalid too. Here
therefore no Presbyters were at all made, and therefore it is in vain to talk
of Charters to prove the power of legal Presbyters, when these are not the
persons of whom those Charters speak, and whose power they are conceived to
describe. And the same is applicable also to the Commonalty. Neither can they
exert any power of which they might otherwise have been capable, but by
majority of Votes, and in regular Assemblies. If they do, it is Null by the
fundamental principles even of Democratical Government. This therefore will
destroy the validity of their second Ordinations, though their first had been
valid; will null all their Ordinations in the state of Separation, though the
Orders received by them in the Churches Communion had been as valid, and valid
to as great purposes, as they can pretend to prove by any Charters. These are
Arguments not (that I know of) insisted on by Jansenius, not answered by Voet
or Mr. Baxter, not (I believe) thought of or considered either by them, or by
any others of our Adversaries, that have most accurarely managed their cause;
and will hold if they were as succesful as themselves desire in answering the
others. The Hypothesis therefore thus managed is that which alone it is their
Interest to stand by. And if this prove nothing, or nothing to their purpose,
we shall have no reason to be very solicitous for any thing else that is
pretended by them.

Humfrey, a person of much more candor and judgment, Seperat. proved Scismat.
chapter 20. 15, etc.
and elaborate thoughtfulness than Mr. Baxter. I am unwilling to repeat any
thing there said more than I needs must, though he has served it as he uses to
do Answers, passed them all by without any notice taken of them. Yet he is the
person who has the confidence to complain of being forced to repetitions. What
I shall now say, shall rather be with a prospect on the Argument it self, and
with reference to some worthy Brethren of our own Communion, than on account of
any new Obligation I can think my self under from any thing new observed by Mr.
Baxter. First therefore, I shall only desire at present, that what has been
said Chap. XXII. of my former Book, be only understood on supposition, that
Ecclesiastical Power is not conferred immediately by God, but mediately by the
interposition of the Ordainers. And on that supposition I cannot conceive what
reason there can be to question it. Who can doubt but that, supposing
Ecclesiastical Power to be properly their gift, it must be conveyed to others
by virtue of some compact of theirs whose gift it is, as all other gifts are to
which any one else can pretend a legal right? Who can doubt but the legal
validity of all such Conveyances depends upon that which the Law presumes to be
the intention of the Giver? Who can doubt but that the Law presumes every one
to mean that which he ought to mean? Who can doubt but that in all like cases
of legal judicature, that is still presumed to be the sense of the Law, which
is the sense of all the visible Makers and Executioners of Laws, no legal
appeal being ever admitted to Powers future or invisible? Who can doubt that if
the Laws be competent Judges in any case, they are most so in such cases,
wherein public not private Right is concerned, such as is that of
Ecclesiastical Power, which is the subject of our present Dispute? Who can
doubt but the visible Powers of any Communion must judge, that all Ordainers
ought to mean to give that Power, which by the principles of their Communion is
thought proper for the Office to which the person is ordained; and to mean to
withhold that which by the principles of their Communion is thought unlawful to
be given to that Office? Who can doubt but where it was thought Heresy to
believe, that Bishops and Presbyters had the same power, there it must also
have been thought unlawful to give it them? Who can doubt but that where the
Power of Ordination was taken for the peculiar prerogative of the Bishop, there
it must have been thought unlawful to give this particular branch of power of
simple Presbyters? If all these suppositions agree with the matter of fact in
that Age wherein these separations were first made, I cannot possibly conceive
how that power of ordaining others (on which the validity of the present
Sacraments and Ordinances of our several Sects do at present depend) could have
been conveyed to the first Presbyters of the several Parties, by any gift of
those Bishops and Presbyteries who first ordained them. So that if they will
pretend at all to have it, they must necessarily bethink themselves of some
other Hypothesis, such as this, by which they might have it antecedently to,
and independently on, the gift of the Ordainers.

Hypothesis is not agreeable to the notions or practices of any Party
whatsoever, that owns any such thing as Ecclesiastical Power for the
suppression of Heresy or the prevention of Schism; but only for Enthusiasts,
who utterly deprive the Church of any such power, or of being a political
Society. I do not say but that it may follow from some principles expressly
owned by them, (as particularly from that principle so much received among the
Sects, that it is dishonorable to think, that the Holy Ghost can be given by
any means of Humane Ministry, though of his own Appointment; for the giving of
the Holy Ghost was in the Jewish Theocracy the exact Method of investing any
with power) but only that it is not agreeable to their notions and practices
concerning Government. For all that hold any such thing as Government must,
unless they will make it perfectly useless, own a power of restraining
particular persons from Innovation; I mean, which may in conscience oblige such
persons, (how different soever from the sentiments of their Superiors, yet)
even in conscience to forbear Divisions in the same Churches, or erecting new
ones in opposition to those which are already established. But this cannot be
maintained by this Hypothesis. For where all that others can do, can neither
hinder a private person from Authority, nor from knowing that he has it, not
even from such a knowledge as may suffice in conscience, to justify his acting
pursuantly to that Authority. There it is plain he is under no obligation to
forbear drawing parties after him if he can. As for the Interest others have in
admitting him for their Minister, that signifies nothing to this purpose: It
only secures that they shall not be drawn away without their own consent. And
for that what use is there of Government? If he can persuade and seduce them,
he will have the consent of as many as he can persuade and seduce. If he cannot
persuade them, it will not be in his power to make any Divisions, though there
were no such thing as Government. And this is the rather so, because in order
to persuasion there is, on these principles, no obligation incumbent on private
persons from the Determinations of Assemblies. For as that private knowledge,
which such a person may have of his own Authority, may suffice to justify his
own acting as a person authorized, so the private evidence every particular
person may have of his Gifts, and consequently of his Authority grounded on
those Gifts, may also suffice for to make it lawful for such a person to
receive him for his own private use, though over-voted by the Suffrages of
regular Assemblies. So that for this there is no need of any, so much as
Democratical Authority. And the same reason which will make this power possible
to be had without, nay and contrary to, the intention and gift of the Bishop,
will prove it also possible to be had without any gift of the Presbytery, or of
the People as they are capable of giving any Authority, by any Rules even of
Democratical Government.

Hypothesis I am now considering as it agrees with the principles, so it fully
answers the designs of our modern Enthusiasts. It agrees with their principles.
For these are they who indeed make the office immediately consequent to the
gifts, so that where women have the gifts, they are thought to have as good a
title to the office as men. These conceive extraordinary gifts and inspirations
to be common now as well as in the time of the Apostles; conceive these gifts
to be given by God immediately, without dependence on Sacraments or Humane
Ministeries; conceive every one who has the Spirit, to have withal the gift of
discerning the Spirit in himself and others, so that in order to his own
satisfaction he is conceived to have a surer testimony within himself than any
Humane Authority, yet so as that he cannot deny but that others of his
Brethren, who are supposed to have the like gifts, have also a right to judge
of his gifts in order to their own reception. It answers their designs. For
receiving their Authority immediately from God, it follows in course that they
should not in reason be responsible to any but him. And as they are not
supposed to receive any Authority from men, so neither is there any rational
Obligation for dependence or subjection to men. This I warn that they, who upon
other occasions oppose this Hypothesis when maintained by Euthusiasts, may see
how little it is their Interest to be driven to such principles as these in
their own defense; how much they as well as we are concerned to answer what can
be said for them; and how bad that Cause must be, that cannot be maintained but
by recourse to such principles, as upon other occasions are so disowned by
themselves.

THESE things therefore being thus premised, XVIII
I come now more closely to examine the Hypothesis it self. No doubt some
Dispositions are necessary to qualify men for Ecclesiastical Offices. No doubt
it is fit that Ordainers should judge who have those Dispositions before they
entrust them with the Offices for which they are qualified by such
Dispositions. No doubt but these Dispositions are Gods gifts, not only on
account of that common Providence by which even natural endowments are his
gifts, but also an account of that supernatural assistance which is thought
necessary for all virtues and ordinary graces, in opposition to the Pelagians,
and for all iminent Discriminations between Men and Men. But these things are
not more proper to Ecclesiastical than to Secular Offices. There is also the
like necessity of Dispositions for Secular as for Ecclesiastical Employments.
There is a like necessity of Graces as well as of Gifts among those
Dispositions. There is a like necessity of Divine and Supernatural Assistance
for those Graces which tend to the accomplishing of men for such Employments,
as there is for those that fit men for Ecclesiasticals. Yet who is there that
therefore thinks that God gives Secular Authority also antecedently to any
interposition of Men? What confusions and disorders, what violations of
Authority and Obedience, would he introduce in Seculars who should think so?

BUT not to take advantage against these principles from the falsehood of their
Consequences, XIX.
themselves are also very questionable. It is very unreasonable to think that
Authority must necessarily result from even true qualifications; or that it
must so depend on them, as that where the persons ordained may want any of
them, there the whole Ordination must be Null, because of the incapacity of the
matter. I shall speak to both these Uses of this Argument, because they are
both of them, as occasion serves, insisted on by Mr. Baxter. 1. It is
unreasonable to conclude that Authority must necessarily result even from the
true qualifications. It is not agreeable to the sentiments of Mankind in
choosing persons qualified. They certainly suppose persons qualified
antecedently to their own election of them, because their judging. them so is
the reason why they do elect them. But do they therefore suppose them already
authorized? If so, what need of any further act of giving the power? How shall
they do when they confess many Candidates sufficiently qualified for an Office,
of which notwithstanding only one is capable? Can their not electing them
deprive the persons rejected of their qualifications? Can it upon these
principles deprive them of their authority, if that do necessarily result from
their qualifications? If it cannot, then in case of an Elective Kingdom, all
the persons who were admitted as Candidates (which they would not have been, if
their Electors at least had not judged them qualified) must, when they are put
by as well as before, be supposed to be Kings. And where can such a supposition
end but in a Civil War? But among all the unreasonable pretensions that have
been made by persons interessed, and of power sufficient to prosecute their
Interests by force, what History can afford an instance of any one who
challenged the power only because he was thought qualified, and permitted to
stand Candidate for it?

THUS it is in case of Supreme Power, XX.
but much more in Subordinate. They who have derived the Supreme Power from
God, that they might this way the better assert their Unaccountableness to Men,
have for that very reason thought it necessary, that inferior Governors
should receive their power from Men, that they may thereby be made dependent
and accountable to those Men (as well as God) from whom they had received it.
And who is there that doubts, but that a legal warrant of the meanest Justice
of Peace is of more force in Law, than the advice of the ablest and most
prudent Lawyer, who is much better qualified to be a Justice than he who is
one? This is the sense of Mankind, which (besides that it overthrows the
consequence, that if the gifts of particular Ministers be from God immediately,
therefore their Authority must be so too, till proved more particularly than as
yet they have attempted to prove it) will also be of great moment for proving
Right in a question of this nature. For that Crimes of disobedience to
Government may indeed prove criminal, and imputable to the person guilty of
them, it is requisite that their criminalness may appear to him from his own
Notions. And accordingly God has always fitted Governments established by
himself to the notions received among the persons to be governed. If therefore
men do take it for the best preservative of Societies, to have all inferior
Governors obliged to a strict dependence on the supreme; and the best security
of this, that Inferiors, whatever their qualifications be, should yet receive
their power it self from their Superiors; then certainly we have reason to
presume, even on this account, that this same Method was also observed by God
himself in his provisions for Ecclesiastical Government.

THIS presumption there is, XXI.
that God would never make this Authority immediately consequent to the
qualifications requisite to dispose men, from the notions of Mankind concerning
Government in general. And as little reason there is to believe it from the
particular principles of Ecclesiastical Government, those very principles I
mean which are owned by themselves when they are settling, though they are
forgotten and contradicted when they are only intent upon overthrowing the
Authority of their own Superiors. When they as well as I make the power of the
Church a power of sealing Covenants in Gods Name, and of transacting for him
with Mankind, it is strange how they could fall into this mistake, if they had
minded being constant to these principles. No doubt whoever would employ a
proxy to act in his name, and to make legal covenants that should oblige
himself, would in prudence choose one that should be skilful in the Law, and
prudent as well as faithful to his trust. But which of themselves would
therefore give an indefinite Authority to all that were so qualified to seal
legal obligations for them without a more particular Deputation? Which of them
would think themselves justly dealt with, or obliged even in conscience to
performance, if any person whom even themselves could not deny to be so
qualified, should presume to do so? And can they think God legally obliged in a
case, wherein they would think themselves injured if it were their own? Is this
to judge of God by the same measures by which they would be content to be
judged by themselves, which God owns as just, and appeals to in the Prophets?
If themselves think other qualifications requisite, for trust as well as for
abilities of management of a trust to be committed to them, before they think
it prudent to entrust a person, even of known and confessed Abilities, with a
power of obliging themselves; has not God the same frail persons to deal with,
who may fail in fidelity to his trust, as well as in point of ability to
discharge it? But to let alone the inconvenience, and to insist only on the
justice of this Cause; do not themselves look upon this right of disposing of
what is their own gift, and of impowering others to do it, as a right inherent
in themselves, which no other man's qualifications, how great or acknowledged
soever, can in justice alienate from themselves, or entitle him to, without a
more particular act of their own? And must the power of God in sealing
Covenants for Heaven and the Holy Ghost, and pardon of sins, escheat to all
that are qualified, without any more distinct gift than that of their
qualifications themselves? Of the two, certainly the disadvantage does rather
lie on the creature's side. Their rights may indeed be disposed of in some
cases without their own act, because they are not absolutely at their own
disposal, but depend on the pleasure of God, and of their lawful Superiors
empowered by him. But the independency of the Divine Right excludes all
possibility of any case wherein any right of his can be disposed of without his
own particular consent and act for disposing of it.

AND yet of all Rights, XXII.
Forgiveness of offenses committed against any one, is that which is least
capable of a general alienation. Property in Goods, especially as among Men,
depends generally on compacts or positive humane (and therefore variable)
Constitutions. But offenses relate to their persons, as also the grief and
resentment consequent to them, and therefore may be where there is no such
thing as property in goods; and the remitting of Offenses does essentially
consist in the remission of that personal resentment, and other mischiefs as
consequent to it, and therefore must be as unalienable from any as his own
person. As long as his person is free and at his own disposal, so long none but
himself can undertake for the managment of his own resentments. Though in truth
in God his benefits, conveyed by this covenant, are as unalienable without his
own express act, as his right to forgive sins committed against himself. Men
may by general acts put the Effects out of their own power to recall them. They
may disposses themselves both of their goods and of their power to right
themselves, and even of their legal right and equity by some less prudent
management. But neither can God act imprudently, nor are his gifts at the
actual disposal of his Creatures, even where he has obliged himself to ratify
what is engaged for in his name. Even there it is he, not the creature, that
must immediately confer the Spirit, and pardon of sins, and the eternal rewards
promised by him. The very actual giving them is not in their power. How then
can this right be granted by God to any without a most particular and express
conveyance?

YET is not this all; XXIII
we are to consider further, that in forgiving or punishing sin God acts under
the notion of a Governor. Now a Governor has not the same liberty in
forgiving offenses against the public, and against himself as a public
person, as a private person may have in remitting private injuries. A private
person need only consider his own private interest, and in doing so he may
remit much of his own right where no others are concerned. But a public person
must consider the public interest, and must not take any other course in
forgiving public offenses, than what may be beneficial for the public. Humane
Governors are obliged hereunto by the Law of Nature, by the nature of the
trust committed to them, by the implicit interpositions of Providence by which
they are made Governors, and by the common dictates of natural conscience. And
even God is also obliged to it, not by imposition of any Superior, but by his
own natural inclinations. Having undertaken the person of a Governor, it is as
impossible that he should use any other methods in pardoning offenses against
his Government, than what is for the benefit of the Society, whose government
he has undertaken, as it is impossible that he should not act well and wisely.
But who does ever think it fit that private persons should have a right to
pardon or retain Offenses committed against the Government, without a
particular express gift? Who thinks it fit that they should have a right to
pass a pardon under the Broad Seal, and in due solemnities of Law, for no other
reason but only because they are qualified for it? Who thinks such Pardons
valid, or thinks it just and reasonable that they should be so? How is it
possible that Government should ever be maintained, if the right of it be
resolved into pleas so capable of being made use of by false pretenders, and so
little notorious to Subjects that are so highly concerned in it? How can
Government be maintained where Inferiors may pardon what their Superiors
condemn, where Rebels may justify or pardon their own Rebellions, by as good a
title as they who are actually possessed of the Supreme Government, (as they
may certainly do, if Inferiors as well as Superiors derive their Authority
from God immediately) where pretended Expositions of Charters against the sense
of all the present visible Governors of a Society must be thought to give men
an authority here in this Life, which how falsely so ever pretended, must yet by
this means be rendered incapable of conviction till the day of judgment? For
what can in the consequence more necessarily invest men with authority, than
this power of pardoning or punishing offenses committed against the public?

THUS unreasonable it is to believe, XXIV
that bare qualifications do invest any with actual power? What can they now
pretend further, but an authority sufficient to countervail and silence all
these contrary Reasonings? I repeat not now what I have elsewhere proved,
Prolog. ad D. Stearn de Obstin.
that some reasons are such, as to be greater Evidence than any other authority
whatsoever. I insist not on what might have been said to show, that the reasons
now produced are of that sort. But alas, how little do they produce to prove
this from authority, which yet is the foundation of all their consequential
reasonings? How much less to prove their sense to be the sense of Scripture,
than what has been produced to prove the contrary to be the sense of God? They
observe, that God is said to have given some Apostles, Ephesians. 4. 11.
some Pastors, etc. as if their very gifts had made them so. But where do they
find that God ever gave Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons? Will they not allow
some difference between the extraordinary offices there spoken of, and the
ordinary ones of which we are at present disputing? Will they not allow a
difference in this very matter of their gifts? Whither do they reason so
confidently from those extraordinaries to these ordinaries? Those extraordinary
offices seem indeed to have been made neither of man nor by man, Gal. 1. 1.
but by God himself immediately, and possibly by the degrees of their
inspiration received their several denominations of that kind respectively.
Thus S. Paul proves his Apostleship, which it seems was then called in question
by his Rival false Apostles, among other Arguments, by that especially, that he
was made so before he had ever seen any of the Apostles, and when he did see
them, that they received him on equal terms, and added nothing to him above
what he had received before. And what men could pretend to give that Supreme
Dignity of the Apostolical Office who were not themselves Apostles? The like
might have been observed concerning others of those extraordinary offices. And
I have before conjectured that, according to these extraordinary gifts, so they
performed the several Offices of their Ecclesiastical Assemblies. So I
understand the (...) and (...), 1 Cor. 14. 16. to which the Amen was in course
replied by him who answered among the people, as it was answered in the Office
of the Eucharist in the time of S. Justin Martyr. And can they desire any more?
Yet even then there was this dependence on the ordinary Officers of the Church,
that even these extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost were generally not given
but by that Imposition of hands, which usually followed after their Baptism,
that even then their deviating from the Spirit of those from whom they had
received the Spirit in that office, at least of confirmation, was a presumption
against those who first deviated from their predecessors; Gal. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9.
(so S. Paul proves his own Orthodoxy from his agreement with those who were in
Christ before him, though he had not received his Doctrine from them, and he
generally presupposes this Principle in his Disputes against the disorderly
Prophets.) That there were manifestations of the Spirit, signs of the
Apostleships, the gifts of discerning of the Spirits, and Judges of the Spirits
for the satisfaction of others, not only to judge in order to their own
reception, (as our Brethren would have it) but to judge so as that they were
not to be presumed to have the Spirit at all, who could not abide their
Judgments, if after their rejection they presumed to exercise any such gifts in
the state of Separation. If they will plead these extraordinary gifts
themselves, let them grant the continuance of the like gifts in their
Superiors, and we shall be at least secure from any Schismatical Consequences
of such pretensions. But if they will alone challenge this continuance to
themselves; let them consider how unequal dealing this is; let them consider
how different from their pretended Veneration of Apostolical Precedents, when
they separate those gifts now which then were made mutually useful by their
conjunction; how different this is from the Judgment of the Apostles
themselves, and consequently of God, by whom the Apostles were more
particularly inspired in what they did relating to these extraordinaries, who
did not it seems think these pretenses to extraordinaries safe, without these
remedies from the gifts of others, and particularly of Superiors. Several of
these things were already suggested and proved, and will be more particularly
in my Second Part, if it please God to encourage me to go on with it, by which
this whole Reasoning is overthrown, which is drawn from these Apostolical
Precedents, even in extraordinaries.

AS for those other precedents, XXV.
of their ordinary establishments for Succession, when these extraordinary
gifts or evidences of them should fail, (which are in truth the only
precedents which are pleadable as arguments in our present times) there is so
extremely little in favor of such pretenses, as would make one wonder how
considering persons could fall into such mistakes. The Inconveniences and
Schisms resulting from those very pretenses to extraordinaries, were observed
and particularly provided for even in those Apostolical Ages. Such were the
Prophets speaking 1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31.
many of them at once, their using the gift of Tongues in the Ecclesiastical
Offices without an V. 13.
Interpreter, the Prophetesses using their Gifts in promiseuous Assemblies of
V. 34.
men, their prophesying as it should seem like the Sibyls, with their hair 1
Cor. 11. 5, 6, 10, 13, 15.
disheveled, and without their veils, unbecoming the modesty of their Sex. How
does the Apostle provide to remedy these Inconveniences, but by obliging all to
a strict dependence on their Superiors? by obliging the Prophets not to speak
but in 1 Cor. 14. 30, 31.
order, not to use their gifts but for V. 26.
edification, not to use them V. 40.
indecorously, to submit to the V. 29.
Judges of their Prophecies; by restraining the women universally from all V.
34, 35.
public exercise of their gifts; a plain sign that the Spirit who gave those
gifts, did not thereby exempt any who had them, from their due Subordinations,
much less did thereby give them the governing power of their Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, as our Brethren would fain persuade us. This also was the great
occasion of that Schism which was the subject of S. Clement's Epistle to the
Corinthians, and that not many years after this former had been written to them
by S. Paul. The gifted Brethren did then also assume, and raised a Sedition
against the ordinary Presbyters of that Church, and are again taught their duty
of Obedience, Humility, and Subjection, through the whole current of that
Epistle. How could that be, if their very gifts had made them Presbyters, when
acknowledged, as they are not here denied? This very pretense therefore was
particularly and expressly disowned by those very Precedents, to which our
Brethren do so eagerly appeal.

ACCORDINGLY they never find any of those Officers, XXVI
to whom Succession is at present pretended, made immediately by God, but by
the intervention of men, notwithstanding that there were then Gifts of the
Spirit requisite to qualify men for those offices. There were the (...), Romans
12. 6, 7, 8.
and (...), and (...), and (...) reckoned among the gifts of the Spirit, which
fitted men for the offices of Bishops and Presbyters. There was also the (...),
v. 7.
with other gifts fitting men for the offices of Deacons. Yet who sees not this
express difference between these and those extraordinary Officers, that these
never so much as pretended to be immediately from God without the mediation of
Men? What great Argument had it been for S. Paul to prove his Apostleship by,
that he was not of Men or by Men, if this were the ordinary case in the
ordinary Governors and Officers of the Church? if all that men did was only a
recognition of their gifts, and a solemn reception of their Authority, which
was as requisite for Apostles as ordinary Bishops and Deacons? Where do we find
any of these ordinary Officers made, but there is express mention of Men, who
laid on their hands, and performed the Ceremony, and that by a distinct
Imposition of Hands from that whereby they then usually received the Holy
Ghost, immediately after their Baptism? And the words used concerning it, Acts
14. 23
(...) and (...), are the same by which the giving of Authority, Tit. 1. 5.
even in Secular Offices, where Authority is confessedly given, is usually
expressed according to the custom of that Age. S. Timothy is said to have his
(...) of S. Paul, 2 Timothy 1. 6.
is said to have it given him, among other things, by the laying on of the
hands of the Presbytery, (...). 1 Timothy 4* 14.
What can be more clear than these words, if they be understood of Ordination?
And who are more forward to understand them so than our Brethren, when they are
concerned to produce Precedents of Ordinations by Presbyters? But I confess I
am not my self very confident of that Exposition. The thing is clear enough
from this new Imposition of hands, which was used on this occasion of ordaining
the ordinary Officers of the Church, but not of the extraordinary. When S.
Matthias was chosen Apostle into the place of Judas, no more was done than
only to know God's pleasure concerning it, according to that ordinary way of
Divination usual in such cases by Lots. When that was known, there was no
further act of Men, no Imposition of hands, only he was added to complete the
number of the Twelve Apostles. That more was observed in ordinary Ordinations,
(...), Acts 1. 26.
why was it but to show, that the Influence of humane acts was greater in them.

BESIDES, XXVII.
the very Ceremony of Imposition of hands, was generally designed to
communicate some of those supernatural gifts, wherewith they were themselves
endued. So it was in their casting out of Devils. and their curing the sick,
and particularly so it was in their giving the Holy Ghost. And indeed what
other gift is imaginable, that was ordinarily necessary for ordained persons?
Themselves cannot think it could be dispossessing or healing, etc. What could
it therefore be but the Holy Ghost himself? And what gifts could be then
thought necessary for making ordinary Officers, but such as are ordinary and
perpetual as the Offices themselves? If therefore the Holy Ghost was given,
this was (according to the Jews) an investing them with power, where he was
given particularly with such a design. So it was in the case of 1 Samuel 10. 9.
Saul and 1 Samuel 16. 14.
David, and of the S. John 20. 20, 21.
Apostles themselves. And what other design is conceivable in giving the Holy
Ghost to them, who were supposed already to have received him before in their
Baptism, and that Imposition of hands which then usually accompanied their
Baptism? And if the Holy Ghost were given in Ordination, then plainly they had
not all their gifts antecedently to their Ordination, as our Brethren conceive,
particularly not those which immediately entitled them to Ecclesiastical
Power. If these Gifts of the Holy Ghost (which immediately entitled them to
Power) were given them by the ministry of Men; then certainly the Power it self
was not given them immediately by God, but by humane ministry. And therefore
their antecedent gifts (which they judged of by the gift of discerning of
Spirits) did not immediately give them the power.

THE great Prejudice that possesses our Brethren against this power being thus
given by the ministry of men, XXVIII.
is that, conceiving it to result from the gift of the Holy Ghost, they think
it dishonorable to the Holy Ghost to say that he is given by men. But how can
they deny those plain Evidences of Scripture wherein he was so frequently given
by the Apostles? Will not their Conjectures reach them as well as our
Ecclesiastical Officers now? Were not they men of the like frail sinful nature
as ours are now? But if they would indeed consider how he does it, what is
there more dishonorable in this than in the whole management of the
Incarnation? Why may not God the Father and Son (whose Gift undoubtedly he is)
give him by covenant as well as otherwise? Why may not himself do so too?
Supposing them willing to take this way of disposing of him, what can hinder
them from deputing men to represent them in the solemnities of such a covenant
to be made with men? What is there in this, I do not say dishonorable, but
unusual, where ever such covenants have been made? Having done so, how can it
be thought dishonorable that they should be obliged by their own act of
deputation, to ratify what is by him acted in their name, when they have
empowered him to do so? Nay, would it not rather be dishonorable to the Divine
Persons, to think them not faithful to those obligations, which they have been
pleased to impose upon themselves? Why may they not empower men for all future
ages as well as that of the Apostles, seeing there are new persons, and new
explicit covenants to be made with each of them for their own persons in all
succeeding ages? Why may not they be as firmly obliged by the act of a wicked
man as a good, if he come lawfully by his power of deputation, by a regular
succession from those who first received it? Nay, who is there of themselves,
that does the least question this in other cases, where their Interest does not
make them justly suspicious of partiality? Does the Law ever make the least
inquiry into the Lives of Proxies, where it is satisfied of their Authority?
Who ever thinks that a Bond signed by a Proxy, who is a good man, does more
oblige the person for whom he is concerned, than a like Obligation signed by
another who were vicious, supposing them equally authorized? Do any of
themselves think what Judas acted as an Apostle, to have been less obliging to
his Master, or less valid in the effect, than what was acted by any of the
other Apostles? Thus I have shown, that those gifts to which Ecclesiastical
Power is really consequent, are not given by God immediately and antecedently
to humane interposition, and that those gifts that are indeed given
antecedently to Ordination, are not, nor were, such as did entitle them, who
were acknowledged to have them, to any Ecclesiastical Office or Authority.

SO also, XXIX
on the contrary, neither does the want of such extraordinary gifts as men are
capable of having antecedently to Ordination, irritate the whole act of the
Ordainers, and make it null, in regard of the incapacity of the maker,
supposing they should be mistaken in judging them to have them who have them
not, as Mr. Baxter does frequently intimate. This he urges sometimes so far as
to make Inmoralities of Life sufficient to deprive them of their power, and to
excuse a Separation from their Ministry, from the guilt of SCHISM. Should I
tell him, that this very Doctrine of his was condemned as SCHISMATICAL in the
Donatists by the Ancients, I easily foresee how little the Authority of those
Ancients is like to signify with him, who scruples no occasion of aspersing
their Sacred Memory with opprobrious and reproachful Epithetes. Chapter Hist.
professedly, and elsewhere.
I have already shown from the nature of the things, how little the validity of
their Ministry is concerned in the holiness or unholiness of their Lives. The
same is easy to be proved concerning those other qualifications, if he had
considered them in relation to my principles. He should first have remembered,
that there are two sorts of Uncapacities of such a person to be ordained, such
as make him utterly incapable of the Office it self, and such as only make him
incapable of administering it wisely and advantageously. Now though these later
Uncapacities ought to be considered by Ordainers, whilst the person as yet
stands only Candidate for Ordination, and even afterward may reflect on the
fidelity or prudence of his Ordainers; yet they are only the former sort of
Incapacities that can irritate their act when past and irrevocable. He should
further have considered, that no Incapacity can irritate the whole gift of an
office, but that which makes a man incapable of the essential work of an
office; not that which only incapacitates him for such works as are not
essential, but only ornamental. Now the essential work of the Ministry
according to my principles, (which he ought to have confuted more particularly
in this matter, if he was unwilling to stand by their consequences) is to
transact between God-and Men, to seal Covenants on behalf of God, and to accept
of those which are made by men, and to oblige them to perform their part of the
covenant by, otherwise authoritatively excluding them from Gods part. Hence
results the whole power of Ecclesiastical Government. And for this no great
gifts and abilities are essential. All the skill that is requisite essentially
is only in general, to know the benefits to be performed on Gods part, and the
duties to be promised on Man's, and the nature and obligation of covenants in
general, and the particular Solemnities of Ecclesiastical Covenants. And of
this how can any be incapable, who is but capable of understanding the common
dealings of the world? And how can Governors be supposed so grossly mistaken,
as that when they design peculiar and excellent qualifications, they should
fall short of such mean ones as these*

THE gifts so much insisted on by Mr. Baxter and his Brethren, XXX.
are such as accomplish an excellent and useful Preacher, which Office of
Preaching they have been used on all occasions to magnify, as if it were the
only, or at least the principal, employment of the Ministry. But how can they
prove that, suppose their office were to preach, it is essential to every
particular Officer, that he be eminently gifted for and skilful in it? How can
they prove that Preaching is at all any essential part of the office? How can
they prove that in the primitive Apostolical times, every particular Presbyter
did either practice it, or did think himself obliged to do so? If they cannot,
how will it follow that he who is lawfully empowered, must therefore be no
Minister on account of incapacity, if he could not preach at all? And they are
his Brethren, who upon other occasions do suggest the most likely Arguments, to
prove that Preaching was no essential part of the employment of an ordinary
Presbyter. They are the persons who tell us, that in the primitive times
Preaching was looked on as the peculiar office of the Bishop. If so, how could
it be any essential part of the duty of ordinary Presbyters? They tell us, (I
do not say Mr. Baxter is one of them) of the distinction between ruling
Presbyters and those who labored in word and doctrine. 1 Timothy 5. 17.
They can never prove that any of those Presbyters were Laics, but however the
distinction seems plainly to imply, that some of those Clerical Presbyters did
only rule, and did not concern themselves in word and doctrine. Nor was this
unagreeable to the aproved advice of the Apostle, Romans 12. 6, 7, 8.
who would have every man lay out himself according to his different gifts, not
that every one should endeavor all, as the Custom is now. So he that had the
gift of Prophecy was to give himself to Prophecy, he who had the gift of
Preaching (called elsewhere (...) or (...)) was to give himself to Teaching, he
who had the gift of Exhortation (called (...) or (...)) was to give himself to
Exhortation. And so they who had the gift of Government (called (...), whether
of the whole Church or particularly for managing the Church Alms, then given
for the use of the poor) where to lay out themselves upon that (...), very
probably the same with that mentioned in S. Timothy. And when Judas and Silas
persuaded the differing Parties of Jews and Gentiles, to agree in the
accommodation of the Synod of Jerusalem, Acts 15. 32.
exercising the Gift of (...), they are observed to have done it, not as
ordinary Presbyters, but as Prophets, to whom (it seems) that Gift of (...) was
then thought proper. And by this means it should seem that they did designedly
contrive the mutual necessity of each others gifts, for the maintaining that
Unity of the Spirit, so much insisted on by the Apostle, in his Disputes
against the disorders of the gifted persons of those times, that each might
have some which might make him useful to his Brethren; but that none should
have so many of them as to disoblige him from a dependence on the gifts of
others. And if this was the precedent of the Apostolical Ages, how false
measures then do our Brethren take, (who are yet the greatest Pretenders of
Reverence to the Scripture-times and Apostolical Precedents) when they judge of
the whole Ministry by this only Employment of Preaching. But it is easy to
see what Exigency of their cause has brought them, to it. Their great neglect
of Sacraments and their contempt of Excommunication, and their opposition to
all that power that can give them justifiable Sacraments, and their
Consciousness how little their own Sacraments can oblige others to adhere to
themselves, who have given so ill precedents of deserting the Sacraments of
those who were originally their own actual and present Superiors, have obliged
them to such slight thoughts of the Sacraments, as if they were the least part
of the Office of a Minister.

HAVING therefore thus proved, XXXI
that what power is received by any ordained person, is properly given him by
the Ministry of his Ordainers, I cannot foresee what can be further urged
against my Argument drawn from the intention of them who gave it, but that
taking it with the Distinctions and Limitations which I have made use of in
managing it, it is such as any Law, or Equity either, would consider in order
to the validity of a Conveyance. And it is easy now to make Application also
to the particulars of the contrary Hypothesis, as I have managed it.

To the I. It has been proved, that power does not immediately result from
those gifts which only qualify men for the Administration of Ecclesiastical
Offices. Whence also the consequences do fail, that the giving or not giving of
those Offices is to be proved from the giving or not giving of those gifts.

To the II. That gift of the Holy Ghost which does indeed immediately invest
with Ecclesiastical Power is disposed of by God, but not immediately, but by
the Ministry of the Ordainers, who do not only declare, but properly convey it.

To the III. The gifts which in the Apostles times were antecedent to
Ordination, and which were judged of by the gift of discerning of Spirits in
the Ordainers, did not entitle to the power, but only that gift which was
given in Ordination, which as to the essentials of it was not extraordinary,
(though it might be so in regard of some manifestations of it) and therefore
fit to be expected in all future generations.

To the IV. Though the Interest of the person to be ordained, and the people,
be only acceptance, yet it has appeared that the Interest of the Ordainers is
not acceptance and recognition of a power already received, but the conveyance
of a new power, which the Candidate for Ordination had not before he received
it by virtue of this conveyance from them, because God does not convey it but
by their Ministry.

To the V. The gifts described in the Scriptures were many of them
extraordinary, in which we are not concerned now; of those that were ordinary,
all were not requisite in each particular person, and indeed fewer were
requisite according to the Discipline of those times, when each of them laid
out themselves on some particular employments than now, when each particular
Minister must undertake all the several necessities of a Parish; and this very
difference of their Employments will make the Scripture times incapable of
being precedents now, when the Employment is so much changed from what it was
then, and will make many more Ministers by the qualifications requisite then,
than can be by those which are required now, all which must be owned to be
valid Ministers antecedently to any humane Ordination, (if our Adversaries
principles hold) though they be not qualified for much the greatest part of
that which is counted the Ministerial Employment now. Nor does it appear that
the Scripture does oblige us to accept them immediately for true Ministers,
even upon recognition of those gifts which are indeed true qualifications. And
withal the Scriptures are very far from describing all the particulars of
power of our present ordinary Ecclesiastical Offices with that likelihood of
design to do it, and that distinctness, as might in reason have been expected
if the Holy Ghost, or the sacred Writers, had intended them as a Charter for
the extent of those Offices in future Ages. They do not distinguish between
their Ordinaries, which were to descend to their Successors, and their
Extraordinaries, which were not. They do not distinguish between Prudentials,
which might validly be changed by acts of humane authority, and Immutables,
which might not. They do not descend to any particulars, but such as were
occasioned by the Disputes of that Age. They do not so much as explain any
terms, which were then notorious, though it could not be expected they should
always be so, even to the distance of our present times; nor have they done any
thing which, upon these principles might prevent litigious Disputes concerning
Government and Subjection, which no doubt so good and wise a Governor as God
would have done for a Society, so well beloved by him as his Church, if he had
designed her a written Charter to appeal to for all future Generations.

To the VI. As it does prove that recourse were indeed to be had to the
Scriptures, for knowing the mind of God immediately concerning the extent of
Ecclesiastical Power, supposing the Power it self were immediately derived from
him; so by the same proportion of reasoning it confirms my argument, that
recourse ought now to be had to the intention of the Ordainers, seeing it has
appeared that God is pleased not to confer it actually, but by their mediation.

To the VII. It thence appears how irreconcilable this Hypothesis of our
Adversaries is with Government in this life, in that it permits persons to
assume Authority, and to extend it as far as they think fit, by appealing to
writings against the sense of all the visible Authority of this life, and this
rationally by their principles, which let any of themselves consider and
explain (if they can) how it is reconcilable with the practice of any visible
Government upon earth. On the contrary, our Hypothesis, obliging inferior
Governors to prove their title to their Office, and the extent of it, from the
intention of their superior Governors, does oblige all to a strict dependence
on the supreme visible power, so as to leave no place for Appeal concerning the
practice of such Government, (which as it lasts only for this life, so it
ought not to admit of Disputes more lasting than its practice) from them, and
that upon rational and conscientious principles. For how fallible soever they
may be conceived to be in expounding Scriptures, yet none can deny them to be
the most certain, as well as the most competent, Judges of their own intentions.
As certianly therefore as God has made his Church a visible Society, and
constituted a visible Government in it; so certainly it is to be presumed, that
their Hypothesis must be false, which by rational consequence does make it
unpracticable; and ours true, which does so fitly secure the practice of such
Government by a like rational consequence.

To the VIII. It is in truth very consequent to the former proposition, but
having indeed no more evidence of its truth, as applied to our present subject,
than its being consequential, it is sufficiently overthrown by what has been
said against the principles from which it follows. And this use may be also
made further of its being consequential, that whatever may be said against it
to prove it false, will more strongly convict the principles themselves of
falsehood, than if it were not so naturally consequent from them. And let any
equal person consider, how any Ecclesiastical Government can be practicable on
these terms. Subjects may indeed preserve their due Subordination to their
Superiors, notwithstanding their differing from them in opinion. But how can
they preserve it if they also practice differently? They may possibly do it,
notwithstanding practices of humane infirmity, and disavowed by themselves. But
how can they do it, whilst they defend their practices, and pretend Divine
Authority for them? It is yet harder to reconcile such practices as these with
Authority. Yet they who disown their Subjection in some singular instances, may
yet own it in all others. But how is it possible that they should own it, who
do not only defend single practices different from the sense of their
Superiors, but pretend to Authority and Offices unaccountable to them, which
must justify a whole course of different practices? Who defend their Authority
and Offices by such principles, as if they were true must in reason make them
unaccountable. If their Authority be immediately received from God, and the
Rule of their practices be taken from the Scriptures as understood by
themselves; what reason can there be of Subjection to any humane Superiors? As
certainly therefore as all that is false, which destroys the practicabless of
Government; as certainly as this Proposition does so, so certainly is it false,
and all those other antecedent principles from whence it does naturally follow.

To the IX. The same things may be said, that it is indeed rationally
consequent to the former, to justify the lawfulness and prudence of differing
from Superiors in a judgment of private discretion, and consequently of
differing in practice, and that practice the practice of an Authority where yet
it is established on such principles, as that a different judgment even of
private discretion, may be allowed as sufficient to defend such different
practices.

To the X. It is the only rational way of making Scripture precedents in such
matters as these are, an obliging Rule to our present times, and rational only
on the principles now mentioned. If, on the contrary, God give his authority by
men, then for prudential cases the commands of those same men ought by the same
reason to be taken for his commands, as the Authority given by them is taken
for his Authority. And then these being Cases not to be expected in the
Scripture, and there being notwithstanding a means to know God's mind
concerning them as far as we are concerned to know it in order to the knowledge
of our duty, and there being withal so little reason to presume, that the
sacred Writers or the Holy Ghost intended to give us any account of such
matters; they will not find it so easy as they think, to prove us obliged even
by Scripture precedent it self in such cases.

To the XI. It is a consequence which it may be our Brethren will not stand by,
who when they speak of the Interest of Presbyters and People, in judging
concerning the gifts of such a Candidate, in order to their own acceptance of
him, and speak of this with a design of solving the Phenomenon of Government by
it, and of restraining disorderly persons from erecting new Churches and
Schisms at their pleasure, will no doubt be willing to believe, that persons so
excluded, or at least not admitted by the Presbyters or the People, ought in
conscience or modesty at least to forbear the exercise of their gifts and
authority, till they be somewhere regularly admitted. But how they can avoid
this consequence, admitting this Hypothesis of an immediate call from God, for
my part I confess I cannot understand. If they be sensible how inconsistent
such disorderly practices as these are with Government, (as they seem to be
when they endeavor, by this Interest of Churches in admitting gifted persons,
to prevent the consequence of such disorderly practices) it will then concern
them seriously to reflect on their principles, which will justify practices,
which themselves confess to be so disorderly, and will ruin Government, for
which themselves pretend to have at least some little reverence.

I only observe one thing more, Part 3. c. 9. sect. 21. p. 92,
that Mr. Baxter tells me, that I have at first given the Nonconformists their
cause, and confirmed them. But I am not conscious, nor is he pleased to tell me
where I have done it. If I could tell how to excuse them, I should still think
my self obliged to own my convictions. But whatever I have done, methinks he of
all men should not upbraid me, who gives so many Reasons of Suspicion, that he
is conscious of defending a bad Cause. It is hard to think of any artifice,
which a person so conscious would make use of, but Mr. Baxter has practiced
something which looks very like it. Such a one would evade all direct Disputes
of the merit of the cause, would neither answer Arguments, nor confute Answers.
Such a one, where he could not justify the Succession of Orders not derived
from Bishops, would have recourse to those of the Nonconformists who had
Episcopal Orders, Part 3. c. 9* sect 13. p* 85.
but had not been impleaded in those Disputes concerning the necessity of
Succession. Such a one would make a Conclusion odious, where he could not
disprove it as false; Ib. sect. 33. p. 102, 103
would endeavor to raise the affections of his Readers, where he despaired of
prevailing on their Judgments; Ib. sect. 2. p. 74, 100.
would traduce the person of his Adversary, where he had no hopes of obtaining
his cause. Such a one would be as confident as he is in general charges of
Absurdities, Ib. p. 92, 90.
Contradictions, and Wordiness, etc. but would withal be as cautious as he is
of mentioning any particulars of such Charges. Such a one would refer an
Adversary to Books written before for Answers to Arguments not so much as
treated of in those Books, Ib. sect. 19. p. 90.
would with great boldness impose on Readers ignorant of those matters, that
all had been already answered there, and that the only reason why no more is
answered now is only to avoid Repetitions; so that unless a new question be
produced as well as a new argument, there shall never want an excuse for want
of a new Answer. I wonder how Mr. Baxter can pretend to have answered what I
have said concerning the sin against the Holy Ghost, or the sin unto death, or
the Sacraments, (which yet I see are so displeasing to him) or even the way of
deriving their Succession from their first Separation, what I have said
concerning the opinion of the Schoolmen, that Bishops and Presbyters differ
only in degree, to show how unsufficient that is for justifying their present
Succession; what I have said concerning this way of resolving the Dispute, not
into ancient Learning, but more modern Histories of their Succession; what
concerning their derivation of Power from any valid act even of the
Presbyteries themselves, etc. Should I say things so notoriously false with
such confidence, I confess I could not tell how to excuse my self from his
uncivil Epithete of Audaciousness. Ib. sect. 2. p. 74.
Such a one would slight the question that pinched him, how momentous soever it
might prove in its consequences, Ib. p. 81.
and divert to others, though of no use, yet more capable of odium, and of a
popular talent of raising passion. And has not Mr. Baxter (who cannot find
leisure to answer these Arguments, Ib. sect. 2. p. 47. sect. 29. p. 97.
wherein the Orders of his Brethren, and their Sacraments, and the whole
comfort of their Communion, are generally concerned) shown, that he has a great
deal of leisure to rake Church History to asperse the dead, and blaspheme the
living Rulers of his people, for condemning Heresies, when yet the generality
of his Brethren themselves do not pretend to differ from us in any thing which
even we call Heresy? To what end is all this, but to make a noise at a
distance, to divert us from the real debate? Such a one would cavil as he does
about words. What can I think it else but cavil, when he pretends himself so
extremely ignorant in the meaning of the Terms of our Dispute? When he who has
lived all his Life in England, p. 92.
and has received his Orders from a Bishop of the Church of England, Ib. sect.
13. p. 85.
is yet to learn what we in England, in our Disputes with his Party, mean by
the name of Bishop; nay, even by that of the Church of England? If he thought
himself in earnest as ignorant as he pretends, why would he meddle in Disputes
where he does not understand the Terms? If he knows better things, what charity
can excuse him from the charge of Insincerity? Though persons may, yet causes
cannot aequivocate. There is but one sense of all Terms, which causes oblige
men to mean, and that every one ought to know who pretends to skill in causes.
Other senses I did not think my self obliged to take notice of in Terms of
notorious signification, till I found some occasion for it from the
misunderstandings of my Adversaries. But there is one thing that looks most
like an Argument of Self-conviction, which though it has been taken up by
persons of worse design than he, yet does withal run through the Reasoning of
several of the later Books of Mr. Baxter; that is, that our Clergy must alone
be responsible for all the scandals that any Clergy, who never had any
affinity with ours, but that of their common office, were ever guilty of. What
is this but in effect to acknowledge that ours are the only real Clergy? What
is it but to acknowledge the conclusiveness of those Arguments, which have been
used by me to disprove the Title of their Ministers to the Office of real
Clergymen? If they thought their own to be Clergymen, why will they not be
as obnoxious to all the scandals they can rake of Clergymen out of the
Histories of Sixteen hundred Years, as ours? I wish I could by this Suggestion
make them sensible of the disingenuity they show in this way of Reasoning, and
of the mischief they do themselves and the common cause of Christianity. It is
strange if Mr. Baxter can ever expect to revive Parochial Discipline by such
means as these, of ruining Diocesan. Can he ever expect to prevail with those
irreligious Laics, who are on this occasion so ready to make use of this
misguided zeal of his Brethren, not as more orthodox than others, but as a
popular party, to submit themselves to the Censures of his Parochial Ministers,
when he teaches them to despise an Authority so much more venerable than
theirs, on all the accounts which Mankind owns for just reasons of veneration?
Can he in earnest hope, than an upstart Authority of Innovators, too late to
have their Scandals traced through any distant Histories, can procure reverence
with them, who are told such vile things of those, who upon the first division
were found possessed of an Authority so much more received by a peaceable as
well as a just prescription? Can he expect that he can preserve that Authority
in Inferiors, which he endeavors to ruin in their Superiors? Can he think
to preserve it in those, whom it seems himself dares not own for Clergymen,
whilst he teaches them to asperse the very name as well as the authority of
Clergymen? Can he think to preserve it in those, who have no other but
extraordinary ways of pretending to a Divine Authority, or to pretend Charters
expounded by themselves in their own favor, when he teaches them to undervalue
an Authority, derived by all the ways by which it is reasonable to expect an
Authority, should be derived at such a distance? Can he expect in the age we
live in, that the great ones will ever be induced to pay respect to the
inferior Clergy, who are so unknown to our Laws, when they are taught to deny
it to those, who have as good a Title even to legal honors as themselves? Mr.
Baxter may possibly ruin us, if God should grant him the curse of a success on
his present Endeavors; but I cannot for my life conceive how he can settle us,
or really reform our lives, or restore Discipline, on such Principles as these.
True Latitudinarianism does only tend to introduce Skepticism into the minds,
and Libertinism into the lives of Men. God deliver us from an experiment of his
Projects, and him from the dissatisfaction of a fruitless repentance, when he
cannot remedy us.

THIS is all which I think fit to say at present. XXXII.
If Mr. Baxter, or any of his Brethren, shall think fit to reply further to my
Book, Pref. sect. 19.
I shall again humbly put them in mind of the same requests I made formerly: if
they will be pleased to observe them, they will not only approve their own
sincerity by doing so, but also minister a subject of useful information; if
they do not, they will force me instead of yielding or rejoyning, to cast my
self upon the indifferent and impartial Readers candor to judge between us,
and I hope they will not flatter themselves with the hopes that all will be
partial.

The Summary of my Book treating of the Sinfulness and Mischief of SCHISM, with
reference to the Chapters, where each particular of this Summary is proved.
THat all are obliged to submit to all unsinful conditions of the Episcopal
Communion where they live, 1.
if imposed by the Ecclesiastical Governors thereof; and that the nature of
this Obligation is such, 2.
as will make them who, rather than they will submit to such Conditions, either
separate themselves, or suffer themselves to be excluded from Communion by such
Governors for such a refusal of submission, guilty of the sin of SCHISM.

Here are two Parts.

I. That all are obliged to submit to all unsinful conditions of the Episcopal
Communion where they live, (...).
if imposed by the Ecclesiastical Government thereof.

This proved by these two degrees:

1. That the supposition, of their being less secure of Salvation out of this
Episcopal Communion than in it, is sufficient to prove them obliged to submit
to all terms, not directly sinful, however unexpedient, rather than separate
themselves, or suffer themselves to be excluded, from this Communion. Chapter I. 7,
8, 9, 10.

2. That there is indeed less security of Salvation to be had even on
performance of the moral conditions of Salvation, out of this Episcopal
Communion than in it.

This proved from two things:

(1.) That they cannot be so well assured of their Salvation in the use of
extraordinary as of ordinary means; nay, that they being left to
extraordinaries is a condition either very hazardous, or at least very
uncomfortable at present, whatever it may prove hereafter. Chapter II.

(2.) That these ordinary means of Salvation are, in respect of every
particular person, confined to the Episcopal Communion of the Place he lives
in, as long as he lives in it.

This proved from two things.

( I.) A.
That these ordinary means of Salvation are confined to the external Communion
of the visible Church.

This proved from four things.

1. We cannot be assured that God will do for us what is necessary for our
Salvation on his part, otherwise than by his express promises that he will do
it. Chapter III. 1, 2.

2. The ordinary means how we may assure our selves of our Interest in his
Promises is by our Interest in his Covenant, by which they are conveyed to us.
Chapter III. from 5. to the end.

3. The only ordinary means, by which we may assure our selves of our Interest
in this Covenant with him, is by our partaking in these external Solemnities,
by which this Covenant is transacted and maintained. Chapter IV, V, VI, VII.

4. The participation in these external Solemnities with any legal validity is
only to be had in the external Communion of the visible Church. Chapter VIII.

( II.) That this visible Church, B.
to whose external Communion these ordinary means of Salvation are confined, is
no other than the Episcopal Communion of the place where any one lives, whilst
he lives there.

This proved in both parts.

(1.) That the visible Church, a.
to whose external Communion these ordinary means of Salvation are confined, is
the Episcopal Communion.

This proved by these degrees.

I. That Salvation is not ordinarily to be expected without an external
participation of the Sacraments. (A)


1. Negatively, Not by those other popular means which ordinary persons are apt
to trust in, to the neglect of the Sacraments, that is, 1. Not by hearing the
Word preached. Chapter IX. 2. Not by private Prayer, nor indeed by any, out of the
Communion of the Church. Chapter X, XI, XII, XIII, XIV.


2. Positively, That Salvation is ordinarily to be expected only by this
external participation of the Sacraments. 1. Proved concerning Baptism. Chapter XV.
2. Concerning the Lords Supper. Chapter XVI, XVII.


II. That the validity of the Sacraments depends on the Authority of the
persons by whom they are administered. (B.)
Chapter XVIII.

III. No other Ministers have the Authority of administering the Sacraments, (C.)
but only they who receive their Orders in the Episcopal Communion.

This proved by four degrees.

1. That the Authority of administering the Sacraments must be derived from God.
Chapter XIX.

2. That though it be derived from God, yet it is not so derived without the
mediation of those men to whom it was at first committed. Chapter XX.

3. That it cannot be so derived from those men to whom it was at first
committed, without a continued succession of persons orderly receiving
Authority from those who had Authority to give it them, from those first times
of the Apostles to ours at present. Chapter XXI.

4. That this Authority is not now to be expected any where but in the
Episcopal Communion. Chapter XXII, XXIII, XXIV, XXV.

(2.) That the Episcopal Communion to which every particular person is obliged
to join himself, b.
as he would enjoy the ordinary means of his own particular salvation, is the
Episcopal Communion of the place wherein he lives, whilst he lives in it. Chapter
XXVI.

II. That the nature of this Obligation to unsinful conditions of their
Episcopal Communion is such as will make them guilty of the sin of SCHISM,
(...).
who, rather than they will submit to such conditions, either separate
themselves, or suffer themselves to be excluded from Communion by their
respective Diocesan Ordinaries. Chapter XXVII.

LETTER I.
The Contents.
What sorts of Disputes are, upon a virtuous account, to be blamed in
Dissenters; and what way of managing them is commendable, 1. A short Account
and Defense of the Preface to my Letters of Advice, 2. A short Defense of the
Possibility of Discipline in a Diocesan Government, 3. The Epistles of Ignatius
not questioned by all the Presbyterians, 4. My thoughts concerning the Reasons
of Nonconformity mentioned in Mr. Baxter's Letter, 5.

Reverend and Worthy Sir,
Approbation or your Reproof, both of them being in their kind so useful, and
both of them being performed by you with so great Civility. I am confident that
if our modern Disputes had been moderated with that candor, men would
certainly have been more peaceful, and very probably more orthodox, than now we
find them. I could very heartily have wished, that the Opinions wherein we
differ, had not been of that nature, as to separate Communion. For this I look
upon as the only Circumstance that can make such differences grievous to a
pious person. For as for those others which exasperate many, that Dissenters
are not so wise as to discern the truth, or so fortunate in avoiding
prejudices, or lighting on faithful Informations in a time when they are
capable of receiving them; or that they are not so submissive as themselves
expect to that Pope, which Luther has long since observed in every man's heart,
etc. They are reasons either sinful, or at least unsufficient to excuse the sin
of uncharitableness upon such an account. But as they are, considering them as
tempered with that piety and moderation, which may expiate their others
malignities; that they are alleged rather as Apologies for your selves, than
as Obligations on others, rather to excuse your deformity in not assisting at
our Altars, than erecting others in opposition to them; that you are still
inquisitive and desirous of further information, and ready to lay down your
mistakes when you are convinced that they are such; that still you preserve a
peaceable mind, and embrace our Communion it self in voto, though perhaps not
actually; these are so valuable Considerations even before God as well as Man,
for excusing from the guilt of error, as that whatever I may think of your
Opinions, I hope it shall not hinder me from a cordial respect and veneration
of your person.

peace and piety as your self, and should have been sorry to have given any
just occasion of offense to you; so I am not a little glad, that upon a view of
the particulars mentioned in your Letter, I find my self to be so very
innocent. For as for my Preface, the main designs driven on in it are, that
disrespect to the Clergy is shown to have been an Introductory to the Atheism
of the Age we live in; that the conformable Clergy, that is, such as would
answer the design of the Church, not only as to their exterior demeanor in
public solomen Assemblies, but also as to the qualifications of their persons,
and the conduct of their whole lives, could not prove either trifling in their
Preaching, or scandalous in their Examples; and therefore that the Church is
not responsible for their misdemeanors where they prove otherwise; and that
the Laity are in their proportion obliged to the same duties with the Clergy,
and therefore may make use of the Advice there prescribed; or to touch at the
errors of our modern School Divinity, are touched, and to make some proposals
for their reformation. In these things I can see no occasion of offense, but
rather some Preservatives against it. The only thing I suppose you aim at is,
my taxing some Opinions of Nonconformists, (and that with as little personal
reflection as I was able) which I conceived prejudicial to Church Authority,
which Opinions because you seem to disown, I do not see how you should
apprehend your self as particularly concerned in what is there said; especially
there being nothing in the discourse whereby you could conclude either your
self, or any of your moderate temper, to have been intended, I assure you I
intended none but such as were guilty, and with being so I charged none
particularly. But that not only the old Puritans and Separatists of Queen
Elizabeth's times, etc. but also very many of ours now are guilty of them, is
too notorious to suppose you ignorant of it. I could heartily wish that the
number of better principled and more peaceable Dissenters were greater than I
fear it is. Nor do I see that what is there said can make it unuseful, even to
the persons truly concerned, that value truth more than any, however beloved
party. Seeing it may let them see the evil consequence of their principles, and
their influence on that Atheism and Prophanness, which I am confident
themselves do most cordially detest, which I conceived to be more likely to
prevail with them than any other Arguments, as being more suited to their pious
disposition. Or, supposing that my fears were indeed groundless of the
Introduction of prophanness by the contempt of Government, or of contempt of
Government by their disobedience to it; yet might it at least warn them from
confining on such dangerous consequences, or from coming to them unawares, by
an abuse of principles generally true, but obnoxious to particular
inconveniences, when unwarily managed. I mean, it may put them in mind of the
greater Momentousness of good Government, and of Peace, than of many other
differences, and consequently of the great Engagements incumbent on them for
their preservation. Whence they would further find themselves obliged, so to
oppose the particular abusive Constitutions of Governors, as not to bring
their Government it self into contempt, nor to suggest unanswerable Apologies
to factious persons for the future, when they are unwilling to be obedient.
These are abuses which your self, I believe, would wish redressed in the causes
of our Church-divisions. But if that part of my Discourse could not be useful,
yet could it not be prejudicial to them, nothing being urged either invectively
or imperiously, and therefore no harm being done, if I should prove utterly
mistaken.

marvel how reviving Discipline could by me be expected from the constitution
of our present Ecclesiastical Government, does seem no less mavelous to me;
especially as to the Exception you make against it. For if it were impossible
to maintain Discipline under a Government so far Monarchical, as to appropriate
the decretory power of the Government of many to a single person, though the
execution be entrusted to many; then it would follow, that the Secular
Discipline under a Secular Monarch of any extent were impossible also to be
observed. Your same reasons will proceed as strongly here, as where you apply
them. For it is every way as impossible for any such Prince to have a
particular cognizance of every particular cause, much more of every particular
person in his Dominions, as for a Bishop in his Diocese. As therefore it
appears by experience (I shall instance a Scripture-example because I know that
will be liable to least exception) that David (in an extent more vast, and a
people more numerous, than that of the largest Diocese, 120 miles in length,
and 60 miles in breadth, and rather better in David's days, where were
accounted 1300000 Men fit for war, besides Artificers and such others not
coming under that account) was yet able to give a good account of his
Government, without particular inspection into all causes, or communication of
his power to numerous coordinate Presbyteries. So I do not see why it may not
hold as well for a possibility of Discipline under an Ecclesiastical Monarch of
a much narrower extent. For the reason produced by you seems to proceed from
the nature of Government in general, and therefore must proceed with the same
force in Seculars as Ecclesiasticals, there being no ingredient peculiarly
relating to Religion, much less to Christianity, which might alter the case, or
argue a disparity. For certainly Princes as well as Bishops are responsible for
the miscarriage of their particular Subjects, as far as they may be prevented
by their moral diligence; and yet you will not thence conclude, that every
particular must come under his immediate personal care and cognizance; nor is
it proved, that the Bishop is otherwise obliged to such a care upon peculiar
respects. Besides that, it is plainly against experience even in
Ecclesiasticals: for as it has fallen out in some places where there were many
Cities, that the Bishops were proportionably multiplied, as in Africa and
Ireland; so that it was not upon account of the impossibility of the managing
the charge of much greater multitudes than the Inhabitants of those small
Cities, appears in that even in the very same places the greatness of no City
was thought sufficient for multiplying the Bishops, though it was for the
inferior Clergy. I need not tell you how great Rome was in Decius his time
under Cornelius, and how full of Christians, which required the united
endeavors of 1000 Clergy, as appears from the said Cornelius his Epistle to
Fabius of Antioch in Eusebius; (...). Cornel, ^d Fab. Ant. apud Eusebius. Eccles.
Hist. 6. 43.
yet was one Bishop thought sufficient for all, nay the erecting another Altar
in the same Church was thought to be formal Schism, as appears from the
Controversies betwixt Cornelius and Novatian, and S. Cyprian and Felicissimus.
The same also might have been shown in several other Cities, exceeding numerous
and abounding with Christians, as Antioch, Alexandria, and Carthage, etc. which
even in those earlier Ages, when Discipline was at the greatest rigor, were
yet governed by single Bishops. Nay, whole Nations were sometimes governed by
one only, as the Goths by Ulphilas, and the Indians by Aedesius, and the
Arabians by Moses; which is an Argument insisted on by some Presbyterians, for
showing the probability of Ordinations by mere Presbyters. Yet are there no
Complaints of dissolution of Discipline in such places, upon account of the
greatness of their charge. Which to me seem sufficient Convictions, that the
multitude of persons governed is not the reason of our present Neglects in that
particular.

Ignatius his Epistles were questioned by the Presbyterians, I never said nor
intended it concerning all (for I know of Vedelius his Apology for them) much
less did I lay it particularly to your charge; so that if you had here forborne
assuming to your self what was spoken of others, (many of whose Opinions I am
confident you will not undertake to justify) there had been no occasion of
this Exception. That other Presbyterians, and those by far the greatest number,
have denied them, cannot be questioned.

Nonconformity alleged by you and your Brethren of the Savoy Conference in
1660, if I might without offense presume to interpose my own thoughts, they are
as follows: For the approving, not only submitting to, such things as you
disliked, and that by an oath, I am sure there are many Conformists themselves
that understand no more to have been intended by the Church, but an exterior
submission, not an internal approbation of the particulars. And particularly I
have been informed by a Letter from a very worthy credible person, who pretends
to have had it from the Bishop himself, that Bishop Sanderson, who was a Member
of your Conference, interposed those words in the Act of Parliament, where it
is required, that Ministers declare their unfeigned assent and consent to the
use of all things in the Book of Common Prayer, etc. designedly that this
Objection might be prevented. The new Article of Faith inserted in our Rubric
I do not know, nor can I now get the Book that past betwixt you at the
Conference, to know what you mean. That Lay-chancellors were disused, and that
the Bishops did more consult their Presbyteries, I could for my own part
heartily wish. But I cannot think these abuses momentous enough to warrant
Schism; and I know your self are for bearing with some things things that are
not so well, rather than the Church of God should be divided for them. In
brief, I do not understand any of the six Particulars mentioned as the reasons
that keep you off, though you do indeed disapprove them, both because you do
not undertake to determine what they might be to others, but only what they
are to persons of your mind, (though I confess this might be understood as a
modest declining to judge of others) and because you conceive piety the most
likely means to unite us, which could not be if we imposed any thing on you
against your Consciences. So that the only one that may be presumed to have
been thought sufficient by you to this purpose seems to have been another,
which because you intimate somewhat obscurely, I do not know whether you would
be willing that it should be taken notice of. But however (I suppose) that it
self does only deprive us of your Clerical, not your Laical Communion. God
give us all to discern the things that belong unto peace. As for other
Questions we may easily a wait our Lords pleasure, who when he comes shall tell
us all things; and in the mean time preserve charity, and be wise unto
sobriety. I hope, Sir, you will excuse my freedom, and let me know whether I
may in any thing be serviceable to you; and above all things reserve a portion
in your Prayers for,

Trin. Col. near Dublin. Your unfeigned Wellwisher, HENRY DODWELL.

LETTER II.
The Contents.
Introduction. 1. Quest. 1. Whether the Bishop be bound to discharge his whole
duty in his own person? Or, Whether he may not take in the assistance of
others? That he may, granted by Mr. Baxter. Quest. 2. waved by me. 2. Mr.
Baxter's reasons do as solidly disprove a possibility of Secular Discipline
under a Secular Monarch, of a Precinct as large as a Diocese, as of Diocesan
Discipline. 3. Secular Monarchs as well responsible for the miscarriage of
particular Subjects as Bishops, and their charge is as great. The Persons,
Crimes, and Laws, belonging to the care of the Secular Governor more numerous
than they which belong to the Ecclesiastical. 4, 5. So are the necessities to
be provided for by the Secular Governor. 6, 7, 8. An Objection prevented. 9.
Mr. Baxter's first answer refuted. The Government of a Diocese may be
administered without any more than three Orders. 10. The Church may for
prudential reasons constitute new Officers, though not Orders. 11. Mr. Baxter's
second answer refuted. Personal Capacity as requisite in a Prince as in a
Bishop. 12. An Objection prevented. 13. Mr. Baxter's third, fourth, and fifth
answers refuted. 14, 15. His sixth answer rejected. 16. What I mean when I make
the decretory power of Government proper to the Supreme, and the executive
only to be communicated to inferior Governors. 17. The decretory power of
Government does not necessarily include personal or particular Exploration. 18,
19. His seventh answer considered. Good men need Government as well as others.
Their mistakes more dangerous to Government than the mistakes of others. 20.
Mr. Baxter's Objection in favor of me. His first answer refuted. 21. His
second answer refuted. Declaration is no act of power. 22. The unbecomingness
of Doctrines, so disparaging to Ecclesiastical Authority, to Mr. Baxter as a
Curer of Church-divisions. 23. The first Reformers at length sensible of the
necessity of Church Authority to Peace and Discipline. 24. Mr. Baxter's
uncandid character of a Prelatick Christian. 25. The use of external coercion
in Religion is not to make men only dissemblers. 26, 27, 28. No Discipline to
be expected without a coercive power somewhere. 29. The liberty desired by Mr.
Baxter inconsistent with the principles of the Ignatian Episcopacy, so much
recommended by himself on other occasions. 30. Inconsistent with the Discipline
of the Church described by Tertullian and Firmilian. 31. Inconsistent with that
of S. Cyprian. No reason why Mr. Baxter should desire to disown them from being
parts of his Cure, who do not observe Rules of Discipline. 32. My second
Argument for the Possibility of Diocesan Discipline from the actual experience
of former times. 33. The notion of a Church for no more than are capable of the
personal inspection of a single Presbyter, not proved to be of Divine
Institution from Acts 14. 23. 34, 35. His second and third answer refuted. The
distribution of particular Cures to particular Presbyters, (from whence it
comes to pass, that one Diocese includes many such Societies as are fitted for
personal Communion) is more convenient than their governing the same multitudes
in common. Very probably as ancient as they had settled places of Meeting. How
ancient in the Churches of Rome and Alexandria. 36. How vigorous
notwithstanding Discipline was at that very time at Alexandria. 37. His fourth
answer refuted. 38. His fifth answer refuted. 39. His sixth answer refuted. 40.
His seventh answer refuted. The ancient Cities of the Roman Empire that had
single Bishops were generally as great and populous as now. 41, 42. The
Ecclesiastical Government of those Cities proportioned to the Civil. 43.
Whether our Diocesans Office be a driving men to sin? 44, 45, 46. His eighth
answer refuted. Great Cities then had great numbers of Christians. Instanced in
the Churches of Jerusalem, Samaria, Antioch, Antiochia Pisidiae, Thessalonica,
Beroea, Ephesus. 47. These were Churches in all likelihood designed by the
Apostles themselves as precedents for others. The multitudes of Christians
every where in the Roman Empire in the time of Tertullian. 48. Instances of
other Churches very numerous besides Rome and Alexandria. Neocaesarea,
Carthage. The passage of S. Cyprian concerning his Contribution explained. 49,
50. The ancient numerousness of Christians proved from Pliny. 51. The
possibility of their meeting in the same Assemblies. 52. Several ways how
greater numbers might communicate from the same Altar, than could ordinarily
meet in the same Assemblies. 53. S. Patrick's Dioceses not equivalent to our
modern Parishes. 54. My Argument from the numerousness of the Church of Rome in
the time of Cornelius. His answers refuted. 55. His endeavors to give an
account how the Clergy then might have been numerous, though their people had
been few. 56. His first five answered. 57. His sixth. 58. His seventh. 59. His
eighth. 60. His ninth. 61. His tenth. 62. No Instance of Mr. Baxter's notion of
a Church of a Society under the Cure of one single Priest, but only in those
two Churches of Rome and Alexandria, so much disowned in this very matter by
himself. 63. Ulphilas Bishop of the whole Nation of the Goths. Whether an
Arrian? 64. Frumentius Bishop of the Indians, and Moses of the Arabians. The
Christians of both more numerous than our single Parishes. 65. His first answer
refuted. 56. His second answer refuted. 67. A Conclusory Exhortation. 68.

Reverend Sir,
Communion with a person of your piety and candor, and from whom I am so
unwilling to differ upon any tolerable terms; so I am withal glad that we can
still maintain an unpassionate way of debating it, which for my part I conceive
not only most Christian, but most useful and succesful. It is only with this
design that I am willing to continue it, wherein I hope you will not be
displeased at me for venturing on that Liberty your self are pleased to take,
and which I hope through Gods gracious assistance I shall never abuse. For my
meaning is as much as is possible to abstain from all things personal, and to
insist only on the way proposed by S. Augustine to Maximinus, Ut res cum re,
causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione decertet. And here it self I shall
endeavor to avoid the multitude of unnecessary controvers^es, that we may be
more accurate in the discussion of such as shall remain.

THE principal controversy of your Letter is concerning the possibility of
reviving Ecclesiastical Discipline under a Diocesan Episcopacy. Where I am glad
to find that the Dispute seems rather derived from your forgetfulness of your
own Concessions and mine, than any real difference of our Opinions, when
clearly and heartily explained. For I can perceive only two things questioned
betwixt us through your Letter. 1. Whether the Bishop be obliged in his own
person to a particular care of all the Souls contained within his Jurisdiction,
or whether he may not assume Assistents and Coadjutors dependent on himself,
over whom he is to exercise the Office of a Bishop, that is, an Overseer: not
to take the whole burden on himself, but to oblige them to the performance of
their duty, and to punish their Delinquencies? 2. Whether supposing this
Delegation lawful, Lay-Chancellors be fit to be entrusted with it?

The former you seem to have yielded when you say; 1.
If this had been all our Dispute, whether a Patriarch or Archbishop can rule
1000 Churches by 1000 inferior Bishops or Church-rulers, I had said something.
Which is indeed the only thing asserted by me in my Proofs, and the very Case
in practice, no Bishop undertaking the particular Cure of a whole Diocese,
without the assistance of his particular respective Parochians. When therefore
you ask, Whether it follows that our Church-Monarch can oversee all himself,
without any Suboverseers, or rule them (by Gods Word on the conscience) without
any Subrulers? Sure you cannot mean that this is the Practice of our Diocesans.
And if your design be to assert, that every Cl^rgyman is bound to a particular
personal care of all within his Limits, and therefore ought not to undertake a
Cure too great for his personal cognizance, and which he cannot manage without
Assistants; this should have been more directly proved than your Letter
attempts. So also for the second, 2.
Whether supposing this Assistance lawful, it were fit to be entrusted to
Lay-chancellors? I expressly declined that question, (if you had remembered it;)
as also, Whether it were expedient that the Bishops Government were so
Monarchical, as to exclude the counsel of Presbyters. But though we be thus
agreed in the main (if not the whole) difficulty, if rightly explained; yet
your Arguments and Answers, if allowed, do so consequently overthrow your
concessions themselves, as that it is easy to observe how heat of Discourse
does transport you beyond the equity of your more composed thoughts.

granted, that a Bishop with many Subrulers (and such are the particular Parish
Ministers) may govern a Diocese of as large extent at least as ours are, as
your words seem to grant; I can then imagine no possible difficulty concerning
the possibility of reviving Discipline under a Diocesan Government.

For by Discipline, I suppose, we mean nothing but good Laws punctually
executed, both of which are necessarily implied in the nature of good
Government. Either therefore you must deny that such good Laws, and such
punctual Execution, may be had under such a Diocesan Government; and then you
will destroy the possibility of such Government, contrary to your own
concession; or you must say that such Government may be maintained without good
Laws or punctual Execution, which is alike absurd to affirm concerning a good
Government, concerning which alone we are at present disputing. But because I
find by some of your other Works, that you do indeed deny a possibility of
Discipline under a Diocesan Government, nay sometimes deny the lawfulness of
communicating with a Diocesan Church as Diocesan; perhaps this Confession may
have slipped from you unawares, so that it may not be safe to take you at your
word. If this later be your case, (as methinks it must, if there be any real
controversy betwixt us) all that at present I am willing to undertake, (that I
may not enlarge beyond necessity) is the Examination of your Answers to the
Reasons produced in my former Letter. My first Reason is therefore for proving
the possibility of Discipline under a Monarchical Diocesan, in the sense there
and here already explained (which I could gladly wish you would keep in mind
for preventing misunderstandings on your part, and unnecessary repetitions on
mine) was, that your Reasons being not drawn from testimony, or any positive
and peculiar prescriptions, which might make the case singular; but from
reason, and that not particularly drawn from the nature of Government as
Ecclesiastical, but general, from the principles of Government as such) will
proceed as strongly against the possibility of Secular Discipline under a
Secular, as Ecclesiastical under an Ecclesiastical Monarch. Seeing therefore
that in a Secular Monarchy as absolute as the Ecclesiastical we speak of, and
as remote from a possibility of a cognizance of all particulars, and of a much
larger extent than any Diocese, Secular Discipline may notwithstanding be
preserved: it must needs follow, that no Reasons of this kind can prove it
impossible under such an Ecclesiastical Monarchy, as is the subject of our
present Discourse. Nay, as it hence appears possible, not only upon particular
accounts, but simply, as having been actually performed under Secular
Monarchies: So it must upon these principles be presumed actually performable
in Ecclesiasticals, which will not only evince the falsehood of your Reasons,
but also the truth of the contrary assertion. In this Argument you seem to
grant (what is also proved in my Letter from the Instance of David's Kingdom of
Israel, and good Government of it, (which I thought least liable to exception)
that Secular Discipline is preservable under Secular Monarchy. That also what
agrees to Ecclesiastical Government, not by virtue of any peculiar Ingredients
as Ecclesiastical, but by virtue of the common principles of Government in
general, must agree to all other Governments; as also, on the contrary, that
what agrees to other Forms of Government upon the like general accounts, must
likewise agree to that which is Ecclesiastical; are so clear, that as I do not
perceive that what you say tends to the denial of it, so I do not think it
worth my time to prove it. The only thing therefore remaining, which you seem
to question in your Answer is, that the Reasons produced by you proceed on
Principles peculiar to Ecclesiastical Government as such. For your principal
endeavor is to show a disparity, why, though Secular Discipline be indeed
maintainable under a Secular Monarchy, yet Ecclesiastical must not be presumed
to be so under an Ecclesiastical. For which you refer me to my Lord Bacon; and
your own Letter to Ludovicus Molinaeus, besides what you add to that purpose in
your present Letter. For the very supposal of a Disparity does necessarily
proceed on peculiar Considerations, and is directly repugnant to the notion of
general and common Principles. Now to let you understand that your Reasons do
indeed proceed on principles common to all Government of the same number of
persons and extent of place, as that of the largest of our Dioceses, Secular as
well as Sacred. I need only to invert those Topics of duty; which because you
think impossible that they should be discharged, you thence infer an
impossibility of Ecclesiastical Discipline, that you may see that none of those
same Instances of duty are to be exempted from the Cure of the Secular
Magistrate.

Secular Magistrate is as responsible for his Cure as the Ecclesiastical; and
that this Cure is not so general, but that all particular Misdemeanors of
particular persons, that are capable of an exterior cognizance, both as to
their prevention and punishment are comprehended under it. If so, then
certainly, 1. As many persons will belong to the Care of the Civil, as the
Ecclesiastical Government; nay, generally more, seeing that in the same
precincts it is true what Optatus Milevitanus tells us, Contra Parm. l. 3.
that the Church is contained in the Commonwealth, not the Commonwealth in the
Church; there being no Members of the Church not liable to the Civil
Government, but many in the Commonwealth not being subject to the Church, as
Pagans, Jews, Mahumetans, and other Infidels. And, 2. At least as many crimes
will come under Secular as Ecclesiastical cognizance, nay generally more, both
as to the individuals and kinds of Crimes. As to the individuals, because those
who are not obnoxious to the power of the Church, as Infidels, are to be
presumed generally more careless of themselves, and less capable of good
impressions, as wanting those most powerful Motives for reclaiming men from a
vicious course of life, which are taught by the Doctrines of Christianity. And
as to the kinds of Crimes. For as for the Law of Nature, the punishment of
Offenses against that will as properly belong to the Magistrate as the Bishop,
and that not only as to the Second Table, (which does professedly concern
Crimes against Secular Conversation) but also the First, as far as it relates
to Natural Religion, the Interest of the State being so nearly involved in that
of Religion, especially as far as it is natural, as that all Obligation of
conscience is derived from thence, which is incomparably a better Preservative
of the Princes Rights, than that of external force. As for the positive Laws of
the State, they are far more numerous than those of Christianity; according to
those who make the Scripture an adequate Rule of such Positives. For how
extremely do these fall short of those Volumes of Codes and Pandects; Charters
and Statutes, Civil and Municipal, of all the distinct subordinat Societies to
which every particular person is related, by multiplication whereof his duties
and possible offenses must be proportionably multiplied? That I may not now
mention all the extemporary provisional commands which are acknowledged
obligatory, (even to the sinfulness of such disobediences) by virtue of the
general Subjection due to ordinary and extraordinary Superiors? But yet the
positive impositions of the Scriptures themselves, which may be conceived
ordinarily and eternally obligatory to sin, are extremely short of the
Voluminousness of the Canonical Writers themselves. For deduct first all those
passages that are purely historical; for as for the obligation of
Scripture-precedent, which is so much insisted on by some, themselves dare not
maintain it in the utmost latitude. Nor have they yet established such Notes,
whereby we might discern when we are concerned in them, and when we are not:
and when we are, when only its imitation is commendable, and when its omission
is directly sinful; what is obligatory in all circumstances, and what only in
some particular ones; what are all the circumstances requisite for such
obligation, and how we may know when they concur particularly in our present
case; when their obligation arises from the authority; and when only from the
prudence of their Author; when they oblige as Laws, and when only as Rules;
when upon account of the authority of the person, and when only of the reason
of the thing. For when this obligation is derived from the reason of the thing,
(as I might have proved it generally to be either as to the establishment of
the Rule, or at least as to its application to the particular case to be ruled
by it) then it cannot be proved without recourse to other Laws of Nature or
Prudence, or positive Constitutions; so that such precedents will not increase
the number of Scripture-obligations. Deduct also all promises and threats, all
exhortations and dehortations, which are not themselves precepts, but suppose
the proof of the precepts which they concern by other mediums. And, even of
that small part of the Scripture, which after these deductions will still
remain properly preceptive, which (for the Old Testament) does according to the
computation of the Rabbis, who are most minutely critical in such punctilio's,
amount to no more than 643, including both affirmatives and negatives. If we
still further consider, how many of them are only positive enforcements of
natural Laws, and so reducible to the forementioned consideration; how many of
them that are positive concern the Jews, not as a Church, but as a
Commonwealth; how all of them that concern them as a Church, are now evacuated
by that Evangelical Liberty, which has abrogated the Mosaic Authority, from
which they derived their Sanction; how, even of the New Testament
prescriptions, many are only provisional, and only grounded on temporary
reasons, and those such as are not suitable to our present times and places;
how many are confessedly antiquated, and how hard it is to distinguish
Apostolical Connivanees from Approbations, their Approbations from
Constitutions, their Constitutions as of ordinary Governors, and their
Traditions as extraordinarily sent and empowered by our Savior, for the
eternal and unalterable obligation of the Catholic Church. When all these
things, I say, are considered and allowed for, the positive Constitutions of
the Scripture, which may oblige us antecedently to the Churches Imposition,
(which the persons I am speaking of do not value) and that to sin, will be
extremely short of the number of Secular Laws.

Ecclesiastical Laws to those of the Scriptures; yet neither so would they
exceed the Secular. For to make this comparison with Justice, we should, 1.
Compare only such Ecclesiastical Laws, as do not derive their force from any
civil Sanctions: For they that do must needs suppose those civil Sanctions at
least as numerous as themselves, and therefore cannot be presumed to
over-number them. And this consideration will be extended not only to such
Instances, wherein Ecclesiastical Persons exercise a Power confessedly
dependent on the Concessions of Princes, as in Marriages, and Wills and
Testaments, and the certain proportion of the Ecclesiastical maintenance, etc.
but also to those spiritual crimes, more immediately relating to their
cognizance, as established under Secular Penalties, which will de jure include
all affairs of that nature in Christian Commonwealths, where the Prince is
acknowledged to be custos utriusque juris, and de facto does include the
Ecclesiastical Constitutions of our Kingdoms, where the Clergy are not only
by Law, but by promise in King Henry the Eighth his time, (as far as that
promise can oblige their Successors) obliged to make no Laws without the
Secular permission. Seeing therefore that (with us at least) there are no
Ecclesiastical Laws but what are seconded by the Secular, but many Secular not
seconded by Ecclesiastical; it must needs follow, that Secular Laws, and
consequently Crimes, must be more numerous than such as are Ecclesiastical.
But, 2. Abate even out of the Jus Pontificium, Petr. de Marca de Concord. Sac.
and Imp. l. 3. c. 6.
which has swelled to the greatest Voluminousness in this kind, not only such
things as are undertaken by Ecclesiastical persons by the favor of Princes,
but such as are usurped against their express consent; and wherein the Romish
Clergy, who have so exceeded in this kind, cannot de jure challenge any
Legislative power; and the number of such Laws will yet extremely decrease.
And, 3. All such Laws as are grounded on Ecclesiastical Usurpation, such as are
all those which abridge the power of ordinary Bishops, and ascribe all to the
omnipotency of the Roman See, which seems to be the principal scandal that
first alienated Spalato from them. I need not instance particulars of this
kind, whose Titles abound with them as those of reserved Cases, of Exemptions,
of Appeals from without the Limits of the Roman Patriarchate, etc. And 4. All
such Laws as are grounded on false Doctrines, as those against the use of the
Cup in Laical Communion, against reading the Scriptures, concerning
Indulgences, and the like practices grounded on the supposal of Purgatory, etc.
And, 5. All such as are misbecoming the candor and equity of a Christian
Church: such as are all those relating to the Inquisition, in relation to the
delation and punishment of the persons and suppressing the Books of Heretics,
etc. the very things the Catholics under the persecutions complained of, as
unequal in the Pagans, and prejudicial to all just Information. And, 6. All,
even indifferent, Constitutions which, though lawful to be obeyed, are yet
either imprudent as to the things, or burthensom as to their number, and
therefore unnecessary to be imposed; for if S. Augustine complained, that even
in his time the Constitutions of this kind exceeded the servitude of the Law,
we may do it much more justly now, when they are incomparably more numerous.
These things, I say, and the like being retrenched, and no more being left,
than what are absolutely necessary for the Government, of a Church, reformed
from all encroachments and abuses, would reduce the Ecclesiastical Laws into a
narrow compass; as we find them in the several Codices Ecclesiae Universae
Romanae and Africanae, which though extremely short of the Voluminousness of
the present Canon Law, yet were thought sufficient for several Centuries,
before the ambitions and factiousness of private Prelates had dissolved the
unity of the Catholic Church.

Crimes have thus appeared more numerous, that come under the cognizance of the
Civil than Ecclestastical Governors; so also, 3. The necessities to be
provided for by the Magistrate are so too. Thus Mary's better part (which was
Religion) is represented by our Savior himself as a solicitousness only for
one thing necessary; whereas Martha was troubled about many things. For
Religion teaches us an indifferency as to our desires, and an unconcernedness
as to events, and a confident acquiescency in God for our temporal provision,
the efficacious procurement and security whereof is the design of temporal
Laws. It preserves us from many or great designs, from all ambitions or
competitions, from all resentment and impatience of injuries; and for such
persons very few Laws will prove sufficient, for direction only, not for
coertion: for the Apostle tells us, that the Law is not for the righteous. And
as the Necessities are thus certainly fewer in persons of an eminent perfection
in Religion, so the means of bringing them to that perfection are fewer and
easier than those of a secular conversation; it being much easier to curb our
own desires, which is the design of Religion, than to curb the world and the
course of providence, which are many times necessary for their gratification;
which is the design of the world. Besides, that the good things of Religion are
not like those of the world, the less to particulars for being communicated to
many, which is the great occasion of those many controversies concerning meum
and tuum, which make the ears of men so intricate, and their Laws so very
voluminous. And though the things themselves were more obnoxious to injury than
they are, yet the persons are not so inclinable to offer it; Religion much more
effectually uniting and endearing its Professors, than the most excellent
humane Laws. To which may be added, that in case of incorrigibleness the Church
is much more easily cleared of the prejudice of a corrupt member, than the
Commonwealth. The Church is sufficiently cleared of his scandal by disowning
him, and excluding him from Communion, and the blessings consequent thereunto;
but the State is never secure from suffering by him while he lives, which is
much the more difficult case.

Secular Government of a multitude, which have not place in the Ecclesiastical;
and that without the partiality of insisting only on the conveniences of one
part, and only on the inconveniences of the other, (which I confess very
fallacious and unfit for a faithful representation of the Cause) but in such
Instances as might be competent for an absolute and equal sentence concerning
the whole. Nay, I might have insisted on your own Topics, and shown you, 1.
The many Requisites for making a good Subject, and wherein more positive Laws
are concerned, than in making a good Christian. First, many Laws of the
Commonwealth concern Marriages, that there may be no injury to the Friends or
the Persons concerned, or the Children. When the Children are begotten, there
are further Laws for preserving them in the womb; and when they are born, for
securing them from murder or exposing, or unwholsom nourishment, or vicious
education. The oeconomical charge of Education does require more care and
constant attendance of the Nurse than is ever pretended or required from any
Minister in the conversion of Souls. Many are the casualties of their childish
Follies, many the distempers of their irregular Actions, many the dangers they
can neither avoid nor complain of, to such as might prevent or remedy them. And
yet for all these their Nurses are made responsible if they happen by their
negligence. Nay, so great is this care for some years, as to take up the whole
time of the Nurse, which the conversion of no sinner does of a Minister. Yet
certainly you would not think your own Argument good if I should apply it here.
If the nursing of one child take up the whole time of one person, then what one
person can be able to govern as many children as are in ordinary Families? And
if this Government of many children appear thus impossible to one person, then
much more that of a Family, of a Corporation, of a City, of a Province, etc.
And if to avoid this you reply, that although every Master of a family be not
able personally to discharge the duty of governing many children, yet he can by
his authority oblige the Nurses and Tutors to do their duty, and so at least
mediately govern them; (as the King, though he cannot possibly be personally
present in all places of his Dominions, where it is necessary that Justice be
administered, can yet command such as may, and punish them upon nonperformance
of their duty, which Subordination and Delegation may be so contrived, as that
they who come under his more immediate personal inspection may be
proportionable enough to the Abilities of one man;) I pray consider whether the
case be not exactly the same here: For if one Minister be able to govern 400,
which is the lowest number mentioned by you as in a Parish, then why may not a
Bishop govern 400 Ministers? especially considering that the Government of a
Bishop over his Clergy, is only in general to see that they do their duty,
and does not require so particular an inspection into their performances, as
that of a Minister over his Parishioners. For it is much easier for a Bishop to
inform himself, whether a Minister perform the duty of his Cure, whether of
Preaching, or Praying, or Visiting, and whether he be of a good repute, or at
least not scandalous, with his Parishioners; than for a Minister not only to
inform him self of those Quaere's concerning each of his flock, whether they
discharge their calling justly and conscienciously, and what means may be used
for their recovery in case of their default, who are not so easily to be cast
out of the Ministers care by Excommunication, as scandalous Ministers are out
of the Bishops by deprivation. Besides his catechizings of the ignorant, and
his admonitions of the knowing, and his resolutions of perplexed consciences,
and his awaiting fit opportunities and circumstances for rendering his
persuasions more prevalent, are most expensive of time, and yet are not so
absolutely necessary to be critically observed in Government, (where the
public Service may be promoted by other Instruments, if persuasions prove
unsuccesful) as in private discourses, where the personal advantage of the
party concerned is principally intended.

Parishes are so little peopled as to consist only of 400, and how few
Dioceses consist of so many Ministers that have proper and distinct Cures; how
that usually the most eminent men for Parts and Action are, or should be,
chosen Bishops, many of them upon personal regards able to perform the work of
many ordinary Ministers, and may well be presumed extraordinary, considering
the great advantage for choice from the disproportion of their number, so few
Bishops being to be chosen out of so many Ministers. If you would consider
further how untrue it is, that the dispensation of discipline, even as it is
practiced, is managed by the Bishop alone, who has his inferior Officers for
preparing things for his cognizance, besides the direction of learned Lawyers
for his assistance in point of counsel, (which is the main reason that may be
pretended, for proving the Government of many better than that which is
Monarchical;) and for counsel in this kind the Clergy themselves are not
qualified as Clergiemen, but as Lawyers, but would have much more of this
assistance, according to my Book, where I have professed my self desirous, that
the Bishops would more communicate the great Affairs of Government with their
Clergy, which I confess I think more agreeable to the primitive Form. If, I
say, you had considered these things, you would find Discipline much more
practicable under a Diocesan, than a Secular Monarchy. And I wish you would
consider whether your Arguments will not proceed with the same force; I do not
say only against those numerous Parishes of 30000 or 50000 persons, which is a
greater number than I believe are in some of our Irish Dioceses, especially if
only Protestants be accounted, (and yet you do not pretend a duty of
separating from the communion of such Parishes, as you do from our communion as
Diocesan; though certainly a Bishop with a multitude of Clergy, more subject
to him than ordinary Curates are to their principal Parsons, is much more able
for the Government of a Diocese, than an ordinary Minister, wanting such
advantages, is for the Government of such a Parish) but against Provincial and
National Classes also. For it is as impossible for every particular Elder of
even a Provincial Class, which were often of larger extent than our Dioceses,
to inform himself particularly of every person and cause to be brought before
him, so as to be able to judge distinctly of their merit, as for a Diocesan
Bishop. And I can perceive nothing that may with any plausibility be pretended
there, that may not with as much force be urged here.

there is a multitude who have their distinct Governments in their respective
precincts mutually independent on each other, some of whom by advantage of
their neighborhood may have opportunity of informing themselves particularly
of every cause belonging to their Jurisdiction. The same may be pretended here,
the same number of Clergy being employed under a Diocesan, as under a
Classical Government. But it is withal clear, that a much greater number of
them will, even in such Classes, prove incapable of that advantage of personal
information, who yet would not be denied their decisive vote on the testimony
of others. And in all Polyarchical Governments the suffrages of the major part
is as decretory as that of a single person, in that which is Monarchical; so
that still the Government is managed without particular information. If their
multitude be urged for the security of their counsel, that is had also here,
especially in the Hypothesis defended by me, where Presbyters are joined in
Government with the Bishops. But with this advantage in our case, that the same
security of counsel is here joined with expediteness in its decision and
execution, and security from equal suffrages, the want of which do oftentimes
more prejudice polyarchical Societies, than the security of their counsels do
avail them. And it is plainly as impossible, if not more, for any Class, which
can only be convened occasionally, to execute its own Decrees without
Delegation as for the Bishop.

answers for showing the disparity betwixt Civil and Ecclesiastical Government,
as many of them as are true, (for all are not) do only prove a disparity on
other accounts, (which is not denied) but not such a one as may hinder the
governableness of the same multitude by an Ecclesiastical, and that in foro
exteriori, (which is the only question I am concerned in at present) which is
acknowledged governable by a Secular Magistrate. You have neither any thing of
reason, nor of any positive revelation of God, which might make such a
multitude less governable, by reason of some liberties restrained in the
Church, but allowed in the Commonwealth. Your 1. is, that the standing of the
Magistrates office is by the Law of Nature, which therefore allows variety
and mutations of inferior Orders, as there is cause. But the standing of the
Clergy is by supernatural institution; our Book of Ordination telling us, that
there are three Orders, etc. Whence you conclude, that men may not alter them,
or make more of the same kind. The force of this Answer, as far as I can
apprehend it, seems to consist in these two things; 1. That the government of a
Diocese cannot be administered without more than three Orders, for those three,
you seem to allow from the Book of Ordination; and, 2. That it is not in the
power of the Church to institute new Orders besides the three already
established, though it be in the power of the State to innovate as they please
by reason of the disparity by you mentioned. The former is so manifestly false,
as that if ever Discipline were observed ever since the government of the
Church was Diocesan, (which is hard to deny, since it has been Diocesan as far
as Ecclesiastical History can inform us) it was under these three Orders. Nay,
the Presbyterians pretend their Classical Discipline to be maintainable by one
Order alone, for Deaconship they make only a kind of civil office for
disposing of the alms of the Church. So sufficient they account the
Subordination of particular persons singly considered to the same persons, as
considered collectively in an Assembly, without any distinction of Orders for
Government. And why the President of these Presbyteries, though not of a
distinct Order, as most of the Schoolmen, and many of the Episcopal Authors,
maintain, especially those of the old Prelatists, (as your self have elsewhere
observed) may not upon the same terms maintain Discipline, for my part I cannot
understand. The ground, I believe, of your mistake is, that in the
administration of our Prelatick Episcopacy you have observed some other
Officers of prudential Ecclesiastical Constitution, which are entrusted with
Jurisdiction, as Deans, Archdeacons, Vicars General, Laychancellors, etc. which
you mistake for Orders, because they have different duties in the subordination
of the policy of the Church. But, 1. I do not doubt but that you know better
than I can tell you, that even Diocesan Government, as Diocesan, may and has
been actually administered without them in the primitive times. Some of them
being of civil constitution, for administering the power of the Prince in the
exterior government of the Church, as he is (...), (that I may use the
language of Constantine the Great) and all of them of prudential use, only
convenient, not simply necessary, even in the opinion of them that use them.
And 2. You cannot pretend, that the addition of new Officers (though possibly
unlawful upon other accounts, yet) should make the Discipline of a populous
precinct less, but rather more maintainable. For certainly in such a case the
multitude of Officers is an advantage. And let me entreat you to remember that
this is the real question, not Whether Diocesan Government be constituted by
God, but Whether Discipline be maintainable under it. But, 3. Suppose it as
inconvenient as you please, even for the maintenance of Discipline, (which I
am not willing at present to digress to) nay even unlawful to be introduced by
Governors; yet how can it be proved that it is lawful for Subjects to
undertake its Reformation without and against the consent of Governors? And
how can they be excused, even in such a case, for refusing passive obedience;
for separating from them, and joining with Parties formed in opposition to
them? Which seems to be your case in separating from our Communion as Diocesan,
and communicating with such who have cast off their obedience, and united
themselves in a communion opposite to their original Superiors? And, 4. You
may be pleased to consider, that as we do not call all these prudential Offices
Orders, so there is no reason why we should do so in the Ecclesiastical notion
of the word. For not now to make use of that distinction betwixt Order and
Jurisdiction, which is generally followed by the Ancient and Modern Popish
Schoolmen, that Order is circa corpus Christi mysticum, and Jurisdiction circa
corpus Christi verum, according whereunto these offices will differ in
Jurisdiction, not in Order. It is plain, that every rank of men in
Ecclesiastical Assemblies, are not by the Presbyterians themselves accounted
distinct Orders, as Scribes, Moderators, Lay Elders, etc. But only such as by
a distinct solemn consecration have a distinct power given them for the
dispensation of divine graces, not to be deprived or repealed as to its
original right, though it may be restrained as to its actual execution. In
which sense it is plain, that these Offices neither are, nor suppose a
distinction of Orders.

proposition supposed in your Answers, That the Church has not power of
constituting new Orders; though I doubt not you understand what Conclusion may
be inferred from the Doctrine of that ingenious person, who has professedly
disproved Dr. Stillingfleet's all divine unalterable right of any certain form
of Church Government, because I confess my self not to be of his mind; yet if
you mean by Orders all deputation even of Ecclesiastical persons to particular
offices, executive of their general power; then I think you have no way
disproved prudential Innovations in that kind. Nay, I doubt not but that it
were easy to instance in all other Sects, as well as the Presbyterians, that
have any face of Government, unscriptural Officers. The Scripture has not used
the word, and therefore cannot be pretended to have condemned. Nor has the
Church ever understood it in this sense, when she has owned but three or two
Holy Orders. But if by Orders you mean the limited sense of the Church of that
word, then I confess they are not multipliable by the Church, but conceive I
have shown the no-necessity of it in our Prelatick Diocesan Government.

That Kingly Power requires not, ad dispositionem materiae, such persnal
ability as the pastoral office does. That a child may be a King, and that it
may serve turn if he be but the Head of Power, and give others commission to do
all the rest of the governing work. But it is not so with a Judge, a Physician,
an Orator, or a Bishop, who is not subjectum capax of the essence of the office
without personal aptitude. This seems to me a plain mistake even in the
judgment of those Nations which are governed by an hereditary Monarchy, who do
not suffer their Princes, whilst children, to intermeddle; I do not say in the
executive (which belongs not to them as absolute Princes) but in the decretory
parts of their Government, (which is their Royalty) but oblige them to perform
all by Regents and Protectors, till themselves come to the years of personal
aptitude, in the mean time reserving them only the honor, without the power
of a King. And this sense of the necessity of personal abilities, as it appears
from the Scripture, which accounts those Nations miserable that are under such
Princes, and the nature of the Office it self, which is as chargable with the
miscarriages of their Subjects as Ecclesiastics, as is excellently discoursed
by Socrates in Xenophon; Mon. Soci.
so the avoiding such defects in regard of personal Incapacity seems to be the
reason of all those Nations who have made their Government elective; and even
of those which are hereditary, who have excluded persons notoriously incapable,
or at least so judged by them, as Fools in all places, Women in France, and
even such as are judged fit in regard of natural endowments, till they come to
be so personally. That children therefore are any where permitted the honor of
Kings, is not because that they think them sufficiently qualified, or that they
think it convenient to stand to the hazardous contingency of their future
qualifications; but that it is accounted a less evil so to be assured of their
person, than to expose themselves to the danger of Civil Wars and Seditions on
that account, if it were managed by popular election. And accordingly those
Nations themselves only make those Offices hereditary, which being supreme are
supposed, in the interregna, not to leave a Power sufficiently preservative of
the public peace. Otherwise they that are consistent with such a Power, are
even among them Elective, as all inferior Magistracies. And upon these
accounts of avoiding greater inconveniences, it is not repugnant to the
Ecclesiastical Magistracy as such, to be hereditary, as appears from the High
Priesthood among the Jews, which yet you will not conclude not to have required
personal abilities. But still your comparison of a Prince wanting personal
abilities with a Bishop having them, are not methinks to the purpose, for
showing a greater multitude to be governable by such a Prince, than such a
Bishop. Nay, certainly in such a case the advantage will lie on the Bishops
side, personal abilities being much more sufficient for the discharge of such a
trust, than the want of them. Nor will it be sufficient for you to reply, That
the defect of personal abilities in a Prince is supplied by the assistances of
his substitute Governors, whose united aids are more considerable than the
personal abilities of any single Bishop. For it will be requisite for making
the comparison even, that the Bishop as well as the Prince be considered with
the like assistances of Substitutes; and then the advantage will still remain
as formerly on the Bishops side. For certainly the Bishop having personal
abilities to judge of the sufficiency of his Substitues, and to call them to an
account in case of their default, must needs be able to perform more work than
such a Prince, who must not be supposed able to assure himself of the
sufficiency or honesty of his inferior Officers.

Princes have power to nominate such Substitutes, but that Bishops have not;
and therefore that the comparison is rightly formed betwixt Princes with their
Substitutes, and Bishops singly considered; I pray remember, 1. That the
question is not, Whether Bishops may lawfully use Substitutes, but what were
possible to be performed by them in the nature of the thing. For of this kind
were your Arguments from the many requisites for dealing with a single Soul,
much more will so many Souls as are included in a Parish, and more yet for as
many Parishes as are comprehended in a Diocese. These, I say, if they prove any
thing, prove the impossibility of discipline in a Diocesan Government, not
only its unlawfulness; and the proving its possibility not only lawfulness,
was my design in this Argument drawn from the good Government of Secular
Monarchy. Now this is clearly granted me in this Answer. For if a Prince
without personal abilities may yet govern a Kingdom by his Substitutes, much
more might a Bishop with the like Substitutes, and personal abilities besides.
And, 2. It is plainly the case in practice among us, for Bishops to govern
their Dioceses not alone, but by the assistance of other Officers, besides the
distinct subordinate Parochians. And to this Government as thus established, I
believe you objected the impossibility of discipline. And, 3. The lawfulness of
such Substitution was, you know, the thing principally debated; and therefore
you ought not so confidently to have urged your sense of it as a disparity.

Laymen; which because I did not undertake to defend, shall not look on my self
as further concerned in. Your fifth is, That either it is the Bishops work that
is delegated by him, or some other. If properly his own, then either he makes
more Bishops, (and that you say is all you plead for) or else a Presbyter or
Layman may do a Bishops proper work; and then what need of a Bishop? This is an
Exception so easily answered, as that I verily persuade my self, that such a
Wit as yours is would have easily defended us against it, if it had been
objected by another Adversary. And if I might be so bold, I would humbly beg
you not to exercise your wit, in bringing needless and weak Arguments ex
abundanti, but only to insist on such as are in your own judgment convictive.
For certainly if you had but cursorily reflected on this Argument, you would
readily have discerned, that this is so far from being a disparity, as that
indeed (if it prove any thing) it will proceed with as much force against the
possibility of Secular Discipline under a Civil Government of the same extent
with a Diocese. For may it not as well be urged against the power of Delegation
in a Prince, that either it must be his own work that is delegated by him, or
some other? If that which is properly his own, then he must either make many
Princes, (which were directly destructive to his Monarchical Government) or
else he who is no Prince may do a Prince's work, and then what need of a
Prince? Besides that, your pretended Contradiction will proceed with as much
force here as in the Church. Consider, I pray, what you would answer in behalf
of a Secular Monarch, and see whether it will not be equally appliable to that
which is Ecclesiastical. I believe your self would deny, that every inferior
Officer, who is delegated to do the Prince's work, is thereby made a Prince,
seeing that though he do exert the same power, yet he does not do it adequatly
(some Acts of grace being still reserved to the Prince's person
incommunicably;) or if adequately, yet at least not independently, all other
Officers being subject to the supreme. For these two are the formal
constitutives of a Prince's power as such; so that they who want them, how many
soever of his commands are executed, or how much soever of his power is
administered by them, will not therefore prove formal Princes. Besides that,
upon these Principles it may be affirmed, that though the Prince may indeed
employ others in all the Services of the Commonwealth; yet it does not thence
necessarily follow, that he delegates that which is properly his own work. For
to do all things himself is so far from being his proper, as that it is none of
his work as a Prince, but only to take care that the supreme Officers
entrusted under him do their duty, and to punish them in case of default; so
that (...), or irresponsible power, is that which is proper to him, and which
if it be communicated to others, must make them also Princes; and this care of
obliging others to the performance of their duties is so inseparable a Royalty
of the Supreme Power, as that those Princes who have entrusted others with it,
have been judged by all prudent persons Princes only in name, not in effect,
as Chilperick of France, Sardanapalus, etc. This proper work therefore of the
Prince being reserved to himself incommunicably, it will plainly appear that
this Deputation will not supersede the necessity of the supreme Monarch; and
that there will be no contradiction in the case, the inferior Officers still
remaining Subjects, not Princes, notwithstanding whatsoever Deputation that
does not make them absolute and unaccountable, and unobnoxious to the care and
cognizance of the Supreme. The Application to our present case is easily made.
For when I mentioned the Delegation of the Bishops power to particular
Parochians, I only meant such a subordinate power for governing their
respective Parishes, as Viceroys and Lieutenants have under Secular Monarchs
for the Government of particular Provinces; but this subordinate power is so
far from being the proper work of a Bishop as such, as that it would make him
no Bishop to suppose it in him at all. That therefore which is proper to a
Bishop as such, that is, the power of compelling the Parochians to the
performance of their duties, is not communicated to any Parochian; and when it
has been communicated to any simple Presbyters, it has been counted as great an
effeminacy and betraying of their power, as the like case in Seculars was
reputed in the Secular Princes now mentioned. For this was the occasion of the
Abolition of the Co-episcopi about the ninth Century, that the Bishops made use
of them as pretenses for their own sloth in the performance of their own
duties. If therefore any thing of this kind have crept in in the later ages, I
will not defend it; but only shall desire you to remember, that it is not
pertinent to your design of making all Presbyters as such, without any such
particular deputation, equal with them; and that your Arguments, if they proved
any thing, are more directly levelled against Diocesan Episcopacy as such,
without any such abusive deputation.

power which is by the Bishops permitted to Parish Ministers, does not make
them Bishops, nor make them who are so properly unnecessary; which methinks
your self might easily have understood, if you had but reflected on what your
self know concerning its practice among us, without such dilemmatical
uncertainties, which would make one think you a stranger to it. The other
member of your dilemma you do not prosecute, whether because you forgot it, or
that you thought it of it self sufficiently evident, I know not; I suppose your
Argument would have been, that if the power delegated by the Bishop to the
inferior Clergy were none of his own, then he could not delegate it, seeing
that none can justly dispose of that which is not his own. To this the Answer
is easy, from the parallel power of Princes already insisted on, that this
power is the Bishops the same way as that of inferior Magistrates is the
supreme Prince's, not to be executed by his own person, but by others obnoxious
to his election and censures, which is sufficient to show, that the disposal of
it is his, though not the Execution.

chief one, is that which I before observed to be a Concession of all that I
pretended to prove, that a Bishop with inferior Church-rulers can govern a
scope as large as a Diocese. But when in application of it to our purpose you
ask, Whether it follows, that our Church-Monarch can oversee them all himself,
without any Suboverseers, or rule them (by Gods Word on the Conscience) without
any Subrulers. I wonder that you should seem so to forget the practice of our
Ministers of ruling our Parishes as Subrulers under the Bishop. It may be your
meaning is, that our Parish Ministers were not allowed a part in the Supreme
Government of their Churches, as if that were sufficient to deny the name of
proper Church-rulers. But you might have remembered, 1. That my desire was, that
the Bishops, as in S. Cyprians time so now, would more communicate their
affairs of any considerable importance with their Presbytery. And, 2. That even
according to the Rubricks of our Church the Parish Minister or Curate is
allowed the power, not only of dissuading, (which yet is all that is allowed
the Church by several of our Nonconforming Brethren) but also of hindering
notorious ill livers and uncharitable persons from the Communion, only with a
provision that they signify such their proceedings to the Ordinary within
fourteen days at the furthest, which was no more than necessary for keeping
them to the notion of Sub, not principal Rulers. This quick and easy dispatch
in case of the Ministers concurrence, would make one wonder at your complaints
concerning the dilatory proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Courts in this
affair, if the Clergy could be persuaded to be unanimous and vigorous in the
performance of their duty. And, 3. As it is plain that there are many Subrulers
under Princes, who are not of their Privy Council; so you cannot therefore
conclude the Parish Ministers not to be Subrulers under the Bishop even now,
because all great affairs are not originally transacted by their Council. Nay,
4. Your self confess Legislation it self to be communicated to the inferior
Clergy in the Lower House in Convocations, when they make Canons, which are
Church-Laws. And this which is one of the highest acts of Government being
communicated to them, can you yet complain of their exclusion from Government?

WHEN I described the Ecclesiastical Monarchy I spoke of, XVII
to be such as does appropriate the decretory power of Government to it,
communicating only the executive to others, you bid me hold to that. What your
meaning is thereby I do not know; for neither do you seem to persuade me to
hold to it as truth, seeing you afterward seem to dislike it. Nor can I think
that you would have me to hold to an error, that you might have advantage of
disputing against me. What you except against a mere Executioner's being no
Governor, might easily have been prevented, if you had considered that the
word [mere] was none of mine, and that the executive power was by me opposed to
that which is decretory, that is, which is absolute, and unaccountable to any
Superior on earth, at least within such limits. Which as it may include much
more power than that which your self call more than executive, that of
reproving, exhorting, convincing, etc. So that decretory in this sense can
agree to a subject, I believe your self will hardly affirm. And indeed if you
had been pleased to follow the analogy in the civil power, where I do not find
you so scrupulous in Ecclesiastical, you would more clearly have understood my
meaning, and its unconcernedness in your Exceptions. For in civils, at least
the decretory power (from whence all Laws and Rules of proceeding are
originally borrowed, and to which all appeals, in case of difficulty in their
sense or partiality of inferior Judges, are finally resolved) will I believe
be owned by your self as proper to the supreme Magistrate. And how will you
call that power of the Subject as such, that is, as depending hereon by a more
proper name than that of executive (though it may withal include something
decretory in affairs of inferior concernment, which though decretory in
respect of their Inferiors, is yet only executive in relation to the sense
and design of their Supreme to which they are even in such cases confined) for
my part I do not understand. If I knew what were more, either indeed expressive
of my meaning, or likely to be understood so by you, though indeed less proper,
I would rather have used it, than have given you occasion to leave my sense,
and only to dispute the impropriety of my expressions.

BUT you pretend your Arguments to prove the Bishop incapable even of the
judicial work, XVIII
(by which I suppose you mean the same that I called decretory) because the
exploration is part of that, which you seem to imply to be neither fit to be
entrusted with others, nor yet possible to be managed by the Bishop in his own
person in so large a circuit as a Diocese. This Argument also would have been
found false if applied to the Secular Power. For by the same reason you may
prove, that a Prince cannot govern a Diocese, because he cannot explore every
particular crime committed within his Jurisdiction, which according to you he
must do in his own person if he be a Judge. Consider, I pray, whether what you
would answer in defense of the power of Princes, which may not be as plausibly
urged in behalf of Bishops? Would you not say, that there is a twofold judicial
power; such as determines Laws and general rules of proceeding, and such as
does apply them to particular facts; and that the former is that only which
reserved as the prerogative of the supreme power, the later only (which is
that alone which alone includes exploration particular and personal) is
communicated to inferior Officers? And you might have descerned, that the
former only was that which I called decretory, and which was by me
appropriated to our Supreme Ecclesiastical Monarch, which you see does not
necessarily include exploration. And even concerning that exploration which is
requisite for pronouncing Sentence in our ordinary Secular Tribunals, you might
have answered in behalf of Princes, that it is not necessary that it be so
minute and exact as might be had from a personal acquaintance with the person,
and observation of his humor and behavior in the course of his life; but for
the Judges information that is thought sufficient which is public and
juridical, upon the testimonies of honest persons, who have known the person
and his fact: for upon these Evidences our ordinary Judges do generally proceed
in sentencing such as they never saw or knew before. Nor is it only usual in
practice, but in reason it is thought abundantly sufficient. And, I pray, what
may be the disparity that may make this just in our Secular, and unjust in our
Ecclesiastical proceedings? Is it that the credit of the witnesses may as well
be suspected as partial or mistaken, (even where no grounds do appear
sufficiently convictive of such a suspicion) as the persons themselves? Or is
it that there have been frequent Experiences of their deceiving such as have
relied on their Testimony? And are not these difficulties as great in secular
causes, where yet they are not thought considerable? For humane affairs are not
capable of demonstrations, but proceed generally on only moral certainty,
oftentimes only on probabilities, which are therefore after the utmost humane
diligence acknowledged fallible: Yet it is thought prudent to rely even on such
proofs, where the public advantage by the decision of such causes is more
considerable, than the prejudice that may redound to the person concerned by a
particular mistake, when such proof is the best that the matter is capable of,
or that can be had, and that its failings are more rare and unusual. And the
same Reasons are as cogent for the like proceedings in Ecclesiastical Courts.
Or is it that some crimes are so secret, as that they cannot be juridically
discovered with such Evidence as may satisfy a prudent person without personal
and particular information? But you may remember that all crimes do not come
under the cognizance of public discipline, but only such as are great and
notorious, concerning which this cannot be pretended. And as Governors have
thought it just and prudent in some criminal causes, to proceed on conjectures
and presumptions, which themselves confess harsh in some instances, as judging
it fitter that some few Innocents should suffer some prejudice rather than that
many guilty should escape; so in others, where the probabilities are more
frequently fallible, they have rejected them, as conceiving it more just that
some few Nocents should escape, rather that many Innocents should suffer.
Besides that, where this public Evidence does not appear, the crime cannot be
so scandalous, nor consequently can the Church in such a case be so nearly
concerned for its punishment.

INDEED in some attempts it has been found, XIX.
that persons have used much more liberty in private for venting and
propagating scandalous Reports, than when their oath has been required for
public service, by which means they have at once made the crime very
scandalous, and yet rescued the criminal from justice. But then the blame of
such impunity is not to be imputed to the negligence of such a Judge, but the
prevarication of such witnesses, and therefore will not be pertinent to our
purpose. And then for other less or less notorious Crimes the private power of
exhorting, reproving, etc. (which you call more than executive, and is no more
denied a Minister in his own Parish under a Diocesan, than any other Form of
government) may and must prove sufficient, because no other is either
convenient or possible. Or is it that the penitence of the criminal, which is
requisite to his absolution, (which is equally an act of power as that of
censure) cannot be so certainly known by this public Juridical Evidence? This
(besides that it may be as plausibly objected in Secular Causes, where personal
penitence, at least that which is judged so, is as much required to absolution
from secular penalties, and where these Juridical Evidences are perfectly as
fallible) will not appear so difficult as it may seem, if it be considered what
kind of penitence is requisite for this Ecclesiastical Absolution? 1. Not a
universal penitence for all sins, but only those which he had been before
censured for. 2. These not secret, but public and notorious. For none but
these can be scandalous, and none but scandalous sins do fall under public
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. And, 3. Not real penitence, even for these
themselves, but only so far as it may be signified to the satisfaction of a
prudent person by exterior indications. And, 4. These exterior indications,
not private but public, such as public confession of the sin, and asking
forgiveness for it, and giving public satisfaction to the injured party and
the Church, and her scandalized enemies, and all circumstantiated with such
pregnant evidences of sincerity, as may be thought sufficient probabilities of
it in the judgment of equal prudent persons. And, 5. These public indications,
such as may satisfy even strangers, who have been scandalized with his crimes,
though unacquainted with his person. Now why a Bishop may not in this public
juridical way of proceeding explore the penitence, even of particular
criminals, without personal acquaintance, as well as the scandalized multitude,
and as well as secular Judges, as you have produced none, so for my part I see
no cogent Argument. And yet further, 6. Considering that it is not the personal
sin, but the public scandal of it, which brings it to a public cognizance,
though these signs should fail of signifying his real personal penitence; yet
if they satisfy the multitude, though erroneously they take off the scandal,
and therefore give a just reason of revoking such public censares? For every
cause that may be sufficient to dissuade a person, upon an account of his own
interests, to abstain from communion, will not be so for depriving him of it
authoritatively. For they are not all sorts of crimes that put us out of the
state of grace, as they ought to be that deprive us of our right to communion;
not all that can deprive us of that right, that have not Evidence enough to
warrant a coercive involuntary punishment; nor all that have that Evidence,
that are fit to be punished publicly, and I believe you will not question but
that Excommunication is a public punishment. And thus, I believe, by this time
you may understand, how that though the Bishop sentence upon other men's words,
(which your self confess may perhaps sometimes be done) yet there are as good
prudential preservatives against that inconvenience which you thence infer,
That he must excommunicate all that some body else says he must excommunicate,
as there are against the like in Secular Tribunals, which do confessedly
sentence on other men's words, and yet do not therefore condemn all that some
body says they must condemn.

YOUR seventh Disparity is, XX.
That in the Kingdom there is not one Subject of an hundred, or many hundred,
who has Lawsuits with others once in a year, or seven years, or his life; not
one of some hundreds where you have lived, that finds the Magistrate work as
a criminal, etc. But we are all of a sinning corrupt disposition, and that the
Pastor has few of his flock that need not some personal Applications in one
degree or other. And even as to gross sins lived in, and ignorance, or heresy
against the very essence of Christianity, it is a good Parish, where a
considerable part of it are not guilty. To this it is easy to reply, That
though the case were as you have represented it, that men were, not only where
you have lived, but generally more guilty of crimes obnoxious to Ecclesiastical
than Secular cognizance; yet it would not follow, that more were governable by
a Secular than by an Ecclesiastical Magistrate; 1. Because I have already
shown, That there are even in the same precincts very many more persons, if not
crimes, subject to the Magistrate than the Church, as Infidels, Excommunicated
persons, and such as are incorrigible by Ecclesiastical censures, etc. Besides
those who are religious, who are not the less subject to the Magistrate for
their being Members of the Church. And, 2. There are many other ends of
government besides the punishment of criminals, such as are the prevention of
the crimes, the promotion of unanimity and industry, and public generous
designs, and the determination of disputable controversies, wherein good and
well-meaning men may bonafide differ from each other, and the like. They must
as well build as take away the rubbish. And therefore there is a government
where there are no crimes, over the Angels and beatified Spirits. But
especially among men, where crimes are at least acknowledged possible, the
prevention of crimes may be a work of no less diligence than their reformation.
And, 3. The freedom of good men from these more ordinary scandalous crimes,
(which I perceive you to instance in) though it may less frequently exercise
the secular power; yet where it does, it will most dangerously. For, 1. Virtue
raises the spirits of men, and makes them active and industrious, that they may
satisfy themselves of their usefulness in their generations. Whereas, on the
contrary, Vice does emasculate men's spirits, and make them slothful and
sluggish, and lovers of their own ease, and more unfit for commotions. And, 2.
Virtue makes men public spirited, whereas Vice does debase them to private and
little Interests. So that the Adversaries of these are only such ordinarily as
may oppose them in their limited and particular designs, and therefore only
private persons; but these having the same object with the public Magistrate,
that is, the public concernment, must more directly clash with him in case of
different persuasion. And, 3. The very authority of Virtue with the multitude,
(who cannot but reverence it in others, how little soever they practice it
themselves) cannot choose but very much advantage virtuous persons for the
forming of a party more than such as are vicious, who, though they may be
flattered and loved by such as are gainers by their vices, yet cannot in
prudence be thought so fit for management of their public concernments, even
by vicious persons themselves, who act upon principles of worldly prudence, as
they who are more honored, and publick-spirited, and honest and sincere, and
so every way as well more fit, as more able for the discharge of a public
trust. And, 4. The only curbs of the Supreme Powers, whether of rewards or
punishments, are less regarded by virtuous than vicious persons, and therefore
must needs be less able to restrain them. For how can he who undervalues Death
and Fear, and all deprivation of exteriors, be governed by any humane power?
Besides, 5. The great courage, and that not precipitant but rational, which
animates good men to the susception of great Attempts, from the satisfaction of
their own consciences, and their strong confidence of the present assistance or
future rewards of God, of which wicked men are wholly destitute. These
considerations, I say, and many others, may suffice to show, that the mistakes
of good men are of more mischievous influence on the Commonwealth, than the
crimes of debauched persons, and therefore far from diminishing the care of the
supreme Magistrate. And accordingly you may find the most virtuous ages of the
Romans more troublesome for popular Broils and Seditions, than those later ones
of wickedness. Witness the almost perpetual clashings betwixt the Senate and
the People, the popular envies against their Hero's, Coriolanus, Camillus,
Scipio Africanus, etc. But, 4. Though the generality of people were actually
every where as little troublesome to the Magistrate, as where you have known
them (which I doubt you can hardly undertake for;) yet you must not thence
estimate the qualifications and duty of a Magistrate. For as none would think
it prudent for a person putting to Sea in a calm, to choose a Pilot sufficient
only for that season, but unprovided for a Storm; so certainly a Magistrate
ought to be prepared and qualified with abilities for governing a criminal and
unquiet people, even then when he lies under the actual obligation for
exercising them, especially considering it as a case so very ordinary, and so
probably to be expected. If therefore a Bishop may not undertake the charge of
a Diocese, because impossible to be performed by him; I may as well by the same
points of reason conclude, that a Magistrate may not take that of a Province or
Kingdom, even when in the good humor you suppose them, because he must not in
prudence venture on that, unless he be prepared for them when vicious, which
you suppose impossible, and therefore unfit to be engaged on. And, 5. You do
not propose the case with any equality; for if you would do so, you should not
compare a Prince governing a regular people and a Bishop with an irregular
scandalous Diocese, but have supposed the Subjects in both cases regular, or in
both irregular. And if you will needs suppose in favor of the Prince, that his
Subjects are as little criminal in his Courts, as you have found them where you
have been acquainted, to show the possibility of his governing such a people,
though in a large precinct; why can you not suppose in favor of the Bishop,
that the Subjects of his Diocese behave themselves as innocently in reference
to crimes obnoxious to the public cognizance of his Courts? Is it either
because that even persons so supposed equally innocent in relation to the
charges of both Courts, are yet more difficultly governable by an
Ecclesiastical than a Secular Magistrate? This is not as much as pretended, I
am confident, not as much as plausibly proved, in your present Discourse. Or is
it that the Supposition it self in relation to Ecclesiastical crimes is more
difficult, it being more rare and improbable to find a people innocent in
crimes of public Ecclesiastical, than Secular cognizance? If this later be
your meaning, I doubt neither of the reasons intimated by you will maintain you
in it. Not that of your own experience; for I believe you would have found
those good persons of your acquaintance as little troublesome to the Bishops, as
the King's Courts, as little guilty of incestuous Marriages, forging Wills and
Testaments, Simony, etc. as of any acts of secular injustice. And as for the
other concerning our propensity to actual, deduced from the original, sin; you
have not as yet proved this propensity greater to Ecclesiastical than Secular
crimes. But it is rather probable, that as the crimes cognoscible in the
Ecclesiastical Courts are generally more heinous, so they are more easily
avoidable. If you have any inclination to think so, for preventing it I pray
remember what I have already intimated, that they are not all sorts of sins
against God that are cognoscible in the Bishops Courts, but only such as are
great, and scandalous, and notorious. And then consider whether it be not as
easy to suppose a people innocent of great, and scandalous, and notorious sins
against God and Religion, as of injustice toward Men. For this indeed will be
the true state of the question. 2. Therefore it will not be so easily proved,
that the crimes cognoscible in the Secular Courts are so few, in comparison of
those that are Ecclesiastical. This I have already proved before, and am not
willing to repeat what I have there said. At present methinks your own
Concessions, if closely reflected on, would have prevented your pretending
otherwise. For, besides that those multitudes of persons guilty of crimes
obnoxious to the Bishops Courts, (which I have said every impenitent sinner is
not, and have given my reason why I said so) are I doubt guilty of many more
civil crimes, for which I shall only appeal to your own experience; I pray
consider how many of the crimes cognoscible in the Bishops Courts are
originally civil, as those concerning Marriages, Wills and Testaments, Tithes.
etc. which are mere arbitrary concessions of Princes in favor of the Church,
as protected by them. And the rest that are not, yet come under the Princes
cognizance, as the Churches Canons are made Laws of the Commonwealth, and her
Censures are seconded by coercive secular penalties imposed by the Prince on
such as have proved refractory against her Spiritual Authority. Upon which
account it is impossible but that the Secular causes must needs prove more
numerous, as including all Ecclesiasticals, and many proper to themselves
besides. So that this Disparity is every way unconvictive of your purpose. For
if you mean those persons who are so innocent of secular crimes, to be
different from those who are supposed so very guilty of Ecclesiasticals, then
there can be no just disparity pretended, because there is indeed no equal
comparison. But if you mean the same persons in both cases, then the Disparity
cannot be pretended true, because the Supposition is false.

BUT you object in favor of me, XXI.
That the Parish Priest is to reprove, exhort, and convince [sinners] first,
till he prove them impenitent; and that he is to instruct the Ignorant,
Infidels, and Heretics; (which must needs considerably lessen the number of
criminals, who only in case of their convicted impenitency in the use of these
means, should be further impleaded in that severer way of proceeding in the
Bishops Courts.) To this you answer. 1. That this is more than an executive
power. If it be so, I do not know any that denies it you, so that you have no
reason that I know of to complain on that account. None hinders you from
reproving, exhorting, convincing, and instructing whom you please, especially
such as are entrusted to you as Members of your cure. But I am sure this is not
more than that executive power, which I said was communicated to the inferior
Clergy, in opposition to that which I called decretory, reserved to our
Ecclesiastical Monarch; for I believe you will not call this power of
reproving, exhorting, etc. decretory. I believe you meant a power merely
executive. But you may remember, that that was neither my word nor meaning; nor
do I for my part think this power mentioned by you to be more than that which
were merely executive. My reason you will suddenly understand.

SECONDLY, XXII.
therefore you answer, That you desire no more at all from Bishops or any. If
so, you need not desire it, for none denies it you. But you say, You know no
other Episcopal power over the people, but thus personally to convince men, and
to declare to the congregation upon proof, the fitness or unfitness of men for
their communion by penitence or impenitence. If you know no other power than
this, you know none at all. For this power of convincing men will as well agree
to the meanest Laick who has reason on his side, as the greatest Bishop; seeing
either of them may convince if furnished with such reason, but neither can
without it. And yet sure you will not say, that the meanest Laick has any power
over him whom he may thus convince, at least not coherently to your own
principles, who in opposition to our Lay-chancellours make Jurisdiction
inseparable from Orders. So also if the power of Excommunication be no more
than declaring a person unfit for the communion of the congregation as being
impenitent, and Absolution be a declaration of his fitness for such communion
as a penitent; then every prosecutor of a criminal, every witness produced
against him, every prudent skilful Canonist, every Laick that is sufficiently
informed of the sense of the Law and matter of fact, may as well excommunicate
as the Bishop or the Presbytery. For every such skilful person may know the
fitness or unfitness of such a person for communion, and knowing it may declare
his knowledge with the reasons of it; and upon such declaration the people may,
if they pleafe, do as he would have them, either communicate with, or separate
from such a person. For indeed no declaration of it self formally and precisely
understood is obligatory, but as it is a promulgation of that which
antecedently has a just obligative power, In actu primo, yet is not in actu
secundo obligatory quoad nos till we know it. As though the King and Parliament
have a power of making Laws, and therefore what has passed all their Votes, in
the first moment when it has done so, is immediately a Law; yet it is not in
actu secundo obligatory on the Subject, so as that its violation by him does
incur the annexed penalty till it be legally promulged. Yet so it is, on the
contray, that this legal promulgation it self, that is, such a promulgation as
is performed by the person authorized by Law, with all the requisite
circumstances, cannot make any thing really obligatory, that has not formerly
been decreed by the Legislative Power. Unless therefore there be in the Church
a power antecedent to such declaration, the declaration can make none, seeing
every one may declare his own sense as well as the Governor; and declaration
does only make that obligatory quoad nos, which was so in se antecedently. I
did not before charge you with any of those pernicious Doctrines to Church
Authority taxed in my Preface, and am sorry now you give me so just occasion to
do it. It may be I may misunderstand you, and shall be very glad to acknowledge
my mistake when you shall call it one.

AND I beseech you, XXIII
who have so publicly professed your self a Friend to public peace, and an
Enemy to Church-divisions, to consider whether those disparaging Doctrines
concerning the power of the Church be not Seminaries of infinite and eternal
Schisms. For if the Church have no other power but persuasive and declarative,
then he who either actually persuaded of the equity of her particular
impositions, or at least pretends it, may freely remonstrate against them, and
refuse obedience to them, and cannot be restrained frm seditious behavior by
Excommunication, unless at least the greater part of Communicants be satisfied,
and profess themselves to be so, that it is their duty, not in obedience to
their Superiors, but on account of the particular reasonableness of the thing,
to withdraw themselves from his communion. And even then it self, if he can
persuade a few to his Party he may upon these principles, without any scruple
of conscience erect a new communion for himself. For indeed what can hinder him
when government, which is the principle of unity in all Societies, is thus
deprived of all other awe of conscience to oblige him to obedience, distinct
from his particular satisfaction of the reasonableness of the things; or of any
coercive means of his restraint, be his cause never so bad, and his
dissatisfaction never so only pretended? And when the unity of the Catholic
Church is thus made to depend on so hazardous and rarely-contingent a
condition, as the persuasion of its many thousand members, of infinite
interests and capacities, of the reasonableness of every particular indifferent
or probable Constitution, who can ever secure it for so long a time, as the
Government of the Church was designed for by him, who first did constitute it?
I know for prevention of these inconveniences you would have Governors
cautious in determining any thing but what is clear and necessary. And for my
part I wish it so too, that for matters of belief (it not being in Subjects
minds to believe what they please) they would determine nothing but what were
very evident, and even for matters indifferent, that they would neither
determine more of them than were needful, nor such of them as were not
convenient in the circumstances, and suitable to the dispositions of the age of
their determination, nor be too tenacious in maintaining them when their
inconveniences should be found greater than their advantage. Though I confess
withal, that it were in prudence much safer, to make any such change by their
own free Election, than to seem necessitated to it by mutinous and seditious
Remonstrances of their Subjects, such a compliance being of greater
consequential prejudice to government, and consequently to Ecclesiastical
Unity, than a maintenance of a thing indifferent, though inconvenient. But
withal you know, that Unanimity even in things indifferent (much more in
matters of Faith) is in general and indefinitely necessary, though not
particularly determined in the Scripture; that this unanimous observance of
things of such a nature is not morally possible by the particular conviction of
every Subject of their fitness; that therefore there is no security for their
unanimous observance but that of authority, and no authority so proper as that
which is Ecclesiastical; that when it is so imposed, it is an instance of
obedience to the authority imposing; that being so, whatever it may be in its
own nature, it cannot still remain indifferent as to its use, seeing it is not
indifferent whether Subjects ought to be obedient to their lawful Sovereigns.
And therefore methinks it would become you in healing Church-divisions, to take
a care of preserving as well the Prerogatives of Governors, as the Christian
Liberty of Subjects, seeing extremes on both sides are alike prejudicial to
Ecclesiastical Unity. Indeed I confess many of our first Reformers not to have
been so cautions herein as the Interest of the Church would have required, who
feeling themselves oppressed by a Tyrannical Ecclesiastical Power, and being
extremely exasperated by their violent and rigorous proceedings, were almost
only sollicitous about Negatives, never satisfying themselves with any
reasonable retrenchments of such exorbitancies; only showing how far
Ecclesiastical Power might not presume, but not how far it might proceed. And
they were then the more excusable for not proceeding to such positives, because
the ends of such Ecclesiastical Power, the preserrvation of unity both in faith
and practice were then more easily attainable without the Interposition of the
exercise of such a power. For their first zeal against the common Adversary
will oblige them in prudence to conceal their lesser Animosities, and the
danger of weakening themselves, whose united strengths were no more than
necessary for their common preservation, which was a mischief so great and
imminent, as might make many less, at least comparatively, tolerable, and might
keep them from being so dogmatical in imposing or opposing Opinions of
inferior concern. And for matters of practice, the zele of their first
beginnings, and the watchful eyes of their Adversaries for observing their
lapses, and the great use of good personal Lives for the propagation of their
opinions, made them at first less sensible of the loss of Discipline, whilst
upon these accounts they performed those things of themselves, which Discipline
should have compelled them to, as far as Ecclesiastical Censures might compel
them, that is, as far they valued the opinion of so many wise and good men, and
as far as they feared the loss of the ordinary means of grace, and those
dangers they were exposed to when cast out of that Society, which could alone
entitle them to the Divine Protection, and all the terrors that are signified
in their delivery to Satan, I am necessitated to interpose this Explication of
the compulsion of Ecclesiastical Discipline, because I see you otherwise apt
enough to misunderstand me. And even for the observation of things indifferent,
the very great opinion they had entertained for some of the first Reformers,
and the little leisure for reflection on their own condition, when they were so
diverted by their heats against the common Adversary, and the little
willingness they had to dissent, at least to make a breach, for little things,
from them whom they loved so dearly, for their unanimity in their common and
greatest cencern, coagulated the multitude in a willing observation even of
indifferent punctilio's.

YET we find those Hero's themselves complain of this defect. XXIV
Our Church of England wishes that Discipline might be restored in her
Commination, a sign that she was sensible of its want and necessity; and Luther
commends it among the Bohemians, and wishes also that it were restored among
his own; and the want of positive constitutions in this kind seems to have been
the greatest scandal to Erasmus, to alienate him from the Protestants, to whom
he had formerly been well affected. But Bullinger and Gualther do, as I
remember, in their Epistles to Erastus, confess their Helvetian Churches to
have no other discipline than what was exercised by the Civil Magistrate. But
when upon a defervescency of their first zele, and a liberty occasioned by
their great successes against the common Adversary, men at length got the
leisure to enquire with the same freedom into the Doctrines of the Reformers,
as the Reformers themselves had into those of the then extant Ecclesiastical
Governors, and so divert that zele which had been enkindled and heated in the
prosecution of the common cause against each other, in the prosecution of their
own private sentiments; and when they grew more remiss in the care of their
lives, and began by degrees to take advantage of their freedom from their
former yoke of Ecclesiastical Governors, and to relapse into their former
dissoluteness, and to be curious and critical in inquiring into the merit of
every Ecclesiastical observance, and to make themselves Judges of the
expediency as well as lawfulness of things confessedly indifferent, and not to
content themselves with their own thoughts, but to discountenance their
dissenting Brethren, and to divide the Church, and to disrespect their
Superiors, who in later times were not held in that great veneration as their
predecessors; then at length at Geneva, and other places that were swayed by
the authority of Calvin, it was found as well in prudence, upon account of its
experienced reasonableness and use; as in duty, upon account of its Institution
in the Scriptures, necessary to revive Ecclesiastical Power, that might for
future Ages prevent and restrain the exorbitancies of men abusing their
liberty, and secure the peace of the Church. And whatever they had before
disputed against their Adversaries, prejudicial to Ecclesiastical Power in
general, it is plain that the authority which that very wise and prudent person
thought necessary for the preservation of peace and piety in the Church, is
more than persuasive and declaratory, even coercive of persons otherwise
persuaded. I shall not mention those excesses which I believe you will not
approve, their encroachments on the Regal Authority in Scotland, and the
burning of Servetus and Gentilis at Geneva, and the Book written by Beza to
justify that action. It is very plain that the Presbyries, where ever they
have been set up, have exercised a power coercive, whether in defining
Heresies, or censuring profane or refractory disobedient persons. And if
Calvin found the necessity of this coercive power then, I am sure, as our
experience since his time is much greater, so we have found much reason to
approve the truth of what he only foresaw. For all the later Sects have
prevailed on the concessions of the former. And by the same reason, as the
first Presbyterians, who broke the peace of the Church, thought themselves to
be excused, because they professed themselves unsatisfied with the Churches
persuasions to her Impositions; so every later Sect has pretended the same
against the Presbyterians. And as long as there is any unanimous observance of
the Church, that is not particularly expressed in the Scripture, at least not
clearly, with that evidence which may be presumed sufficient to satisfy every
well-meaning person as well as our selves, (which I doubt will be found as long
as such a thing as communion with the Church as a body politic is owned, that
is, as long as it is not dissolved into mere Enthusiasm) we shall never be
secure of the communion) not only of pretended, but really dissatisfied pious
persons. And till you make a power in the Church coercive of men's practice, as
well as a belief of Fundamentals, a requisite condition to unity; I fear you
will never be able to reach what you are so zealously and commendably
attempting, the Cure of our Church-divisions.

BUT that which makes me most of all wonder is, XXV
that you should pretend that this persuasive declarative power is denied to
Parish Ministers; and the reason you give for it seems to me more paradoxical:
That the Minister can have no access to the guilty by their own wills, and that
there is no law nor penalty that you know of to constrain any to come to you,
or receive you, to hear or answer you. Here one would think that you did
approve of coercive means, as necessary for doing good to those that are
unwilling to be persuaded. For if you did not, why should you blame our
Diocesan Discipline for not allowing you that which you would not have allowed?
But presently after you take occasion from these coercive means, which you
confess are used among us, to inveigh against us, as if our Prelatick Christian
Profession were only to choose rather to be Christians and communicate, than
to lie in Gaol, and have all our Estates confiscate. One would think that you
were desirous to find Objections against us, when thus almost at the same time
you blame us for having that, which immediately before you blamed us for
wanting. For the difference is not (as one would think) from the most candid
interpretation of your words, That you would have such guilty persons forced to
confer with you, but not to profess themselves Christians, and communicate
without your leave: for you afterward profess simply, that you would have no
force at all. Besides, what force is it that you mean? is it that exterior one
of laws and corporal penalties? (this your words seem plainly to imply.) This
you know does not belong to the Church, but the civil Magistrates power circa
sacra, who is therefore to be blamed for it, and not the Church, if it be a
crime, and some body must needs bear the blame. Or are they the spiritual
coercions of the Church? I know none of that kind but Excommunication, which is
of no force with those who do not value the advantage of communion; and they
who do, need not to be forced to confer with their Minister. Besides that, your
self know and have confessed, that the power of Suspension of unworthy persons
from the Sacrament is allowed to the Parish Minister even in our Church, so
that even in that case he has his remedy in his own hand, as far as it can be
proved expedient that he should under a Monarchical Government. But methinks
your description of a Prelatick Christian is very harsh, and (though for my
part I am resolved to take nothing ill, because I verily believe, not only by
this Letter, but your other public writings, that the heat of your style, and
the extraordinary expedition you make use of, not allowing your self time for
second thoughts, do transport you to such expressions, as your serious
reflections would not approve; yet) would, to other less favorable Judges of
your good meaning, rather tend to exasperate than cure those divisions, for
which you are justly so much concerned. And besides your own acknowledgment of
many good Prelatick Christians on other occasions, you cannot be ignorant, that
many of them have been Christians of that which you call the old profession,
that is, [have been Christians, and held communion with the Church, though they
have gone to prison and death for it] not only in Queen Mary's days, but even
in your own memory in England and Ireland, when their being so has brought
sufferings on them, not rescued them from them. So that I do not understand why
you should stigmatize them with the name of Prelatical.

INDEED if you could show, XXVI
that it was rather the extraordinary good influences of God, and their own
good inclinations, that made them voluntarily good, against their worldly
interests, notwithstanding their malignant principles, which of themselves
would have made them otherwise; I confess your commendable inclination to speak
of things as they are might have excused the rigor of such expressions. But,
1. You cannot but know that these exterior compulsions have not been proper to
Prelatists, but common to all those that have owned such a thing as discipline,
Presbyterians as well as Papists; so that there is no reason to appropriate to
such Christians as are made so by coercive discipline the invidious name of
Prelatical. And, 2. You have not, and I believe you cannot, prove that such
external force must needs of it self make Prelatists dissemblers: 1. Because
all that are of themselves good, will not need such force, this being only a
secondary reserve for reducing such as are desperate, as to that power which
alone you allow the Church, that is, of persuasion, none being this way
compelled, but they who cannot be persuaded. And certainly for such persons it
is at least a less evil to profess themselves Christians, though dissemblingly,
than not so much as to profess themselves so, both in regard of the honor
which is done Religion even in professing it, and the edification of others,
who may be moved by their example, and that they are by this means taken from
the sins of open hostilities against the truth. And, 2. You must not presently
condemn all of dissimulation, who are brought to a sense of their duty by fear.
Otherwise you will condemn all the penal laws of the Commonwealth, as tending
to make their Subjects dissemblingly loyal, and all Gods providential crosses
and menaces of hell, as tending rather to make men profess themselves
Christians rather than be damned, etc. For frequent experience cannot but have
informed you, who are so very experienced, that the fear of Man, as well as of
God, has to many proved the beginning of true wisdom; that good Christians have
found more occasion to bless God for their crosses than their consolations;
that the terrible vengeance of God against sinners, even in this life, under
the Old Testament, was a great restraint to that hard-hearted people, to deterr
them from their sins, and to reduce them to solid real piety, whom we find less
efficaciously moved to their duty by any other means. For I pray consider, 3.
That this dissimulation which you seem to suppose to be the ordinary consequent
of exterior compulsion, cannot indeed have any place but upon these conditions;
that, 1. The sufferer do believe his cause to be good; and, 2. That such belief
be grounded on conscientious motives, (whether really or apparently
conscientious I now dispute not, seeing the person must act according to the
evidence of his own conscience, however really erroneous, after he has used his
best endeavors for its information;) and, 3. That this persuasion of his
conscience be unalterable; or at least, 4. That such exterior compulsion be
neither a means nor a probable occasion to make men alter their opinions,
atleast not to make good and conscientious persons to alter, at least not
ordinarily; so that it be presumed, that the multitude of goodmen cannot be
altered upon such terms, and therefore that if the multitude do, they cannot be
generally presumed to do it on just and conscientious motives; and yet, 5.
That, notwithstanding his being persuaded as formerly, he be by his exterior
compulsion wrought on to make an unveracious exterior profession.

NOW to show briefly that none of these hold, XXVII.
at least not all of them, which is requisite for your purpose; I must premise,
1. That the design of this kind of discourse against these coercive means, if
it be to hinder them, must be to persuade them in whose power they are, that
is, the Church or the Magistrate, that their practice were sinful to them.
That, 2. Nothing can be imputably sinful to Governors, but what either does or
may, in the use of their utmost moral diligence, appear to them to be so. So
that it is not your opinion of the sinfulness of such coercion, that can prove
it sinful to them, unless they be of the same mind, or neglect the moral means
of information, which if you suppose the case evident, you must presume such as
would infallibly bring them to be so. 3. Therefore what are the real thoughts
of Governors, and whether they have made use of the means of information with
integrity and diligence, none can for their own satisfaction (which is
principally to be taken notice of in order to the imputableness of sin) judge
of so well as themselves. Nor, 4. Can we better be assured of their sense
herein than by their word, unless it be by the evidence of the thing. It is not
therefore every proof that may seem satisfactory to our selves, that may
warrant our presumption of their sense, unless it be such as is thought
cognoscible by them, and whose evidence is presumed inevitable upon a sincere
examination. And, 5. It is not sufficient as to the matter in hand, that it
appear that some persons have indeed been made hypocrites for fear of this
exterior coercion, but it must further be shown that its natural tendency is to
do so, or at least that it is its most usual consequent. And, 6. That it is an
occasion of their hypocrisy by virtue of it self, not of the disposition of
the Subject. For the sins that are derived from the disposition of the Subject,
they that give the immediate occasions are not responsible for. Otherwise when
the wicked turn Gods grace into wantonness, and those things which should have
been for their good into the occasions of falling, and the word preached turns
to be the savor of death unto death to its unworthy hearers, and the blessed
Sacrament of the Lords Supper to its unworthy receivers; you might conclude
God, who gives those abused favors, to be the proper occasion of the abusers
sin. And (because there are some who will with less scruple grant of God, that
he is, the designer of his creatures sins, than they would grant it concerning
any good men) S. Paul had been the culpable occasion of the perjury of those
conspirators, who had sworn not to eat until they had killed him, only by
making use of just means for his own preservation. And these you may easily
believe to be the thoughts of Governors, concerning those whom they are
pleased to prosecute for their opinions. That they do as seriously believe,
that the reasons which satisfy themselves, are as sufficient to satisfy all
others, that use their moral diligence for finding satisfaction, as the
sufferers believe it concerning their own reasons, that they are sufficient to
satisfy their Governors; and therefore that such dissenting hypocritical
Subjects are as faulty in not using their diligence in the use of the means, if
they find not actual satisfaction, as such Subjects believe the same concerning
their Governors. And, 7. That this personal hypocrisy of such dissembling
persons is a greater inconvenience to the public, than the toleration of their
seditious behavior. For as it is certain that Governors no more than other
good Christians, may design any sin for any good whatsoever; so it will not be
easily disproved either by reason or authority of Casuists, that they may
design that from whence they know a sin will necessarily follow, for the
avoidal of a greater both inconvenience and sin, such as is sedition in respect
of hypocrisy. For though it be unlawful to choose any evil where it may be
avoided; yet it is not so when two occurr, whereof at least one is inevitable,
to make choice of the less before the greater. And now upon these supposals it
were easy to show, from these conditions of dissimulation, that either there
were no necessity that the sufferers under these coercive means must needs
dissemble; or if there were, yet at least not such as would make it imputable
as sin to Governors; or if it were a sin to them absolutely, yet not such
under such a straightened election.

BUT I must avoid prolixity, XXVIII.
and therefore at present shall only briefly make Application to the
forementioned conditions of dissimulation. 1. Therefore it is not necessary
that every sufferer for his opinions must believe his cause to be good; for
there are bad as well as good of all much received opinions, that maintain them
not upon account of their truth, but because they are themselves factiously
disposed, and love contradiction, especially to Superiors, (a humor such
people of the vulgar are usually too much addicted to) or affect popularity or
singularity, or promise themselves some great advantages by public Innovations
and Disturbances, or engage in a party out of kindness to their Friends that
are concerned in it. Much less, 2. Is it necessary that every one who does
indeed believe his own Opinion true, must do it upon Motives, so much as
apparently conscientious. For education and custom, and the authority of a
person respected, or a vainglorious ostentation of his own Wit, or the shame of
being mistaken or convicted, may at first incline many to defend Opinions
fortuitously taken up, and afterward the love of their own arguments may
delude many to believe what they have once asserted. And God knows whether the
vulgar of most Opinions be not acted thus, whatever pretenses they make of
conscience, (for custom may go very far in making men abhor unusual, innocent,
or commendable things as profane and piacular, as appeared in the Experiment
of Darius Hystaspis in Herodotus, who found the Scythian to pretend as much
conscience for eating, as the Grecian for burying his dead Relations.) And we
have reason to believe, if of too many, whom we find the most zealous
maintainers of opinions controverted, and yet the most negligent practisers of
such as are undoubted, which certainly would not be, if Gods sake, or
conscience, or a sense of their own duty, were the reasons inducing them to
believe them. Now these Deductions being made, the number of conscientious
Dissenters would I doubt be generally found the smaller. And it is a general
and just rule of public proceedings, not to forbear that which may generally
do good, though it may prove inconvenient and prejudicial in some rarer
Instances. Nor would these coercive means oblige these Dissenters upon Motives
not conscientious to dissimulation or hypocrisy. But even for those fewer
truly conscientious Dissenters which would remain, it is not necessary, 3. That
if they have been of a different Opinion, they should persevere in it
unalterably. And as their minds may alter at any time, so as well when they are
prosecuted for their Opinions as otherwise, in which case their conversion may
be veracious. And possibly the number even of good converts, even upon such an
occasion, would be more, if they did not some of them, for fear of being
censured as time-servers, not allow the contrary Opinion the same favor of an
equal hearing, when it is countenanced by Authority as otherwise, or at least
not express their sentiments so freely and ingenuously; not heeding that hereby
instead of courage and constancy, they only choose their conqueror, being
more awed by the persecution of the tongue than of the sword. Nor, 4. Is it
true, that this coercion is not a probable means of bringing even good men to a
conscientious change of their Opinions. For, 1. It is of it self likely to
allay that tumor and rigor of spirit, to which even good men themselves are
frequently betrayed by prosperity, which does usually alienate them from all
sober thoughts of accommodation, and even of sober and impartial inquiry. And I
believe you who have so well studied the peace of the Church, do very well
understand, that in very many things men's spirits, are at a greater distance
than their principles, in all which for making peace it is sufficient to make
men peaceable. Indeed for a while such a way of proceeding may rather
exasperate than calm them; but by that time that the strangness of it is over,
and the sudden tumor has evaporated and spent it self, they are at length
reduced to a more composed temper. And I believe your own experience, which is
great in the late and present posture of Affairs, cannot but let you understand
the much greater moderation of those Presbyterians of your temper and
acquaintance now than formerly. For it is natural for men, as well in wars of
opinions as of swords, when they have wearied themselves with fighting to
desire peace. And, 2. As this coercion brings good men themselves to this more
sedate and candid temper, which makes them more competent Judges of rational
discourses; so it usually obliges them to a more faithful and accurate inquiry
than formerly. For good men can no more than others endure afflictions
willingly and patiently, unless they be animated by the goodness of the cause,
and that they cannot so well satisfy themselves of, without an impartial
inquiry into its merits. Besides that good men themselves, and that reasonably
enough are unwilling to suffer, unless it be indeed necessary for the
preservation of their more momentous interests, and therefore are willing to
admit of any satisfactory favorable construction of their duty, that may
dispense with such severe performances, which cannot be attained but by a more
close inquiry into the merit of the thing, and the nature of the Obligation.
And hence it follows, 3. That they must upon prudential, and yet just and
rational accounts, be favorably inclined to the Opinions of their prosecutors,
as far as any favor may be just and conscientious. And this may do much for
determing them in all such cases, as are not either very evident or very
momentous; and such not very many would be found on a severe examination. And,
4. Affliction does very much quicken good men's consciences, to approve
themselves to God when they are destitute of humane consolations. And this also
may exceedingly contribute to a conscientious change, when by this they are
freed from those carnal prejudices, which before had blinded or diverted them
from a clear discovery, and are excited to a greater industry in the inquiry of
means, and obliged to a greater sincerity in following conviction, when they
consider how much their greatest Interests are concerned in it, and how vain it
is to hope to escape his discovery in case of negligence or dissimulations, who
is the immediate Lord of conscience. Upon all these accounts therefore
Governors, who are to be presumed to believe their own Opinions true, may
justly believe external coercion to be a means of reducing others to them,
conscientious as well as such as are not. But, 5. Though you might with more
plausibility pretend, that dissimulation would indeed be the ordinary
consequent of coercive means alone, they being alone no rational arguments for
working a conscientious change; yet when they are not designed as the principal
arguments inviting to such a change, but merely as dispositions to prepare and
qualify the persons for receiving conscientious arguments, the case will be
clearly otherwise. Now this I believe you do already know to be the case with
us. Besides what coercive means may have been pretended, the means of
information are freely communicated to any that desires them. Our Books are
extant, our learned men and Parish Ministers are freely to be consulted with;
and why these may not ordinarily be presumed likely to make a conscientious
change, only because people are necessitated to use them, I do not understand.
And, 6. The case is not such as you have proposed it. None was obliged to be
Christian rather than go to Gaol, etc. I believe you cannot instance any Law
lately in use, that obliged people to profess any thing not believed by them.
All I think that can be pretended was to restrain persons, not from the public
profession, nor from the private practice of their Opinions; but only from
practicing them in public or great assemblies, that might create suspicion to
the State. Otherwise I know nothing restrictive of those persons you are
concerned for, from being commonly known to be such as they were. And I pray,
what necessity is there then of dissimulation? The only Canon of that kind
that I can think of, is that of communicating once a year at Easter, the
exacting whereof whether by infliction of Civil or Ecclesiastical penalties,
whether of Non-conformists, or even Conformists themselves, has been at least
where I have been, so generally neglected, that I do not know any reason you
have to complain of it. For any other coercive means for compelling Dissenters
to communicate with us, I know none that have been rigorously executed to my
knowledge in Ireland. What has been done in England your self know better, and
therefore I shall very willingly leave you to your own information, wherein I
hope you will be ingenuous. Yet, 7. Suppose that coercive means were not for
the good of the persons concerned, but did indeed make them Prelatical
Christians, as you call them, that is, dissemblers; this were not sufficient to
show that they are therefore not to be used, if their punishment and
dissimulation it self may prove for the advantage of the public. For you know
that Governors are not to heed private advantages any otherwise, than in
subordination and coincidency with the public, and that even in civil affairs
there are some few punishments imposed, which are known to be utterly
inconsistent with the civil interests of the party punished, (and their civil
interests are properly obnoxious to the care of Governors) for such are all
that are capital, especially such of them as are withal rigorous and painful.
For in public punishments there are other ends more considerable than private
emendation, namely the prevention of future offenses from the same person, and
the terror of others by his example. Nor is this way of proceeding blamed by
any just (however favorable) Judge of such things, when personal emendation
has been first attempted, and no criminals are subjected to such censures, but
such as have been found, in the use of all other prudential rational means,
incorrigible. To such it is not thought any more cruelty to be severe for the
good of the Commonwealth, than it is for a Surgeon to cut off a gangreened
member for the preservation of its owners life. And such is the design of the
Church, who is not for using even her spiritual coercions (which only belong
to her) but only on such persons on whom her rational inducements have proved
desperate and succesless.

BUT notwithstanding your former contrary intimations you say, XXIX
You desire no force nor Church power; but not to take these, 1. for
Christians; 2. for your special Christian flock; 1. who are no Christians; 2.
who themselves refuse it. But this power you desire here is more than that
which alone was allowed by you to Bishops, of reproving, exhorting,
instructing, and declaring persons fitness or unfitness for communion by their
penitence or impenitence. For what if your people believe those penitent whom
you think impenitent, or on the contrary? What if they be not satisfied with
your Declarations, or resolved not to observe them? What if at least the
greater part, which is always predominant in popular Governments, be not of
your opinion? Would you think your self obliged in such a case to make your
peoples opinion or your own, the rule of your practice in receiving or
rejecting persons from your communion? If you follow your people, then you are
as capable of being imposed on against your will, (for receiving such persons
for Christians, and for part of your Christian flock, who are no Christians,
and who themselves refuse it) by them as you are now by the Bishop. And it does
not appear that the greater part of your flock (especially if such as you
describe, whereof whole Parishes have been presented by the Churchwardens) are
likely to stand with you in opposition to your Bishop. And if they stand for
him against you, you can have no reason to obtrude your own judgment and
complain, according to this principle? But if notwithstanding their dissent
from you, you yet resolve to follow your own judgment, in receiving or
rejecting according to your own thoughts of the penitence or impenitence of the
person obnoxious to your Discipline; then you will indeed be so far from
desiring no Church power, as that you would desire more than you seem willing
to grant the Bishops, which is only declarative. And then if you may as a
Governor impose on the people, why may not the Bishop as your Governor impose
on you? Indeed there can be no such thing as Government without such an
Imposition as you speak of. For the reason of all Government is the inequality
of men's Judgment in their own causes, and the inconvenience of deciding their
differences by force, which is many times the greatest on the unjust side. The
design therefore of all Government is to entrust a third person or society,
supposed impartial to the litigant parties, with a power sufficient to compel
either of them to submit to her decision. For seeing it is not ordinarily to be
expected, that differences should be decided by a persuasion of both parties of
the equity of decisions, but that both parties will frequently prove tenacious
of their own Opinions; therefore it is necessary that the guilty, whatever he
be, who will seldom believe his own condemnation just, be imposed on; and such
an Imposition being thus thought necessary, common prudence will suggest, that
it is much more equal and secure for the party imposed on, that he be imposed
on by the common arbitrator of their differences than by his partially affected
adversary. And accordingly where there is no need of imposition there is none
of government, and the seat of government is finally resolved on them, who have
this power of imposing their own sentiments on others; so that to deny
Ministers this power over the people, or the Bishops over the Ministers, is to
make neither the one nor the other properly Governors. Besides, the power of
Excommunication and Absolution (which you seem to mean in this your complaint,
that the independent use of them is not communicated to the Ministers) are so
incommunicably proper to the supreme governor, (who, as having the power of a
Society, must also have that of admitting to, and rejecting members from it) as
that it were impossible for him to give an account of his charge, if others may
admit and reject at pleasure without dependence on him. So that to complain of
being imposed on in this kind, is indeed in effect to complain of the Bishops
superiority over you. And if this reason were of any force, it would proceed as
much against the Presbyterian government as the Episcopal, for even among them
the Minister may as well be overvoted, and consequently overruled, by the
Classes, as with us by the Bishops. So inseparable this power of imposing on
Parish Ministers is found from Government, as that is indeed admitted by all
them who own a Government superior to single Parishes?

BUT, XXX.
I pray, quo jure do you challenge this Parochial power of Excommunication and
Absolution independent on your Ordinaries? I shall at present give you leave to
say, (not because that I think you can prove it, but because I am unwilling at
present to dispute it) that Presbyters were not only counselors, but
coordinate governors with the Bishop. But how can you show the least
likelihood that the Bishop had not at least a negative vote among them? That as
he could not do any thing without their suffrages, so they were able to
conclude any thing without his? Much less are you able to prove, that every
particular Presbyter, singly taken, ever had within his own Jurisdiction the
power of determining so momentous a thing as Ecclesiastical censures. Wherever
you find any Presidents over Presbyteries in the Scriptures, whether Apostles,
or Evangelists, or Angels, you cannot find any Precedent of any thing carried
by the major vote against the consent of the President, as at least one of the
prevailing number. And for the Ignatian Episcopacy and so downwards to S.
Cyprian, which you seem to approve, it is very plain that all the power of
Presbyters was dependent on the Bishop. Thus Ignatius (in his genuine
uninterpolated Epistle to the Ephesians) (...). Edit. Vsser. p. 3.
And that that (...) is the Communion of the Bishop, appears from the sequel,
whence he concludes, (...). whence you may easily guess what he would have
thought of Presbyters communicating in opposition to the Bishop, that even such
Communions being without the altar, must needs have been destitute of the bread
of God. To the same purpose also the same blessed Martyr advises even
Presbyters not to despise the youth of Damas the Bishop of the Magnesians, Ep.
ad Magn. p. 11.
(...), (the word (...) translated appositely to the sense of this place,
familiariter uti, seems to argue a greater distance than you would I believe
think consistent with the parity you are so desirous of) (...) (observe I pray
again the word (...) reverence) (...), (hence it appears that Presbyters as
well as others are concerned in this his Exhortation) (...), (this is the (...)
so much disputed of, the youthfulness of their Bishops person, not the novelty
of the Institution of his Order, for it was that youthfulness which they were
likely to take advantage of, which is the notion of (...). You see here that
even Presbyters are not to take advantage even of a youthful Bishop, either for
presuming on too much familiarity with him, or denying him the reverence due to
his Order, though in a youthful person. That they are to yield to him, or
rather to Jesus Christ, whose person is represented by him, (and sure you would
not think much to be imposed on by Jesus Christ.) That this duty is to be paid
without all hypocrisy to the Bishop for Gods sake, whom it is impossible to
deceive. That harkening to him (for that is the notion of (...), which in the
Hellenistick style then in use, is the same with obedience) is part of that.
And that the disrespect to him in any of these duties, redounds to the
dishonor of God, for whose sake he is to be honored. And now I pray consider
how you can reconcile herewith your desired liberty of excommunicating without
his privity or consent. Immediately after he blames them who give their Bishop
the honor of an empty name, and yet do all things without his privity, and
expressly censures them as (...), men of no good consciences, (...) Where,
besides the coherence formerly noted, it is plain, that even Presbyters also
are included, because he speaks of Assemblies, which could not be celebrated
without some act of priestly power. And if such Assemblies be not according to
the command, nor the rules of good conscience, how your proceedings without the
consent or privity of your Bishop can be excusable I do not understand. In the
Epistle ad Trallian. after having enjoined respect to all the three Orders, he
concludes, (...), p. 17.
whence you may easily conclude his thoughts concerning such Assemblies, which
are maintained without one of them, that is of Episcopacy, as they must needs
be who take upon them to act independently on their Bishop. So in the Epistle
to the Philadelphians, he says expressly that as many as are on Gods part and
Jesus Christ, (...), p. 28.
by which you may see what he would have thought of those who should have
joined with any Presbyter, exercising an Authority different from, and
independent on, that of the Bishop. Nay, he confidently charges them, not as
from his own private sense, but inspiration, (and those extraordinary (...) had
not as yet failed in his time) (...), and after teaches that God gives
remission of sin to them that are penitent, only on that condition, p. 30.
(...), which if it be so, how can the Absolutions of Presbyters attempted
without the consent of their Bishop be valid? But what can be more clear
against your Independency of Parish Ministers in the exercise of discipline,
than that excellent passage in the Epistle to the Smyrnaeans; p. 36.
(...). And a little after; (...) So again; (...). You see how expressly all
persons ( Presbyters themselves not excepted) are forbidden to meddle in
Ecclesiasticals without order from the Bishop. You see what Ecclesiasticals he
means by his enumeration of the particulars, not only Baptism and the Feasts
of Love, but the very Eucharist. You see how clearly he disowns the validity of
that Eucharist which is not received either from the Bishop himself, or some
person authorized by him. Which both may serve to let you see, that even
Presbyters themselves are included, seeing your self do not allow the power of
admitting to communion Laics or Deacons, though authorized; and that the power
you seem to challenge of communicating whom you please, without the Bishops
License is again censured as invalid, as a dishonor of God, nay as a service
of the Devil, which would have been thought harsh and passionate expressions,
if the Age he lived in, before the starting of our modern Controversies, had
not put him beyond any just or probable suspicions of partiality.

I HAVE the rather insisted on the Testimony of this blessed Martyr, XXXI
because you seem to seem to have been willing to have condescended to the
Ignation Episcopacy, and were therefore concerned, because in my Catalogue of
the ancient Writers, I said Ignatius was decretory against the Presbyterians. I
might have descended lower, because you said you would have yield to the
Episcopacy practiced in S. Cyprians time, to show that this liberty you desire,
of admitting to, or excluding from, your flock whom you please, was not even in
those Ages allowed to bare Presbyters. At present I shall only note a passage
or two, because I am desirous of hastening. Baptism therefore, which has always
been thought to require less power than the Lords Supper, De Baptism. c. 17
was not in Tertullians time permitted to Deacons nor Priests themselves,
without the Authority of their Bishop. These are his words; Dandi quidem (viz.
Baptismi) habet jus summus sacerdos, qui est Episcopus. Dehinc Presbyteri and
Diaconi, non tamen sine Episcopi authoritate, propter Ecclesiae honorem. Quo
salvo, salva pax est, etc. Exactly herein agreeing with Ignatius. Ep. 75. apud
S. Cyprian. p. 182. ed. Pamel.
And the same seems to have been the sense and practice of the Asiatick
Churches in the time of Firmilian, who, though indeed he mention the majores
natu praesides (under which word, according to the use of that Age, I confess
Presbyters may be included) as having the power of Baptizing, Imposition of
hands, in reconciling penitents especially, and of Ordination, which we do not
deny them; yet he seems to intimate their dependence on the Bishop in the
administration of that power which properly belonged to them, which is all that
we desire. For thus he afterward expressly asserts the power of remission of
sins, (either in Baptism or Absolution of Penitents, as appears from the
occasion of the Dispute concerning the validity of both among the Heretics) to
have been given to the Apostles, p. 184.
and Ecclesiis quas illi a Christo missi constituerunt, and EPISCOPIS qui eis
dinatione vicaria successerunt. Where it is to be observed, 1. That no
exclusive particle be expressed, yet it must necessarily be understood from the
whole design of his Discourse, which is to exclude the Baptism of Heretics
from being remissive of sins, because the power of remitting sins is not
granted to them, which would not follow unless all which had that power
conferred on them, had been adequatly enumerated by him. And, 2. That by the
Churches here mentioned cannot be understood a Society contradistinct from the
Bishops. For I believe you cannot produce a precedent of that age, where the
word is taken for the other Clergy; so that there are only two other Senses
that I can think of reducible to this purpose; either for the Laity, and that
your self I believe will not think intelligible here, that the power of
remitting sins by Baptism, or otherwise, does agree to them; or for the complex
of both the Laity and the Body of the Clergy, in contradistinction to the
Bishop. And to this his proof of the power of remitting sins given to the
Apostles, being also given to the Church in this contradistinct sense, must
have been impertinently urged from its being given to the Apostles, seeing that
the Church in the Apostles time must have been as contradistinct from the
Apostles, as the later Churches from their respective Bishops. By the word
Churches therefore are only meant Orthodox Societies, including Bishops as
well as other members; whence it will follow, that the Church is only
therefore said to have this power, because the Bishops have it; and therefore
that no Ecclesiastical Member can have it independently on them. 3. Therefore
that by the word Bishops, to whom this power of remitting sins is given, to
which all other Ecclesiastical Power is consequent, Presbyters are not
included; will appear probable, if you consider, 1. That though the word
Presbyter and Sacerdos be attributed to Bishops properly so called, yet at
least in that age I believe you will hardly find that a simple Presbyter is
called Episcopus. Blondell himself I think will not furnish you with an
Instance. And, 2. That these Bishops are such as are called Successors of the
Apostles. And that by these Successors of the Apostles, single persons are
understood in the language of that age, appears in that when they prove
Succession from the Apostles, they do it by catalogues of single persons, as
those in Irenaeus, Tertullian, etc. and that Bishops in the confined sense are
so frequently said to be Successors of the Apostles, which is not said of
simple Presbyters. See S. Cyprian ep. 42, 65, 69. and the Author de
Aleatoribus, with many others usually produced in the Disputes concerning
Episcopacy.

AND then for the sense of S. Cyprian, XXXII.
he was as resolute in vindicating his own right, as condescending in his
practice. He it is that asserts the unaccountableness of the Episcopal Office
to any under God; In Council. Carthag. init.
that makes the Church in the Bishop, as well as the Bishop in the Church; Ep.
4. ad Cornel.
that charges the contempt of the Bishop as the original of all Schism and
Heresy, and parallels it with the Sin of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; that
spares not even Presbyters themselves, when presuming to act without his order,
but puts them in mind of his being their Superior, and charges them with
rebellion, when they took that liberty you desire of acting arbitrarily and
independently. Instances of all these kinds might have been produced, if I were
not afraid of being too tedeous, These things may at present suffice to show,
that the liberty you desire of admitting or rejecting whom you please from your
own flock, is not more unreasonable than dissonant from the practice of those
Ages for which you profess a reverence. Nor do I understand your design in the
use of that liberty you desire. If it be that you would have those whom you
think unworthy of your flock excluded from your cure; that is as improper as if
a Physician should desire to be excused from visiting those who are most
dangerously, though not desperately, sick. Certainly the contrary would rather
follow, that as they need most, so they should have most of your care. It is
our Saviors own saying, that the whole need not a physician, but the sick;
that is, at least not comparatively: and generally his greatest pains and
favors were extended to those who had least deserved them. Nor is their
unwillingness to deal with you in affairs of this nature a sufficient reason to
exempt them from your Cure; for this unwillingness it self is a most
considerable ingredient in their distemper, and that which makes them most
truly pitiable, and it would be as great a piece of inhumanity for the
spiritual as the corporal Physician, to desert them on that pretense, I am sure
very different from the behavior of Christ and his Apostles, who found the
World generally as much prejudiced against and unwilling to hear, them
concerning affairs of that nature, as you can with any probability presume
concerning a Christian Auditory. If your meaning be, not to be excused from the
use of all other good means for their recovery, but only from admitting them
to the blessed Sacrament, which ought to be the privilege of such as are
already deserving; I pray consider, 1. Whether though you deny them to be
Christians, yet their very Baptism and exterior profession of Christianity, be
not at least sufficient to entitle them to exterior privileges, if on their own
peril they will venture on them; and that Sacramental privileges are but
exterior. They are invited to the marriage feast, and none may exclude them if
they come, though it is at their own hazard if they presume to do so without
the marriage garment. And, 2. That this does at least hold till they be
convicted and censured by their due Superior, and you know it is questioned
whether you, as a private Presbyter, ought to have that power. But, 3. That you
have a power of suspending refractory persons till you acquaint the Bishop, and
with him you have that power of convincing and persuading, which seems as much
as your self desire, so that even upon this account you have no reason to
complain.

MY second Argument was from experience even in Ecclesiasticals; XXXIII
to which you answer, that It Is hard then to know any thing, and that you
dispute all this while as if the question were, Whether men in England speak
English; that therefore if you herein err, you profess your self incurable,
and allow me to despair of you. If I had disputed from present experience in
England, I should have confessed your Answer proper, that I had endeavored to
conquer your sense and experience, as you elsewhere express it. But I wonder
how you could understand me so, considering that our present want of discipline
was the reason of my desire of its revival, whence you took the occasion of
these Disputes. My meaning was, that in the primitive times, when Bishops were
indeed laborious and conscientious, and were willing and desirous to do what
they could do, experience showed that discipline was actually maintained under
such a Diocesan Government; and therefore I concluded, that the multitude of
persons governed was not the reason of our present neglects. And what is it
that is scrupled in this Discourse, or need put you to those unequal
resolutions of being uncurable? Is it whether the number of Christians in
Dioceses were equal then with what we have now? This was proved in my former
Letter. Or that the Bishop then challenged the same power over the Presbytery
as now? This I have but lately proved. Or that discipline was then maintained.
This I do not find that you deny. Nay certainly your self thought discipline
maintainable under it, when you professed your self ready to yield to such an
Episcopacy. Or that what was then performed by the same Government, is still
performable, if men would be the same? The admission of this would not oblige
you to question your self or experience. Nor indeed is any thing of this kind
concerning antiquity as notorious to you, as what men do at present in England.

FOR proving the great multitudes then subject to Diocesan Discipline I said,
XXXIV
That the greatness of no City was thought sufficient to multiply Bishops. To
this you answer, 1. That Gods Institution was, that every Church have a Bishop,
for which you quote Acts 14. 23. etc. But, 1. The place you refer me to has no
mention of a Divine Institution; for Apostolical practice is not a sufficient
proof of that, and this is all which is so much as intimated in this place. 2.
It does not as much as mention the word Bishop, but that of Presbyter. And
though the words were granted to have been then confounded; yet you know they
were so afterward when the things were certainly distinct. And therefore you
cannot conclude from the word Presbyter, that a Bishop was meant, especially in
the sense wherein it was afterward appropriated. Nor, 3. Is it evident that by
(...) is meant a single Presbyter in every particular Church, as in a Parish;
but it may as well be meant of Presbyteries as Presbyters. And when afterward
the Presidency of a single Monarch was introduced, no Churches and Presbyteries
but such as had Bishops, and were Diocesan in the sense we now understand the
word. And if they were Presbyteries, you cannot hence disprove the presidency
of one over the rest, as we find it soon after practiced. Nor, 4. Is it evident
that by (...) must needs be meant a Parish, as it concerns you to believe. For
the word Church is as applicable to great as small Societies, and the great
ones may as well be called one in their kind, though they be capable of a
further subdivision into many Churches of smaller denomination. Thus the
Catholic Church is called one in the Constantinopolitan Creed, though
consisting of many national, and the Church of England but one national Church,
though consisting of two Provincial; and the Province of Canterbury but one
Provincial Church, though consisting of several Diocesan; and every Diocese but
one Diocesan Church, though consisting of several Parishes. And even in the
Scripture there are several notions of the word of different proportions. There
are the (...), and there are the two or three gathered in the name of Christ,
which from the coherence, and the Jewish notions of Assemblies, seem to make up
a Church, Exhort. Cast.
and accordingly Tertullian calls an Assembly of two or three a Church, though
consisting only of Laics. And yet these Churches are so little serviceable to
your purpose, as that I believe you would not be for confining a private
Presbyter to so small a cure, I am sure they are much beneath those populous
Parishes which you do not seem to disapprove. Supposing therefore I should
grant you, that every distinct Church should have a distinct Bishop; yet how
will you prove with the least plausibility, that this Church must be understood
of a Parochial one, that the multitude of Bishops may answer that of Parishes?
Especially considering that the notion of the word for a Parochial Church will
not be so easily deduced from Scripture, as that for a Diocese. For thus much
the Independents, I think, do prove sufficiently, that a whole Church in those
times did generally meet in one place; but they fail in proving distinction of
Churches in Cities, though never so great and populous, which two put together
do plainly amount to our notion, not of a Parochial, but Diocesan Church, there
appearing no footsteps in those times of any Subdivisions allotted to
particular Presbyters. Besides, if we may believe the (...) here parallel with
those (...), Tit. l. 5. as in all likelihood they are; then a Church will be
that which will extend to the Liberties of a whole City. And because you find
no mention of distinct Presbyters for Villages recommended to Titus's care it
seems very probable that they were sufficiently provided for by those of the
City, and therefore that they had some dependence on them. That the name of
Churches was attributed first to Cities, see proved by the Excellent Dr.
Stilling fleet, Iren. p. 2. c. 7. 2, 4.

FOR that the Apostles did take care even for Villages we have the express
Testimony of S. Clemens Romanus, XXXV.
(that (...)) if these words be understood as commonly they are. p. 54. edit.
Junii.
But I confess it does not seem to me so clear, that by (...) here is
understood those Country Villages, which are obnoxious to the Jurisdiction of
the City; but rather Regiones, as it is translated, not as Rome and
Constantinople were divided into their Regiones answerable to our Wards, but as
it may in a larger sense signify whole Provinces, under which many Cities
might be comprehended (my Reasons I would give if I were not unwilling to
digress;) much less am I satisfied with Blondell's Conjecture, who conceives it
to relate to the Chorepiscopi, and thence concludes that they were not
originally subject to the City Bishop. For though (...) were indeed taken in
the sense he is concerned it should be; yet there is no necessity that it
should be referred to (...), as if distinct Bishops had been imposed over them
from those of the Cities to which they were related, but may conveniently
enough be joined with (...), to signify their preaching in the Villages as
well as Cities, and their election of fit persons from both for Bishops and
Deacons, to be disposed of where they thought convenient. However it were, it
seems very probable that the Apostles, as they planted Christianity first in
Cities, so they seemed to have settled the Government there first; and as they
generally left the Villages to be converted by excursions from the Cities, so
it seems most credible, that the influences of the Government must have
followed that of the propagation of their Doctrine. Certainly the (...)
mentioned by Ignatius, in his Inscription of his Epistle to the Romans, over
which the Church of Rome is said (...), cannot in the narrowest exposition
choose but include a Precinct as large as our ordinary Dioceses. But, 5.
Supposing all had been as you would have them, that it had been enjoined by the
Apostles, that every Parochial Church should have a distinct Bishop; yet how
can you prove that it was an Injunction of an immutable and eternally-obliging
nature, (as it is clear that some, that of abstaining from blood, Acts 15. was
not.) For if they be not, you ought not to urge them to the prejudice of
superinduced Constitutions. But lastly, all that you can hence pretend for your
purpose is only, that the having only one Bishop in the appropriated sense in
a Diocese, was not conformable to the sense of the Apostles. But it does not
thence follow, that discipline is not maintainable under such a Government,
which was the only thing for whose proof I produced it. You answer, 2. That a
particular Church was a Society of neighbor Christians convened in personal
communion for Gods worship. I confess personal communion was generally
practiced with the Bishop, but I have proved it to be of whole Cities, and such
great Assemblies as could not be served by a single person, (without the
assistance of a Presbytery, which the Bishop had for his help;) and therefore
could not be Parochial in the sense of the word now commonly used. If you
think otherwise, when you prove it I may then, and not till then, be concerned
to think of a further Answer.

YOU answer 3. That for 250 years you think I cannot prove, XXXVI
that any one Bishop in the world (save at Alexandria and Rome) had more such
congregations and altars than one; nor there for a long time after the
Apostles, nor in many Churches for some hundred years longer. The is the same
mistake as before, to think them answerable to our Parishes, who did then all
communicate at one altar; whereas indeed the fame circuit and number of
Inhabitants, who had first been governed by the Bishop and his Presbytery in
common, no particular Presbyter having nay proper portion assigned him, but by
the provisional commands of the Bishop, was afterward distributed into parts
proportionable to the number of the Presbytery, that so every one might know
his own work. And I pray, what essential difference is there betwixt the same
Presbyteries, as acting in common as they did at first with the Bishop; and
distributed into several divisions as they are now, unless it be that this
later is more convenient? And if the Bishop was major universis when they acted
in conjunction with him; why must he be minor singulis, or at least aequalis,
when dispersed to their several distinct Employments? If all of them when
united might not attempt any thing without his consent and privity; why must
each of them be allowed that liberty when deprived of their united forces? And
if discipline was maintainable by them, when by acting in common they were more
remote from particular exploration; why should it not be much more so when none
is invited to be negligent by trusting to another, as men are apt to do in
cases of common concernment, and when each of them has a task proportionable to
his own abilities? But, 2. Suppose that this subdivision of the Diocese into
Parishes, (which is all that you can pretend to have been attempted at Rome and
Alexandria, for by this means it fell out by accident, that there were several
altars under the Jurisdiction of the same Bishop) had not answered the
primitive example, nay had been a culpable, not a lawful prudential Innovation;
yet will you say that discipline was not maintained, when it was actually
(however upon other accounts) culpably introduced? If you grant it was, that is
sufficient for my purpose, to show that the experience of those times has
evinced the possibility of discipline under a Diocesan Government, and
therefore that it is practicable even now if men would but endeavor it. If you
say it was not, you must then charge the most celebrated Churches in the purest
earliest Ages with want of discipline. For in Rome the first division into
Titles (answerable to our Parishes) is attributed to Pope Euaristus, Under
Domitian in the year 83, according to Eurychius.
(who came into his See Anno Dom. 112.) by the Author de Vit. Pontif. commonly
ascribed to Damasus. For afterward in the two Epistles of Pius (which are of
better repute with Blondell than the others that bear his Name) to Justus
Viennens. we find mention of two Titles then newly established by Euprepia and
the Pastor; so that I think this division there (if we may trust these Authors
for it; and if we may not, you will have no ground of charging the Romans of
those Ages with plurality of Altars more than in other places) will appear to
have been as soon as they had any settled places to meet in. For before that
their meetings seem to have been ambulatory and uncertain; sometimes in the
Temple, sometimes in the (...), sometimes in secret places, particularly in the
Coemeteria, (for of some of these may the passages of 1 Cor. 11. and the
ancient Author of Philopatris in Trajan's time, who bears the name of Lucian,
be understood) and then it was not so convenient to subdivide into Parishes,
when there were not any settled places peculiarly designed and convenient for
Parochial Assemblies. Upon which account there will be no reason that the
necessitous examples of the former Age should prejudge against the prudence and
conveniences of this. But the Titles mentioned by Pius, as left by Legacy, seem
to have been perpetually alienated to the use of the Church, and therefore
fitter for this purpose. Which if it be supposed, then the antiquity of diverse
Altars in the same Diocese will be equal with Churches and Parishes which you
do not condemn, and as ancient as they could be with any tolerable convenience,
and you cannot blame them for being no sooner. And sure you will not deny, that
even then, and a long while after, discipline was maintained among the
Romanists themselves. If you do, you must contradict all the histories of that
Age, which mention the Martyrdoms of their Bishops of those Ages, together with
very many of their other Clergy and Laity for several Successions; Tertul.
and the great Elogies of Tertullian and S. Cyprian, Praescr.
and the confident Appeals to the Roman Church as well as others, Iren. l. 3.
adv. Hoer.
for the Assertion on of Apostolical Tradition, used frequently by the Fathers
against the Heretics; whereas a sensible decay in discipline would have
weakened their credit even in Doctrinals. And for the other Instance of
Alexandria, the first mention that we find of a subdivision there is in the
time of Arius, who is said to have been Presbyter of a Church called Baucalis,
upon which occasion Epiphanius tells us, (...) ( so it is to be read) (...).
Epiphan. Haeres. 69. N. 1. Vide etiam Haeres. 68. N. 4.
That the Churches of the Catholic Communion in Alexandria, under the
Jurisdiction of the same Archbishop, had their particular Presbyters assigned
them, for the Ecclesiastical necessities of the Inhabitants, which divisions
were by the Alexandrians, according to the custom of their Country, called
(...). But it is not mentioned as an Innovation in or near his time, and
therefore is in all probability to be presumed much more ancient. And if the
custom of the eldest Presbyters succeeding in order to the Episcopacy, was in
Alexandria, (where it seems observed as a special custom) practiced from the
Apostles time to Heraclas, (who was Scholar to Origin) as S. Hierom and
Eutychius say it was, and there ceased at S. Hierom seems to intimate, then it
would be very probable that this subdivision into (...) was introduced at least
before that time of Heraclas; because some relics of that practice remained
even in Arius his time, whose place as Presbyter of Baucalis is made next to
the Bishop. Act. Council. Nicen. l. 2. c. 1.
(So Gelasius Cyricenus speaking concerning Alexander, (...).) Whence also the
relation in Nicephorus Calistus of the quarrel of Arius with one Baucalus,
being the first and second Presbyters of that Church of Alexandria, which is
given as an occasion of his Heresy; a story very probably raised by occasion
of his mistaking Baucalis the name of his Parish for the name of a Man, who is
made second because Arius was known to be the first. For this Precedeny of
Arius is no way probable to have been because of his longer standing in his
office of Presbytery, seeing Alexander is said expressly to have given him it,
who was the first that made him Presbyter, for he was only made Deacon by
Achillas the Predecessor of Alexander. Now Alexander himself is by Baronius
thought to have succeeded Achillas in the Year 311, and if he be mistaken,
seems rather to err in placing him too soon after Peter, and the difference
betwixt him and Arius arose about the Year 315, not above four years after, too
small a time to make him in course the senior Presbyter. This Precedence
therefore seems to be upon account of his Parish, which at the first
distribution had in all probability been allotted to that Presbyter, who had
been senior in due course of standing, which therefore seems to have been
introduced whilst that seniority was observed, that is, at least before the
time of Heraclas.

AND how long before Heraclas his time this distinction might have been
introduced you cannot tell; XXXVII.
yet I believe you will hardly say, I am sure much more hardly prove, that
discipline failed there in the time of Heraclas, or for a long time after. Apud
Eusebius. l. 4. c. 40, 41. l. 7. 10, 11.
After Heraclas, how much the Church of Alexandria and himself particularly
suffered for Christianity, you have fully related by his Successor Dionysius in
Eusebius, in the time of Decius and Valerian; and how severe they were in their
Fasts, appears from the Canonical Epistle of that same Dionysius to Basilides,
besides his other penitential Treatise now lost. What the Alexandrians also
suffered in the most bloody Persecution of Dioclesian, ^. 8. c. 10, 12, 13.
you may find in the same Eusebius, and particularly in Thebais, (which by the
Nicene Canon establishing the (...) we find to have been influenced by the
Alexandrian Discipline) the number of Martyrs was so great as to denominate a
famous Epoch, which those Countries observe to this day, called the Annus
Martyrum or Dioclesiani. Which severity is by so much the more remarkable,
because it followed an intervall of rest, which usually corrupts that
discipline which is only voluntary, and unseconded by good Laws. I need not
mention the Martyrdom of their Bishop S. Peter in this Persecution; his very
severe Canonical Epistle is sufficient to show how rigorous discipline was then
practiced, when in the height of persecution such severe Penances against
lapsed persons were not judged unseasonable to be exercised on such persons,
over whom they had no coercive power, but the obligation of the Penitents
conscience. I might have proceeded to have shown the same severity still
maintained in that City, (which you so particularly reflect on as unworthy to
be made a precedent) during the Prelacy of Alexander and the great Athanasius,
from the great Elogies given to those excellent Prelates by the Fathers, and
the courage shown by them, in ejecting and keeping out Arius, and the very
slight Exceptions urged by the Arians their Enemies against them, especially in
the several Synods convened in the cause of Athanasius. Eusebius. l. 9. c. 8.
But for evincing the general severity of the Lives of Christians, that
memorable Example of their great diligence in providing for those who had been
formerly their severest Persecutors, in the great Plague and Famine which
immediately followed the Persecution of Dioclesian, and venturing many of their
own lives in the service, when they had been deserted by their nearest Friends,
may be an illustrious evidence. Besides the Controversy betwixt S. Pet. of
Alexandria and Meletius, Epiph.
the occasion of the Meletian Schism, Haeres. 68. N. 3.
shows how generally the Alexandrians were affected to discipline. For when S.
Pet. though severe enough against lapsed persons, as appears by his
forementioned Epistle, yet thought it a necessary Indulgence to admit Penitents
to Communion during the Persecution, even Priests as well as others, that they
might be the better animated to new occasions of sufferings; Meletius opposed
it, and was followed by much the greater part of the Clergy. Nor ought you to
conclude, that the like subdivision was not introduced into other Churches,
because we have no Records attesting it to have been so, seeing there is so
little extant of the Histories of those earlier Centuries, much less any thing
so minute and particular in describing the Customs of particular Churches, as
that it would be safe to argue negatively, from their omission of a custom to
conclude that there was none. For my design, it is sufficient that the ancient
Dioceses had as many Presbyters, besides other Clergy requisite to rule them,
in conjunction with the Bishop, as are now thought sufficient, since their
distribution into particular Parishes; besides the Chorepiscopi and the Clergy
under them, all subject to the Government of the City Bishop. Which is enough
to show, that the charge of a Diocese was as great then as now, and much beyond
what you would have it, the abilities of a particular person without Parochial
Subrulers.

4. YOU say, XXXVIII.
At Antioch (the third Patriarchate) Ignatius professes that every Church had
one Altar, and one Bishop with his Presbyters and Deacons, Fellow Servants.) If
you mean every Church at Antioch, as if that or any other City in that time,
had more than one Bishop presiding over a Presbytery; that is more than you
will find in Ignatius, or any Authentic Writer of that time. But if you mean
at Antioch as a Patriarchate, that is, within that circuit which was afterward
subject to the Bishop of Antioch as a Patriarch, including the whole Oriental
Diocese, there were many Cities that had in them but one Altar with one Bishop
and his Clergy, that I have already granted probable; but have withal shown
how little it will advantage your Cause, or prejudice mine, and I am not
desirous to trouble you with Repetition. The name of Fellow Servants I doubt
you misunderstand; it is indeed true if related to God, that persons of all
Orders in the Church are his Fellow Servants; but if you mean it (as I doubt
you do) that they are Servants coequal among themselves, that is clearly
against the whole current of Ignatius his Epistles, and against the supposition
of their being distinct Orders; and, I believe, against your own opinion
concerning Priests and Deacons, whom I think you will not say to be thus
coequal. But for what you add further, (as if you had it out of the same
Ignatius, though indeed you have not scored it as you did the former part) That
in this one Church the Bishop must enquire The place intended is I believe Ep.
ad. Polycrap. (...), etc. p. 139. Ed. Vsser.
all by name, even Servant Men and Maids, and see that they absented not
themselves from the Church; whence you ask, Why is not Ignatius. confuted if he
erred? and refer me to Mr. Mede on the point. I am confident that you will find
no such thing in Ignatius or Mr. Mede that will need confuting. For this
inquiry by name need not have been performed by personal visitation of them,
but by Schedules delivered to him by his subordinate Clergy, which if any of
our Bishops would do, I should be so far from offering to confute, as that I
should highly honor and reverence him for it.

BUT you say, XXXIX
5. That Alexandria and Rome by not multiplying Bishops as Churches or Converts
needed it, began the great sin and calamity which has undone us, and therefore
are not to be our pattern. If you mean by Bishops your Parish Ministers, (as you
seem to do) who must have no greater charge than one particular person,
unassisted with a Presbytery, may give a particular account of; then sure you
cannot but know, that as they are by you thought singular in introducing this
distinction of Altars in the same City; so they must have been so in
multiplying such a kind of Bishops that might attend them, at least in more
accurately proportioning them to the multitudes of Churches and Converts. But
if you mean a multitude of Parish Priests, whom you would fain call Bishops,
independent on a principal President; then it would concern you to prove, 1.
That Alexandria and Rome were herein singular, which you will find impossible
to be done. And, 2. That their guilt herein was not only an occasion (for
occasions of evil cannot be proved evil, and so unfit for being paterns) but
natural causes of that grand sin and calamity you so lament.

YOU answer or rather argue, XL.
6. That were Bishops necessarily to be distributed by Cities, the Empires that
have few or no Cities, must have few or no Bishops; and an Emperor might (
aliud agendo) depose all the Bishops by disfranchising the Cities. This does
not show the impossibility of a Bishops maintaining discipline in a City that
is great and populous, (which is indeed our question) but only the
inconvenience of scrupulously multiplying Bishops according to the multitude of
Cities. And that, as it is not to our purpose, so I know no Adversary you have
in it. For there are no humane Establishments whatsoever that can fit all
circumstances; yet are not such possible inconvenient cases thought sufficient
to abrogate them though known and foreseen. And therefore it were not in
prudence a sufficient reason for the Church to alter her general rule of
multiplying Bishops by Cities, because the cases mentioned by you are but rare
and improbable, which kind are not taken notice of by humane Legislators. They
are rare; for where will you find that Empire that has few or no Cities, at
least in those civilized parts of the world they were then acquainted with?
They are improbable; for the administration of justice among Subjects, and the
encouragement of traffic, which are the Governors Interests, do require such
Privileges to be given to places not too distant from each other. But if the
inconveniences were greater than indeed they are, and sufficient to persuade a
deviation from such a general rule in such cases. Yet, 1. The Church never
acknowledged any unalterable divine obligation to observe it, but has always
reserved a power to her self of deviating in such cases, of which she might be
satisfied that they were sufficiently momentous. And, 2. She has in such cases
actually taken the liberty of exerting her own power; as in those Nations which
had but one Bishop, though many Cities, of which instances were already given;
and in those places where Cities too numerous, and too little frequented,
against which she has made those express Canons, Can. 6. Council. Sandicens.
that Bishops should not be placed over them, Can. 57. Conc. Laodic. Epist.
ne vilesceret nomen Episcopi, 1. Pseudo-Clementin. ad Jacob. ep. 1.
Pseudo-Anacleti and Did. 80. ep. 3. Pseudo-Anacleti n. 2.
which those of your Persuasion do so often take notice of with offense.

BUT, XLI.
7. You say, Every Corporation, Oppidum, like our Market Towns, was then truly
(...). And if we will procure every such City with us to have a Bishop, and the
office of such Bishops to be to drive men from sin, and not to it; and to
silence Blasphemers, not faithful Preachers of the Gospel; all our
Controversies of Prelacy are then at an end. But I fear though you had your
desire, that in analogy to Cities Bishops should be multiplied according to the
number of Cities, (which Rule you lately seemed to dislike) and that every
Market Town should be accounted a City, as you conceive it to have been
practiced among the Ancients, and that Bishops discharged their duty as you
have described it; yet you would hardly suffer our Controversies to end so,
especially if you acted consequently to your own Principles. For you know, by
the same rule that small Cities, as you have described them, must have distinct
Bishops; the greatest that are, London it self for example, must have but one,
together with the Villages about it; and I doubt that would be found to be a
charge as disproportionable to the abilities of a single man, as some of our
Country Dioceses, especially here in Ireland. The 15th. part in Taxes, 14th.
really, p. 83, 84
Nay, by Captain Grants Calculation London bears a greater proportion to all
England than any single Diocese, which is only the 25th. part. Now according
to your Principles, our Communion qua Diocesan, that is, if I understand you as
exceeding the abilities of a single man, is not to be embraced. Therefore even
in this case you must refuse to communicate with the Church of London. And
considering that in communicating with a particular, you do communicate with
all with whom that particular Church holds Communion, (for Communion with a
particular Church is no where understood as a profession of union with her
alone, but also with all such whom she accounts orthodox members of the
Catholic Church) you must by the same sequel conceive your self obliged to
decline the Communion of all particular Churches communicating with London.
Unless therefore you suppose a Schism of all other Churches from her, you must
make one from them; and so be in the same condition wherein you are at present.
I confess you do not act consequently to this later Principle, whilst you
refuse not our Parish Communion, which communicates with our Diocesan qua
Diocesan; and so I had much rather decline the Dispute, than urge you too far
to approve your self more rational by your being more uncharitable, which may
too probably be the event if you should prove too tenacious of your present
Opinions. But I believe, Sir, if you would be pleased to examine, you would
certainly find your self mistaken in thinking their ordinary Cities to have
been no more considerable than our ordinary Market Towns; for sure you know
that then as well as now Cities were the highest denomination; and that in
those flourishing Countries, proportionably much more populous than England, it
is likely their Cities were accordingly frequented. Nay, most of the Cities of
those times, especially the Oriental the Greeks and Asiaticks, had been little
Republics among themselves, before the success of war had subdued them to the
yoke of a common Master, which must in all likelihood have made them more
considerable, when their Governors care and interests were more confined to
them, than if they had originally been included in a greater Society. Besides
the wars waged by them, and the resistance made against numerous Armies, and
the multitude and capaciousness of their Temples and Theaters, then so frequent
in ordinary Cities, (as you may see for the small Tract of Greece very fully in
Pausanias, besides what other Authors have mentioned occasionally concerning
that and other places) are sufficient Arguments of their ordinary populousness.
And considering that those Cities that were among them eminent for greatness,
did rather exceed than fall short of those which are accounted so now; we have
reason to believe that the common Cities did likewise hold the like proportion.

NAY, XLII.
according to all the qualifications of our modern Cities, those ancient ones
were every way as considerable as ours. They were Towns corporate among
themselves. This appears from the Government mentioned as exercised among them;
the (...), Acts 19. 39. the (...), and (...), and (...), so very frequently
mentioned in Greek Cities, and the Praetors and Aedibes among the Latins. They
were walled, whence the ordinary Etymology of Urbs quasi Orbis, from the
compass allotted for the walls by the plow, and the customs for plowing, for
founding, and demolishing their walls, so famous among the Romans. And the same
you may observe to have been the general custom; for you will, I believe, never
meet any mention of City a unwalled, though possibly not with those ceremonies
and formalities. And this seems to have been one of their principal
distinctions from places of a near, but inferior account; that the O^^ida
among the Latins, and the (...) among the Greeks, were not walled as our
Market Towns usually are not. They had Suburbs subject to their Jurisdiction
frequently mentioned in the Scriptures, particularly those of the Levites,
Numb. 35. 5. have 2000 cubits on every side without the walls, which is near a
mile. So the Romans had their Pomoeria and Suburbana, and the Greeks their
(...) or (...) obvious in Authors. And besides these Suburbs there were several
places of inferior denomination subject to the ancient Cities; these you have
frequently mentioned Josh. 16. and in several other passages of that and other
Books of Scripture, and are rendered Towns in our English Translation, Vici and
Villulae, Castella, and sometimes Oppida, in the Vulgar; (...) and (...) in the
LXXII. And expressly Aristotle defines a City (...). Polit. l. 1. c. 2.
And as the Grecians had their (...) subject to their Cities, so the Romans
particularly had their Pagos, places of some natural advantage for strength, to
which the Rusticks might have a ready recourse in time of danger, instituted by
Servius Tullius, yet subject to their City, as you may see in Halicarnassaeus;
whence you know the name Paganus first signified a Country Clown, in opposition
to a Citizen, or a person of civil education. And generally through Italy you
may find mention of Vici and Villae and Oppida, and the Ager denominated from
the City, who in all affairs of consequence had recourse to their neighboring
Cities. And besides the Examples now mentioned from the Scriptures, the same
practice seems to have been observed in other Oriental parts, as appears from
Isidorus Characenus, who in his Parthick Stages mentions not only (...) but
(...), in contradiction to Cities; as also in Xenophon in exped. Cyr. And that
they were subject to the Cities might have been shown from the manner of their
Census described by S. Luke 3. 2. that they were to be taxed in their own
Cities, which seems to have been the common custom of the whole Roman Empire,
and the ordinary practice of the men of those Ages, to denominate themselves
from the City they had relation to, though born in the Villages, and their
usual recourse on solemn occasions to the City Sacrifices, a practice very much
conformed to their secular dependences by the ancient Legislators; besides
their repairing thither for secular justice. But besides all this, the right of
a City was given to places, not upon account of their greatness and
populousness, but by special Charter. A clear instance hereof we have in 13
Action of the Council of Chalcedon; there we find Anastatius Nicaenus pleading
a a right to Basilinopolis, because it had been formerly a Region of Nice,
(what Regions were, is notorious from the divisions of Rome and Constantinople
into them) till it was made a City by Julian or some other Emperor. Here we
see a place so considerable, as that it was afterward made a City, yet
formerly only a Ward of another City, which Ward was in all likelihood
equivalent our ordinary Market Towns. Nay more than that, for he gives
instances of two such others, Tatiens and Doris, that were then acknowledged
Regions of Nice. We see also this Region raised to the dignity of a city by the
Imperial Rescript. And further he proves the dependence of Basilinopolis on
Nice by this argument, that the Emperor who made it a City took (...) or
Curiales, (whence the Imperial Rescripts themselves are frequently called
Pragmatica) from Nice; and that the custom was still observed, that the
Vacancies of Basilinopolis, as they fell, were supplied from Nice, and that
they were frequently translated from thence back to Nice again; and that thus
that which had formerly been a Region became a City. Where several things are
observable to my purpose: 1. That that which made the Region a City, was the
having Courtofficers of their own, whence it appears that Courts were
appropriated to Cities, and that therefore all other Towns not thus privileged
must have been subject to the Jurisdiction of the Cities. 2. That these Courts
were granted by special Charter of the Emperor. And, 3. that the borrowing
these Officers from another City, if constantly observed, signified some
secular dependence of such a place on such a City, from whence they were
borrowed. And now I pray what an such a Town walled, incorporated, and having
Jurisdiction, not only over Suburbs, but a proportion of the Villages and
Towns adjacent, by special Imperial Charters, want of our modern notion of a
City, even as contradistinct to our Market Towns?

AND that the Government of the Church was proportioned to that of the State is
so commonly observed by learned Men, XLIII
as that I cannot think it necessary to be tedeous in proving it. And that in
this very particular of the subjection of the (...) to the City Bishop, appears
from the 17th. Canon of this same Council, where it is not only for this, but
all other affairs of a like nature, established as a general Rule, (very
probably occasioned by the forementioned Controversy;) (...). And though we
had no express Testimony, yet the multitude of the Clergy requisite for the
Government of their ordinary (...), a whole Presbytery in the City, besides the
Deacons, and the other inferior Orders there, and others in the Country
subject to the Chorepiscopus or (...), and all subject to the City Bishop, do
plainly show that the Bishops Jurisdiction, if not as large as now, was at
least much larger than our ordinary Market Towns, which usually have but one
Parish, and are therefore thought sufficiently governable by an ordinary single
Presbyters. And this form of governing Cities was so universal, as that your
Assertion to the contrary is not credible even in Africa, or any other place
where Bishops or Cities are observed to have been most frequent or numerous:
But if it had indeed been otherwise in some singular places, yet it is plain
that the general rate of Cities among the Ancients was equal to ours. Whence it
will follow, that the Dioceses generally designed were such as ours are now,
though in some particular more anomalous Instances they were (it may be) as
small as you would have them. Whence two things will follow very apposite to my
design: 1. That the Judgment of those Ages themselves were certainly more for
us than you, seeing their judgment is only to be concluded from their general
rules, not from their particular anomalous practices. And, 2. that the case of
discipline must have been the same with them as us. For the general observation
of discipline cannot be effected by singular, but general practices and
designs. Whence it will be easy to infer, that if discipline was then
generally observed, then it is observable under a Diocesan Government, in the
sense we are now disputing concerning it. For such I have proved to have been
generally practiced then, and if it was observed then, you can give no
disparity why it may not be so now, if Governors would be equally industrious.

YOUR intimation concerning to Bishops you would have in your Par^chial
Dioceses; XLIV
(that their office must be to drive men from sin, and not to it and to silence
Blasphemers, and not faithful Preachers of the Gospel;) as if our Bishops were
guilty of the contrary, is methinks very sharp and uncharitable. We are all
agreed, you as well as we, that this is our Diocesan Bishops office. Our only
difference is, that you conceive their actual practice to be otherwise. But I
pray consider seriously what good meaning you can have herein if your desire
had been granted? Is it that the Bishop must not do that which himself thinks
to be driving men to sin? You cannot but know that they pretend, (and how can
you know that they do not really believe) their prosecutions of Dissenters to
be not a driving them to sin, but from it, from disobedience to that which they
think lawful Ecclesiastical Government, and from those Separations which
themselves judge Schismatical, and from the defense and malice of unlawful
Oaths. And certainly what they think to be Disobedience and Schism, and the
maintaining of unlawful Oaths, your self (...) blame them if they believe them
(...) (...) And the Preachers silenced by (...) not by them thought faithful
(...) of the Gospel, at least not in the (...) of their silencing; but
^^eachers of (...) and Founders and Fomenters of parties, to the great weakening
of the common Interest of the Gospel. And can you think it faulty in them to be
zealous against them, whom they conceive to be such enemies to the Gospel, at
least while they think them so, and profess themselves unable to find any
reason to think otherwise? Or do you mean that the Bishop must not drive to
that which the Criminal will pretend to be a sin, or prosecute that which he
calls faithful Preaching of the Gospel? If so, you had dealt more plainly to
have denied the Bishop any power at all to drive men from sin, or silence
Blasphemers; than to grant him it, and yet to make it useless and
unpracticable, as it must needs be if he must not practice it till the Sinner
or Blasphemers confess themselves so, for how rarely do you find real Criminals
plead guilty at the Bar? Besides that, by this means the most innocent if any
must only suffer; and the most dangerous must generally escape. For they who
confess their crime must generally be presumed penitent, and they who are so
are almost innocent, if we may believe the Tragedian; but he who denies his
guilt, aggravates it by the disingenuity of his Apology. Besides, he who
confesses himself a Sinner or a Blasphemer, is only chargeable with a personal
guilt; but he who denies sins and blasphemies to be sins, sins more heinously,
not only sinning himself, but teaching others to do so too. Nor is the
multitude only more considerable, that is drawn aside by this later sort of
disingenuous sinners, but the quality of the persons seduced, and the greatness
of their danger is much more considerable, than in those who are prejudiced by
the former. For none are likely to be seduced by professed debauchees, but such
as are ill-inclined themselves. But they who are deceived by them who teach ill
principles, not only defending sins ad excusing them, but pretending them to
be duties, are usually such who are of the best lives, and the most innocent
meaning, whose Errors are like to be authenticated by their personal authority
and reputation. And those who acknowledge their sins are more easily
recoverable, their own consciences being ready upon any occasion to join with
external conviction whenever offered to them; but they who mistake their sins
for the service of God, do both alienate their minds from conviction, by laying
out their zeal against hearing or impartial considering that which they look on
as a temptation; and in the event resolve their conviction into an issue of
more difficult proof. For it is generally more easy even to the meanest most
popular capacity, to prove a matter of fact than a matter of right, how
unquestionable soever. Certainly you would your self acknowledge him to be much
the greater and more dangerous person, who should preach for drunkenness, and
maintained it to be an evangelical duty, and call this his Preaching a faithful
preaching of the Gospel, and accordingly be guilty of it, without any thing of
remorse or shame, than he who should ingenuously confess his guilt and
blame-worthiness for it.

NOW this you know is the sense of Superiors concerning Dissenters; XLV
they think that to be their Subjects duty, which their Subjects pretend to be
sins. And can you blame them for obliging their Subjects to perform their duty?
If you do, you will thereby make their Government useless and unsignificant.
They think Schism to be a sin really much greater than those which sound louder
in the vulgar esteem, than drunkenness, etc. and more nearly relating to their
trust as Governors, as being more directly prejudicial to the public, to take
care of which is their peculiar office as Governors. They think that which is
called faithful preaching of the Gospel, not to be for reforming of men's lives,
which is the great design of the Gospel, (for God be praised we do not differ
in Subjects of that kind, but men may be as zealous as they please against
vice, though Conformists) but the constituting and perpetuating of Schism,
which is by so much the more dangerous by how much it is more palliated by
specious titles, such as is that now mentioned; so that though themselves may
believe them faithful in other things, yet in this they are far from thinking
them so, and therefore as far from prosecuting them as faithful Preachers. And
I believe your self will hardly pretend, that their fidelity in some things
must excuse their unfaithfulness in others. Or do you mean, that persons of a
pious conversation and conscientious, must not be driven to that which they
think sin, or from that which they think faithful Preaching of the Gospel? If
you mean that all truly pious conscientious persons ought to be treated with
all candor and respect, before severer means be used; or that the use of
severer means is utterly to be forborne, as far as may be, that is, as far as
such forbearance may be reconcilable with the public Interest, which is to be
preferred before the private of any single person how pious soever; I could for
my part heartily wish it were so too, and I believe most of the Bishops do
practice accordingly with those concerning whom they have entertained such a
good opinion, and do endeavor to show the same charitable demeanor to them on
earth, which they think God will in heaven.

BUT, XLVI
Sir, you know that they who are indeed free from carnal vices, and such as are
obnoxious to observation, may yet be guilty of spiritual, such as Obstinacy in
yielding to conviction, or Disobedience to Superiors, or Negligence in
inquiry, or too much prejudice or aversation to the persons or reasons of their
adversaries, before they have given them an equal hearing, or some such other
prejudice, which unawares seduces the very best and wisest persons; and their
guilt upon some of these accounts may be discerned and judged by their
Superiors, from their perverse demeanor under those milder Treatments. And
when it is discerned, though their innocence as to carnal crimes may indeed, in
prudence and charity, be thought sufficient for the expiation or preterition of
smaller delinquences, yet they can upon neither account be judged so, in regard
of crimes of a more heinous nature than their virtues are eminent, and of such
a kind would Schism and Factiousness appear to such as would equally and
soberly consider them. But suppose that Governors do indeed believe, that
their Subjects do bona fide believe as they profess, and conceive themselves
obliged in conscience to deny their due obedience, and to follow those factious
courses they were engaged in; yet sure you cannot think but that well meaning
men, as well as others, may be mistaken, and that very dangerously; nor does
their goodness secure their judgment from error, in thinking that evil which is
good, and on the contrary; but only their practice, that they are not likely
to be guilty of what themselves think evil, nor to be negligent of what
themselves think good. One would verily think, that Raviliac and several such
resolute persons, who engaged themselves without any private provocation, on
dangers they could never hope to escape, and much greater than any possible
secular ends, if in their wits, could have been animated by nothing to such
desperate enterprises, but only a strong persuasion of the goodness of their
cause, and the hope of future rewards. And yet you would not think that a
sufficient reason to exempt them from the severity of the Law. God may indeed
be merciful to such in regard of their pious intentions. But, 1. Their
practices by being acknowledged to need mercy, must be supposed blamable, not
commendable; S. Paul confesses himself the chief of sinners, in regard of those
persecutions, for which he owns his ignorance as the reason of his pardon. And,
2. Even God himself does often chastize them for the terror of others, with
temporal afflictions, whom he intends to spare in the world to come. A clear
example hereof we have in David, 2 Samuel 12. 13, 14. where after his sins of
murdering Uriah, and defiling Bathsheba, had been forgiven him; it is yet
expressly added, that because by this deed he had given occasion to the enemies
of God to blaspheme; the child that had been born of that adulterous mixture
should surely die. And therefore good men themselves, when guilty of Schism,
giving the like scandal to the enemies of the truth, and drawing others to the
like sin by their persuasion (...) example, may in this life be punished for
the good of others. And, 3. God himself cannot be thought merciful to men good
for all other things, and peccant only in one kind, especially if of so
heinous a nature, as Schism without their repentance, either particular by an
actual explicit confession and reformation of it when known; or general and
implicit, and in voto, when they are penitent for all sins unknown as well as
known, and are in a ready preparation of mind to use and accept of all moral
means of discovery, and to reform what might be convicted by such discovery how
dear soever otherwise. And this you know is the case of the Church in punishing
well meaning persons who are guilty of Schism. It is plain, that they are so
far from being penitent for what she thinks to be sin, as that they defend it,
and draw others to it. And as to general repentance, she thinks she has not
reason to believe it in them, when upon proposal of her reasons they show
themselves perverse, and factious, and incorrigible. If it be pretended, that
the Church may be mistaken in censures, I pray consider, 4. That she must act
according to her own conscience, though erroneous; and though God may prove
indeed indulgent to many persons, whom he as a searcher of their hearts may
know to be penitent; yet the Church being obliged to accommodate her demeanor
to them, to her own knowledge, may at the same time justly and commendably
prosecute them, if they seem otherwise to her. And I believe you will find it a
general occasion of your mistakes in this kind, that you look upon Superiors as
obliged to act according to your own private conscience. But if your self had
been a Governor, and had to do with a person of a reputation otherwise
unblamable, but yet notoriously guilty of some very remarkable offense coming
under your cognizance, and so far from being penitent for it, as that he should
defend it, and preach it to others, and call such Preaching a faithful
Preaching of the Gospel; I believe you would think your self more secure in
acting according to your own conscience, than that of the criminal, though you
might confess your self as liable to mistakes as him. And believe it, that it
is the most equal way to clear your self from prejudices, and to prevent
uncharitable censures to represent their case as if it had been your own.

YOU answer, XLVII.
8. That I must remember that great Cities had long but few Christians in
comparison of the Heathens till Constantine's time, and mostly long after. But,
1. Though this had indeed been true, yet it will not follow that the Government
must have been proportioned only to the necessities of those few, both because
Heathens as well as Christians, the reducing of Infidels, as well as the
government of Believers, belonged to their charge. Which must have been by so
much greater rather than less, as there was much more difficulty in reducing
one from his vicious practices as well as his opinions, to the severe rules of
Christianity, than to govern many, especially such good and excellent persons
as Converts were generally in those times, when actually reduced; and because
Christianity was in a growing condition, and therefore the Government was to be
proportioned to their future hopes, as well as their present fruitions. But, 2.
The supposition, That Christians were so few till Constantine's time or
afterward, is a great mistake. In the Church of Jerusalem we find 3000
converted by one Sermon, Acts 11. 41. besides those who had already been
converted by our Saviors personal Preaching, (which may be supposed to have
been very many, by the multitude that sung Hosannahs before him, which amazed
the whole City, and the terror of the Pharisees, who durst not seize on him by
force for fear of the people, and their profession, that all the world went
after him, etc.) and those who were afterward daily added, ver. 47. besides
5000 men more expressly said to have been converted by another Sermon, Acts 4.
4. and multitudes of men and women, chap. 5. 14. added through all Judaea,
under which Jerusalem was also comprehended) Acts 9. 31. And in the same place
after Herod Agrippa's death the Word of God further grew and multiplied, Acts
12. 24. and many thousands are mentioned (though imperfectly, for in the Greek
is (...) ten thousands) Acts 21. 20. Yet were all these under single Bishops,
S. James and his Successors, as far as History can inform us, though in all
likelihood this number was vastly increased, when most of the refractory Jews,
who most of all hindered the progress of the Gospel, were destroyed in the
Siege of Titus, and generally banished, when it was reedified by Adrian, and by
him called Aelia. This is very observable, because it is most likely to have
been established by the Apostles as a pattern for other Cities. But it was not
herein singular even in those times; for Samaria seems generally to have been
converted. This appears, in that all the people are said to have been deceived
by Simon Magus, Acts 8. 9. all from the least to the greatest, ver. 10. and the
same number seems to have been converted by S. Philip, and to have been
baptized both men and women, ver. 12. and therefore Samaria is said to have
received the word of God, ver. 14. Now the least that can be understood by
these expressions is, that much the greater part received the faith, which must
have very much exceeded the Government of a single solitary person. In the
Church of Antioch Ignatius his charge, (by which you in some part understand
the extent of the Diocesan Government mentioned in his Epistles) a great number
is said to have believed, Acts 11. 21. and after Barnabas his coming, much
people is said to have been added to the Lord, ver. 24. who are therefore to
have been supposed distinct from the former. And again, ver. 26. Saul and
Barnabas together for a year together taught much people, who there first
received the name of Christians, very probably from the great multitudes
observable there above other places adjacent, which could hardly have been so
likely, if they had not held some great proportion to the Inhabitants, which if
they did must have very much exceeded our ordinary Parochial Cures. For Antioch
was the third City of the Roman Empire in Secular as well as Ecclesiastical
Dignity; so in Antiochia Pisidiae many of the Jews and religious Proselytes
followed Paul and Barnabas, Acts 13. 43. And afterward almost all the City
came together to hear the word of God, ver. 44. and with what event may be
conceived from that which follows, ver. 48, 49. That the Gentiles were glad,
and glorified the word of the Lord; and as many as were ordained, to eternal
life believed: and that the word of the Lord was published in all regions.
Which, besides the opposition mentioned only by the Jews and devout and
honorable women, (that is, Proselytesses of the Gates, as some understand)
acted by them, ver. 50. must imply the number of Converts to have been
extremely considerable in proportion to the whole, which must have included a
great multitude, this City being a Metropolis of a Province. In Thessalonica
some (of the Jews) believed, and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of
the chief women not a few, Acts 17. 4. And in Beraea, another remarkable City,
they were more noble than those of Thessaloniea, ver. 11. And accordingly many
of the Jews believed; also of honorable women which were Greeks, and of men
not a few, v. 12. In Ephesus S. Timothy's Diocese, S. Paul himself disputes
first three months in the Synagogue, Acts 19. 8. afterward two years in the
school of Tyrannus; so that all which dwelt in Asia (that is, the Lydian or
Proconsular, whereof Ephesus was the Metropolis) heard the word of the Lord
Jesus, both Jews and Greeks, ver. 9. 10. fear came upon all of them; and the
name of the Lord Jesus was magnified, ver. 17. And you may guess at the great
multitude of Converts by the vast sum which their conjuring books then burnt
were valued at, 50000 pieces of silver, v. 19. which is observed by the Holy
Ghost himself, as an Argument how mightily the word of God grew and prevailed,
ver. 20. And it must argue a very great number, considering that books were a
commodity which is not to have been presumed a considerable part of the riches
of each, much less of that particular subject, (however the (...) be celebrated
among the Ancients) and the total number of the persons concerned must needs be
greater, by how much the particular proportions to be distributed among them
are likely to have been less to the particulars; and it is accordingly
observable, that no particular is noted to have been considerably impoverished
by so great a loss.

THESE are the most remarkable Cities mentioned in the Acts, XLVIII
which we have reason to believe to have abounded with numbers of Christians,
too great for the Cure of a single person. And it is to be considered, that as
in their preaching you find little mention of their preaching in villages, but
in Cities; so it is most credible that they left them to the care of the
Government established in the Cities. Whence it will follow, that the
Ecclesiastical as well as the Secular Government of Villages depended on the
Cities, and that therefore they were Dioceses in the modern extent, and that
the Government established in Cities seems to have been most agreeable to the
design of the Apostles. And of all Cities those are to be supposed most
accurately provided for by the Apostles, which were converted by their personal
preaching, and which in their times had numbers sufficient for Government; and
therefore if other places had deviated from the examples of these, as those in
Africa and Ireland, which you cannot prove to have been converted by the
Apostles, you ought rather to have corrected those by these, than as you
preposterously do, to confine the Dioceses converted and established by the
Apostles, to the dimensions of them which were not. But besides these Scripture
Arguments evincing the great number of Christians, even in the times of the
Apostles themselves; another may be drawn from the multitudes of Heresies,
which must have needs drawn great numbers from the Church, not only that swarm
which rose immediately after the decease of the Apostles, as the Basilidians,
Valentinians, etc. but also those who were contemporary with the Apostles
themselves as the Simonians, Nicolaitans, Ebionites, Corinthians, etc. For
though some few of these did, even in the Apostles times themselves, separate,
as is clear from 1 John 11. 19. and several other places of the Epistles, where
they are blamed and confuted, and the multitudes of them that perished in
Jerusalem in the Captivity; yet most of them did then act more covertly, and
were followed by smaller parties, in regard of what was done after the decease
of the Apostles, which is the reason why Hegesippus in Eusebius calls the
Church a pure Virgin till the time of Trajan, in whose time S. John the last of
them died, not long after his return from Patmos. Now if the Christians were so
numerous, as it appears they were, even after these deductions of their own
members by relapse, and the hinderance of the conversion of others, whom we
find to have been alienated at a greater distance by this scandal of the
multitude of their Sects, (for about that time we find it objected by Celsus,
who wrote his Book against the Christians under Hadrian, the immediate
Successor of Trajan, if we may believe Origin) we cannot think their number so
small as you conceive in the times of the Apostles, when they did not labor
under these disadvantages. But when they had overcome these difficulties, and
were exercised with new persecutions, it is strange how exceedingly they
increased. In Severus his time, about the Year of our Lord 201, Sect. 37. and
Anno 200. Sect. 7.
according to Baronius, Tertullian wrote his Apology, which was above 100
years before Constantine; yet even then there were such multitudes of
Christians, as that he prefers them before the Moors, and Marcomans, and
Parthians; as being spread over all the Roman world. His words, though they be
so known that I wonder that you forgot them, yet are withal so very pertinent
and full to my purpose, as that I think it necessary to transcribe them; thus
therefore he is in Cap. 37. Apolog. Plures nimirum Mauri and Marcomanni,
ipsique Parthi, vel quantaecunque unius tamen loci, and suorum finium, gentes,
quam totius orbis? Externi sumus, and vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas,
castella, mancipia, conciliabula, castra ipsa, tribus, decurias, palatium,
senatum, forum. Sola vobis relinquimus templa. Here you see Cities, and
throughout the whole world, (that is, according to the language of those times,
the Roman Empire) full of them. What can be more contrary to your Assertion?
Yet fullness may be understood with a latitude, for a great, though not the
greatest number. But that he understood the greatest, will easily appear from
what he afterward adds; Potuimus and inermes, nec rebels, sed tantummodo
discordes, solius divortii invidia adversus vos dimicasse. Si enim tanta vis
hominum in aliquem orbis remoti sinum abrupissemus a vobis, suffudisset utique
dominationem vestram tot qualiumcunque amissio civtum, imo and ipsa
destitutione punisset. Proculdubio expavissetis ad sobitudinem vestram, ad
silentium rerum and stuporem quendam, quasi mortuae urbis quaesissetis, quibus
ves vobis remansissent; nunc enim pauciores hosts habet is prae multitudine
Christianorum pene omnium civium, pene omnes cives Christianos, habendo. And
again, Suffecisset hoc solum nostrae ultioni, quod vacuae exinde possessio
immundis spiritibus pateret. Certainly they whose very secession would leave
nothing but solitude, and silence, and amazement, and empty possessions for
unclean spirits behind them; they who had left their City as it were dead,
almost destitute of Citizens to be governed, and their Enemies more numerous
than their Subjects, must needs have been much the greater number. But when he
says expressly, that almost all their Citizens were Christians, what can be
clearer than that? (notwithstanding what allowances may be made for the
confidence of the man, and the humor of the opressed parties to advance their
numbers.) Christians were so far from being few in comparison of the Heathens,
as that the contrary seems most probable, that the Heathens in the Roman Empire
were considerably outnumbered by them.

AND that in other Cities besides Rome and Alexandria, XLIX
(which though Apostolical Sees you will not admit as (...) numbers were under
the Government of Ecclesiastical Monarchs with their Presbyteries, than had
been governable by any single (however able) Presbyter. Instances may be given
(besides the general proofs already intimated) out of the good Records of those
times, as imperfect as we have them extant at present. One is of Neocaesarea a
metropolis of the Province of Pontus Polemoniacus, (which I take notice of that
you may understand how great a City it was.) Here though the persons are
expressly said to have been (...) etc. S. Greg. Nysser. Vit. S. Greg.
Thaumaturgi, edit. inter opera Thaumaturgi, a Gerard. Voss. p. 255.
infinite, that inhabited the City it self and the adjacent Region, (by which
you may understand the extent of the Diocese of those times, that it included
the (...) as well as the (...), and that the number of the Inhabitants of such
a Diocese did far exceed the Government of a single Presbyter;) yet there were
but 17 Christians when S. Gregory Thaumaturgus was first made their Bishop, who
managed his charge with such good success, as that in a Visitation of his
Diocese a little before his death, again expressed as formerly, p. 313. ib.
(...) he found only the same number of 17 Pagans. Yet this infinite number he
had governed himself, without any addition of coordinate coadjutors upon the
increase of his charge, and left them in the same condition (...), that is, to
his succeeding Bishop. Sure you cannot but think this Diocese exceeded the
greatest Parish in London. Another is that of Carthage, the multitude of
Christians wherein, intimated in my former Letter, you tell me plainly, you
believe not. Not to insist on the general Argument I formerly made use of; from
the multitude of Presbyters here as well as elsewhere, which sure would not
have been multiplied if one had been sufficient; the testimony of Pontius
concerning the great multitude of Christians, that were present at the
Martyrdom of S. Cyprian, (of which himself seems to have been one, which may
make him the more credible) is somewhat considerable. He tells us, Pont in vit.
S. Cypr. fin.
that comitatu ejus infinitus exercitus adhaerebat, quasi ad expugnandam mortem
manu fact a veniretur. Which military expressions of their readiness to die,
are not so applicable to any as to Christians, who were only concerned on that
account. But a more pregnant presumtion of their numbers is the sum collected
out of the Contributions of his Diocese for the relief of Captives. Ep. 60. ed.
Pamel.
Misimus autem (says he) sestertia centum millia nummum, quae istic in Ecclesia
cui de Domini indulgentia praesumus, cleri and plebis apud nos consistentis
eollatione, collecta sunt, etc. This 100000 sestertia being reduced to our
English Coin, according to the rate observed by Mr. Brereuood and Dr. Hakewill,
will amount to 781250 l. and more according to the Bishop of Hereford; a sum
so vast in the judgment of Pamelius and Baroni^^s, as without the Authority of
any new MS. and against the consentient readings of the former Editions of
Manutius and Morellius, by no greater warrant than their own conjecture of the
incredibility of the thing, they venture to correct it by leaving out the later
words millia nummum, reading only sestertia centum, and by that means reducing
it to 1000 part. Yet even so it rose to 781 l. 5 s. a sum very considerable
for a single Parish of those times, especially considering that they were newly
recovered from a severe persecution, which may be presumed considerably to have
exhausted them, both by the sums confiscated, and the loss of all their lands
and rising rents, and the multiplication of the domestic objects of their
charity; (for we find the necessities of the Martyrs and Confessors to have
been supplied out of the Treasury of the Church from the story of Peregrinus in
Lucian, and several passages in S. Cyprian's Epistles) besides the greater
value of Money in those times before the discovery of the Indies, and the
readiness of that Church to a new contribution, if the Numidian Bishops to whom
they write should think it necessary. A sign that they had not been extremely
impoverished by their former charity, whereas such a sum would, even in these
days, since the great supplies from America, have ruined several of our modern
Parishes.

BUT notwithstanding these difficulties I confess a single Parish (I mean the
same multitude of Christians than which might have made up a Parish according
to our late estimation) might have advanced a sum as great as this later of
Pamelius and Baronius, L.
without disabling themselves for future contributions. For I consider that in
those times, as well as the Apostles there were those who sold their lands, and
brought the prices to the Bishop, who (as S. Justin Martyr tells us) was (...),
Apolog. 11. p. 99.
of which we have S. Cyprian himself for an example, Pont. vit. Cypr.
who disposed of his own Land that way at his conversion, and had the same Land
returned into his hands when Bishop, which he again intended to sell if he had
not been prevented by the persecution, as Pontius his Deacon assures us.
Besides, there was the Offertory at every Communion, which we find practiced in
S. Justin Martyr's time, and the same S. Cyprian's, and in the time of the
Author of the Constitutions called Apostolical, and in those times was reckoned
as a part of the Communion it self, and accordingly criminals were as well
excluded from the Offertory as from the blessed Sacrament; and it was then the
general practice to communicate daily. To which may be added their more solemn
Synaxes and Offertories on Sunday, on which the Apostle himself particularly
advised a provision for the poor, and their occasional contributions, such as
that mentioned by the Apostle for the poor Christians in Judaea, and this of S.
Cyprian's we are speaking of. And indeed besides the great propension of the
Christians of those ages to works of charity, and the particular diligence of
S. Cyprian, to stir them up to it by his own example, as well as exhortation,
(as appears from Pontius, and from his Treatise de Opere and Elemosynis still
extant.) It was in reason the most prudent course they could take, to convert
their Lands into Moneys to prevent forfeiture, and to lay out the Moneys on
such good uses which might entitle them to future rewards, rather than hazard
their loss in such times, when they were unsecure how long they might keep
them; besides, that such a disposal of their riches was the most likely way to
animate them for future accidents, and to make them unconcerned for temporal
fruitions, and to raise their minds to Heaven, where their Treasures had been
deposited. Besides the great fruitfulness of the Country adjacent observed by
(...) Strabol. 11. Greg. p. 131. vide l. 18. p. 833.
Strabo, and several other ancient and modern Authors, which must have enhanced
the price of their Lands when exposed to sale; and not only that, but its
great improvements, if we may judge of S. Cyprians time, by what it was when
Agathocles invaded the Carthaginians, which you may see described in Diodorus
Siculus, Bibl. l. 20. p. 731. edit. Graeco-Latin. Hannov. 1604. that it was
admired by the Sicilians themselves, whose own Country was admired for the
same causes by the rest of the World; and the vastness of the City it self, if
estimated with what it was before it was destroyed by the Romans. L. 18.
The Island it stood in was (as Strabo tells us) 460 stadia in compass, all
walled in, which being reduced to our miles, will amount to about 45 miles. A
scope very much larger than London, and their Walls so vast and capacious, as
to contain Stables for Elephants, and 4000 Horses, and Lodgings and
Guard-houses for 20000 Foot and 4000 Horse, which were their ordinary constant
Guards, as Appian. Bell. Punic. p. 56. edit. Graeco-Latin. Stephani 1592. And
when it was destroyed by Scipio Africanus junior or Aemilianus, had 700000
Inhabitants. Strabo ib.
And though at its rebuilding by Julius Caesar it might possibly fall short of
its ancient magnificence; yet it was certainly a very great City even then,
after the rate which then they counted great, which rate I might easily have
shown to be as great as now. So (...). Id. ib.
Strabo, who lived not long after the Restoration, says that it was even then
inhabited as well as any other City in Libya; and after him it is by Ptolem. l.
4. Greg. c. 3.
Ptolemy, who yet flourished about 100 years before St. Cyprian, called (...);
and Tertullian. de Pall.
Tertullian and Apul. Florid.
Apuleius call the Carthaginians Principes Africae, relating to their own as
well as former times, (for Alexandria, which was under a Praefectus Augustalis,
was excluded from the ordinary notion of Africa, according to the Notitiae of
those times) as very well they might, considering that of the six African
Provinces that of Carthage only was See Pamel. in Tertullian. de Pall. and S.
Cyprian. epist. 45, 49.
Proconsular, and the City was the residence of the Proconsul himself, which
must very considerably have contributed to its greatness. And now considering
the very great fertility, and improvements, and populousness of the City, and
the adjacent Region under its Civil, if not Ecclesiastical, Jurisdiction;
considering that in times of persecution it is most probable, that as much of
this as belonged to Christians was converted into ready money; that of these
very vast sums, which may have been thought credibly have been levied by these
means, many were entirely bestowed on charitable uses, and that generally so
much was as could be spared from the owners necessary expenses, and therefore
might be reputed superfluities, were so; that according to the state of
Christian Affairs in those times, much more could have been reputed
superfluities than now, when not only all expenses not adequate to the dignity
of their persons were accounted so, but even such as were, it being neisafe nor
prudent, nor agreeable to the heroical magnanimity so common then to maintain
that dignity; that as the former sums were exhausted, more were daily brought
in, that saying of Tertullian appearing then experimentally true, that the
Sanguis Martyrum was Semen Ecclesiae. These things* I say, being considered, it
cannot be thought so incredible as Pamelius and Baronius conceive, that a
considerable proportion of the Inhabitants of the Diocese of Carthage,
according to the rate of Dioceses in those times, might indeed contribute the
greater sum, so well attested by consent of MSS. so that there will be no
necessity to leave the received reading upon account of their only
conjectures, which have hence appeared so groundless. But then as this sum of
100000 Sestertia is in a parallel case granted by Seneca, Conso. ad Helv. c. 10
to have been equal to the Revenues of a Province, and so too great for a
Parish after the rate now in use; so it is no way improbable that considerable
part of the Diocese might indeed have given the Revenue of a Province, (upon
the terms now described) without disabling themselves for further future
Contributions. It being therefore so well attested by the consent of Copies,
that the sum given was so great, as not to be thought crediconcerning a
Parish, and it being no way credible that any but converted Christians did
contribute to it; it must hence follow, that the number of Christian Converts
was even then greater in Carthage, than in any of our modern Parishes.

TO these Christian Authors concerning the multitude of Christians I shall add
a Heathen. LI.
It is Pliny whom I mean, who thus dissuades Trajan from his severity against
the Christians by an argument from the multitude of the persons likely to be
concerned in it: Plin. ep. l. 10. ep. 97.
Visa est mihi res digna consultatione, maxim propter periclitantium numerum.
Multi enim omnis aetatis, omnis ordinis, utriusque sexus etiam vocantur in
periculum, and vocabuntur. Neque enim civitates tantum, sed vicos etiam atque
agros superstitionis istius contagio pervagata est, quae videtur sisti and
corrigi posse. Certe satis constat, prope jam desolata templa coepisse
celebrari, and sacra solennia diu intermissa repeti, passimque voenire
victimas, quarum adhuc rarissimus emptor inveniebatur, ex quo facile est
opinari, quae turba hominum emendari possit, si sit poenitentiae locus. You see
that many, not as you say few, were Christians, that not only Cities, but
Villages and Towns were overrun with that contagion, (as he calls it) that he
thence concludes what a great multitude (that is, turba) might be gained by a
more indulgent way of treating them. And that this multitude was to be
understood comparatively to the Heathens, (directly contrary to what you say,
that in comparison of them they were but few) appears clearly from what he
adds, that their Temples had been almost desolate, (exactly herein agreeing
with Tertullian's Sola vobis relinquimus templa) that their solemn Festivities
had been long intermitted, that their Sacrifices (which we find to have been
exposed to sale in the Markets, 1 Cor. 10. 25.) found few buyers; which could
not have been if the number of Heathens had been then considerable, I do not
say as you do, comparatively with the Christians, but even absolutely in it
self. And then for discerning the pregnancy of this Testimony I pray consider,
1. That this Epistle of Pliny is mentioned by Tertullian, Tertul. Apol. Eusebius.
Chron. number. 2223 Oros. l. 7.
Eusebius, and Orosius; so that there can be no doubt of its being genuine.
Consider, 2. That this Epistle was certainly written very soon after S. John's
death, who died in Trajan's time, ( Baronius places S. John's death in the
second year of Trajan, and the writing of this Epistle in the fifth or
thereabouts;) and therefore the words diu intermissa will in all likelihood
extend the paucity of Heathens in those parts to S. John's time, at least
certainly very long before your Period of Constantine. 3. That this Church of
Bithynia, of which Pliny gives account being his own Province, was converted in
the Apostles times, as appears 1 S. Pet. 1. 1. and therefore the Government
there settled must have been, ^f not instituted, yet at least approved by them,
especially being so near those Sees which were undoubtedly founded by the
Apostles. Yet it cannot even here be shown, that ever one City had more than
one presiding Bishop. 4. That this Testimony is of an Adversary, whose Interest
had been to have made the Christians more despicable by concealing their
numbers, if he could have done it veraciously. And, 5. That as Pliny must in
all probability be presumed veracious in telling what he knew, so he had means
of knowing what was really true, being Governor of the Province, and having
actually made enquiry after the Christians in their persecutions of them.

I BELIEVE the great reason that inclines you to believe the paucity of
Christians in those times is, LII.
that in great and popular Cities they were able to communicate at one Altar,
upon which account you conceive them to have been no more than what may
assemble in our ordinary Parochial Congregations. But you might as well have
concluded whole Cities indeed, nay whole Nations, to have no more people in
them than our ordinary Parochial Assemblies. You know every clean Male in Jewry
was to appear before God at the two solemn Feasts of Easter and of Tabernacles,
whose numbers computed by Cestius Gallus, amounted to a number sure too great
for a Parish, and the number in Jerusalem when besieged by Titus, taken there
upon occasion of Easter, is a plain Argument of the vastness of their religious
Assemblies. Nor was it only proper to the Jews thus to confederate and unite
their Commonwealth by their Conventions on account of Religion to partake of
the same Altar, but the same Policy was observed among the Heathens. The
Assemblies of whole Cities are so ordinary, that it were but pedantick to give
instances of them. For those of Nations you may observe the Athenian
Panathenaicks, the Olympic Solemnities which were of all Greece, and then the
Panionia of the Asiatick Jones, not now to mention those of the Barbarians. Nor
were only Sacrifices common to these vast Assemblies from the same Altar,
which is more easily intelligible, but speeches also were made to numbers much
greater than our Parochial Assemblies, which I believe you will think the
greater difficulty, how the Bishop, who you say then was the principal, if not
the only Preacher, should be heard in a Multitude proportionable to a populous
City. Yet is this so far from being incredible, as that it was in those Ages
frequently practiced. I will not instance in places of special contrivance, as
that at the Roman Rostra, the Theaters, and Amphitheatres, where many
thousands, sometimes 100000 or more, have heard with convenience. And yet it is
very probable, that these public places of religious Assemblies were contrived
with convenience for that purpose. Nay it is certain, that the Jews had their
Suggesta and Cathedrae raised on high for that end. Nor shall I mention the
Orations of Generals to their Armies, who had the like advantages. It is very
clear that upon occasions not so solemn nor prepared, great Routs of tumultuous
people, wanting heads to whom a particular address might have been confined,
have yet been spoken to. I will not again instance in the Speeches of Petronius
and King Agrippa to the generality of the Jewish Nation, of which we are
discoursing. Scripture Examples, though purely historical, I find most easily
admitted by you, and therefore I am the rather willing to insist on them.
Rehoboam speaks to all Israel, 1 Kings 12. 1, 13, 16, 20. So Jehoiada makes a
covenant with all the people of the Land, 2 Kings 11. 17, 18, 20. Our Savior
preaches his Sermon on the Mount to great multitudes from several places, S.
Matthew. 4. 25. v. 1. And several other places, to 4000 at one time, and 5000 at
another, though in wildernesses; by which we may guess how much greater his
Auditories were in populous Cities. The Town Clerk of the Ephesians to the
whole City, Acts 19. 29, 35. S. Paul to all the City of Jerusalem, Acts 21. 30,
36, 39, 40. And by the multitudes converted by single Sermons of the Apostles,
you may easily conjecture the vastness of their Auditories. Which will be the
rather credible when it is considered, that the principal preaching of the
first Propagators of Christianity, was generally in places of greatest
frequent, such as the Temple, or Synagogues, or Streets, or or Schools, or
Marketplaces. Thus you see that it will not follow, that the number of
Christians must have been few, if they assembled in one place for the Word and
Sacraments, and if the Bishop alone had preached.

BUT neither supposition is so very certain, LIII.
at least not so general, as you seem to believe it. For preaching, we see that
while the extraordinary (...) of prophecy lasted, under which preaching was
comprehended as well as prayer, (which by the way is observable against them
who allow studied Sermons, and yet complain of the Spirit's being quenched if
their prayers be other than extemporary) several Prophets met and officiated in
their Synaxes, 1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31. so far was it then from being confined to
any person; Bishop or other, to preach to the people. And even afterward we
find preaching not always performed by the Bishop, though I am apt indeed to
think it was ordinarily. The Catechists were usually Presbyters, and Origin,
though a Presbyter, yet preached before Bishops. But for the times of
persecution, wherein they could not meet so numerously in one Assembly; yet
other provisions might have been made agreeably enough to the Principles of
those Ages, for supplying the necessities of much greater than parochial
multitudes. Such was that of reserving the species, which I believe was a shift
found out in times of persecution, when every particular person could not get
any opportunity of frequenting the Synaxes as often as he was desirous to
communicate, which was then daily, it being the first meat they tasted. This
reservation is clear from S. Cyprian de laps. the Author De Spectaculis among
his works, Tert. l. 11. and Ux. Dionys. Alex. ep. ad Fab. Antioch. in Eusebius. S.
Iren. to Pope Victor. Now by this means very great multitudes might frequently
communicate, though their Synaxes were rarely and thinly celebrated, that they
might not give their Governors any just offense by their numerousness. For by
Pliny's Epistle to Trajan it appears, that they did upon this account utterly
forbear their feasts of charity, upon his putting of the Law De Hetaeriis in
force; and in all probability yielded as far as lawfully they conceived they
might in the Eucharist it self. A second shift was that of sending the
Sacraments by the Deacons to those that were absent. So S. Justin Martyr
expressly, Apol. 11. p. 97.
(...). And again, Ib. p. 98.
(...). And who knows whether the breaking of bread (...), or from house to
house, as we read it Acts 11. 46. (if it be meant of the Sacrament, and not
rather of their feasts of love) may not allude to this custom? I shall not now
dispute it, but only observe that this practice, though not grounded on this
Text, yet certainly used in those times, might from the same Altar have
communicated much greater multitudes than are contained in our ordinary
Parishes. But there was also a third Expedient for these numerous Communions,
that though indeed the Roman Altar, where the blessed Sacrament was ordinarily
and solemnly administered, were only one, even in those populous Cities, and
that in the power of the Bishop; yet in private and occasional Assemblies
Presbyters were permitted to do it by leave of the Bishop, without any
prejudice to the Unity of the Church, which was signified by the Unity of their
Altar. I will not mention the instances hereof in the Acts of the Martyrs,
which are not so secure to be trusted. Ignatius and Tertullian are very clear
to this purpose in the places already produced. Now this account being given
how, notwithstanding the multitude of Communicants, and though the Sacrament
were the greatest obligation to meet in public Assemblies, yet much greater
numbers than our Parishes might have been supplied conveniently enough from one
President and one Altar; it will be easy to give an account of other things.
For as for preaching, which is now more insisted on as a reason of Church
Assemblies than the Sacraments, though certainly very differently from the
sense of those Ages. First, you cannot prove that to have been so appropriated
to the Bishop, as that ordinary Presbyters were excluded from it. All that can
be pretended to this purpose is, that the Exhortation with the Communion Office
was then generally in the presence of the Bishop, and that in his presence it
was not usual for Presbyters to preach; (for this is the only thing that was
thought so strange in preaching of Origin before Theophilus, and S. Augustine
before Valerius, that it was done in the presence of their Bishops) and that
the power of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, upon what pretense soever, preaching as
well as other Offices was appropriated to the Bishops. But, 1. All private
visitations and conferences which were much better suited to the exigencies of
those times, might undoubtedly be performed by single Presbyters; and these
being performed with that diligence as they were then, would in a great measure
supersede the necessity of public Sermons. And, 2. Even for those public
preachings, which had no relation to the Communion Office, where that one Altar
was concerned, might have been ordinarily permitted them by the Bishop. And, 3.
Even those which were connected with that Office, might yet by the Bishops
leave have been permitted in places distinct from the one Altar, as well as the
Communion it self.

YOUR instance of St. Patrick founding 365 Churches, LIVE.
(for I only take notice of the more probable number) and ordaining in them
365 Bishops, and under them 3000 Presbyters, does not methinks seem any thing
to your purpose. You say, Here is no more Bishops than Churches; I believe you
meant the contrary, that there were no more Churches than Bishops, for this is
only to your design, of having as many Bishops as Churches, that is, in your
notion of the word, as Parishes. And you know though we pretend many Parish
Churches may be subject to one Bishop. Yet we are far from saying that there
ought to be many Bishops in one Parish. But admitting there were in S.
Patrick's time no more Churches than Bishops, yet how can it follow thence,
that there were no more Parishes, or that the word Church in those Ages used
without any restrictive Particle, must signify that only which were
equivalent to our present Parishes? For you know that we do not pretend, that
there ought to be any more liberty for a Bishop to hold plurality of Dioceses,
than for a Minister to have plurality of Parishes, though I will not defend all
practices in both particulars; so that if the word Church imply that which is
Diocesan, as most probably it did according to the sense of those times, then
we do not think there ought to be more Churches than Bishops. Indeed I confess
the Dioceses of those times must have been for scope of Land, as much less as
the number 365 is greater than 21, or thereabouts, which is our number now. But
it is withal most clear, 1. That as small as they were, they were yet greater
than Parishes, there being about nine Presbyters to a Bishop, as your self
observe. For your own notion of a Parish containing no more than are capable of
being governed by a single person, where nine persons were thought necessary,
there must be supposed nine times that proportion, that is, nine Parishes. And
then if you think your self obliged to abstain from that Communion where
Discipline is impossible, and think it impossible where the Bishop undertakes
the government of any more than he is able to give an account of by his own
personal care; you must have conceived your self obliged as much to separate
from Diocesan Communion qua Diocesan then as now, and therefore should not
plead those Dioceses as precedents. But, 2. Your own principles will warrant
the enlargment of your Dioceses now; for if Bishops might in the primitive
times take the charge of whole Cities, not because the Cities were small, or
the Inhabitants few, but because they who owned Episcopal Authority, that is,
Christians, were so; then I may say our present Dioceses may be very much
enlarged since the divisions of Christians. For whereas then they were all
unanimous, the case is otherwise how, when Papists and Scots, and other
Non-conformists, being deduced of all Sects and Opinions, those only are
accounted that own our present Episcopal Authority, would be so few
comparatively, so that you see that by Separation upon account of the too great
extent of our Dioceses, the inconvenience is not remedied, but confirmed in
consequence of your own Principles. But, 3. What inconvenience soever may
indeed be in things of this nature, is to be judged as well as reformed by the
Governors, (whose proper care it is) not to be remedied by worse, such as are
the undutifulness and separations of private persons from their Superiors on
that account.

I CONFIRMED this by Argument from experience, LV.
from an instance of Rome which though so great in Cornelius his time, as to
need the Services of above 1000 Clergy, was yet at the same time under the
Government of one only Bishop. To this you answer, 1. That this was above 250
years after Christ's Birth. But this is not the question, how soon it was, but
whether it was not when discipline was severely enough observed? For from hence
it follows, that experience has then shown, that discipline was sufficiently
reconcilable with a Diocesan Government, and therefore may be so now if
Governors would be equally industrious. And that discipline was then observed,
I believe you will not deny. You answer, 2. That you never took all the
impotent persons, poor, and widows, in the Church, to be Clergymen and
Clergie-women. I shall not dispute the propriety of my expression, (not but
that I know that the word has indeed been used in a very large sense, so as to
comprehend most persons relating to the Church, and possibly all there
enumerated) both because I do not conceive the thing material to my present
purpose, which is only to show the numerousness of the Church from the
multitude of Presbyters, whom you will not deny to be properly Clergymen; and
because I confess I too much trusted my memory in quoting the place, and upon
consulting the place find my self to have been mistaken in two things: 1. That
I thought the word Clergy to have been used by Cornelius. 2. That I thought
that all the several sorts there mentioned, Presbyters, Deacons, etc. to have
been comprised in the number 1500, whereas I now find, that the later sort of
the poor maintained on the charges of the Church were only therein included.
Omitting therefore these mistakes, which now I know I will not undertake to
justify, the thing I insist on is, that here are 46 Presbyters mentioned, and
that there were in Rome quadraginta, Optat. Milev. l. 11. cont. Parm.
and quod excurrit, Basilicae, (as we learn from Optatus) when Victor
Garbiensis was sent from Africa to be made the Schismatical Bishop of Rome,
which was about the persecution of Dioclesian, when the Schism of the Donatists
commenced. Which numberof Basilicae or Parish Churches (for you have already
seemed to grant, that Rome was then divided into Parishes) may very well agree
with the number of Presbyters mentioned by Cornelius. There being therefore
even then so many Christians in Rome, as were able to make up 46 Parishes,
besides those of the (...) or Region adjacent subject, according to the
practice of those times, to the Jurisdiction of the City Bishop; it is plain
that the Diocese was even then of a larger extent than Parochial, as your self
had already granted, (though here you endeavor to answer the arguments, that
are designed to prove no more than what you had granted;) and therefore 46
times exceeding the ability of a single person. Yet I believe you will not
deny, but that all this number was then sufficiently governed by one Bishop,
without any visible decay of discipline observable in those times. I know
indeed that Mr. Potter in order to his own design does endeavor to prove the
number of Presbyters and Titles originally derived from Cletus, Interp. of the
number 666, c. 19.
Euaristus, Dionysius, and Marcellus to have been 25. Nor shall I now digress
to show the ground of his mistake. All that I shall desire you to observe at
present is, that his Authors are either evidently late, or suspicious if
pretendedly ancient; not comparable in credibility to Cornelius and Optatus
produced by me. But if I should admit all that he pretends, yet 25 Parishes
themselves are too large an extent for such Dioceses, as you desire, that might
not exceed the personal abilities of one.

BUT you endeavor to give some account how their Clergy might be numerous
though their people were few, LVI.
from the conceived extraordinary exigencies of those times. But neither does
it appear that the exigencies were indeed so extraordinary, there appearing no
ground to believe any Innovation accommodated to present exigencies; but rather
that that had been the ordinary Government: if it had, were it to your purpose.
For the same extraordinary exigencies, which then required the united helps of
a multitude of Clergy, made the burden too great for one; and therefore if a
Bishop cannot (as by your Principles he cannot) undertake the government of a
number too great for his personal care, without prejudice of discipline; it
will follow that he could not do it then. But it appearing clearly otherwise,
namely that discipline was severely maintained under a Government properly
Diocesan, that is including a multitude of subordinate cures; it is plain, that
what neglects are now in that kind, are not to be imputed to the Government but
the Governors.

BUT I shall consider the disparities themselves: LVII.
1. The Christians meetings were then obscure and small in houses, (as the
tolerated Churches in London.) But I have already shown you how the multitudes
of Christians were (according to the practices of those Ages) suppliable
without any unnecessary multiplication of Altars, or Priests, or Churches; and
that this multitude of Priests was not accommodated to their extraordinary
meetings in houses occasionally, but their solemn appointed places for
Parochial Assemblies, for such were the Tituli or Basilicae. You consider, 2.
That these meetings were in so vast a City in so many distinct places. But the
Christians of those times were not so sparing of their pains, as to scruple the
distances of places in the greatest Cities, for the comfort of their Synaxes;
for in S. Justin Martyr's time they came out of the Country to the
City-meetings, much more from the most distant places of the same City. And
therefore it is not probable that the distance of place, but the multitude of
the persons, occasioned the multiplication of the Clergy. And by the multitude
of their poor, 1500 not only 1050 as you mistake) you may guess at their
multitudes. For it was too great a proportion for the multitudes of one Parish,
especially where S. Paul's Rule was severely observed, that none should be
maintained on the Churches account, but such as were poor indeed, and where
none should eat who did not labor if he were able. Besides, the treasures of
that Church were thought worthy the design of the Secular Magistracy, and great
multitudes of poor are said to have been maintained on the Church account in
the time of Pope Sixtus and S. Laurence. Prudent. Perist. in Laurent.
You consider, 3. The Suburbicarian Assemblies; I suppose you mean the
Assemblies in the Suburbs of Rome, not those of the Regiones Suburbicariae,
(which I believe you will not doubt but that they contained a number too great
for a single Parish) and then the former Answer will suffice, that they who
ordinarily came out of the Country to the City Assemblies, were not likely to
scruple coming to them from the Suburbs, if their numbers might be entertained
in one place with convenience. 4. You say, many Presbyters used still to be
with the Bishop in the same Assembly. If you mean it on solemn occasions of
great concernment for the Government of the Church, I confess it; but you
cannot thence infer, that they being deducted few would remain for Parochial
Cures, being those being but rare, they might all be spared from their
Parochial Affairs. But if you think, that in all ordinary Synaxes such a number
of them were obliged to a personal attendance on him, as must distract them
from their other Employments; I believe you have no ground to think so. In the
Form of their Offices by S. Justin Martyr you find no mention but of the (...)
and the (...), a sign that there was no part of the Office obliging Presbyters
to be present. 5. You observe, that here were in all but seven Deacons. But
this is no argument to conclude the paucity of Believers; for it was an Opinion
taken up in that Age, from that unsecure principle of making Apostolical
Practice even in Ecclesiasticals obligatory, that no Church, how great soever,
must have any more than seven, because there were no more in the Church of
Jerusalem at their first Institution. The words of the Neocaesarean Canon are
plain; Can. 14.
(...). And that this number was not casually taken up in the Church of Rome,
Conc. Neocaesar.
but upon some such designed account, Pseudo-Euarist. ep. 1.
may very probably be conjectured because we find it observed in S. Laurence
his time, who being Archdeacon of Rome is called Primus e septem viris qui
stant ad aram proximi, Perist. ubi supra.
etc. by Prudentius. And you will accordingly find constantly in the Author of
the Pontifical, the number of Deacons ordained by every Bishop of Rome to be
less than of Presbyters; and this comparative paucity of Deacons in respect of
Presbyters was accounted by S. Hierom an occasion of the Deacons presumption,
in his Epist. 85. ad Euagr. And if the form of Christ's appearing in the
Revelations, be taken from the Bishops sitting in the Church (as if I be not
mistaken the most learned and judicious Mr. Thorndike thinks it is) then as the
24 Elders may allude to the Christian Presbyteries, derived from the lesser
Sanhedrims of the Jews consisting of 24; Vid. Orig. tract. 24. in Matthew.
so the seven ministering Spirits may in conformity to the septenary number of
Angels, so famous among the Jews, (as Mr. Mede proves professedly) which are
called (...) by the Apostle, Heb. 1. allude to the septenary number of Deacons,
which were always attending on the Bishop, in a readiness to execute his
commands, as the Angels are supposed by the Jews to do on God himself. Nor need
you wonder that so small a number of Deacons might be conceived sufficient to
answer so great a proportion of Presbyters, considering that their special
Office was to distribute the Alms of the Church to such as were maintained on
public charity, and to attend more immediately on the Bishops person, as
ordinary Executioners of his commands. For I believe you will never find that
they performed any service to Presbyters acting separately from their Bishop.
And certainly for distribution of Alms, and personal attendance on the Bishop,
as small a number as seven might be sufficient in a great City.

6. You say, LVIII
That many then were Presbyters that used not to preach, but for privater
oversight, and as the Bishops Assessors. This, though for my part I conceive it
very true, seems strange to me to proceed from a person of your principles, who
usually teach public preaching in Ecclesiastical Assemblies to be the
indispensible duty of every particular Gospel Minister, by which name they
include, if they do not only mean, Priests. But supposing it true as I believe
it was, that there were several Priests who did not preach; yet will not this
diminish the multitude of Parishes, as you seem to conceive. For I believe you
cannot prove that public preaching was then accounted an ordinary parochial
employment. And though it were not, yet there were others equivalent sufficient
to take up the time and pains bestowed on it now, with equal edification; such
were visiting, communicating, exhorting, persuading, resolving cases of
conscience, and satisfying themselves concerning the lives of penitents, for
discerning who were fit or unfit for their communion; all those Offices which
were performed out of their public Synaxes, and all that were performed in
them besides preaching, that is, their ordinary prayers, their hymni
antelucani, their reading of the Scriptures, their catechizings, their general
Exhortations pro re nata not designed and solemn, their collections and (...).
So that though there had not been so many Preachers, in our modern notion of
the word, yet there might have been as many Parochial Priests as Titles or
Parishes.

7. YOU say, LIX.
That the poorer sort most commonly received the Gospel. If your meaning herein
be to conclude, that the 1500 poor were the most considerable part of
Believers, that you might conclude the whole number of Converts to have been
small; you should have remembered what poor they were, such as were maintained
on the public charity, that is, such as were not only poor but impotent,
unable to get their livings otherwise. And sure you cannot but think, that the
multitude of other Believers upon whose charity they were maintained,
especially if poor themselves, (though able to earn a livelihood) as you seem
to suppose, must have been great, especially considering the other expenses of
their charity on the Clergy, on the Martyrs and Confessors, on their
hospitality to strangers, etc. all which may be sufficient presumptions that
these 1500 poor did not in any probability bear any considerable proportion to
the multitudes of the Roman Church by whom they were maintained. And I believe
in few Cities in our Kings Dominions, if any, will be found so great a number
of poor, who by reason of impotency are thought by the Magistrates fit objects
of the public charity, even in these our Ages, wherein all are supposed
Professors of Christianity.

8. You say, LX.
That none of these but the 46 Presbyters had any power in the discipline. If
you mean a decretory power in the sense I have explained it, then I think I
have proved that the 45 Presbyters themselves had it not, but the Bishop alone.
But you can thence no more conclude the paucity of Believers in one of the
Dioceses of those times, than in any one of ours now, when it is plain that the
Bishop himself has monopolized it, as your self complain. But if you mean an
executive or even a consultory power of giving consent or advice in affairs of
discipline, to be decreed by the Bishop; that was so far from being confined to
the Presbyters, as that it was communicated to the Deacons, nay to the common
people themselves. This might easily have been cleared from Cornelius his
Contemporary S. Cyprian, (from whom we have the clearest account of the
discipline of that Age) if I had not been unwilling to be more tedeous than
needs I must; and because upon reflection I believe your self will acknowledge
it, and because it is usually undertaken by Presbyterian, but especially
Independent, Authors. Indeed there were some privileges of the Presbyters, that
they only sat in the Bishops presence, as S. Hierom tells us, besides other
distinctions in Synaxes. But it is sufficient for my purpose that the execution
of discipline, which is the main thing which necessarily requires plurality,
was managed by all; and that for counsel here was a number exceeding the
Councils of several Princes of Dominions larger than any Dioceses.

But, LXI.
9. You say, That by all this reckoning the whole Church maintained not
(besides the Officers) near 1000 poor, we may probably conjecture that the
whole Church of that Bish. was not bigger than some one London Parish,
(Stepney, S. Giles Cripplegate) where are about 50000 Souls. But, 1. You are
mistaken in your account: For, 1. The number of the poor besides the Officers
were not near 1000 only, but 1500; for the Officers are not included in that
number, as you suppose. 2. That number of poor maintained on the public
charity, does imply a greater number than you suppose For consider, 1. That no
poor were reckoned in that number, but such as were unable to earn a livelihood
for themselves, according to S. Paul's Rule already mentioned. Consider, 2. That
even of those impotent poor none were to be charged on the Church that had
believing Friends able to maintain them, according to another Rule of the same
S. Paul, 1 Timothy 5. 4, 8. by which means none were likely to have been
maintained by the Church, but such as might have been starved if they had not
been so relieved. Now considering that, according to Captain Graunts
Calculation of 229250 in London, not above 51 were starved, which he reckons as
the 4000th. part, but with too great latitude, for it is indeed the 4495th.
part, besides a Fraction of 5, or thereabouts, if his Numbers be rightly
printed; let 1500 be multiplied by 4495, and the sum will be 6742500; or if it
be multiplied by his own proportion of 4000, it will amount to 6000000, a sum
too great for the City. And by all deductions that may be made, for the
unkindness of some Christian Friends, and of most Heathen, that would leave
many destitute of their help, for no other reason than their being Christians;
and of others that were maintained by the Church, not for want of callings, but
of lawful ones, as the Stageplayer in S. Cyprian; and the remisness of some
Officers of those many entrusted in this affair, who either might have not used
their utmost diligence in informing themselves of the poverty and helplesness
of the persons admitted by them, or might have failed of the success, and being
misinformed after all humane diligence, and have had persons sufficient either
in themselves, or by help of their Friends, obtruded on them; or all other
failings imaginable, (for I confess moral affairs are not to be estimated by
Mathematical measures;) yet it will be hard after all to bring the sum so low
as 460000, which Captain Grant conceives to be the whole number of Inhabitants
in London, much more to reduce it to the limits of the greatest Parish
mentioned by you. But, 2. If you had indeed computed right, and the number had
been no greater than of one of those great Parishes you speak of; yet why
should not the numbers of people here mentioned be thought sufficient for a
Diocese even in our modern sense? For I doubt there are no Cities in the Kings
Dominions that have Episcopal Sees, that have 50000 Inhabitants, except London.
Ours of Dublin, which is thought by most that have seen it, to be second to
London for greatness and populousness, is by a Bill of Mortality, and an
account of the Poll-money sent to Captain Grant, estimated to contain only
30000, or thereabouts, (though I can hardly believe that to be our full
number;) according to which estimation the Parishes you speak of will exceed us
by two thirds more; and so I believe they will equal our whole Diocese; for I
believe the rest of it put together can hardly exceed the proportion of two
third parts to the City. And can you think the same number in a Parish
governable by the single unassisted abilities of a single Parish Minister, and
not think it so by a Bishop seconded by his Presbytery, Dignitaries, and
Parochial Curates. Or, if the case of preserving discipline be harder in such a
Parish than such a Diocese, (as certainly upon the accounts now mentioned it
needs must be;) then I pray consider what equality is it to communicate with
our Parishes indiscriminately, (such great ones themselves not being excepted;)
and yet to separate as indiscriminately from our Diocesan Communion, even of
such as exceed not those greater Parishes in the numbers of their people,
though they do in numbers of their Governors. And if you think that as many
may meet in one place, as may make up our ordinary present Dioceses, (as you
must do if they may be conveniently included in a Parish;) then how can you
conclude the less populousness of the ancient than our modern Dioceses, from
that very Topic of their meeting in one place? For my part I verily believe
that it is by accident, not designedly, that those Parishes have so vastly
exceeded their ordinary proportion, merely from the increase of the trade of
the City in those parts, which were more thinly inhabited when the Parishes
were first distributed, as you may easily conjecture from the disproportion,
some of them exceeding other Parishes in your City an hundredfold, as is
observed by Captain Grant, which is more than there are Parishes in some of
our Dioceses; and from the disproportion of their ancient Churches, when they
were designed Parishes, with their present multitudes, and their equality with
those other Parish Churches, whose present Parishioners are so extremely
unequal, and that these vast Parishes are generally in the Suburbs, where the
City was very likely to increase. And therefore seeing the greatness of those
Parishes seem never yet to have been approved, though they were not yet
amended; you cannot thence conjecture, what has certainly appeared false as to
matter of fact, that the Roman Christians were no more than one Parish, under
the personal and immediate care of their Bishop.

10. You say, LXII.
When none were Christians but persecuted Volunteers, they were the holiest and
best of men, and you have tried that 600 such make less work for discipline,
than 10 of the Rabble that are driven into our Churches, and choose them rather
than the Gaol. Upon account of which conceived disparity, I presume your
meaning is to conclude, that one Bishop might rule a greater number than now,
and therefore though Diocesan Churches might indeed have been rulable by one
Bishop then, yet we are not thence to conclude that it may be so now. But I
have already shown that Government must not be proportioned only to the good
humors of men, but must be able to prevent and reform those lapses to which
men easily and naturally degenerate, and therefore that there must have been
the same power in Governors then as now, though there was not the same
necessity of its actual exercise. And that the Bishops power was not only over
orderly Converts, but over lapsed criminals, who had then more temptations to
fall, and being so to behave themselves refractorily against the discipline of
their Church, when their lapses were countenanced, than now when they are
discouraged by the Civil Magistrate; and over the Heathens who were to be
converted and severely disciplined for the trial of their veracity, and
securing them from a relapse. And if you find it so hard a matter now to
persuade such as know their duty, and acknowledge their reasonableness, and
have a reverence of such persuaders and persuasions, instilled in them by the
principles of their Christian Education, to the practice of what they cannot
deny themselves obliged to; certainly the difficulty of reclaiming Heathens
must have been much greater, who were as debauched in their lives as ours now,
and less disposed for correction, in all the regards now mentioned than vicious
Christians, nay contrarily prejudiced, not only by practical but dogmatical
prejudices against the wisest and most rational exhortations, as proceeding
from the mouth of a Christian, of whom they had conceived so unworthy an
opinion, by reason of the slanders raised against them then so commonly
believed.

BUT when all is done (you say) two Cities under the power of great
temptations, LXIII
are not to be our rule against Gods word, and the state of all other Churches
in the world, and undeniable experience. So that it seems you are at last
diffident of your Exceptions against those two instances, and yet unwilling to
yield though you should be convinced of their weakness. Indeed if what you
pretend were true, that they were against Gods word, etc. I should confess so
great evidence sufficient to reject them. But it is certainly otherwise, and I
believe you cannot give an instance of a Parochial Church in the sense we now
understand it; for such a multitude of Believers as were governable by a single
Presbyter alone, either in the Scriptures, or in any other Church in the world,
(excepting those two so much decried by you) for the first three Centuries, so
far you are from proving what you seem to design, that Bishops ought to be
multiplied in proportion to them. Your volume of proof from Antiquity of one
Altar and one Bishop in one Church will not do it; for I have already shown
that Church to be the Church of a whole City how great soever, and therefore to
have been Diocesan not Parochial. And for the Argument from Experience, though
it will hold well enough as I have managed it, that discipline has once been
preserved under a Diocesan Government, therefore it may be so again; yet not
vice versa as you do, discipline is not observed, (for this is all the
undeniable experience you so much insist on) therefore it cannot.

MY instance of Ulphilas Bishop of the whole Nation of the Goths, LXIV
which sure were greater than one Parish, you seem to deny, when you say he was
Bishop only of a few Goths, who were presently presecuted to the death by
Athanarichus, (ut Socrat. l. 4. c. 32.) which few you say I may call a Kingdom
if I please. But the number were not so small as you suppose; for they were
converted long before they were persuaded to the Arrian Communion, which was no
sooner than the time of Valens, when Eudoxius prevailed with Ulphilas to bring
them to it. For they were vanquished by Constantine, Soc. l. 1. c. 18.
and by admiration of his success against themselves were drawn to embrace his
Religion, to which they imputed his victories so strange beyond their
expectation; and accordingly had a former Bishop in their Nation one Theophilus
before Ulphilas, Ib. l. 11. c. 41.
so that though even at the first the Nation, that is, at least the generality
of them were converted to Christianity; yet before the time you speak of they
had a considerable time to allow for further propagation. And accordingly when
Vlphilas was brought over to the Arrians, he is said to have separated (...),
Sozom. l. 6. c. 37.
(an expression certainly as comprehensive as that I used of a Kingdom) from
the Communion of the Catholic Church. For his Authority is described to have
been so great with the Goths, as that they took his words for irrefragable
Laws, Theod. l. 4. c. 37.
and yet certainly was not so great with any but converted Christians. Sozom.
l. 6. c. 37.
But you say, They were presently persecuted to the death by Athanaricus. If
you mean this as an Argument that they were few, because they were presently
extirpated by persecution, you are certainly mistaken. For Athanaricus his
storm lasted not long, but upon Phritigernes his return, Socr. Hist.
who by the assistance of the Romans prevailed against them, Eccl. 4. 33
the Christian Religion again returned, Soz. 4. 37.
and was countenanced and so far advanced, as that in their Invasions of the
Roman Empire afterward in Honorius his time there Army was generally Christian,
which could not have probably been, if they had been extirpated by Athanaricus.
But you say, That Ulphilas was an Arian. But, 1. If he had been so, yet that
cannot weaken his Authority in our present case, both because this practice of
a Nations having but one Bishop, is never reckoned by the Haeresiographers as a
point of Arianism, no nor as a singularity of the Arians themselves upon
personal accounts. Nay, my other instances of Tiramentus and Moses were both
Catholics; nay, the Goths themselves whilst Catholics had the same form of
Government that is, till Ulphilas was wrought on by Eudoxius. Till that time
not only his Predecessor Theophilus, but himself maintained the Nicene Faith
in opposition to the Arian Communion, and yet in all likelihood they were not
much less numerous when Catholics than when Arians; for the whole Nation which
is said by him to have been reconciled to the Arian Communion, were in all
likelihood none but Christians, and therefore Catholics, seeing they seem at
that time to have been unanimous. But, 2. It does not appear that he was a real
Arian. I confess he did communicate with the Arians, and that not only with
the more moderate Homousians, but also with those who owned Christ to be a
creature, and by degrees from communicating with the Arians the Goths
afterward used the Arian Forms of speaking, and from them proceeded to embrace
much of their Opinion, and so at length alienated themselves from the Catholic
Communion, as appears in their later persecutions of the Catholics in Italy
and Africa. But at first the very reason that prevailed with Ulphilas was, that
Eudoxius pretended the difference betwixt themselves and the Catholics to be
(...), Theod. ubi suprae.
as Theodoret shows, and Sozomen censures his proceeding herein as done (...),
as inconsiderate rather than out of any ill design. And there were other
deceits as disingenuous as this used by the Arians, to draw such to their
Communion who were known really to retain the Nicene Faith. You know how the
greatest part of the Latin Fathers were imposed on in the Council of Ariminum
by Valens and Ursacius, who read (...) instead of (...) in the Nicene Creed,
and how a Confession of their Faith was drawn up by them at Nice in Thrace, and
imposed on the Catholics under the name of the famous Nicene Creed of
Bithynia. So that there were two reasons that in those Ages prevailed with some
Catholics to communicate with the Arians; one that the first quarrel betwixt
Alexander and Arius was thought only personal, not on account of any real
difference, at least that that betwixt the later Arians and the Catholics was
so; another was that, if there was any real difference, yet it was rather in
expressions mutually misunderstood, than in things, or at least in things not
conceived sufficiently momentous to divide Communion. As therefore you would not
I believe in your own practice have it concluded, that you are an Independent
or Prelatist, because you are for communicating with such as are so, but only
that you think our differences unworthy that the Churches peace should be
broken for them; so you cannot conclude that Ulphilas was an Arian, because he
communicated with such as were, but only that he thought the Controversies too
trivial. Nor can you blame him for thinking them trivial, seeing he was
persuaded they were nothing but words. Nor is such his communion the least
intimation of his deserting the Catholic Doctrine, seeing he embraced them no
further than he conceived them not to differ from what he had formerly
believed. Nor need you think it so strange in Ulphilas, for I verily believe
that there were very many more in Constantine's time, Of this kind of
Dispensation even in matters of faith see Examples of S. Greg. Naz. S. Basil,
Maximus in Petr. de Marc. l. 3. de concord. Sacr. and Imper. c. 13. sect. 10,
11.
especially who did not seem to condemn or desert the Catholic Doctrine, but
were unwilling to separate Communion for any unscriptural expression
whatsoever, where they conceived the sense secure; and did as much censure the
Arian Forms of (...) and (...), as the Catholic (...) of being unscriptural.
So that their whole design seems to have been, that persons agreeing in things
might not disagree about words, which I believe you will not disapprove.

To my other instance of a National, LXV.
at least much greater than Parochial Church, under one Bishop, that of the
Indians, (not the Persians, as you mistake) both converted and governed by
Frumentius, you say, It is easy to gather by the History how few of them were
then converted. If you mean, that they were so few, that they might
conveniently resort to one place of meeting, (which we mean by a Parish) the
contrary is so manifest from the places, as I believe you would not have said
otherwise, if you had been pleased to have consulted them. Socr. l. 1. c. 19.
Socrates plainly mentions one (...) founded before Frumentius was consecrated
their Bishop by S. Athanasius; but after his return to them with Episcopal
power, he as plainly says, that he founded many more. Soz. l. 11. c. 24.
Sozomen says, that he did (...) in the Plural Number; Theod. l. 1. c. 23.
Theodoret, that (...), which appears also from Ruffinus, who had the relation
from Aedesius himself, who was the Companion of Frumentius. To my third
instance of Moses, all that you answer is, that its likely he had as few among
the Arabians, there being no mention in the History of any thing to persuade
us, that he had many Churches under him, that you remember. Sozomen's words
concerning him are, Soz. l. 4. c. 38.
(...). Theodoret is indeed indefinite, Theod. l. 4. c. (...).
but yet his words are such as imply a very considerable multitude; (...). For
if they had been but few who were converted by him, it is not likely that the
expressions would have been so unlimited, having before spoken of the whole
Nation, who had desired him by their Princess Maria.

AFTER these instances of great numbers under the Jurisdiction of single
Bishops, LXVI
I at length applied them to my purpose, observing that they were so many, yet
discipline was not dissolved. To this you answer, 1. That in all this I leave
out a matter of chief consideration, viz. That all the Presbyters then were
Assistants in discipline, and had a true Church Government, which now they have
not. If you mean such Government as you count true, in respect of their
Parishioners, this you know is not denied them; they have a power of executing
their Ordinaries commands among them, and to discharge their own office, though
with dependence on the Bishop, which is as much as is consistent with an
Ecclesiastical Monarchick Government, and is an assistance sufficient to enable
an Ecclesiastical as well as a Secular Monarch to preserve discipline. If such
as is true in respect of the Government in general; even this they have in the
lower houses of our Convocations. So that all that you can complain of among us
as dissonant from the primitive example, is that they are not indeed assistant
at their Bishops counsels in every particular act of discipline. This you may
remember I wished reformed, but as it is I cannot conceive it so extremely
prejudicial to discipline, as to excuse the want of it under a Diocesan
Government. For even among us the Bishop, or he who represents him, (though for
my part I could wish that he would act personally without such Representatives)
does not give sentence in particular acts of discipline without counsel, and
that counsel qualified with such requisites as would make Presbyters fit to
assist in it, that is, skill in the Canon Laws and prudence in Government; so
that their being also ordained persons would only prove an advantage of
decorum, not of material influence on Government. Certainly unless Clergiemen
were better skilled in these things, than I doubt they are commonly, their
only being Clergiemen would not so conveniently fit them for service in this
kind, if wanting those other more essential qualifications, as their having
them though wanting Orders. So that of the two evils which follow their
disunion in the same persons this seems to be the less. But if you think no
assistance sufficient, but such as may make them independent on their Bishop,
that I have proved as far from the practice of those earlier ages as of the
present.

2. YOU say, LXVII.
It Is strange that we that have eyes and ears must be sent to the Persians (you
mean the Indians) and ancient History, to know whether one Bishop can hear, and
try, and admonish so many thousands at once, as we see by experience are those
objects of discipline, which the Scripture describes; and when we see that it
is not done. But all this need not have been thought so strange, if you had
remembered the true state of the question; that it was not whether discipline
were actually maintained by our Diocesan Government? but whether it could not
possibly be maintained under it? and that it does no way follow that it cannot
because it is not. That although this argument ab actu ad potentiam negative
(which is yours) do not hold, yet mine which proceeds affirmatively will, That
discipline has actually been maintained under a Diocesan Government, therefore
it is still possible to be maintained under it. That for concluding this
possibility it is not requisite that it must be maintained in all times and
places, but it is sufficient that it was in any, and that sure may be proved as
well by ancient and exotic Histories, as by those which are modern and of our
own Country. And for showing the possibility, I have already proved, that so
many thousands may as well be disciplined by one Ecclesiastical as one Secular
Monarch. That of those many thousand objects of discipline you conceive
described in the Scripture, many are only Objects of private cognizance, which
is not denied to ordinary Parish Ministers. That they who are of public are
not so extremely numerous, or if they were, they may be dealt with as in
Seculars, some punished in terrorem, and others equally guilty permitted to
escape without any great charge of partiality, than what is ordinarily thought
equitable in great multitudes by secular persons. And that of those which
remain, it is not so requisite that all be tried at once, and that one must
hinder the procedure against the other. But after all this you say, We have
talked but of a Phantasm; for it is not one Bishop but one Layman, a
Chancellor, that uses this decretory power of the Keys, etc. and that the
Bishop rarely meddleth with it. Still you forget that I did in my former Letter
expressly decline this Controversy, and intimated that our present question was
not concerning the decorum of the person, but the possibility of discipline
under him; (and sure you will not deny that a Laymans abilities for Government
may be as great as a Clergiemans, whence it will follow, that discipline may as
well be preserved under him;) that our question was concerning Diocesan
Government as such, that is, as including under it the Cures of several
Presbyters, to which this office of Laychancellour is accidental. The business
of the Covenant I am unwilling to engage in, because I do not know whether it
can be done conveniently without offense. Your Explication of my Information
concerning the words [consent to the use, etc.] in the Act for Uniformity, I
verily believe to be true, both because you say it, and because it does not
deny, but only give a further account of some passages not mentioned by my
worthy Author; and because the word [use] is omitted in the Form it self,
though mentioned immediately before. What the Reasons were that were urged by
the House of Commons for proving them intolerable I know not, nor have been
informed by you; yet I could conjecture several that were very apposite and
expedient, notwithstanding they might not intend to oblige to an internal
assent, in case exterior peaceable acquiescency, as it is usually understood
by Conformists themselves; and that they did not intend to exclude peaceable
Conformists, though otherwise not satisfied of the expedience of every single
Imposition, seems very credible, because there is not the least intimation of
so rigid an exposition as that is which is mentioned by you, That you must
never endeavor any alteration, no not by a request or word. All that is
desired is, that you would not, while you are a private person, endeavor any
further than by request and words; (as indeed you cannot lawfully and justly do
without encroaching on the offices of others, which cannot be excused by the
conceived justice of your cause.) That you would give leave, when all is done,
to the persons requested by you to judge of the reasonableness of your
requests, not obliging them to act by yours but their own consciences, which
when all is done must be the measure of their own proceedings. That in case of
their dissent from you, you neither raise parties against them, nor encourage
them that do by communicating with them. That you would in such a case not
easily conclude the error to be in your Superiors, considering that your self
are at least as fallible as they; or if you did indeed think the cause so
evident, as might justly warrant your dissent, (as I confess thet there are
some degrees of evidence to private persons sufficient to countervail any
authority whatsoever) yet that you would use no other means for prevailing
against the conceived prejudices of Governors, than such as would become the
modesty of a private person, powerful persuasions and hearty prayers. That even
in such cases they would give active obedience in things not sinful, and
passive in such as were. This behavior would salve the difficulties on both
sides, would both preserve the peace of the Church, and the peace of a
Dissenters conscience, if invincibly persuaded; would minister more comfort to
him, and satisfy him of his own sincerity in designing the glory of God, when
there were less suspicions of any ends of his own; and his sufferings for the
peace of the Church would be as glorious and rewardable, if we may believe S.
Cyprian, as if they were for the faith of the Church.

IF I had been dealing with a person less zealous and industrious for this
peace than you have approved your self by public Monuments, LXVIII
it had here been seasonable to have conjured you by all that is or can be dear
to a Lover of God, or of the honor of Religion; by all your sacred or civil
Interests, by your respects either to the Church or Country of your birth and
education, which are not more prejudiced by any thing than our Ecclesiastical
Divisions; that you would be pleased to lay out those great Talents of Parts
and Interest in the Peoples Affections, wherewith God has so abundantly
enriched you, on the reconciliation of the people with themselves and with
their Governors, (I am confident you would find that a more effectual course
of promoting discipline, for which you are so zealous, than the unsettlement of
the present and forcible Establishment of another Form of Government as much
maligned as this when it has prevailed, and has attempted the execution of
discipline.) That you would consider it as your greatest security, to be
inquisitor and wary in a cause of so dangerous consequence, if you should prove
mistaken, and your greatest honor to yield to truth, and to relinquish any
opinions, how long maintained, or how dear soever, when they shall appear to be
erroneous. That you would be pleased in order thereunto, to consider
impartially what I confess has here been weakly represented, not as an
adversary to my cause; but as a diligent enquirer after truth, where ever it
may be found, as our most serious common interest. That therefore you would
excuse my failings in the impropriety of words, and correct those that may be
found in the disadvantage of my management, and consider all not according to
the unskilfulness of my proposal, but the nature, strength, and evidence of the
Arguments themselves, as discoverable in order to your own satisfaction, by
your own more discerning judgment. That you would beware of precipitancy in
resolving, and of tenaciousness in maintaining unsufficiently grounded
resolutions, in a question of so great consequence for catholic peace. These
(I say) and the like Topics might have been urged and insisted on to another,
that had been less skilful or sincere; but to you I believe it is sufficient to
have intimated them, rather as warnings what you may avoid, than as
instructions in what you need to be informed. I shall therefore recommend the
whole success to God, who has often manifested strength out of the mouths of
babes and sucklings, and to your own ingenuous and pious industry and
favorable judgment, in an affair so nearly concerning the Churches peace, and
the good of Souls, for which you are deservedly so zealous; and conclude, only
desiring the continuance of your prayers (if I have already impetrated any
portion in them) for

Trin. Coll. near Dublin, June 26. 1673. Your sincerely affectionate Friend and
Servant, HENRY DODWELL.

LETTER III.
The Contents.
Reasons of delaying this Answer, 1 Endeavors to prevent his displeasure 2.
Advices then against some Intimations of his of publishing our Letters, 3. My
unwillingness to differ from him in any thing tolerable, 4. The Charge of
SCHISM briefly stated against them, 5. A pathetical Application of all that had
been said to Mr. Baxter, 6.

Reverend Sir,
larger Answer to the body of mine, and partly because I thought you a little
offended at my former freedom, and because I was jealous how things never so
innocently intended might have been understood, till a little time had abated
the resentment; and because I was, and I hope ever shall be, very unwilling to
give an occasion, though I be conscious of no cause of disturbance to a person
so pious and peaceable, and who has already exposed himself so freely to the
persecuting pens and tongues of the exasperated Zealots of the several parties,
for his desire to bring them to a mutual better understanding, I have deferred
my Answer hitherto.

misunderstandings still so continued, possibly through my obscurity; for
otherwise I think there is nothing new objected by you, but what I think I
might have referred you to the several Paragraphs where I endeavored to answer
it, which yet you take not the least notice of. You may perceive how far I have
been from any thing that might savor of arrogance; how I have therefore waved
those principal disputes, which I perceived had principally alienated you from
our Communion; and how I have engaged on none but such whither you seemed your
self to invite me, and how even there I have behaved my self, though indeed
freely, (which I have always looked on the indispensable duty of a virtuous
friend, and I presumed you to be of my mind) yet with all possible respect to
your person, and submission in matters of private concernment, and
acknowledgment of my mistakes where convicted. I had never so much as mentioned
these things, if I had not been necessitated to it for your satisfaction and my
own defense. If I have spoken any thing which might be capable of an ill
construction, and may be spared without prejudice to the merit of my cause; I
do again most heartily retract it, and submit to your own correction, if you be
pleased to let me know the particulars. For I desire to have no other
Contentions with you, but that which I believe you will not be offended with,
the (...), an emulation who shall most contribute to a solid peace. These
things I hope may satisfy a mind more displeased, and less influenced with
Christianity, than yours, whom I find very well disposed even in the height of
these little resentments; and I hope we shall both of us defeat the Devils
policy, in turning those things which he intended as provocations, into grounds
of a future mutual endearment.

acknowledged mistakes, which I would not have by any means obtruded on the
public, (I mean in my own papers, for I do not undertake to censure yours;)
and many things may be further cultivated, and I think we may both of us be
more willing to yield to truth, whilst our Disputes are managed with due
privacy and candor.

personal opinions with you, that may either be defended or denied without
breach of mutual charity; and that I have been necessitated to such unhappy
ones as divide external communion, though I believe they do on both sides leave
room for personal charity: as I am sorry for it, so it is my duty to my dear
Mother the Church, my love to real peace, which I am sorry to see you as
pernicious to in your consequences, as you are zealous for in your directly
professed principles, the very same things which have made me love and honor
you, that have here obliged me to contradict you. And therefore I hope you will
give me, if not your ear, yet your pardon.

only Heresy could oblige to separate communion, and there were no such thing
as Schism; then I do confess that your plea for the external communion of all
that agree in matters fundamental, would be more satisfactory; or if all Schism
were only in the overvaluing of lesser differences. But considering that God
has made the Christian Church not only a multitude of Christians agreeing in
their assent to several propositions, like the followers of Plato or Aristotle,
but a body politic, consisting of Governors and Governed, united in an
exterior way of profession in Creeds and Sacraments, and empowered with an
authority of depriving refractory persons of the benefits of Communion, for the
only crime of disobedience, though the instance wherein obedience were
required, were otherwise of no very considerable consequence. And considering
that all the Sects were at first subject to the Jurisdiction of the Church,
which was conformable to all other times and places, where there has been any
such society as a Church, (as far as History can inform us, for all Blondell's
vast reading and diligence, when thoroughly examined, will not afford you a
different example) in that very form of Government from which they separated;
the question will not be whether a Surplice, etc. be necessary to be imposed?
but whether the first Separators could be excused for their disobedience to a
Government so firmly settled by so long and so peaceable a prescription, under
whose Jurisdiction themselves were born? not whether Episcopacy be the form
established by God as obligatory on all, where they are supposed in their own
liberty of choice? but whether it be not lawful to submit to it? or whether
Subjects can be excused for their disobedience to a Government, under whose
Jurisdiction they are born, if acknowledged as lawful, though not most perfect?
not whether Episcopacy ought to be changed? but whether Subjects could lawfully
do it without the consent of Superiors? whether Subjects erecting a new form
of Government, independent on that of the Bishop within his Jurisdiction, be so
much as passive obedience? whether if it be not, it can be an excuse from the
guilt of Schism? whether erecting an altar in opposition to the one altar of
the Bishop, be not the very notion of Schism condemned by the Church as such,
as soon as Ecclesiastical History informs us of any such thing as Schism in the
world? whether by this way of proceeding there be any security for the future
against the enterprises of any factious person, that shall pretend the
discovery of a new form of Government, either in substance or in any
indifferent circumstance, to hinder the infinite propagation of Schism? whether
if the first Separators had no power to do so, they could propagate any to
their Successors? whether if they could not, the present case be not the same
as formerly? whether your communicating with Schismatics do not countenance
them, and involve you in the guilt of it?

Schism in opposition to Ecclesiastical Government, I beseech you consider how
it is possible to be committed, if not by the means now mentioned? For Gods
sake, for your Souls sake, for the Churches sake, I beg of you as on my bended
knees, that as there is no reason that you should receive these things, so you
would not reject them for my sake, because the proponent is contemptible. The
question is not, whether you should be of my opinion? but whether you should
not beware of being guilty of the sin of Schism, and being accessory to those
divisions which you do so seriously deplore? Our Savior did not deny the
Scripture when quoted by the Devil, and I hope you will not disown the truth
from a Christian, though weak and unworthy to be called so. S. Augustine, who
was a great writer as you have been, never got more honor by any than by his
Retractations. And I know I need not tell you, that no victory is more glorious
than to be overcome by truth. I entreat you excuse my eagerness in this affair,
and believe it to proceed from nothing so much as from a hearty affection to
your person, and an ambition of a near union to you, in the truly solid bonds
of catholic unity, who might by your example be highly instrumental in the
recovery of many Souls from that dangerous sin of Schism, of which too many are
too little sensible. If I may any way prevail on you in these things, impose
what penance you please for other errors or imprudences, whether real or
conceived to be so, on

Your sincerely affectionate Friend and Servant, HENRY DODWELL.

Postscript.
SInce my Letter to Mr. Baxter, which gave him warning of my design to publish
these, he has hastened out an old Discourse written before my Letters, which he
will needs have pass for an Answer to my Letters, which were written
afterward. He cannot pretend it to make any Application to most of the
particulars of mine: all therefore that he can truly so much as pretend, is
only that it is virtually an Answer, by disproving my Answers by such
principles as are unanswerable by any principles laid down by mine, or by a
further proof of his own assertions. But he is the person who accepts not of
such virtual Answers from his Adversary. Otherwise why is he still so clamorous
for Answers to Voetius and his own Disputations of Church Government? For what
is there in either of them (as far as I am concerned, who am not concerned for
any of the peculiar ways, by which the Romanists manage this same Argument, not
now to mention the many other particulars, which peculiarly relate to the
singular ways of stating the same Questions, in other Protestant, or even
Episcopal, Authors, which are notwithstanding nor made use of by me) but what
has already been sufficiently provided for by the principles of my former
Discourse?

But I will not deal so hardly with him as he does with me. I accept even of
virtual Answers where I can find them. What has he therefore said to the
Subjects of the two Particulars which himself mentions as the sum of my
Letters? Has he produced any thing new, to show that his Arguments to prove the
impossibility of Ecclesiastical Discipline, in a Diocese consisting of a number
of Presbyters proportionable to the populousness of the Diocese, but obnoxious
to the curb and Ecclesiastical coercion of the Diocesan Bishop, do not as
validly overthrow the possibility of the like Secular Discipline under a
Monarch of a District equal to a Diocese, with the like assistance of
subordinate Governors? Has he proved that it is more the Bishops office to
take a personal care of every Soul in his Diocese, than it is the Monarchs to
secure the Lives and Fortunes of every Subject in his Dominions? Has he offered
any further proof, that any thing in the Bishops Office does oblige him to
discharge his Office to every Individual in his own person, more than the like
office of the Magistrate does him to be particularly acquainted with all the
cases of his particular Subjects? Has he shown that it is any more a culpable
delegation of the Episcopal Office, to employ others in the care of those many
numbers in a Diocese, to which no care of a single person can extend, than it
is in a Prince that he does not personally arrest and punish every particular
Offender? Till these things, or something equivalent to these, be urged with
greater force than they were in those Letters of his which were answered by
mine, and urged in such a way as may prevent the Answers which may be given by
the principles laid down here; I cannot in equity think my self obliged to make
particular applications to such Answers as afford no matter for further
improvement or discovery.

The other particular insisted on by me was, that in those primitive times,
wherein discipline did most remarkably flourish, the Government of the Church
was notwithstanding Diocesan; which plainly shows that discipline is still
practicable under a Diocesan Government. And what has he done new for avoiding
this consequence? Does he deny that discipline was then practiced? This he does
not that I know deny, concerning those earliest ages, of which we are at
present disputing. Does he therefore deny that the Government then was
Diocesan? This is all he aims at. But what has he produced new, for disproving
what I have here said to prove it so? He still repeats his old Assertion, that
(...) then was equivalent to our present Market Towns of one Parish. But I see
nothing new produced to disprove what I have said to prove mine, that Cities
then were walled and incorporated, and included the Jurisdiction of the
Country that belonged to them, and were generally in those places which were
converted by the Apostles, as great if not more great and populous, as ours are
now; and consisting of as great numbers of Christians of one denomination. And
certainly those Cities, which had generally been Commonwealths, including their
Jurisdiction in the Country subject to them, how small soever he will fancy the
Cities themselves to have been, were yet too numerous to meet particularly in
Assemblies so frequently as Christians did meet then, and in such times of
jealousy from an otherwise persuaded Government. I have also proved the same
from the multitude of Presbyteries assisting the Bishop, of which no imaginable
account could have been given if a Bishops charge had been then no greater than
could have been discharged by a single person, even this himself acknowledges
from Ignatius, yet does not see how inconsistently with his own Hypothesis, nor
does he offer to give the least account of it. I have observed that the
multitude of Churchgovernours was proportionably as great then as now, but that
the allotting each Presbyter his particular Cure, as it is now done by the
distinction of Parishes, is in truth a more convenient expedient for making the
Government practicable. I have shown that his own decryed Instances of Rome and
Alexandria are the only Instances in all Antiquity, of Churches fitted and
confined to the management of single persons. I have given an account how so
great multitudes might notwithstanding communicate from the same Altar. To all
these things I find nothing here replied, nor is it likely that he thought of
them in a Book written so long before mine.

In short, though he have indeed produced more Instances, yet I see none but
what are reducible to the same Topics, and are therefore already answered in
generally speaking to those Topics. I find neither any new Arguments, nor any
further Improvements of old ones, much less any satisfactory account of my
Arguments or contrary Assertions. So that if this be all he has to say, I see
no reason why I may not leave it to the Reader to judge between us. These are
my present thoughts on a cursory view of the design and management of his Book,
that part especially wherein I am more particularly concerned. However I do not
prejudge either the Reader or my self, if upon a close perusal any thing do yet
appear, that may deserve a further examination, more than I see yet any reason
to expect. I shall be thankful to him who will tell me what it is. O that it
would please God to awaken this good man's former zeal for solid peace and
piety! Those are things for which his Talents serve better than they do for
Controversy. How much rather would I serve him in the meanest offices that
might be really subservient to these things, than thus contend with him in
these unedifying dividing Disputations?

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books sold by Benjamin Took at the Ship in S. Paul's
Churchyard.
HErodoti Halicarnassaei Historiarum Libri IX. Ejusdem Narratio de Vita Homeri
excerpta ^ Ctesiae libris Persicis and Indicis. Graeco-Lat. Folio. Francisci
Suarez Tractatus de Legibus ac Deo Legistatore, in X. Libros distributus,
utriusque fori hominibus non minus utilis quam necessarius. Folio.

Herbert. Thorndicus de Ratione as Jure finiendi controversias Ecclesiae. Folio.

The Holy Court in five Tomes, written in French by N. Caussin. The fourth
Edition. Folio.

The Works of the most Reverend Father John Bramhall, D. D. late Lord
Archbishop of Armagh, Primate and Metropolitan of all Ireland, some of which
were never before printed; with the Life of the Author. Folio.

The History and Vindication of the Loyal Formualry or Irish Remonstrance in
several Treatises, by F. Peter Walsh. Folio.

A Collection of all the Statutes now in use in the Kingdom of Ireland, with
Notes in the Margin, and a Continuation of the Statutes made in the Reign of
the late King Charles 1. And likewise the Acts of Settlement and Explanation,
etc. As also a necessary Table to the whole Work. Folio.

Several Chirurgical Treatises by Richard Wiseman Sergeant Surgeon. Folio.

The Primitive Origination of Mankind considered and examined according to the
Light of Nature, by Sir M. Hale, Knight, late Chief Justice of the Kings Bench.
Folio.

Sir Richard Bakers Chronicle of England. Folio.

Bishop Sandersons Sermons. Folio.

Bentivolio and Urania in six Books, by N. Ingelo, D. D. Folio.

Le Beaus Pledeur, a Book of Entries containing Declarations, Informations, and
other select and approved Pleadings, with Special Verdicts and Demurrers, in
most Actions Real, Personal, and Mixed. Together with faithful References to the
most authentic Law Books now extant, and a more copious and useful Table than
has been printed in any Book of Entries. The whole comprehending the Art and
Method of good Pleading. By Sir Humphry Winch, sometimes one of the Justices of
the Court of Common Pleas. Folio.

Skinneri Etymologicon Linguae Anglicanae, seu Explicatio vocum Anglicarum
Etymologica ex propriis fontibus, in 5 distinctas classes digesta. Folio.

Holyoaks last Dictionary in 3 parts; 1. The English before the Latin, 2. The
Latin before the English, 3. The proper names of Persons, Places, etc. Folio.

Sixty one Sermons preached mostly on public occasions, by Adam Littleton, D.
D. Rector of Chelsey, and Ch^plain in ordinary to His Majesty. Folio.

Dr. Edw. Brownes Travels illustrated with Figures. Quarto.

The Controversial Letters, or the grand Controversy concerning the pretended
Authority of Popes, and the true Sovereignty of Kings. Quarto.

A true Widow, a Comedy acted at the Duke Theater, written by Tho. Shadwell.
Quarto.

A Vindication of the Syncerity of the Protestant Religion in the point of
Obedience to Sovereigns, by P. Du Moulin, D. D. Canon of Christ Church
Canterbury. The fourth Edition, in which more light is given about the horrid
Popish Plot whereby our late Sovereign K. Charles 1. was murdered. Quarto.

Phocaena, or the Anatomy of a Porpess diffected at Gresham College, with a
preliminary Discourse concerning Anatomy, and a Natural History of Animals, by
E. Tyson, D. D. Quarto.

Dodwells Separation of Churches from Episcopal Government, as practiced by our
present Nonconformists, proved Schismatical from such Principles as are least
controverted, and do withal most popularly explain the sinfulness and mischief
of Schism. Quarto.

-- Two Letters of Advice, 1. For the Susception of Holy Orders, 2. For Study
Theological, especially such as are rational, with a Catalogue of the Christian
Writers and genuine Works that are extant of the first three Centuries. Octavo.

-- Discourse concerning Sarchoniat honis Phoenician History. Octavo.

-- Considerations of present concernment, how far Romanists may be trusted by
Princes of another Persuasion. Octavo.

-- Two short Discourses against the Romanists, 1. An account of the
Fundamental Principle of Popery, and of the Insufficiency of their Proofs for
it. 2. An Answer to six Quere's proposed to a Gentlewoman of the Church of Engl.

FINIS.

