MODERN NOVELS:

VOL. V.

CONTAINING, I. Don Sebastian King of Portugal. II. Agnes de Castro, or Fatal
Beauty. III. Amorous Abbess.: In Two Parts.


LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, in Russel Street, in Covent Garden, 1692.

Don Sebastian KING OF Portugal.

An Historical Novel.

IN FOUR PARTS.

Done out of French by Mr. FERRAND SPENCE.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1683.

TO THE Right Honorable THE COUNTESS OF STANFORD.
Madam,
AN Unfortunate Prince begs Audience of Your Ladyship, in hopes of representing
His Unhappy Circumstances to be such, as that he may with Justice lay claim to
Your Ladyships Protection.

He is sensible that neither His Ambition, or rather His Destiny, could make
Him amends for the Misfortunes they have plunged Him in, than by suffering Him
to reappear in the World under Your Ladyships Commission. If He succeeds in
this Request, He questions not to Reign again with as much Glory and Luster, as
He was before oppressed with the Malignity and Perverseness of His Fate.

To You, Madam, He flies for Refuge, knowing the Whole Universe must pay
Veneration to such an Asyle, and that the Sactuary cannot but be inviolable,
that is supported by so much Beauty, so much Wit and Virtue.

He is assured His greatest Enemies will be forced to court His Reconciliation
and Friendship, when under Your Colors; and that they will freely make
Restitution of all the Stars unjustly gave them to His disadvantage, rather
than incur the Blame and Censure of the present Age, and all Posterity. For it
is Declaring War to All, to continue at variance with a Prince, under the
Guarranty of a Lady, whose many Charming Qualities would have obtained her even
the Adoration of the Ancients.

But he is most capable of telling His own Story: And as for doing You Justice,
Madam, in so nice a Character as that of Your Ladyships, a Character that
entitles You to the Love of Heaven, and demands the Esteem and Admiration of
all Mankind, is what surpasses the Art and Skill both of Pen and Pencil. Every
Action of Yours is a Panegyrique of it self. You stand in no need of the
Daubing either of the Writer or the Painter: Daubing, I said, Pardon the Word,
Madam; but every thing must prove Course, that vainly attempts to Copy so
perfect an Original. So much Merit needs no Historian. As it has already
rendered You the Favorite of the present Age, so Tradition will transmit you to
Posterity, as an Extraordinary Instance of all the Advantages of Birth and of
Fortune, of Body and of Mind, without any of the Vanities that almost
constantly attend these Blessings and Accomplishments in others.

But this is a Subject so bewitching, that it had almost transported me beyond
the Bounds of the most profound Respect and Submission wherewith I am,

Madam, Your Ladyships Most humble and most obedient Servant, F. SPENCE.

Don Sebastian, KING OF PORTUGAL.
IN the first Years of the Reign of Don Sebastian, Portugal was the most
Peaceable and Flourishing Kingdom of all Europe. The Divisions and Contests
about Religion, which so cruelly shattered other Provinces, had not spread
their fury into that Country: And ever since Don Alphonso Henry, the first King
of Portugal, aided by William Long-sword, had chaced the Moors out of his
Territories, the Quiet of that People had not been troubled by any fears. This
King had hardly attained his fifteenth year, but he made himself admired by all
his People, and feared by all his Neighbors: The vivacity of his Wit, the
elevation of his Soul, the dexterity he made appear in all his Exercises, and
the greatness of his Courage, rendered him the most accomplished Prince of that
Age. He was Handsome, well made, Valiant, and Liberal: He had a Majestic Port,
Royal Inclinations, and it seemed as if Nature had taken leisure to form him
with all the Qualities that can make a Prince recommendable to Mankind. A crowd
of young Courtiers, who were brought up with him, or whom the desire of timely
advancing themselves by Employes, had drawn from all parts to Lisbon, composed
his most agreeable Court. And as Youth, Amors, and Pleasures have ever been
inseparable, and as Love is the first and softest amusement of Mankind, all
these Courtiers insensibly applied themselves more to their Mistresses, than to
their Prince; and their hearts being little touched with Ambition, made them
give sighs to Love, when they fancied they rendered Assiduities to Fortune.

That Court was made up of Persons of extraordinary Merit: Queen Katherine, the
Kings Grandmother, was no less elevated above those of her Sex, by her Virtue
than by her Quality. She had ever applied her self with a great deal of
Prudence and Success to dissipate the troubles that threatened the State, during
the Infancy of Don Sebastian; And when this young Prince took upon him the
Government of his Kingdom, she gave her self entirely to the Practice of all
those Virtues that can recommend a Queen to the World. The Duchess of Braganza
had a great share of Wit and Beauty, and though she had a Son of the same age
with the King, she despaired not of charming that Prince, and employed all her
Arts to inspire him with Friendship, Esteem, or Affection. She was much in
Katherine's favor, and managed her self with so much Cunning, that Acting as
well the part of a Lucretia as of a Gossip, she shared in all the Exercises of
the Queens Devotion, and in all the Matches of the Kings Divertisements. The
Duke her Husband knowing her heart to be too susceptible of Ambition to be the
like of Love, suffered her with Tranquillity enough at Lisbon with the Young
Duke of Barcellos their Son; and was himself almost always at his
Country House. Eugenia, whose Relations had ever had the most considerable
Charges of the State, admirably well maintained her Quality in that Court: She
was brown, of an advantageous Shape, and had a sweet and solid Wit: And though
she had lost her Father and Mother when she was very young, her Carriage had
been ever so regular, that she gave as much admiration for her Virtue, as for
her Beauty. Christopher de Cavora, who was Master of the Horse to the King, and
his Favorite, had a Daughter called Leonora; who, maugre her tender Age, was
already the Ornament of the Court, and with her Blooming Beauty made the most
insensible to tremble.

That Court was filled with several other Persons, who had no less merit than
those I have mentioned; though they were of a less Elevated condition. Violanta
was of these last: She was Maid of Honor to Jane of Austria, a perfect Beauty
and infinite Deserts, and if her Charms were proper to give Birth to a great
Passion, her heart was capable of being sensible of the like.

But all the luster of the Court was not confined within the Circle of the
Beauty of this Sex, the Men made there likewise admirable Figures. Cardinal
Henry, Don Sebastian's Uncle, had ever made appear great deal of Conduct in the
Tutelage, that was committed to him, of the Young King. Don Lewis, who was
likewise his Uncle, had signalized his Courage in several Rencounters, and with
Justice passed for the bravest and handsomest Prince of that Kingdom. He had
had a long time a very tender Engagement with Violanta; and the report even run
at Court, that he had Married her, and by her had a Son, whom he brought up at
one of his Houses near Lisbon. Duke d'Avero had made his Prudence and Valor
appear on several occasions under the Reign of John the III, and had been one
of his Favorites; but Cardinal Henry had no great kindness for him, knowing
him to be ambitious and daring. The Young Duke of Barcellos gave great hopes of
his Dexterity and Wit, and began to view of the Beauty of Leonora with a tender
emotion. The Count de Sousa was much esteemed both by the King and Cardinal
Henry: He maintained his Favor by a great merit, and had taken care to join to
all the fine Qualities that make a well bred-Man, the solid Virtues that
compose an honest-man. Don Henry had a thousand good Qualities, that made him
be beloved by all the World, he was well Built, and Vallant, and breathed
nothing but dangers: And as he was the chief of an Illustrious Family both for
Nobility and Riches; his Father had taken care before his Death, to Conclude
his Marriage with Eugenia, they having loved one another from their most tender
Infancy. All things seemed to conspire to unite them; their Humors being
alike, their Qualities suitable, and their Age almost equal, gave all People
great hopes of their happiness.

Amors were the Soul of that Court, and even those who were only sensible of
Ambition were constrained to call Love to their succors, that they might the
better succeed in their Designs. The Duchess of Braganza would have been
willing to have been indepted for the advancement of her Fortune to this last
Passion; she placed all her cares to make the King love her; but was not able
to render his heart sensible: He had no other Passion than for Arms, he had
raised a Regiment which he Exercised continually, and frequently Reviewed: He
would as often undertake the Labors of Common Soldiers, as the Cares of chief
Officers, the greatest Perils had a secret Charm to invite him, and not
believing that any common danger was worthy of him, he would not undertake any
thing that was not attended with difficulties: If he had any Voyage to make
upon the Sea, he affected to Embark during the Tempest, disdaining to rock
peaceably in a Calm that might lull his Virtue asleep. Duke d'Avero had no less
Ambition than the Duchess of Braganza, and likewise fancied that Love might be
useful to his Designs. He had a Daughter called Elvira: He sought in her Beauty
for the reputation that was refused his own merit, and imagined that she had
Charms enough to touch the heart of that Young King: She had not yet been seen
at Court, though she was at an Age to appear there with luster, because the
Duchess her Mother, having a long time languished in a Disease which
occasioned her Death two Years before, had retired her self to one of her
Country Houses, and had ever kept her with her; and the Duke, after the Death
of his Wife, had put his Daughter into a Nunnery near his House, not designing
to take her from thence, till he had found out a Match suitable to her
Circumstances.

In the mean time Eugenia had too many Charms to satisfy themselves with the
Conquest of Don Henry. The Count de Sousa had been long Passionately in love
with her: His Respects, his Complaisances and Assiduities had sufficiently
assured her of it; but whether she was not willing to understand them, or she
had only Eyes for Don Henry, the Count de Sousa always found in her so much
indifference for him, that he judged it not convenient to declare his Passion
more openly: He had too much respect and discretion to hazard an unprofitable
Declaration. Don Henry was his Friend, Eugenia had ever seen him only under the
notion of Friendship, which he could not any longer support the constraint of:
He saw her every day; she was ever lovely in his Eyes; she had hardly in the
least concealed from him the Passion she had for Henry: That Lover likewise
made him the Confident of his happiness. What a torture is this to a Man, whose
love is extreme, and was not capable of easing himself by betraying his
Mistress and his Friend? After having been for some time in these Extremities,
and having in vain Employed the Succors of his Reason for to cure him, he
fancied, that absence would diminish his Sufferings, by weakening his Passion,
and so was desirous to remove from Court; but his Merit had put him there in
too good a posture for him to go away without some specious pretext.

Elizabeth, whom Philip the II. had Married in his third Nuptials, died in
Spain about that time; wherefore one was to be sent to make the Compliments of
Condolance to this King on the behalf of Queen Katherine his Sister, and Don
Sebastian his Nephew* Sousa fancied that occasion was favorable to him, and
for the obtaining that Commission, he Employed Cardinal Henry's Credit with the
King; the Cardinal highly esteeming his Virtue, used to Queen Katherine, the
Solicitations of Lewis of Granada his Friend; whose Birth and Piety were had in
veneration by all People; and whom that King had caused to come from Spain to
communicate to her, all that concerned the Salvation of her Soul and the good
of the Kingdom. He obtained what he desired, was sent to the King of Spain; but
could not depart without going to take his leave of Eugenia, with whom he found
Don Henry. He used all his endeavors to conceal his Grief, and his Love in
that separation; the Words he spoke had no coherence with one another, and the
Sighs he vented were half stifled: And seeing he could not resist his Grief* he
quitted those two Lovers, and Embraced them, bidding 'em, Farewell, and live
happy, while I do lead a Languishing life, far from you and my Friends. His
Sighs hindered him from speaking more than these Words; he went immediately away
for fear they should see him shed tears: And Eugenia and Don Henry were really
afflicted at his departure, and attributed to Friendship alone, what a more
violent Passion had produced.

The Duke d'Avero, caused Elvira to come and second his Projects: He was
himself surpised with her Beauty, and conceived fresh hopes at the sight of so
dazeling an Object. The truth is, she was capable so ^ngage the most
insensible: Her blew Eyes were sweet and piercing; all her Features were
regular, her Complexion was admirable, and Hair was the finest in the World,
delicately accompanied by all the Beauty of her Face: She was of a middle
Stature, but her Wit was above what is common; she had an insinuating Prefence,
and engaging ways with her; her Conversation was easy, of a soft humor and a
Gentle Soul. Her Father would at first instruct her with the measures she ought
to keep in regard of all the Persons that composed the Court, into which he
would introduce her: But found in her so much Wir, so much Judgment, and a
disposition so Natural to second his desires, that he had nothing else to do
than to describe to her, the different Characters of those, who held the first
Rank. The day after she arrived, the Duke Conducted her to Queen Katherines
Appartment, to pay her her Respects. Her Dress admirably well seconded her
Beauty; the Queen found her the Loveliest Person she had ever seen: The
Duchess of Braganza, Eugenia, Leonora, Violanta, and all those who were there,
were surprised with her Luster. After which they examined all her Features with
a Jealous Spite, and not finding any defect, they all fancied they saw in her a
formidable Rival, who was going to ravish all their Conquests from them. The
Duchess of Braganza more Jealous than any other, would see if her Wit was
answerable to her Charms. She said to her, all she thought would perplex her,
and all the others by the same motive, Engaged her in a Conversation upon
several Subjects; but she ever replied with so much Sweetness and Wit, that
they even admired her against their Will.

This Conversation was interrupted by the Count de Tavora, who came to acquaint
the Queen, that the King was a coming. She immediately Commanded all those in
her Chamber not to make Elvira known, and bid the Duke d'Avero retire, for fear
of discovering her. He obeyed with some vexation, ardently desiring to be a
Witness of the interview of Don Sebastian and his Daughter. The King came,
Elvira was the first Object he saw, and he was so lively struck, that he was
sometime without being able to speak, and without knowing what he should say; a
thousand confused Motions agitated him at that sight, and he was sensible of
'em all, but could not distinguish any; and of all the several thoughts arising
then in his Mind, he was not able to know or explain any, but that which told
him that Elvira was the most Beautiful Person in the World. All the Court
perceived the Kings trouble, and as he saw the Queen likewise observed it, he
endeavored to speak, and conceal his disorder: Who it that Charming Person,
you have embelished the Court with, Madam, said he to the Queen, still eyeing
Elvira? She is a Native of Spain, answered she, whom King Philip my Brother has
sent me, to be of the number of my Maids; but not being willing to have any
more, I am going to send her back: For Heaven's sake don't send her back, (he
interrupted her with a tra^sport) that would be but an ill return to the
Civilities of the King of Spain: Well then, replied the Queen smiling, I will
not send her back without first Consulting you, and she shall have your leave
if she returns. The King clearly faw they had perceived his disorder, he
blushed; and Elvira, who had ever had her Eyes down from the time the King
entered, raised 'em at that instant, and met with those of that Prince, but so
tenderly and so passionately, that she blushed, and was in as great a Confusion
as himself. The Queen after some other Discourses, at length acquainted Don
Sebastian, how this Lady was the Duke d' Avero's Daughter. He was as little
capable of dissembling the joy this News gave him, as he had been to conceal
the disorder that the sight of Elvira had caused in him. He made her a thousand
tender Compliments, and the day being already much advanced, and the Queen
using to withdraw betimes, every one took leave of her and retired.

Elvira went to her Father's, with the Women who had waited on her, and was at
first in some trouble, that Don Sebastian had raised Motions in her, which she
was not acquainted with, and which she however attributed after she had well
examined 'em, only to the respect that the looks of a King inspire. She was
still making these Reflections, when the Duke her Father entered her Appartment,
to know what she thought of the Court. She answered him very exactly upon all
the different Characters she had seen there. But when he asked her, if the King
had been there, if she had seen him, and what she thought of him, she made
appear so much disorder in her Face and understanding, that the Duke divined
the reason of that Confusion, and changed Discourse immediately. The Duchess
of Braganza, retired with sentiments very different from those of Elvira: She
was Ambitious, and Jealous, and penetrating: She aimed at the heart, or rather
the grandeur of the King. She knew from that moment that Elvira was capable of
depriving her of both; and Ambition and Jealousy inspired her with an aversion
for that Rival, that her Policy would hardly dissemble; but amongst all the
different Motions this Visit had caused, there were none so lively and so
tender as those of the King. He was so full of Elvira's Beauty, that it was
impossible for him to speak of any thing else as long as Supper lasted. He lay
all Night thinking of her Charms; fancied, that the blushing he had observed in
her Face, when their Eyes met, was a good presage for his Love; and that her
Eyes were ever too animated for it to be a mere Modesty, which had given
occasion to this Confusion. How happy, said he, should I be to be beloved by
this Charming Person: How Beautiful is she, and how Rich in Wit and Sweetness!
And how miserable should I be, continued he immediately after, if her heart
were engaged, or if it were insensible. For some moments that fear interrupted
the delights of those Reflections, but his hopes coming immediately to his
help, calmed his Mind and revived his Affection.

The Duke d' Avero being impatient to know what Effects his Daughters Beauty
had produced, did not fail to be the next day at the Kings rising, who, as soon
as he saw him, cried out to him aloud: Ah Duke: how Charming is your Daughter,
and how Beautiful did I find her Yesterday? The Duke was so good a Courtier, as
to take this Compliment kindly, and every one made him some upon this Subject,
and the Duke de Barcellos approaching him, told him, The Duchess my Mother has
made me so advantageous a Description of her Wit and Beauty, that the very
recital Charmed me. The truth is, that the Duchess of Braganza, who foresaw
the King would have a very great Passion for Elvira, was desirous that the Duke
de Barcellos might fall in love with her, for traversing this Commerce which
she feared. But if by chance Elvira should have any inclination for this Young
Duke, then she might at least become necessary through the part her Son would
take in that Intreague, and by the absolute power she had over him.

But necessary it was, he should declare himself speedily, and not stay till
the King had explained his budding Passion. Wherefore she passed over
Formalities, and went the next day with her Son to see Elvira. You will find
perhaps, said she to her entering, my Visit rash and too hasty, Madam; this is
not the only fatigue your Beauty will cause you, and the Duke to whom I made
Yester day the recital of it, has forced me to come and importune you with so
much precipitation: But he is still Young Madam, continued she smiling, and
knows not what he demands. Elvira answered with a thousand Civilities. At this
meeting, the Conversation was less serious, and more warm than usually those
are of the first Visits, and the Duke de Barcellos showed so much admiration
for Elvira, that the Count de Tavora, who was then there, fancied he had
conceived a great Passion for her, and said, the day following, in Entertaining
some Persons that came to see him, with the News of the Court, that Elvira's
Beauty made a great noise there, that the Duke de Barcellos was extremely in
love with her, had been to see her, and declared to her a great deal of
kindness.

Leonora was present at this Discourse, and could not hear it without
shivering. For above two Years that the Duke de Barcellos saw her with
assiduity, he had not dared to declare what her Charms had made him suffer; and
their hearts having been used to love one another from their tenderest Infancy,
upon the credit of their sighs, without having otherwise explained themselves,
they had spared themselves the vexation, that Reflections give at the birth of a
Passion, and the confusion which these forts of Declarations cause in those
that hear them: She returned into her Chamber to conceal her trouble; and as
soon as she was at liberty, she let some tears fall, without knowing the reason
that made her weep: She saw her self oppressed with a grief that she had never
felt; sometimes she abandoned her self to all imaginable hatred against Elvira,
sometimes she complained confusedly of the Duke of Barcellos; and not knowing
what Motions to keep to, Why should I complain of him, said she, did he promise
me never to love any one? has he told me, he had a kindness for me? does he
know that I have an inclination for him* or rather, have ever loved him? Alas,
I know nothing of it my self, continued she, but I know very well, I have been
deceived in the opinion I had of the care he took to purchase and preserve my
favor. She had not yet so strictly Examined the Sentiments she had of the Duke
de Barcellos; she durst not even in that moment tell her self, that she loved
him, and attributed to the hatred she had for Elvira, all that the strongest
Jealousy made her suffer. I should not care, said she sometimes, though he
loved another, but I have so great an Antipathy for Elvira, that I cannot
suffer the Passion he has for her; he must renounce it, or never see me more,
I Will rather from this present deprive my self of the pleasure of seeing him,
without asking him any thing, continued she; and likewise the sacrifice that I
pretend from him would oblige me to too much acknowledgment. Ah! what would my
Father say, if I should engage my self without his Consent: Alas! perhaps he
has already discovered my trouble, and perhaps he attributes to Jealousy the
disorder I have made appear. This fear for some time suspended the violence of
her Motions, and made her at length take the resolution of concealing her grief
from the Eyes even of those who caused it.

The Duke d' Avero relied much upon the merit of his Daughter, and hoped to see
her one day Queen of Portugal. She likewise conceived great hopes of her
Charms; and both in concert, without imparting to one another their Designs,
laid Ambushes for the liberty of a Prince, who came and cast himself into
Chains. Don Sebastian distinguished Elvira from all those that endeavored to
please him: He paid her a thousand little passionate addresses, that are never
offered but to one Person, and are the forerunners of the tenderest Passion.
Elvira's heart was too sensible, and her Soul too ambitious not to be touched
at the distinctions and the eagernesses of a Prince, so gallant, so well made,
and so lovely as Don Sebastian; but how prone soever he was for Love, his
domineering Passion was Glory: He impatiently suffered the prudent Zeal of
Cardinal Henry, who opposed the boiling ardour with which he sought out
dangers; he often stole from the vigilance of his Guards, and quitted the
company of Ladies and tender Conversations, to go encounter the most Savage
Beasts in the midst of the Forest. He passionately loved Hunting, the more
dangerous it was the more Charming it seemed to him. And as Queen Katherine and
Cardinal Henry did with all their power mollify the violence of that Exercise,
and the ardour which he gave himself up to it, they got the Ladies of the Court
to be often of the Parties, and endeavored to make a Diversion of so rude and
so dangerous an amusement. He was one day at Queen Katherine's, and proposed a
Match to go hunt Lions the next day. The Queen, whom this Proposition had
caused to tremble, and who knew very well that directly to oppose this Princes
Designs, would but so much the more irritate his desires, cunningly made use of
the Power she saw Elvira had over the King, and told him gently; The only name
of Lions has made Elvira tremble, my Son, and I believe if you hunt them to
morrow, you will have but few Ladies in your train: I love hunting
passionately, answered Elvira, having penetrated into the Queens Design; but
the truth is, this Chase seems to me too terrible, and there are much gentler,
wherein I made the greatest delights of my solitude consist. Well then, we will
run a Stag to morrow, answered the King hastily, the Ladies shall be of the
party, and you will be there Madam, pursued he, looking tenderly on Elvira? The
Queen had a great deal of joy, she had made her Son change his design: Elvira
was much pleased she had served the Queens intentions, and she had received
this mark of Complaisance from Don Sebastian. The Duchess of Braganza, who was
present at this Conversation, could not see, without blushing for spite, this
slight proof of the Kings tenderness for another than her self; and every one
retired some moments after to give Orders for all that was necessary for that
Match.

The King sent one to tell the Duke d'Avero the next day, that as Elvira had
not perhaps had time to prepare her Hunting Clotths, he prayed him to give her
those he sent her; which was a Justicore covered with Spanish Point of Gold and
Silver; the Flowers of which were raised to the life with Jewels of several
Colors; a Riding Petticoate of the same Fashion, and a Cap loaded with a
number of long and very beautiful Blew Feathers: The Duke accepted this Present
for his Daughter with a great deal of respect, and went immediately to Elvira's
Appartment, where having found her still in Bed, he told her, after having
caused all her Women to retire: My Daughter, I bring you a Hunting Habit, which
the King has Commanded me to give you. This Present and Message delivered by a
Father, could not but cause much trouble in her, who received them. Elvira
appeared at it amazed and confused, and not knowing how to answer the Duke, she
told him with a trembling voice: I am very much surprised my Lord, at the
Present the King makes me, and still more, that you your self would take the
care to offer it me. It would however have more perplexed me, had it been
presented me by any other, continued she, and as I have neither Rank nor Merit
that can draw the Cares of this King -- No my Daughter, interrupted the Duke, I
know, Don Sebastian distinguishes you from all those that are at Court: You are
young, he is sensible, and nothing surprises me of all that I have seen from
him in your favor; it might alarm a more severe Virtue than mine, but I think
I know you, and I know the Court. All I desire of you at present, continued he,
is, that you would without repugnance and dissimulation discover to me, all
that shall pass of most importance, in the Commerce Don Sbastian would engage
you in. You have no longer a Mother, my Daughter, pursued he, with an
affectionate and mourning accent, perhaps being both of the same Sex, you would
have been more bold and easy to have discovered to her what you thought upon
this Subject, and her Prudence would without doubt have aided you, to conduct
your self in an Affair of this importance. You have given tears enough to her
death, seeing she began to weep, you must at present reunite in me alone, all
the confidence and tenderness you had both for her and me, and you must speak
to me with the same frankness, you would have done to her, to the end, my
Counsels may supply the want of her, and we may take just measures in all that
concerns you. My Lord, answered Elvira, penetrated with grief and confusion, I
have for you, as much sincerity and respect as I ever had for my Mother, whom I
cannot too much lament: But I dare assure you, without being wanting in what I
owe you, that as Don Sebastian has never acquainted me, he had an inclination
for me, I have never yet consulted my self in what concerns him. I do not ask
you what passes in your heart, (said the Duke) I could not prescribe you other
Rules than those your Duty dictates to you; you know them all, and I am
persuaded you will ever follow them: My Honor, your Reputation, the Memory of
your Mother, and your own Advantage have too much power over your Spirit, to
let your self be seduced by a Passion that is contrary to them. I will only
know from you, continued he, if you have not any aversion for the King, and if
you find in your self ambition enough to desire to become one day Queen of
Portugal. This design I know is something rash, and it would be even
extravagance to let it appear in the Eyes of all the World, but the
endeavoring it cannot be dangerous; and provided you have but greatness of
Soul enough to form the Project, and pursue it with Care and Caution, I do not
despair of success. My Lord, answered Elvira, whom these last Words had
animated with hopes, if I must speak to you with all the Confidence you desire
of me, I confess to you, that the Courtship of a King so well formed, so young,
and so gallant as ours is, cannot displease a Person, who is not prepossessed,
and that not being forestalled with any Sentiment to his disadvantage, the
Crown of Portugal would seem full of Charms to me, if I saw the least
likelihood of pretending to it. Ah! my Daughter, replied the Duke with joy in
embracing her, these are the sentiments I would have inspired you withal:
Pursue this great Work with all the Conduct, and all the Perseverance you are
capable of; but fill all your heart with that Noble Ambition, for fear some
other Passion should seize it, and not leave you all the freedom, that is
necessary for this Project. He gave her several other Counsels for her
Carriage: Elvira promised him to regulate it always according to his wishes,
after which the Duke went out of her Chamber, and left her to think at liberty
of all she had been newly acquainted with, and of the Dresses that were
necessary for her in the Hunting-Match, of which she might apparently receive
all the Honors.

The hour for Hunting being come, every one went to the Rendezvous: The most
part of the Ladies were dressed like Amazons, and mounted upon very fine
Horses: But Elvira appeared Beautiful in her Dress, the King hardly knew again
the Habit he had sent her, so much luster it had upon her; her Hair was tied
back in great Buckles round her Cap; and this Dress gave her a lively and
penetrating Air, which she had not ordinarily. Don Sebastian said to her a
thousand fine things upon her Beauty, and she Complimented him upon his
Present. All the Ladies had their Knights near them; and there was only
Leonora, who ever avoided the Duke de Barcellos; and this Troop dividing it
self into Couples without being too particular, furnished the Lovers with
favorable Occasions of speaking to them of their Passion. Elvira, Riding
better than any of her Sex, outwent them all, and was almost ever up with the
Dogs; the King, being Charmed with her Grace and her Address, ever accompanied
her, and being come with her far enough from the rest, to a Pond, which the
Stag they Hunted leapt into. Your Presence has brought this Stag to the last
gasp, Madam, said he to her, there is no Liberty but what yields to you; I have
not been able to defend mine a against you, pursued he tenderly, and I shall not
regret it, if I can but hope to please you. How bold soever Don Sebastian
naturally was, he could not pronounce these words with his usual resolution, he
felt that instant such fear as a whole Army would not have been capable of
giving him; and Elvira, who had expected such a kind of Declaration, did not
fail to affect the surprise and bashfulness, that such an avowal might cause in
a Person less witty and less prepared than her self. Your Highness (for thus
are the Kings of that Nation styled) said she to (...) then blushing, will
never lose (...) Liberty, without costing the Parties repose, who shall (...)
it from him -- But Sir, said she stopping her self, wholly confused I was a
going to, answer seriously (...) a thing you only told me in raillery* and my
innocence (...) your Discourses have almost made me forget that you are a great
Monarch, and I am your Subject. No, Madam, answered Don Sebastian, with all the
transport the heat of his Temper and Passion was capable of, I love you, I
adore you, my Eyes have told it you; my Sighs have assured it you; my
assiduities shall confirm it: I know not whether I am King or Subject when with
you; and you alone can render me happy. Wherefore tell me in the Name of
Heaven, pursued he, what I ought to hope or fear, and do not make me languish
in uncertainty. Elvira doubtful and confused, had, during this Discourse, her
Eyes upon the ground, her Carriage uncertain, and her Countenance languishing;
and as she was sometime without answering, the King prepared himself to tell
her still something more pressing, when the Duchess of Braganza taking notice
of this Conversation, spitefully run to them, and could not forbear
interrupting them, notwithstanding all the measures she had resolved to keep in
regard of those Lovers: Elvira ran maliciously to her; but however made Don
Sebastian see in her Eyes, in quitting him, a languishing sweetness, that,
without explaining too much, gave him great hopes.

After the Troop was come to the death of the Stag, they returned to Lisbon,
where Cardinal Henry came to show the king Letters that he had newly received
from Spain in the Packet of Souza, by which Philip let him know, that Millei
Moluc, Brother of the lately deceased King of Morocco, was come into Spain to
demand Succors of him, which he had not thought fit to grant him; neither did
he think, that Don Sebastian ought to grant it him, because the Pretentions of
Moluc were too opposite to the Laws of the Europeans, and it would be but to
perplex themselves in a War, that could not be advantageous on their side,
Moluc having neither Troops nor Money to Execute so great an Enterprise. But
the King, impatiently longing to signalize himself, and having his Mind only
filled with Wars and Conquests, told the Cardinal his Uncle, That the Succors
he should give to Moluc, might be advantageous to the Crown of Portugal; that
the Moors would destroy themselves in that War; that in Succouring that Prince,
they might weaken the strongest without strengthening the weakest: And at leng
than those Quarrels, he should not fail to gain some Cities or Places, which
they might join to those that Portugal already had in Africa. The Cardinal, who
saw with delight the Warlike Ardour of this young King, but could have wished
to have something moderated its excess, answered him: Before you determide your
self for this War, Sir, it is convenient you be perfectly well acquainted with
the Subject of the Quarrel betwixt those two Kings: And for the Explaining to
you their different Pretentions, I must be a little more particular in their
History, and tell you things that no occasion has yet been offered to discover
to you.

The Kingdoms of Fez, Morocco, and Turedant, (pursued he, seeing the King gave
Ear attentively to him) have ever been governed by two different Kings, till
Mulei Mahumet-Cherif possessing, together with his Brother Mulei Hamet, those
divided Kingdoms, endeavored to reunite them under his Power: These two Kings
then made a Law, by which they ordered, that Brother should succeed Brother,
and should thus Reign after one another, to the exclusion of the deceased Kings
Children. Some time after, one of Mahumets Sons called Abdala, seeing this Law
opposed his Ambition, caused several of his Brothers and Nephews to be killed
and strangled, under diverse pretexts of interest of State; at last he succeeded
his Father, and had the most happy and peaceable Reign that the Cherifs had
ever enjoyed.

Though Abdala had Policy and Cruelty enough, to commit all the Crimes that
should seem advantageous to him, he did not cause all his Brothers Throats to
be cut at his coming to the Throne; he let three of those unfortunate persons
live, who by reason they were very young, did not appear to him formidable
enough for him to take care to dispatch them. These weak Children feared his
Fury, as soon as they were capable of reason. Two of them took Refuge with the
Grand Seignior, to avoid the death that threatened them; and the third fled to
the Arabians, where he died some years after. Abdala having Reigned peaceably
the space of seventeen years, and finding himself decaying, delivered his
Kingdom into the Hands of his Eldest Son, called Mahumet, and caused him to be
Proclaimed King through all his Territories, notwithstanding the Law of the
Cherifs, which was contrary to that Election. Abdala died in a little time
after, and left a Daughter very young, called Almeida, whom he caused to be
brought up in Spain, and whose blooming Beauty began to make great noise in
that Court, when she departed from it to retire to her Brother Mahumet: But as
this new King feared at his coming to the Crown, that those two Uncles, who had
took Refuge in Turkey, for the avoiding his Fathers fury, would come, grounded
upon the Laws of their Ancestors, and dispute the Kingdom with him: He sent a
Moor to Tremisena, to Assassinate the eldest, who was retired thither. It is
but two years since this Assassination was committed, with all the Rage and
Success, that Mahumet had wished, and only one that remains at present of those
three Creatures, is this Mulei Moluc, whom the King of Spain makes mention of
to us in these Letters: He has given marks of a great Valor amongst the
Ottomans, where he had taken Refuge. He has Signalized himself against the
League which the Christians lately made, to fight the Turks: He has done a
thousand Actions worthy of an Eternal Memory, in the late engagement of those
two Fleets, and when Charles the V. took Golette, he was almost the only one,
who resisted him with vigor; but judging himself too near Mahumet in that
Country, where he had not any Troops, and fearing such a treachery, as that
which had deprived his last Brother of his life, he left Algiers, where he then
resided, to come into Spain, and implore the Succors of Philip, imagining,
though a Wanderer and a Vagabond, without Forces, and without Money, he could
by his Valor alone recover the Kingdoms, belonging to him by their Laws, and
Conquer Mahumet his Nephew, who is settled upon the Throne, beloved by his
Subjects, fortified in his Cities, and maintained by a powerful Army. Thus,
pursued Cardinal Henry, your Highness sees clearly, how King Philip had reason
to refuse Succor to Moluc, and how to second his Design's would be to maintain
a Law, contrary to ours, and to declare against him, who is Naturally Heir of
the Crown. These and such other like reasons dissuaded Don Sebostion from
aiding Moluc: He judged after some Reflection, that this African would not come
to demand Succors in Portugal, after having been refused by the King of Spain,
being acquainted with the strict Engagements of those two Kings. These Politic
Considerations did not so take up the Kings Mind, but that he bestowed some
thoughts upon his Love. If the Declaration he had made of it, gave some ease to
the violence of his Passion, the vexation of not having been able to get from
Elvira any favorable Answer, made him pass very troublesome Moments: He
sometimes Figured to himself, that he could never be beloved by her: The
Languishing and the Tenderness which Elvira made appear to him in her Eyes when
she left him, could not reassure him against this fear; but he was not long in
his Suspicions, and he had all manner of reason to believe in the Conversations
he had afterward with Elvira, that she had no aversion for him. She even
assured him in several Rencounters that she could suffer that Passion with joy,
provided it might suit with her Duty, and told him all these things with all
the sweetness and complaisance, that though she cunningly referred her self to
her Father, as to all the sentiments of her heart, the King conceived hopes
that he should be beloved, and even sometimes flattered himself with having
some part in her tenderness, their Commerce became at length so great and so
manifest, that the Duchess of Braganza, seeing she could not break it, feigned
to second it, and fancied, that introducing her self to those two Lovers, by
the Title of a Confident, she might on some occasions of falling out, or
inconstancy, recover her favor with the King, rather than by the Jealousy she
might make appear. She quitted the Design she had taken of Engaging her Son in
an Intreague with Elvira, rightly judging, that in the posture things were,
this enterprise would be more disadvantageous than profitable to her Projects.
And the young Duke having never had any inclination but for Leonora, and seeing
himself treated with more rigor than usnally, without having yet penetrated
into the Cause of it, endeavored to clear this point with her. He saw her all
alone; Vexation did in her, what all his Tenderness had not been able yet to
do, and Jealousy made known to the Duke the love she had for him. He first
complained of her, and then comforted her with a great deal of affection for
all that unlucky juncture had made her suffer, and gave her a thousand
assurances of fidelity against her suspicions.

All these Lovers enjoyed, with Tranquillity enough, during some time, the
pleasures of their inclinations. But how accomplished soever Don Sebastian was,
he was not born to be happy, and the most civil Man of the Court was the
innocent cause of these first misfortunes. The Count de Souza having worthily
acquitted himself of his Embassy, abandoned the Court of Spain, loaded with
Glory and Presents. The News of his speedy return was immediately spread about
Lisbon. As he had a great deal of Merit, and a great many Friends, he was only
heard spoken of in all Companies; and the Conversations were almost all
composed of his Praises. Elvira heard his fine Qualities cried up in several
Places: She had never seen him, and conceived a great desire to know him. Don
Lewis had a very fine Country House, two Leagues from Lisbon, and near unto a
Lordship that belonged to Souza, whither he often carried Violanta and her
Friends. Elvira was one of her most intimate acquaintance: and Don Lewis
Treating them there one day, after the Ball was begun, four Persons were seen
to enter disguised like Slaves, who drew the Eyes of all the Assembly, by the
Magnificence of their habit. But one among 'em charmed all People by his Air
and his manners; they took him at first for Don Henry, because Eugenia having
never had any great kindness for Violanta, they were not of that Assembly, and
could only come in Masquerade; but they afterward observed, that Don Henry was
much fatter, and of a less advantageous shape than this Slave. He at first
placed himself at Elvira's Feet, and told her with the best Grace imaginable,
that he came from the farthest part of Africa, to have the honor of wearing
her Chains: She answered him very Obligingly. And by the discourse she had with
him, she easily observed, that this Slave had as much Wit as he had a good
Mien. Violanta took him out to dance, and he acquitted himself in the most
seemly and pleasing way that can be fancied. He took out Elvira, who danced
better with him than she had done before. None knew him, and they all
impatiently longed to see his Masque off. At length Elvira so earnestly begged
it of him, that he was constrained to retire apart, and show her his Face. She
was much surpised, she did not know him, but much more at his Luster. Ah!
since I do not know you, said she to him, (being somewhat recovered out of her
astonishment) and you are so well formed, you must be the Count de Souza? I beg
you would not name me, Madam, said he to her; I am unwilling to be known; I had
a desire to pass this night at my Country House, and have not been yet at
Court. Elvira promised she would not discover him, and kept her Word. As no
body knew, that the Count de Souza was Arrived at his House, none of them
suspected any thing of the truth. He made his Court to her during the Ball, as
to the Mistress of his King; whose favor he ought to manage. She hearkened to
him with a delight that caused an emotion in her, and found a secret Charm in
his Words and Actions. The Ball being ended, Elvira returned to Lisbon with a
numerous Train of Coaches, and Souza came several times into her mind in the
Night, under the most agreeable Idea that can ever be formed of an accomplished
Man.

He appeared the next day at Court, and went to give an account of his
Commission to the King, who was with Elvira. She could not forbear blushing at
the sight of him; she found him yet more charming than he had appeared to her;
but she so well knew how to conceal her Blushes and Emotions, that no body
perceived 'em. They discoursed of the Court of Spain; the Count de Souza, of
whom they asked the News of it, said, that Don John, Natural Son to Charles the
V. was lately Arrived there, and appeared in great Splendor; that he was a
Prince equally understanding in War and in Policy; that he had shown him a
great deal of kindness, and had a particular Esteem of his Merit: That King
Philip, who had been three times a Widdower, was going to Marry Ann of Austria
his Niece, and Sister of Maximilian II. and that Katherine Michela, Daughter to
Philip and the late Deceased Queen, was one of the most Beautiful Persons of
Europe. He was going to tell several other particulars more of that Court; but
Don Henry, entering in that moment, caused him so much trouble, that he could
not continue his Discourse: He received his kindnesses with the greatest
Civility, having resolved to avoid as much as he could the meeting with his
Mistress and his Rival; and being afraid, that Eugenia would suddenly come to
see Elvira, he took leave of the King, and retired to his House, where he
employed all the Efforts of his Reason to stifle a Passion, that he perceived
was ready to revive, notwithstanding all the Cares he had taken to extinguish
it.

In the mean while Elvira no longer gave her thoughts up to Greatness, and was
not so much dazzled with the Crown of Don Sebastian, but that she considered of
the merit of the Count de Souza with much admiration. Her Heart engaged it self
by degrees in seeing him; and Love evermore usurping somewhat upon Ambition;
she begun to have more desire to please the Count, than care to engage the
King. She saw Souza every day, and always discovered in him some new Quality,
capable of pleasing: She found that he did the most indifferent thing, with a
most particular Charm. Not any Man about the Court appeared to her so well
Made, so Active, or so Witty as he; the greatest Divertisements tired her, when
he was not there; and the inclination she was sensible of at first for him, in
a short time, augmented after such a manner, that it became at length a most
violent Passion. It is true, that the Assiduities and Complaisances, which this
Count rendered her, contributed very much to the Violence of her Love. As he no
longer made Visits to Eugenia, and had resolved to apply himself entirely to
the cares of his Fortune, Elvira had with joy observed, that she was the Person
of all the Court, whom he oftenest Visited; she took for amorous Addresses, the
Devoirs he rendered her as the Mistress of his King, and so ardently desired to
be beloved by him, that she easily imagined he had a love for her.

There appeared so much affectation in the Complaisances she had for Don
Sebastian, and she answered his tender respects with so great a Constraint,
that the King quickly perceived he was not beloved; and as he loved with all
the fervency that a first Passion can be capable of, these coldnesses did very
sensibly aggrieve him. Sometimes he openly complained; and walking one day with
her, and those that were the Companions of his Pleasures, in the Gardens of Don
Lewis: After having proposed to her several sorts of Divertisements, none of
which she would accept of, he reproached her for the indifference she seemed to
be in to Pleasures. She defended her self, and told him, there were a thousand
Recreations capable of diverting her: They are those then that I have no part
in, said the King to her, and I do not believe, that of a long time any of
those has pleased you, which I have proposed? Elvira could not hold from
blushing at these Words, and Violanta, who loved her tenderly, perceiving her
disorder, and the King's vexation, told him, for to make up the business: Ah!
Sir, it is impossible to be more gay than Elvira was at the Ball, you gave two
days ago: (And in truth she was in a very good humor in that Assembly; because
the King had Commanded Souza to do the Honors of it) I must confess, said
Leonora, that Elvira found the Ball very Charming: I remember that at a Regal,
which Don Lewis gave to the Ladies, sometime since, she appeared the merriest
of the Company; I remember too, said Don Lewis, and I believe the four Moors,
who came to be her Slaves, had put her into that humor. These last Words put
Elvira so out of Countenance, that she would never have been able to have
concealed her trouble, if she had not luckily made a stumble, which gave a
pretext to this disorder. The King after having lent her his Hand to hold her
up, enquired very earnestly who those Moors were; the Count de Souza Arrived
when the King asked this Question. He himself was struck dumb, and the sight of
him redoubled Elvira's disorder, they were both of them in an equal pain;
though they had different Sentiments; and this trouble would without doubt have
discovered Elvira's secret Passion, if Cardinal Henry, whom Don Sebastian still
considered as his Tutour, had not arrived at that instant, and broke off that
Conversation by his presence. The King going to Supper presently after, the
Ladies retired; and as Souza had perceived he was the cause of Elvira's
trouble, he very prudently avoided any particular Conversation with her, and
pretended he was obliged to be at the Kings Supper, that he might be dispensed
from leading Elvira as he was used to do. But what Address and Care soever he
employed to avoid the assurance of a thing, which his Zeal and Modesty ever
refused, it was impossible for him to be long in suspense of what he feared.
Elvira loved him with too much Passion, to be able to constrain her self: When
she ever talked with him, she was strangely disordered; she was even sometimes
so bold, as to let him know how much the Kings Cares and Complaisances fatigued
her, and what a torture it was to her, that she could not follow her
inclinations with an entire Liberty; she began several times to talk to him of
the disorder the Moors Conversation put her in; the Count came always off from
these perplexities with a great deal of Prudence and Civility; but at length
Elvira fan. cying to her self, that he had some affection for her and that
respect hindered him from telling it, she believed it was her part to encourage
him. She resolved one day in the violence of her Passion, to declare to him
openly, what she was sensible of; but the occasion could not easily be found,
because the Count carefully avoided her, and saw her but at the Kings, whither
he could not dispense himself from going.

A light indisposition had detained this Prince in Bed that day, Elvira was to
see him, the Dorekeepers told her, he was asleep; whereupon she stepped into
the Antichamber, and perceived near the Window Count Souza, in all likely hood
expecting Don Sebastian's waking, and seemed to be profoundly pensive: She
approached him trembling, and as they were far enough off from those, who were
present, as not to be understood: May I ask you, what you think of at present,
Count, said she to him all amazed? Souza being surpised at her presence, would
have retired after some Civilities: No, no, stay, said she to him, stopping
him, I will Discourse you about something concerns you; I participate too much
in all that touches you, to leave you in the trouble I have seen you in for
some time: Do you love, are you ambitious? continued she, my Credit may equally
serve you in those two things, and I offer it you all entire, if you will tell
me, what it is that makes you sad. The Count de Souza was much out of
Countenance to hear this Discourse, and told her, after having thanked her for
her Civilities, that he had no other ambition, than that of maintaining himself
at Court, in the rank his Birth had placed him: You are then in Love, replied
she immediately, with an extreme disorder. I assure you, Madam, interrupted
Souza gently, I Love only my King. A little affection is not incompatible with
a great deal of Zeal, replied Elvira tenderly. A Heart all entire is not too
much for so great a Prince, answered he firmly, we owe him all our thoughts;
and I make it my business, and am proud of Consecrating to him even the very
least of my Actions. This Discourse so discouraged Elvira, and put her so out
of Countenance, that she could no longer bear the looks of Souza, nor replied
any thing to him, and she knew not whether she had best quit him, or stay with
him, when the Doorkeepers came and told her, that the King was awake, and that
they might see him: They went both into his Chamber, the Court grew full in a
little time, and Souza retired presently after, more troubled at what he had
newly heard, than he had been in all his life time.

The Duke d'Avero observing all his Daughters Actions, and seeing the sequel
did not answer the happy beginning, suspected, that some stronger Passion
triumphed over Elvira's Ambition. She had talked to him so often, and with so
much admiration of Souza, and this Count appeared to him so proper to inspire
love, that he Examined them both with Care; he saw, Elvira blushed, and was ever
troubled at the sight of him. He no longer doubted, but he was the cause of
this change, and resolved to remedy it without seeming to be the least
concerned. The Count de Souza was of a Rank, Merit, and Conduct, not to be
easily ruined at Court: Wherefore the Duke employed his Cares and his Credit to
remove him after another manner. An Ambassador was to be sent to Pope Pius the
V, who was newly raised to the Pontificate by the Cares and Solicitations of
the Great Boromeus, and Cardinal Farnese. The Duke d'Avero took such a course,
as that the King cast his Eyes upon the Count de Souza for that Embassy: But so
soon as Elvira had learnt this News, the displeasure of ceasing to see what she
could not forbear loving, made such an impression upon her Mind, that she went
with all haste to the King, pretending to be ignorant of what he had resolved,
to pray him with earnestness to give that Commission to Don Alvaro Castro, whom
all the Court knew to be one of her Creatures; and the King having told her, he
had granted that Employ to the Count d'Souza at the Duke de Avero's desire, the
fear she was in that her Father had discovered her Passion, and for that reason
was desirous to remove him from Court, made her so dumb and out of Countenance,
that she almost suffered all which passed in her Heart to be read in her Eyes;
but after being come somewhat to her self again, she spoke with so tender and
pressing an Air to Don Sebastian, that not being able to refuse her any thing,
he told the Count de Souza in the Evening, who came to thank him, that his
Council had judged it more convenient to give that Commission to Don Alvaro
Castro, who had already one of the same Nature, and was perfectly well
instructed in the several Interests of the Court of Rome. This Change surprised
all the Court: They sought for the reason of it, and it was found, that
Elvira's Credit was the cause. Her Father did not doubt of her Passion: He make
her a thousand reproaches, which did no good at all. Alvaro Castro departed,
after having thanked her for a favor, he was not indebted to her goodness for;
and the Count de Souza knew with an extreme grief, that 'twas as great a
misfortune to him to be beloved by the person he did not love, as to be hated
by her he loved.

The King daily perceiving more and more indifference in Elvira, was so
mortally grieved at it, that it rendered him the most unhappy of all Men, though
he seemed the most happy. And that which still augmented his trouble was, that
at that time arose one called Peter Bertrand, the Eldest Son of the Illustrious
Montluc, not being willing to steep his Hands in the Blood of Frenchmen, not to
be on either side in the Civil Wars and Heresies that so Plagued all France;
fitted out a little Fleet, and Manned it with about Twelve hundred Men, or
thereabouts: His youngest Son, and another younger Brother of the Family of
Pompadour accompanied him in this Voyage, and being come upon the Coasts of
Madera, they would have Landed to have taken in fresh Water; but the Portugals,
who were Masters of that Island, Fired their Canon upon them, and Sallied out
against Bertrand. He immedietely set Eight hundred of his Men on Shore, Cut the
Portugals to pieces, Sacked the City that bears the Name of the Island, and
died a little after, of a wound he received in that Fight.

Don Sebastian could not hear this News without a great deal of vexation, he
caused satisfaction to be demanded of Charles the IX, and accused Bertrand and
his Companions of being Pirates and Infractours of the Treaties. France having
then Intestine Enemies enough, without needing to draw upon it others, was
willing to Sacrifice to the King of Portugal's anger, all those who had
followed Bertrand in that Voyage; but the reputation of Montluc, and the Power
of the Admiral, who ever maintained the Glory of the French Nation, fenced off
this blow by his Subtilty. The Count de Sanzay was sent to Don Sebastian to
justify the Frenchmen, and Queen Margarite, who was ever contriving Great
Designs, took that occasion to attempt a Match between Don Sebastian, and the
Sister of Charles the IX, to the intent this Alliance might the more closely
unite France and Portugal, and might augment the Rights, that the French
pretend to have upon that Crown. The Count de Sanzay departed with secret
Instructions for that Marriage. He justified Bertrand and his Companions; and
knowing that pleasures are often very good means to succeed in Affairs, he was
at all the Divertisements of the Court, to the intent he might the more easily
bring to pass his secret Negotiation. He was young and well made, which was
sufficient to get into the favor of the Portugal Ladies. His Discourses and
his Manners had a certain agreeableness, that had the Art of Charming even in
the best of things; that free and easy Air that makes Gentleman be
distinguished from others, was more Natural to him than to any Man besides; he
was of that sort of gallant humor, which ever engages it self in Love, but is
ever for all manner of Divertisements: But his Wit was yet more Solid than
Gallant, and he oftentimes made those Trifles be useful to the greatest
Affairs. Leonora seemed to him worthy of his Cares, and fit for some little
Engagements; she had an Air of Sweetness and Sincerity, which made one not
afraid of those Artifices in her, which her Sex commonly makes use of: The
Count de Sanzay, entertained her with a thousand Gallantries. He gave her
Treats and Diversions nearly contrived; he spoke to her of Love upon all
occasions, but he spoke after such a manner, that one could not take seriously
enough so as to be displeased, and however appeared so sincere, that Credit
might be given to it, designing to give high Ideas of the Court of France for
the facilitating the Marriage which he negotiated: All that he did for Leonora
was so magnificent, that the Duke of Barcellos's affection was alarmed, and he
was sometimes very uneasy.

He immediately found that Elvira had great Power over the King; he endeavored
to make her his Friend, and though he judged, that the Ambition of the Duke
d'Avero, and the tender Commerce of his Daughter, with Don Sebastian, would
bring great Obstacles to his Negotiation, he persuaded himself that they would
soon penetrate into his Designs, and that before they could know them, he might
have perhaps brought them to pass. He fancied he might draw great light from
her for the carrying on his Projects: He forgot none of all those little Cares,
that might procure him some part in her Friendship. She could not refuse it
him; she took delight in seeing him, she spoke to him with Confidence, she
often enquired of him News of his Amor; he did not excuse himself from telling
her, hoping that the Confidence he put in her, would obtain the like, and
others from her, that might be useful to his enterprise; but persons for Wit
are too reserved in that matter; she would sooner have acquainted him with the
most secret Affairs of State, than the least motion of her Heart, and all that
the Counts penetration could discover in that Intreague, was, that Elvira had
no great inclination for the King, but that he had a violent Passion for her.
He spoke immediately of this Marriage unto Queen Katharine, because he saw her
well intentioned enough for France, she assured him, she would endeavor it
with all her Power: But as she no longer concerned her self hardly at all with
Affairs of State, she was no great help to him. He likewise managed Cardinal
Henry with great Care: He perceived, that this Prelate did not approve of the
Passion which Don Sebastian had for Elvira, and that it was not his meaning to
Contract a New Alliance with the Spaniards. He spoke to him very slightly of
that which Portugal might make with France: But whether this Cardinal was not
willing to procure Heirs to the Crown, that devolved upon him after Don
Sebastian's Death, or not any of those Matches did please him, he found
difficulties every where, and the Count de Sanzay did not think fit to
Discourse him any more about it.

He turned all his Designs upon the King: He praised upon all occasions, the
Wit and Beauty of the Ladies of France; he showed him all the advantages he
might have by making an Alliance with that Crown. He likewise cunningly let him
see the Picture of the Princess Marguerite, and often described her to him in
all the extent of her Charms: But of what effect are all endeavors against a
prepossest Heart, it was in vain he laid in view all the reasons of Policy, and
Charms of Beauty; Don Sebastian had only Eyes for Elvira, though she rendered
him the most unhappy of all Men.

The Duchess of Braganza, whose Jealousy did continually make some discovery
of her Rivals inclinations, and being also one of Sanzay's Friends, was the
first who made him observe, that Elvira had a kindness for Souza. This Duchess
fearing, that all she could say to the King upon this Subject would be
suspected, cunningly set on Foot a report amidst the Secret News of the Court,
that Elvira had a greater Passion for another than for the King. But as Souza
saw Elvira less than any other, the King did not suspect he had any part in
that Intrigue, and was not able to discover his Rival. Chance at length
acquainted him with what not any one about Court durst have told him, and what
was suspected but by very few People. Elvira was coming one day to the Queen's,
as the Count de Souza was going out; and as he always endeavored to avoid
meeting her, bowing, he would have passed by hastily; but she stopped him, and
said to him: Methinks Count, you take a great deal of Care to shun me, and I
should have been glad, you would have told me, what reason you have to do so.
The Count, perplexed at this Discourse, answered her with a great deal of
respect: Since I have merited your hatred, and you have judged me unworthy of
serving my King, in the Commission he had given me, I ought to hide my self
from all the World. Is that hating you, Count, replied she tenderly, not to be
willing you should go from us? The King came at these Words, and they were all
three so discomposed, that it was impossible for any one of them to speak so
much as one Word: Don Sebastian entered the Queens Appartment, where his
disquiet did not permit him to stay long. Elvira did not make her Visit. The
Count retired to his House. And the King, who had only heard the last Words of
that Conversation, impatient to Explain himself with Elvira, and all on a Fire
to make her a thousand Reproaches, went to her House in such a rage as
threatened the ruin of Souza. But the King's anger could not last against the
feeble Reasons of Elvira; she persuaded him, that in the coldest indifference,
she could do no less than answer the Count to appease his trouble; and she gave
so innocent a Color to that Conversation, that the King went from her with
very little suspicion, and a woundrous deal of Love.

The Kings Choler being appeased, all the Lovers of that Court enjoyed for
some time a very deicious Peace. Elvira took care not to give any Jealousy to
the King: Souza comported himself so prudently, that no suspicions could be
conceived of his Behavior. The Duchess of Braganza seeing all her endeavors
were in vain, renounced her Design, and retired to the Duke her Husband. The
Duke de Barcellos being cleared of all Jealousies by Leonora, was sure of her
Affection, and no longer alarmed at the Addresses of the Count de Sanzay, who
did not apply himself very passionately to that Conquest. Don Lewis and
Violanta enjoyed the sweetest pleasures of Love. Don Henry was full of joy to
know he was beloved of Eugenia: And Souza's Reason was become so much Master of
his Love, that his presence gave not trouble at all to their Pleasures, and
there was only the Duke d' Avero, who was still in disquiet and suspicions.

As he had to no purpose endeavored to remove Souza from Court, and his
presence perpetually allarming him, he fancied, that the Count being Married,
he should be exempt from all those fears, and should deprive his Daughter of
the hopes that entertained her love. He cast his Eyes upon Eugenia for that
Design. Some light suspicions that Don Sebastian made appear one day of Souza,
gave an opportunity to the Duke, of proposing this Match to the King, which he
did not fail to Color with sevenal Reasons of State. This Proposition was well
received by the King, he undertook it with a great deal of heat, and told Souza
the next day, that some important reasons had made him think of Marrying him to
Eugenia; that he took upon himself, the care of making her Consent to that
Match, and that he should prepare himself for it. A Thunderbolt could not have
astonished Souza more than this Discourse did: He made no other answer by a low
Bow, and a prompt Retreat. The Count de Sanzay being then at the King's, and
having heard the Order Souza had newly received, made use of that occasion for
the fully clearing his suspicions. He went to Elvira's, and told her this News
with so much art, that she was not able to conceal either her trouble, or her
weakness. The Count of Sanzay took advantage of her disorder, and pitied her
with a great deal of kindness. Compassion is the surest way to insinuate ones
self into the favor of the unhappy; he pressed her with so much address, and
so obligingly offered her his Service, for the preventing this Match, that she
Ingenuously Confessed to him the Affection she had for Souza; he murmered
against the Ambition of the Duke d'Avero; he extolled the Constancy of Elvira;
and in fine, when he took his leave, he promised her to use his endeavors to
deliver her out of this perplexity.

When Souza was returned to his House, he felt a thousand different motions of
Grief and Joy: He at first suffered himself to be lured with the hopes of
possessing Eugenia, which was the greatest of all happinesses to him; but
making reflection, that if he obtained her, it would be against her Will, he
found something so culpable and so base in those hopes, as he laid them by
immediately. He searched into the cause of that Proposition; he saw, that to
Marry Eugenia would be to make himself her Tyrant; he foresaw, that the
disobeying Don Sebastian, would make all the Court believe he had some
Engagement with Elvira, and it would be to expose himself to all the fury and
hatred, that a Jealous and Offended King can be capable of. But in short, the
Count being ever a Complete Wellbred-Man, chose rather to be Unhappy than
Criminal, and resolved to lose rather the favor of his Prince, than to
Tyrannize over his Mistress; he would however speak to her before all things.
He went to her House the next day, where having found her alone, he asked her a
moments Audience, without being interrupted, and told her with the most
Submissive and Passionate Air Imaginable, I come to declare to you a secret,
which I conceal from all the World: For above four years I have loved you,
Madam, with the purest and most violent Passion that ever was, I have in vain
endeavored to stifle this Flame; I went away from Lisbon; I deprived my self
of seeing you; I used a thousand Efforts every day; and all that I have been
hitherto able to gain upon my self, was, not to let any thing escape from this
Passion that might displease you: No Madam, continued he respectfully, I could
not yet have made a Confession of it to you if I were not constrained by the
most pressing necessity that can be imagined. My Lord, replied Eugenia, very
much surpised at a Discourse whose end she did not foresee, if my Heart was
not engaged -- I know it, Interrupted Souza, Don Henry loves you, and you love
him; by my sighs I never troubled a Commerce, that did not displease you; I
have ever respected your choice; I would die a thousand times rather than
Traverse the Joys of your Union. However, Madam, however, for reasons, I cannot
tell you, the King would constrain you to Marry me. Ah Count! answered Eugenia
all disordered, I cannot persuade my self, that the King would use violence
upon any one. I do not believe, Madam, replied Souza, penetrated with grief,
that you suspect me capable of any Artifice, and what I am ready to do for you,
well merits, that you had other sentiments: It Is the Kings Will, that we Marry
one another: These Words set you a shivering, as they do me a trembling; not
but that it would be the greatest happiness of my life, for I adore you. My
Lord, interrupted Eugenia impatiently, these repetitions are useless, and I
will believe all you would have me. Ah! Madam, replied Souza passionately, let
me have at least the pleasure of telling you this time; I suffer so much, that
I fancy it might very well be permitted me, and it is the only satisfaction I
shall have in the misfortunes that are ready to oppress me. I vow to you,
Madam, the Passion I have for you has not exacted the Order which the King has
given me, more Powerful Motives have obliged him to resolve of this Marriage,
and our disobedience will draw upon us all his anger. And of what importance
can this match be to the King, answered Eugenia? who begun to suspect him
guilty of Artifice, No, Cruel Man, continued she in a Fassion, it is you, who
misuse the Royal Authority, for the dividing two Hearts whom you thought took
pleasure in being united. How have I been deceived in the esteem I have had for
you? How are you changed? All your Friendship is only Artifice; you have
seduced the King, and would seduce me: But this is not the securest course for
you, and by these means, you will draw upon your self all my hatred. Eugenia
spoke these Words with a great deal of Grief, and Anger, and accopamed them
with some Tears: What a Spectacle, and what a Discourse was this to poor Souza?
He was ready to renounce what he loved, to disobey the King, to be accused of a
Criminal Infidelity in regard of his Prince, to lose his Reputation, his
Fortune, and perhaps his Life, and all this in favor of a Rival and a
Mistress, who accused him of Imposture and Cruelty. He was so lively pierced
with her reproaches and tears, that he could not forbear shedding some himself.
And after having eyed Eugenia some time, without being able to answer her. No,
no, said he to her, do not fear any thing from the King, nor my Artifices,
Madam, I deserved a kinder Treatment, but you are resolved to complete my
misfortune, and deprive me of the pleasure of being pitied by you, which was
the only one I durst aspire to. I do not pretend to force you from Don Henry; I
never had even the least hopes you would change your sentiments in favor of
me, and I would only have been a little more certain of my misfortune. Yes,
Madam, continued he, with an extreme Grief, I love you too much to make you
unhappy: Our Marriage could not make you happy, wherefore I must Renounce it;
and though this refusal perhaps will cost me my life, I would rather run to
death, than lose your esteem, and sooner endeavonr your Happiness than my own
Fortune: I do not desire you should come before the King, and join your
disobedience to mine; I should be but a little better justified, and I shall
expose my self alone to his Choler, as soon as you shall have have made me a
little more certain of your aversion. My Lord, answered Eugenia, in Confusion at
what she had said, and what she had newly heard, so far from hating you, I have
ever had a perfect friendship for you, I esteemed your Merit as soon as I knew
you, but I was not acquainted with your Love before I was engaged, and I did
not believe the Kings Orders would be so fatal to us. Alas! they are only so to
me, answered Souza, you will enjoy in Peace what you love, and I am deprived of
what I adore, and oppressed with the hatred of my King, I shall wait for death
with impatience. Ah Count, said she to him in suspense, I would not have my
happiness cost you so Dear, and if your Life be concerned, I will do all I can
to save you. It Is enough, Madam, said the Count to her, falling at her Feet, I
am content, and I am going to think how to satisfy you: No, my Lord, said
Eugenia stopping him, it is not just you should make me happy by your
unhappiness; Duty and Friendship conspire against my Passion; I must obey, I
must follow your Example; I have not so much force, and so much firmness as
you. But what Torments soever it may cost me, you may tell the King, that if
your Life be concerned, I am ready to do all that is necessary to save you. She
could not speak these Words without an extreme constraint and grief: The
horror she figured to her self in losing Don Henry, put her into a Condition
to have raised pity: And Souza, who saw all sort of grief painted in her Face,
told her in reassuring her, Madam, it is for me to conquer my self, my love has
ever been concealed in silence, and this season is very improper to make it
appear. You love Don Henry, he loves you; you have both conceived great hopes
to enjoy your happiness; you never loved me; I never had any hopes you would;
let me die, I shall be content provided the King believes me innocent, and you
allow some Tears to my Misfortunes. The Count went our having spoken these
Words, and did not wait for Eugenia's answer, who was in the Cruellst
perplexity that ever was, admiring Sanza's Gnerosity, fearing the Kings Power,
and infinitely concerned for her love.

Don Henry came to her House, as she was still in these Reflections, and asked
her the reason of the sadness he saw in her Face. She made him a sincere
recital of all the Count had newly said to her; commending his Generosity and
his Constancy: But as we ever fear to lose what we love, Don Henry could not
assure himself of Souza's Resolution; he fancied there was never such an Honest
Wellbred-Man, as could resist an ardent love, and so favorable an occasion, he
could not suffer himself to be convinced by the strong reasons Eugenia brought
to reassure his affection. He said to her the most touching things imaginable
upon his fears; he would have gone, and flung himself at the Kings Feet, and
offered him his life instead of his Mistress: But she let him know that it was
to expose two Heads instead of one to the anger of Don Sebastian, and this
Declaration would without doubt include him in the same disgrace, there needed
no more than this Declaration to stop Don Henry; they both agreed that they
ought to content themselves with employing all the Friends they had at Court to
serve the Count de Souza, in the misfortune that threatened him.

Souza was to make his Court the day following: The King did not fail to ask
him, if he had executed those Orders: He answered with a profound respect, that
he should be ever ready to obey his Highness; but he had acquired so little
Reputation, and had yet so feebly served the State, that he could not resolve
to Marry, and that such Engagements evermore took up the better part of the
Cares, that are due to ones Prince. The King much displeased at this refusal,
did no longer doubt, but he had an Intrigue with Elvira, and told him
furiously, That a disobedient Subject could not render him good Services, and
bid appear no more in his presence. The Count went away oppressed with sorrow,
and was no sooner at his House, than a Captain of the Guards came to Command
him from the King to leave the Kingdom with the soonnest. He received this
Order with all the respect imaginable, and not reproaching himself with any
Crime, nor imputing any thing to the King of his misfortune, and Sacrificing
all to his love, he went out of the City some moments after without murmering,
and without going to any Friends House for fear of being obliged to see Elvira.
The Count de Souza's Exile being spread a little time after through all the
City, the best sort of People pitied him, and in the Grief that Elvira was in
for his a fence, she could not forbear having a secret joy, being he had
refused Engenia, she fancied, (as it is usual to flatter ones self) that she
might well be the Cause of that refusal; and entertaing her self with that
thought, she resolved to employ all her Friends secretly to solicit Souza's
return, not daring to ask it her self. This incident did help much to encourage
the Confidence and Friendship she had for the Count de Sanzay; she imagined,
that in the offers of Services, and the promises he had made her, he
contributed very much toward the hindering the Execution of this Match; she
imparted to him all the Griefs that Souza's absence gave her; she even
confessed to him one day, that the indifference she had before for the King was
even changed into an aversion, since this Exile. Sanzay labored in Court with
her, to cause Souza to be recalled: All the better sort of People at Court
begged the same of the King, but their Prayers were useless; Jealousy is not
appeased like other troubles; and the King being ever inexorable. Elvira had
coldnesses for him that they would have been capable of revenging Souza if he
had known them, and if he had been a less good Subject.

He was some time deliberating into what Kingdom he should go into Banishment,
and for what Quarrel he should expose his Life.

The End of the First Part.
Don Sebastian KING OF Portugal.

An Historical Novel.

PART II.

Done out of French by Mr. FERRAND SPENCE.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes in Russel Street in Coventgarden,
1683.

Don Sebastian, KING OF PORTUGAL.
FRance had at length, in a General Peace, lulled asleep the Rage and Fury of
the Civil-Wars; all things were preparing in that Kingdom for the Marriage of
Charles IX, with Elizabeth Daughter to the Emperor Maximilian II. Queen
Margarite, who in the intestine troubles of the most Cruel Wars, had ever
carried along with her Divertisements and Pleasures, prepared to Celebrate this
Marriage by such Sports and Rejoycings as were worthy of the Princess. But what
Souza sought was quite different from Joy. And Pius V, had in his Politic Zeal
obliged the King of Spain, and the Venetians to join with him, to make War
against the Grand-Seignior, the Count de Souza finding an occasion of
Signalizing the Zeal he had ever had for Religion, took the Road of Cephalonia,
otherwise called the Isle of Zantes, where was the Randezvous of all the
Christian Troops. He demanded Employ of Don John, Natural Son of the Emperor
Charles V, who Commanded the Spanish Forces, and was Generalissimo. He mounted
a Galley, tho Don John, knowing his Merit, and having Contracted a Friendship
with him in Spain, would have given him a more Considerable Command. The
Ottoman Forces assembled in the Gulf of Lepanto: The Armies approached, a
profound Calm equally favored both the Fleets; the Winds, and the Sea seemed
to remain in suspense between so many Combatants. At last the Engagement began;
Souza's ardour made his Galley to fly every where, where he saw Danger and
Glory. A hundred Illustrious Actions fignalized him in that Rencounter; he sank
Ships, took Galleys, pursued so vigorously Bashaw B^rthai, that he was
constrained to fly in a Pinace to Lepanto. This great Victory acquired an
Immortal Glory to the Christians, and caused an Irreparable loss to the
Infidels: A hundred and fourscore Galleys were taken from 'em* fourscore and
ten sunk, fifteen thousand Christian Slaves freed; thirty thousand Turks were
there drowned, ten thousand taken Prisoners, and almost all their Chief
Officers perished in that Battle. Tho the Count of Souza had no very
considerable Employ in that Battle, he was one of those who gained the most
Honor, and all he sought was to die in that occasion. He was mortally troubled
at the Advice he had received some days before, that Don Henry had Married
Eugenia, and that Don Sebastian's displeasure still continued.

In the mean time, the grief and slight of Elvira became an insupportable
rigor to the King. The Duke d' Avero was in despair, and could no ways remedy
it. All those, who took a just interest in the Affairs of State, made use of
that occasion for to force this love from the heart of Don Sebastian: Count
Sanzay employed himself in it more cunningly than any other. The King combated
on all sides, and extremely vexed he should be so much in love with Elvira,
used all manner of Efforts to overcome that Passion: But he was too deeply
engaged, and irritating himself against a Love he was not able to triumph over,
reproaching himself, that he had not yet performed any thing Glorious, he
resolved to absent himself from Elvira, and go seek in his Enemies Territories
the means of signalizing and curing himself. While he made these Reflections,
the report of Don Lewis and Violanta's Marriage became public. Their Son
called Don Antonio appeared openly at Court, and Don Lewis obtained the Priory
of Crato for him. The King disapproved in himself the inequality of his Uncles
Match, but feared to become culpable of as great a weakness. He caused all
things necessary to be prepared for a speedy departure, he strongly endeavored
to over come that Passion, and to begin the triumph of it, he granted the
return of the Count de Souza upon the pressing solicitations of Don Lewis of
Granada, who had ever been his Friend, and who fully justified him in his
opinion.

The Count de Sanzay believing this time was favorable for his Design, began
to make the Proposals of it to the King, and in the desire that this Prince had
to make some Voyage to cure him, he immediately proposed to him, the going into
France, where he would find Feasts, Divertisements and Sights worthy of him:
But the King sought for Glory, and not for Pleasures; his trouble was too great
to show himself in a Court filled with so much joy. That Ambassador represented
to him, how the Kingdoms of France and Portugal had ever been in a strict
Union; but the King his Master desired to continue it always, and to make it
even more binding; how it was to be desired, that their Councils would conclude
a Marriage betwixt the King of Portugal, and the Princess Marguerite the French
Kings Sister, who joined to her High-Birth, a thousand Beautiful Qualities,
that tendered her worthy of the greatest Monarchs. Don Sebastian received this
Proposition as an advantageous mark of esteem and friendship on the part of
Charles IX. But his Mind and Heart were in too great a perplexity to come to a
speedy determination in an Affait of that Importance. He told the Count de
Sanzay, that there required time to consider of it; and he would propose it to
his Council, and give him an answer within eight days: This Proposition was
Debated in Council, but all the Members having particular Interests to hinder
this Marriage, and the King himself having no great inclination to it, the
Count of Sanzay made the advantages appear to no purpose, which the Crown of
Portugal might receive from that Alliance. Cardinal Henry, and the Duke d'Avero
always opposed it. The Pensioners the King of Spain had in this Council
disapproved it likewise, and the French Ambassador was at length constrained
to take his Audience of leave, and to return into France, without having
succeeded in that Affair, or made any progress upon the Heart of Leonora. The
greatest Wits, and the greatest Gallants not being always the most successful
in Business and in Love. All these Propositions, and others that were made to
the King to prevent the Voyage he was resolved to make into Africa, were not
capable of dissuading him from it. And when he Communicated to his Council the
desire he had to make War upon the Moors, Cardinal Henry seeing he could not
raise Troops enough for that Expedition, Disputed with all his force the
boldness of this Design, and the Duke d'Avero, who notwithstanding so many
Obstacles, had not abandoned his Ambitious Project, would by specious reasons
hinder an absence, that might quite destroy a Passion he had seen budding with
delight.

But the King was fixed in his resolutions, he was no longer willing to see
Elvira, he would fly her, and Court Glory, and for a pretext to this Design, he
represented to his Council, how Mulei Moluc, to whom the King of Spain had
refused his Succors, had newly routed the Moors, with three thousand Men only
that the Grand-Signior had given him, and was ready to chase away his Nephew
Mahumet from the Throne; that his Heart was as great, and his Forces more
considerable than Moluc's; that Enemies who destroy one another, were not
difficult to be Vanquished; and in fine, that he might take advantage of the
disorder the Civil-Wars had brought that Country into. They were forced to
yield to the reasons, and to the ardour of Don Sebastian: Orders were given for
the fitting out four Galleys, and some Ships; Troops were raised, and the King
went but with a small Force into Africa, whither the Duke d' Avero, the young
Duke de Barcellos, Don Lewis, the Count of Souza, who was arrived some days
before, and all the other Lords followed him: And Elvira, treated ill by her
Father, neglected by her King, abandoned by her Lover, returned into the
Convent, the Duke d' Avero had caused her to come out of, and there gave her
self up so to grief, that a lingering Fever took her, that was not judged
dangerous at first, but in a short time made a considerable change in her
Person. Though the King had neither Forces nor Ships enough, to undertake a
great War against the Moors, who were in their own Country, and had beaten an
Army much more numerous, he did things that surpassed all hopes and
expectations. He gave in all Places Testimonies of his Valor; he was in Person
in the least Attacks. He went into the very Ports of the Enemies to burn their
Ships: He Attacqued all that he found, without being daunted at the number of
the Moors. Coming near Arsilla, he immediately resolved to Besiege it: That
City is Situated upon the Sea side; its Outworks and In works being Fortified
with all things necessary for its desence, it had been taken formerly by the
Portuguez. The King had not Troops enough to undertake that Siege: But the
vexation he was in, when he considered how the Moors had gained from him that
Conquest, and when he made reflection upon the Glory which would follow that
enterprise, made him pass over all difficulties. he caused with a great deal of
Expedition, to be prepared all things necessary for the Execution of that
attempt; he surpised the Garrison, entered the City by Scaling the Walls, and
was in the midst of its Inhabitants with two hundred Men at most of his
Attendants. The Arsilians somewhat recovered from their first surprise, sold
their Liberty very dear, and Defended themselves veey vigorously. This Fight
was Bloody; several were killed on both sides upon the spot; and the King
having at length made himself a passage through all his Enemies, and got to the
Castle of the City, which vielded without fighting, upon Condition all the
Moorish Women should be left at Liberty, that had taken Refuge there, and no
outrage should be done them; the King willingly granted them this Condition,
and entered the Castle, followed only by his Principal Officers. He went to see
the Ladies, who were retired thither, and offered safe Conduct for what way
soever they would take: One amongst others by an Air of greatness and Majesty
made him desirous to consider her more nearly. He found that the Charms of her
Face were answerable to the Beauty of her Shape: She was brown, and her
Features were so fine, her Complexion so delicate, and her Eyes so piercing,
that Don Sebastian was amazed: He forgot Elvira in that moment, and afterward
Comparing the Idea he had of her Beauty, with hers he saw, he found that
African, a thousand times more Charming; he asked her Pardon for appearing with
Arms in his Hands before her, and offered her all the Succors she should have
occasion for. But she received his Compliments with so haughty an Air, and
retired with so much Majesty, that Don Schastian inquired, who she was. They
told him, that she was a Princess called Almeida, Sister of Mahumet; that this
King having already lost two considerable Battles against Moluc his Uncle, had
sent her to that City, where he believed her in more safety than in the midst
of his Kingdom, which Moluc furiously ravaged.

He had no sooner learnt the Name and Quality of that African, than he
remembered that the Cardinal his Uncle, had spoke to him of her formerly. He was
vexed he had not showed her more respects: He asked to see her, but she let him
know by the Governor of that City, that the greatest mark of goodness he could
give, was to consent to her retreat without seeing her, and she prayed him not
to make use of the Rights of Victory against her Liberty: The King made known
to this Governor, that he impatiently longed to pay her the Devoirs he could
not acquit himself of, before he knew her; but this Envoy told him so plainly,
that his Visit would be so extreme a violence to the Princess, that this King
consented at that instant to her departure, notwithstanding all the desire be
had to see her again. She departed immediately, and retired toward her
Brother. Don Sebastian could not lose the Idea of her Beauty; he thought of her
night and day, and sometimes repented he had let her depart: if there had been
no more required than Besieging of Placea, and Taking of Cities for the having
her again; he would have undertook the most difficult Sieges; but he could not
learn to what Place she was retired. He feared he should displease her, if he
pusht his Conquests farther, and his Council of War was not willing to let him
engage farther in an Enemies Country.

His Principal Officers remonstrated to him, how the Troops he had left, were
not sufficient to keep and defend the Places he might Conquer, and if he went
on at this rate, he must employ all his Army in Garrisons. He was obliged to
return to Lisbon, Crowned with Honor, and full of the Idea of Almeida. The
other Lovers put on their Chains again; and Souza not being able to see without
grief the happiness of Don Henry, and being evermore in fear of being disgraced
at Court, retired to one of his Country Houses, where he became so much in Love
with solitude, that there was no less requisite than an Order from the King to
make him leave it. Notice was given to the Duke d'Avero, that his Daughter was
dangerously Sick in the Convent where she made her abode. He went to see her,
but did not find her in a Condition to be brought to Lisbon. She died four days
after: Her Father was a long time in the deepest affection, having passionately
loved her, and not quite lost all the hopes he had conceived from her Charms.
The King was sensibly grieved at her Death; but as his Mind was possessed with
another Idea, his grief was not so violent as 'twould have been at another time.

The Duke d'Avero seeing that Love had not been Assistant to his Ambition, was
willing to see if War would make it more successful. He did all he could to
inflame the Passion Don Sebastian had for Arms. The King had given him Orders
to cause Forces to be raised in all Parts; he zealously seconded his Designs,
how troubled and averse soever Queen Katherine and Cardinal Henry seemed to be
to them. The Duke was perpetually representing to this Young King the Glorious
Success he had in Africa, and the Conquests he had made with a little handful
of Men. He assured him, that if he would return thither with a considerable
Army, he would render himself Master of all Tituan and Alarache in a little
time. Don Sebastian's Courage needed not to be raised, and never Man loved Arms
so much as he, but he could not resolve to make War upon Almeida's Country.
She still returned into his Mind, with that Majestic Air with which she had
received him in Africa; he feared her Indignation more than that of the
Mightiest Kings; and would gladly have followed his Warlike Ardour without
renouncing the respect he had for her.

While his Mind floated between these two Motions, the Governor he had put
into Arsilla sent him word, that Moluc had vanquished his Nephew a third time,
in a set Battle, that with a handful of Men he led, he had defeated in that
last Battle an Army of sixtythousand Horse, and ten thousand Foot; that he had
newly constrained Mahumet to fly the Kingdom, and 'twas to be feared, that this
Conqueror, after having drove away his Nephew out of Africa, would recover the
Places the Portugals had in that Country.

This piece of News inspired Don Sebastian with so much Courage and Emulation,
that he considered the Glory which Moluc had acquired, as a Jewel he had robbed
him of, and which he was resolved to make him restore; he impatiently longed to
signalize himself against him, and the occasion was but too soon offered, for
the good of the State. Mahumet being drove out of his Country, came sometime
after with Almeida to take refuge in Portugal. The King learned with an
expressible Joy, that he should suddenly have the happiness of seeing that
Princess again, who had Charmed him, and who he had never seen but in that
Instant, and had so often desired to see since that moment. He would
immediately have made them a Magnificent Entry, but that the King and Princess
let him know, that Pomp and Triumph were not very suitable to the deplorable
condition they were then in. The King went to meet 'em with all his Court; he
Embraced Mahumet a thousand times; he rendered profound respects to Almeida, and
after the first Civilities were passed on both sides. You see Sir, said that
Princess to him, I am come to Demand the Succors you offered me so obligingly
in Arsilla. Have you not forgot that Goodness, continued she, in a Modest and
Languishing Air, or rather, do you remember you have seen me? Never any first
sight made so much impression upon a Heart, Madam, answered Don Sebastian
passionately, as that rencounter did upon mine, and you have acquired absolute
Power over me from that moment. Don Sebastian continued this Conversation, till
they were arrived at the place that was prepared for their reception.

After that Mahumet had made known to the King, the Justice of his Cause; he
represented to him, the Moors being divided, it would be easy for him to
vanquish them; that if the Portugez's would but descend into Africa, tho with
but mean Forces, they might render themselves Mesters of all the Kingdom he had
newly been stripped of; how the Enterprises the King had already made, and the
Glorious Successes he had had there terrified all those People; and when they
should see him, who was born their King, joined to those who had already
Vanquished 'em, they would come of their own accord, and range themselves under
their Power. Glory and Love incited Don Sebastian much more to that War, than
all the reasons Mahumet could invent: His Valor had a long time disposed him
to make some Enterprise in Africa, and Almeida's Beauty had rendered him too
sensible of her Misfortunes, to neglect the attempt of revenging her. The
Council of Portugal opposed his Design with all its might; Almeida knew it; she
went to the King, she Employed all her Charms; she lamented her Disgrace. A
sensibe Heart makes little resistance against the Tears of a Beautiful Person;
he promised to Aid her, notwithstanding these Obstacles; she gave him some
hopes of being beloved, and he caused Troops to be raised in all parts for the
Execution of this Enterprise.

How great a Comfort was this to Almeida, in her Misfortune! She saw her self
Adored by the most accomplished King that was then in the World; she saw that
her Beauty Triumphed over all Policy, and over all the Forces of Portugal; she
was persuaded, that Don Sebastian would Sacrifice all to her Revenge. Her
Brother often told her, that she was Mistress of his Fate, and hoped, they
should suddenly be Re-established upon the Throne: But that which still
Augmented the pleasingness of these hopes, was, that she found Don Sebastian as
Lovely as he was Amorous; and that she was yet more sensible of the Affection
he had for her, than in the Cares he took in her Favor: She would have been
sorry that any other had rendered this Good Office to her Brother; and esteem
and acknowledgment conspiring in her Heart in favor of Don Sebastian, gave
Birth there to a Passion little different from that the King felt for her. If
he spoke to her passionately, she heard him with delight; if he continually and
eagerly sought her out, she never met him but with an extreme joy. The most
fatal Amor has ever in its beginning, a thousand Pleasures to engage us; this
at first laid only Charms to view in the sight of those Lovers. All the Court
was with Justice alarmed at it: Queen Katherine used all her Efforts to destroy
it: Cardinal Henry opposed it with all his Power; but the King was absolute,
these Obstacles the more enflamed him, and they were constrained to leave a
free Course to his Passion.

Don Sebastian thought it convenient to take a Journey into Spain, to implore
Succors of his Uncle, in Favor of Mahumet. He departed, after the Ambassador
he had in that Court had agreed with Philip, that Guadalouppe should be the
Place of their Interview; and gave Order at his Departure, that the Moorish
King, and his Sister, whom he left at Lisbon, should be Treated and Respected
as himself. The King of Spain came to the Rendezvous, accompanied with one of
his Daughters, and all the Lords of his Court, and received Don Sebastian with
great Testimonies of Joy and Affection: He endeavored to dissuade him from so
dangerous an Enterprise: But danger does but the more inflame Great Souls. He
then Prayed him not to go in Person to that War; but it was to no purpose,
being he would have exposed his life a thousand times for Almeida's sake.

Philip (at length being desirous to try if Pleasures would not have more Power
than Reasons over the Mind of that young King) caused Tournaments, Lists of
Combats to be made for to Divert him. He even caused Catharina Michela, one of
the Daughters he had by the Deceased Queen Elizabeth his third Wife, and whom
he had brought with him to Guadelouppe, to conceive some hopes of the Crown of
Portugal. And as Philip was then Married again to Anne of Austria his Niece,
and Sister to Maximilian II; the Princess Catharina Michela would have been
glad to have freed her self from the Power and ill humor of a Mother-in-law;
she was Ambitious; and the King of Portugal being handsome, she took care to
engage him, and even engaged her self a little: But Don Sebastian thinking of
nothing but of Re-establishing Almeida's Brother upon the Throne, was not much
moved with all these attempts, and would quickly have returned to that Charming
African, if Philip had not staid him with the hopes of some Troops, which he
promised, and perhaps would have given him, had it not been for the Obstacles
that were raised by the Princess Katherina, by earnestly desiring Ruy Gomes de
Silva, at that time Favorite and Minister of the King of Spain, not to hasten
the Succors.

In the mean time, Don Sebastian, continually possessed with the thoughts of
that War, and Almeida's Beauty, was not sensible of the Pleasures of that
Pompous Court, nor the marks of kindness which the Princess daily gave him.
Almeida writ a thousand kind engaging things to this King, which the more
augmented his impatience. To little purpose it was Philip had told him, that
the Duke of Alva had written to him; that this War was not reasonably to be
undertaken with Portugal Troops alone; that besides them, it was requisite to
have fifteen thousand Italians, Spaniards and Germans. It was to little
purpose, he assured him, that he would give him five thousand Spaniards, as
soon as his Affairs in Italy would give him leave. Nothing could stay Don
Sebastian; and Philip, who fancied that the Princess's Beauty, and the desire
of being in his Alliance, would perhaps be capable to persuade him from this
Design; or at least, make him stay yet some time at his Court, offered him
Catherina Michela in Marriage. Don Sebastian did not fly off so much as he
would have done, if he had not stood in need of Philip. He made some Court to
that Princess, which put her in some hopes; seemed to relish the Pleasures of
that Court with less disquiet: Remained also there yet some time with little
impatience, for the having the Succors so often promised.

The Court he made to Catherina Michela in these hopes, was quickly known to
Almeida. All those who approached her, took delight in exaggerating things to
her, which put her in despair; and as the diverse Passions and Interests of
particular Persons even adds something to the News that comes from afar off,
the report ran in Portugal, that Don Sebastian was going to Marry Catherina
Michela. A Person who loves and fears is but too credulous; Almeida Figured to
her self a thousand things far more stinging than all the malice of her Enemies
could have Invented upon that Subject: How vainly did I flatter my self with
the Power of my Charms, said she sometimes, how weak are they, and how am I
deceived? The Princess Catherina has more than I have; she is in Prosperity and
Glory, I lie under Misfortune and Shame! Her Father is a Prudent and Fortunate
King, whom the greatest Princes would be proud to be Alied to, and I have but
one Brother, whose disgrace is capable of dispersing the most Zealous Friends.
These and such other like expressions did so trouble her, that she was sometime
without writing to Don Sebastian: This King reproached her with her silence;
but as she was prepossessed with his infidelity, she gave so ill an
Interpretation to all that came from him, as she fancied he only made her these
reproaches, for the having a pretext to quit her, and made no answer to his
Letters.

The King not being able to support any longer the trouble he was in at
Almeida's silence, and seeing the propositions and delays of the King of Spain
were only vain amusements to retain him, he resolved at length to return to
Portugal, and desired Philip to send him with the soonest all the Troops he
could. He found Almeida in so great a grief, that he could not see it without
being much concerned. He made her his Complaints; she made him, her Reproaches,
and both of them being undeceived of their suspicion, were more charmed than
ever, with one another.

The King of Spain let Don Sebastian know, how the Sedition of the Rebels
increased daily in Flanders, how he was afraid that Province would get from
under his Power; how he was obliged to send a great many Troops thither, and
this disorder hindered him from sending the Succors he had promised him. All
these Obstacles did not at all cool the Ardour of Don Sebastian. And Philip
being acquainted he had still the same Design, he sent the Duke of Medina Coeli
to him, who was one of the most Eloquent and Understanding Politicians of
Spain, to represent to him, that the Rebellion in Flanders augmented from day
to day, which putting the King his Master in great fears, he found himself
obliged to conclude a Truce with the Turks, in which he would cause him to be
comprehended, if he thought good; and that being in Conference about that
Treaty, he could not send Troops into Africa against Moluc, for as much as a
part of that Country was Tributary to the Port, and Moluc was a Friend and
Confederate of the Grand Seignior's. Don Sebastian answered that Ambassador,
that he was very much surpised, that Philip had made a Truce of three years
with the Turks; that in thinking to avoid their Incursions into Italy, he gave
'em time to Fortify themselves in Africa, and fill it with Forces, which would
carry into the Heart of Spain, after that Truce, a more Cruel War than that he
feared. He added, that he did not think it convenient to be Comprehended in
this Treaty; that 'twas requisite for their Common Interest to leave him the
Liberty of assisting the Spaniards against the Irruptions of the Africans, and
thus the King of Spain would assure himself of Italy by his Truce, and of
Africa by the War that the Portuguezes were going to make there. The Duke of
Medina Coeli returned into Spain, but little satisfied with his Embasie. Queen
Katherine, who had Governed the State with great Prudence, died at that time.
All the World fancied that the trouble Don Sebastian's Designs gave her,
occasioned her Death. And the King having put his Army in a Posture of
marching, the Count de Souza went out of his solitude to accompany the King in
that War.

Don Sebastian followed by all his Nobility, his Guards, and a great number of
Volunteers went to the Cathedral Church of Lisbon, where having with great
Ceremony caused the Standard to be Blessed, which he would carry into Africa,
he put it into the hands of Christopher de Tavora, and as all the Court fancied
he was going to return to his Palace, he went to to the Port; and having met
with Almeida, who was taking the Air with her Brother in a Chariot, coming up,
he told them: That all was preparing to revenge them, and in a little time he
would re-establish them upon the Throne of their Fathers. So many Obstacles,
answered Almeida, have hitherto opposed your good Intentions, Sir, that I shall
not promise my self any Succors from your Highness till you are Embarked.
Well, Madam, we must then Embark, replied the King in a Transport, I accuse, as
well as you, my Love of too much slowness, and you shall not see me defer any
longer: He mounted his Galley, after having said these Words, Mahumet and his
Sister accompanied him, and he Commanded the Duke de Avero to cause all his
Forces to Embark. During the eight days he was Employed in putting them on
Board, the King never went ashore. He himself caused the Seamen to labor: He
examined the Built of all the Ships; he Visited the Equipages, to see if there
was nothing wanting to his Fleet; and showing Almeida the Ardour of the Passion
he had for her, by the care he took to Revenge her: This Princess answered so
many Kindnesses with as much Love as the delicacy of her Sex would allow of. As
the King never went from his Ships, and all the Lords remained there with him,
the Ladies came there to see 'em; and Don Sebastian, who seemed to have
Established his Empire upon the Waters, had round about him a Floating Court,
that amidst the hurry of Embarking, would however have been very agreeable, if
the trouble of parting had not traversed the Pleasures which those would have
relished there, whom Love had united: Violanta quitted Don Lewis with all the
grief that a real affection can be capable of in such an occasion. The Passion
the Duke de Barcellos had for War, shared his Heart with the Love he had for
Leonora; and as she gave her self up entirely to her Inclination, she was much
more troubled than her Lover at their parting. The Duke d'Avero's Ambition
finding an opportunity to satisfy it self in that War, made him quit Lisbon
with joy: But what Power soever Glory had over Don Henry, he had all the pains
imaginable to Renounce the Pleasures he enjoyed with Eugenia. Souza found some
Comfort in thinking, that notwithstanding the Bonds of Marriage, in a short
time his Rival would be no more happy than himself. The Duke of Braganza, who
was arrived at Lisbon to accompany the King in his Voyage, and had still a
great deal of Vigor, and a strong Passion for War, was very glad that this
Occasion was offered for the instructing his Son by his Example, and by the
Advices he might give him, according to the Diversity of Occurrences. And at
length the King departed full of joy, and of hopes, with the Flower of the
Nobility and People of Portugal, and was accompanied by Adrias de Sylva Bishop
of Porto, and Emanuel de Mensis Bishop of Conimbre. The whole Fleet made Sail
with a fair Wind; but as the Kings Galley took its turn to go out of the Port,
it struck with so much Violence against a Flemish Ship, that its sides were
broke to pieces, and a Seaman of that Galley was killed at the same time in his
Boat, by a Canon Shot, that the City had Fired upon the Kings departure. These
two accidents made the most Zealous Portugals tremble, and seemed to be an ill
presage to that Enterprise; even Almeida appeared alarmed at it, she conjured
the King to put off the Voyage till a more favorable season: She told him
several times, that she would rather choose to Renounce the Crown, and pass the
rest of her days in all the misfortunes and obscurities possible, than to
expose his life to Dangers, the sole Idea whereof made her tremble; but the
more kindness and alarms she made appear to Don Sebastian, the more eager was
he upon this Voyage, and all the Fleet arrived quickly at Cadiz, where the Duke
of Medina regaled the King with great Splendor and Magnificence, and made all
the Court during eight days relish all the Pleasures that Island could furnish.

The King caused all possible Sail to be made toward Africa; this Fleet in a
few days, came between Tangier and Arsilles. There he caused his Army to
Disembark, and after having made Almeida observe the Place where he had seen
her the first time, and having said to her the most tender things imaginable
upon that point; he himself appointed the Quartering of his Troops. With an
exact care he sought the most advantageous Posts; he Encamped one part upon the
Sea Shore, and in the most Commodious Places. His Army was composed of thirteen
thousand Foot, fifteen hundred Horse, or thereabouts, and thirteen pieces of
Artillery. He went every Night with an indefatigable Ardour to Visit all the
Quarters: He entertained the bravest; he excited the most languishing,
flattered some, made promises to others, and being sometimes willing to awaken
their Courage by a tender pity, he showed them Mahumet, and his Sister, cruelly
driven out of their Dominions, and promised 'em all great Recompenses on his
and that Princesses part. Mahumet on his side addressing himself to all the
Africans he sound in his way, endeavored to engage them in his Party. Some
yielded to these solicitations. Almeida drew the Hearts of all those who saw
her; some Officers even Charmed with her Beauty, and moved with her Brothers
Misfortune, came and offered themselves to serve them. Don Sebastian and
Mahumet having proved their sincerity, received them with joy.

Moluc well knowing that Don Sebastian was Ambitious and Formidable, would have
Treated a Peace with him, and have given him all the Chams the Portugals
pretended to have Conquered, for the making good to him the Charges of that
War, and for those People to Cultivate in all Peace and Safety they could have
in their own Country. This Proposition made Mahumet tremble, fancying, that so
advantageous an Offer would make the King abandon a Party, that could not be
very useful to him: But Almeida promising her self all she desired from her
Charms, and the Love of Don Sebastian, reassured her Brother, and did not at
all doubt, but that the Ardour which the King of Portugal had to Serve her,
would make him refuse more advantageous Offers. He himself came presently after
to assure him of the same, and made answer to Moluc, that the greatest Charges
of the War being already made, he would not hearken to any Proposition of
Peace, till Moluc should give him Alarache, Tituan, and the Cape de Agero,
which were three places of Extreme importance to the Moors, and of great
advantage to the Portuguezes. Moluc enraged at this demand, and seeing how
small were the Forces which the King of Portugal was at the Head of, answered
him haughtily: That when Morocco should be Besieged, he would think of that
Proposition, and he fansied he should have time enough to think of it, and it
would not be necessary to make or hear such a Discourse. Moreover, that the
Kingdom of ^ez was not so easy to be Conquered; that he had got it only by main
^orce, and by winning three Battles; that he would defend it in the same
manner, and that it was thus it was to be Attacqued.

Don Sebastian in the mean time seemed to be enslamed afresh by the Eyes of
Almeida. He could have wished, that all his Forces had had the same Heart, and
the same Eyes as he had, for the Consecrating their Lives as Generously to that
Princess, as he was going to Sacrifice his. Moluc being a very prudent Man, and
knowing that a Battle oftentimes decides the Fate of a State, and is not to be
undertaken without all possible sureties, or in the greatest extremity, offered
him ten Miles of Land round each Fortress he had in Asrica, if he would consent
to retire; but he was resolved to fight, he only breathed Victory, and all
other things seemed to him unworthy of his Valor and Love. He caused his Army
to be Fortified on one side, with high Ramparts of Earth, and with Wagons; and
the Sea and the City served him for Trenches on the other sides. The Moors, who
Border upon the Maritime Cities, were so alarmed by this Army, that they sled
into the Mountains: The Cities of Tituan, Alarache, and some others, were all
desert. Moluc, without being astonished at this disorder, and equally divided
between Prudence and Valor, did all his Experience could teach him for his
defense: And though he was seized with a very violent Fever, he departed from
Sale, where he had given a Rendezvous to some Troops. His Natural Brother, who
was Governor of Fez, and whom he had given the Command of the Cavalrey of that
Province, joined him near Alcazar, with twenty thousand Horse, and five or six
thousand Foot.

Moluc extremely weakened by his Sickness, was constrained to put himself in a
Litter to Visit the Quarters of his Troops, and to see what condition his
Cavalry was in. He caused himself to be carried through all his Army, and
fearing among his Troops he should meet with several Partisans of Mahumet, and
judging, that ill-intentioned Soldiers would be more dangerous in the day of
Battle in his Party, than amongst his Enemies, he declared before all his Army,
that he would permit all those who had more inclination for Mahumet than for
him, to retire to his Enemies. And besides this Declaration, being willing to
make known to all the World, that he despised the Enemies Forces so much, as to
send 'em Succors, without being in any fear, and thinking fit to upbraid the
Honor of the Malcontents, and favor a Depart he could not hinder, he chose
all those whose fidelity was suspected by him, of whom he made a flying Camp of
three thousand Horse; he placed at their Head Mulei-Cheique, a famous Captain
of that Nation, who having been infinitely in love with Almeida, gave reason to
fear that he was for her Interests, and Commanded him to go view the Christian
Army, to keep it ever in play by frequent Courses, and continually to Skirmish
the Enemies. Though Mulei-Cheique had still a great Passion for Almeida, and
could ardently have wished to serve her, this Artifice produced a quite
contrary effect to what was expected; and this Generous Captain, considering
this Order of Moluc as an effect of the extreme confidence he had in him, would
not belie an Opinion that was advantageous to him, and rather renouncing his
Love than his Duty, he did all that the severest Honor and greatest Courage
could demand on that occasion. All the others, animated with so brave an
Example, joyfully followed the Valor of so Generous a Leader, and as he had
an extreme desire to see Almeida, his Love and Valor carrying him farther
than his Forces ought to have led him, he did things that surprised and alarmed
the Portugals. He knew the Quarter where Almeida was; he used a thousand
efforts to break through 'em, that he might go lay his Arms at her Feet, and
made Don Sebaslian and Mahumet so much afraid of losing her, that they caused
her to be securely conducted into one of their Galleys, that was the properest
to save her in case of need.

The King seeing that the Enemies Skirmishes caused a dread in his Troops, and
having no longer any that might retain him in the City, went out to be sooner
ready to oppose the Assaults that were made upon his Men. The day after, two
thousand Horse, Commanded by Mulei-Cheicque advancing in good order toward the
Christians, and the King having learnt how his Rival was at their Head, went to
meet them only with six hundred Men. But what happy Successes does not the
presence of a King produce amongst his Troops? Don Sebastian, at the Head of
this handful of Men, Attacked the two thousand Moors, cut them to pieces, and
pursued the Runaways with so much violence, that he found himself above ten
miles from his Army, accompanied only by Edward of Menezes his Marshal de Camp,
and without having near him any Troops that might relieve him from this danger.
Moluc was sensibly vexed when he learnt this defeat; but did not judge it
convenient to go out of Alcazar, being he expected there some Forces that were
to come from the Seacoasts, from the Cities of Tituan and Mechines, and was
desirous too, that the Enemies would come and attack him upon the main Land,
which they seemed willing to do, to the end he might engage 'em very far into
the Country, and afterward cut off their Correspondence with the Sea; and he
was resolved to go find them out at length, when this reinforcement was come,
that he might fall upon their Rear, and reduce them into a pressing necessity
of all manner of Ammunition, without giving Battle but with extreme advantage,
and at the last push.

The King resolved to attack the Enemies upon the main Land, as Moluc desired
it; he prepared all things toward a Battle, he Commanded the Count de Souza,
whom he had made Admiral, and whose Prudence he had tried, to attend him at
Alarache, with his Fleet, and advance his Conquests upon the Sea as much as the
small Forces he had left in that Fleet would permit; he Confided Almeida to the
Cares of this Count, and quitted her with less grief than hopes, after having
assured her, that he would suddenly bring Moluc to her Feet. He Commanded his
Troops to quit the Sea side, and at length took the Field with all his Army, to
go toward Alcazar to meet the Enemies.

The End of the Second Part.
Don Sebastian, KING OF PORTUGAL.
SO soon as Moluc had notice of the Christians March, he was overjoyed to see
them engaged on the main Land; and though he was extremely ill, and perceived
that he could not live but a very few days, he gave order for all that was
necessary, with an admirable Courage and Prudence. He regulated his Camp,
caused himself to be carried in a Chair from Rank to Rank through all his Army,
for the animating his Troops to sight; and seeing his Forces were ever
diminishing, and the Enemies approached, he sent for Mulei Hamet, his Natural
Brother, who was still young, and of little Experience, and told him: I know
the great Art of War demands a thousand high Qualities, which you have not yet,
and which you will likewise sind difficult to acquire; however I place you now
at the Head of above forty thousand men, and make you General of all the
African Cavalry: But I Command you at the same time to vanquish or die. So long
as I shall have one moment of life left me, I will not let you want an Example;
and if you do any thing unbecoming the rank I place you in, I shall employ the
little strength I have left to strangle you with my own Hands: And for the
rest, Brother, I order you, if I die before the Success of this Battle, to
conceal my death with great care from all the World, and to put in my Litter
any one of our men, who shall most resemble me; to the end, that feigning to
give Orders, and acting my part, the Enemies may not take advantage of the
Consternation that such an accident usually brings into an Army. Having ended
these Words, he embraced Hamet, and caused him to be owned by all his Forces.
After which he went out of Alcazar, and retired into the Plain, for to draw on
the Enemies. He was persuaded, that having better Officers, more Troops, and
better Disciplined, than the Portugals, he ought not to fear the Issue of a
Battle: But prudent as he was, he was loath to commit his Crown to the
uncertainty of a fight, knowing that we ought not to expose our selves to the
Fortune of War, till after all the efforts of Prudence have not been able to
produce any advantage; he let the Enemies March, without going to meet 'em, and
fancied, that by still permitting them to advance into his Territories, he had
nothing more to do than to cut off their passage, to see them afterward perish
by Famine, without costing him so much as one Man. He was not able however to
bring this Design to perfection, as well because his illness reduced him to
extremity, as by reason he was informed the same day in the Evening, that the
Enemies were very near, and the two Camps might see one another, if the
obscurity of the night had not hindered it. He sent as soon as it was day, his
Master of the Horse, at the Head of two or three hundred Men to observe the
Countenance of the Enemies, and it happened, that some Battalians of the
Portugal Army, that had passed a little River, repassed it in that moment, by
order from the King, who judged it more convenient to be left between the two
Armies. These Troops which Filed off, made the Morish party believe, that the
sight of them, put the Christians to flight; and they carried with all
diligence this News to Moluc. The Barbarians animated by this flight, cried out
aloud, that they ought to pursue them, and they might cut them to pieces: But
Moluc, ever wise, and ever prudent, appeased this too pert Ardor, and said he
demanded no more than their retreat, and if they fled, he should vanquish
according to his desires, without his Army running any danger, or losing one
drop of Blood.

While the Moors were deliberating upon this Affair, Don Sebastian caused his
Council to Assemble, to know of his Chief Officers, if he should give Battle
that same day. The most part of them seeing Moluc had three times more Forces
than the King of Portugal, were unwilling to run the risque of a Battle: But
the King fancying, that as at the Head of six hundred Men, he had put to flight
two thousand of the Enemies, a Christian would ever beat five or six Moors,
went boldly out of his Camp, ranged his Troops in Battle array, and divided
them into three Battalions: The first was Composed of Strangers, who had their
Officers at the Head of them, and of five hundred Portuguez Volunteers,
Commanded by Don Henry; the second and third were Composed of Portugal Troops:
The Cavalry was at the two Wings in the form of a Triangle. The Duke d'Avero
Commanded the Right, where Mahumet was Ranged with the Troops that followed
him, the Kings Standard was at the left with the Duke de Barcellos, and the
Baggage was betwixt the Infantry and the Cavalry.

Though Moluc felt the pangs of Death, he had still the same Valor, and the
same Conduct; he ranged his Army in Battle, with as much presence of Mind, as
if he had been in perfect health. He had forty thousand Horse, eight thousand
Foot, and thirty four pieces of Artillery. He kept to himself, the charge of
Generalissimo, and placed his Brother at the Head of the Cavalry. He caused
immediately all his Infantry to March in the form of a Halfmoon, at the two
points of which he placed two Bodies of Cavalry, each of ten thousand Horse;
the rest of the Horsemen were divided into little Squadrons, and followed in
equal distance, being ordered to March still on, and surround the Portugal Army
for the Engaging it on all sides. When it was in presence, it appeared so Weak
to Moluc, that he thought himself sure of the Victory, and thought of nothing
but rendering it Complete. He would have made a Speech to his Soldiers, but his
extreme weakness would not permit him to say four words. He caused himself to
be put again into his Litter, and placed himself in the middle of his Troops,
that he might be able to give Orders on all sides, and see all that the two
Armies should do.

Don Sebastian seeing the Enemies make some Motion to advance, sent one of his
Querries to Almeida, for the assuring her that the Battle was going to begin,
that he would lose his life therein, or re-establish her in her State; and
after having given some moments to the most tender reflections a Lover was ever
capable of, he set all his thoughts to the Execution of that Enterpize. Moluc
on his side caused his Cavalry to March and extend in such order, that being
within a Canon-shot of the Portuguez's, the two points of that Half Moon came
and joined behind the King's Arrier-Guard, and that great Circle, filling by
little and little, became still more thick as it approached the Portugals,
insomuch as the Christian Army was environed on all parts by the Moorish
Cavalry, and took from the most faint hearted all means of running away. The
Portuguez's were daunted at the doleful aspect of this danger, their fears were
redoubled at the noise of the Fire of the Moors Artillery, which making
frequent shots, by degrees broke the Files of the Christians, and made great
breaches in their Squadrons. Don Sebastian as ready as the Enemies shot, went
to every rank to fill it, and also causing his Cannon to fire upon the Moors,
he gave 'em Bullet for Bullet, disorder and fear for fear: But the Moors being
stronger in Artillery than the Christians, did much more Execution, and the
Portugez's were so terrified, that the King gave the Signal of the Battle, to
stop this disorder. The Moors made a vigorous attacque upon the Vangard; the
Christians opposed them Courageously. Don Henry at the Head of his Volunteers,
made all bend under his blows that opposed his passage, and relieved such of
the Portugez's as were most pressed, so that notwithstanding the numbers of the
Moors, which were greater than the Portugals, those Barbarians could hardly
keep for some time things in Equality: But the King, who impatient to see the
Victory so long in suspense, would constrain it to declare in his favor,
quitted the left Wing, where there was not yet any danger, to run to the
Vanguard, where the Enemies fell on with the greatest sury. He advanced at the
Head of his Troops: The Kings ardour made him be every where, he Sacrified a
thousand lives to the Beauty he had Consecrated his to. Victory durst not
remain longer doubtful at the coming up of Don Sebastian; the Moors not being
able to support the Valor of the Christians, animated with the Example of
their General, gave ground at the first Shock, and notwithstanding the
endeavors and threatenings of their Leaders, who used their utmost endeavors
to make them stand to it, and put incessantly new Men in the places of those
who fell: These Barbarians were broken three several times, and put to flight,
to the loss of all their Colors.

The Duke d'Avero, who Commanded the Right Wing, charged the Moors Cavalry that
came to Attacque him, and his heart greedy of Glory, made him fly to the
greatest dangers, and triumph in all places. His Squadron in the form of a
Triangle was so close, and Attacqued so vigorously the Enemies Cavalry, that he
constrained it to retreat in disorder. Mahumet, who had likewise ranged himself
in in this Body, Attacqued, Fought, and Pursued his Enemies like a desperate
King, who chose rather to lose his life than his Crown. The Duke d' Avero
fought with a great deal of Valor, and the desire of Conquering carried him
very far amongst the Barbarians. A Body of Horse coming up to Succor them, he
judged it convenient not to suffer himself to be environed by those Squadrons,
and to retire in good order with his advantage, hoping these Troops would
divide themselves in pursuing him, and he might return to the Charge with yet
more vigor and success than before. Whereupon he turned back upon those who
pursued him; but he found them all so firm, and so well united, that his
Squadron being weakened with its losses and wounds, could no longer bear the
Enemies Assaults, but were constrained to retire in haste, and not finding a
sase place in the Army, they cast themselves amongst the Cavalry and Infantry
with so much disorder, that it put those Troops into a Confusion, which the
Africans made great advantage of.

On the other side the Body of the Army, where the Kings Standard and the Duke
de Barcellos were placed, made a horrible slaughter of the Moors, pursued them
to their Canon; and those Barbarians finding the King every where, fancied that
all the Army was composed of Hero's, or that this Hero alone composed all the
Army. The Duke of Barcellos accompanied the King in all places, and did a
hundred things worthy of his Birth and great Courage: The Moors terrified and
flying, took refuge even in the Quarters where Moluc was, who falling into an
extreme fury at this disorder, and being resolved to repair it or die, he rose
from his Litter, without considering that he was half dead, and caused himself
to be set on Horseback with a great deal of pain, resolved to stay the flight
of his Men by his Example, or to put them to Death himself. Those who were
about him, used all their endeavors to retain him, and even seized the Reins
of his Horses Bridle; but his Courage making him forget his weakness, the Crowd
of the Runnaways and Fugitives still augmenting, and the King at the Head of
his Men coming pretty near that Quarter, he put his hand to his Sword to
disperse those who stopped him, and this Effort quite consuming his Strength
and Forces, he fainted away, and fell into the Arms of his Men, and died some
moments after, putting his Finger between his Lips, whether it was for vexation
that his Men run away, or to make them remember they were to conceal his Death.
And the Prudence of this Barbarous King so well compassed his Designs in the
last moment of his Life, that dying it self could not ravish from him Victory;
and he appeared brave and prudent even in the Arms of Death.

However the Renegado's, who were about Moluc, concealed his Death with a great
deal of care, insomuch as the Army of the Barbarians weakened by this accident,
was so far from flying, after having been vigorously repulsed, it recovered
Forces out of its own shame. The Moors Rallied with fresh Troops, and returned
to the Charge with more Valor than before. The Vanguard, where Don Sebastian
made his Courage be admired, gave ground at its turn, and though the
Christians, who were in that Body, had killed above two thousand of the Moors,
there came again fresh ones in so great multitudes, that they were forced at
length to yield to the numbers in that place; and all the Christians who
remained there, having used all their Arms against the Enemies, and being at
length come to Ponyards, lost their lives, appea ring to be rather weary with
Killing, than Conquered. All the Brave Volunteers that Don Henry led there,
being dead, this General was encompassed by the Moors of Andalousia, and fell
at length under their numbers and their fury. The King received there a Musket
shot in his Right-Shoulder; but not ceasing to Act for this wound, tho
dangerous, and seeing his Vanguard was defeated without recovery, he run to the
Left-Wing where the Duke d' Avero, after having rallied several times his Men,
changed Horses, and Succored those whom the Enemies pressed the most, was at
length killed by a Musket shot. As he was the Soul of that Body, his fall put
the Portuguez's to a rout: Mahumet endeavored in vain to retain them, by his
Example and his Voice. They no longer knew any Body, but the Conquerours, they
fell upon their Knees to the Moors, instead of standing up in their own defense.

The King running to this disorder, and being acquainted with the Dukes death,
who was dear to him, revenged it upon all those he met with; he fought amongst
the Soldiers, and engaged himself amongst the Moors; he animated the
Christians with few Words and a great many Examples, and cast admiration, fear
and surprise amongst his Enemies by his Valor. He had three Horses killed
under him without being daunted, and though he was already wounded, he did not
cease to Attacque, Strike and Relieve; but he could not vanquish the fury and
number of his Enemies, nor communicate his Courage to his Troops. At length
hazard conspiring with the Moors against the Portugals, Fire seized the
Christians Ammunition for the Completing their Defeat, and put so great
disorder in all their Army, that Horses, Soldiers, Wagons, Ammunitions, Arms,
Tents, Pavillions, and all the rest of the Baggage being confusedly heaped one
upon another; some were stifled, others burnt, and others cut to pieces by the
Enemies. The young Duke de Barcellos being fallen from his Horse in that
Confusion, was taken Prisoner; almost all the Chief Officers were killed, or
put out of condition to fight by reason of their wounds: The Portugals, who in
their flight would have taken the way of Arsilla, were all killed or drowned,
being deceived by the River of Mucasen, which ebbing and flowing as the Ocean
does, whose Waters it receives, was almost dry when the Army passed it on their
march thither, but the Tide being high at their return, the Christians did not
know the places where they had all forded it. The Defeat was so General, that
of thirteen or fourteen thousand Men the Portugal Army was composed of, there
hardly escaped an hundred from that Battle. In the mean while, the less fearful
and most zealous, seeing this General Rout, they sought the King on all sides:
But Christopher de Tavora, who carried his Standard, having been killed, they
could not find him, and deceived by a Colors that very much resembled it,
which Edward de Menezes had, they followed it instead of the other, fancying
that Don Sebastian had ranged himself near it. Thus the King remaining alone
among his Enemies, was notwithstanding his Valor oppressed with numbers, and his
Forces not being capable of seconding his Courage, he was constrained to yield
to the fury of the Moors. All the Christians, who returned from this Battle did
affirm, that he had received only one wound in his Shoulder, which was not
Mortal; that he fell not among the dead, and that they had seen the Enemies
take him Prisoner.

In the mean time this Battle became famous for the loss of three Kings. Moluc
died there in performing all that a Wise Conqueror is capable of in such an
Exigence. Mahumet seeing the Portuguezes routed, and willing to avoid the
Cruelty of his Enemies, who would not have failed to have Sacrificed him to the
repose of the State, endeavoring to escape, was drowned in the River of
Mucasen. Don Sebastian was lost there, and so many rare Qualities that were
observed in him, made his Subjects and all those who knew him, extremely regret
his loss, and lest a great Example to all young Princes, who keep not their
Courage within the bounds of Prudence, which ought to preserve Kings for the
advantage of their State, and the affection of their People.

While Don Sebastian was giving the Bloody Battle, which occasioned his own
ruin, the destruction of his Kingdom, and the death of so many famous
Warriers, the Count de Souza Signalized himself as much as the few Men that
were in his Ships could make him capable of doing. He made oftentimes Descents
upon the Land with his Troops; burnt the Buroughs and Villages he met with in
his way, put to flight all those who Guarded the Coast; Besieged the City of
Allarache, and battered it so Vigorously, that the greatest part of the Moors
abandoned it, and had only left in it a weak Garrison. Almeida being nearer the
Naval Army, than the other Forces, learnt Souza's Conquests with an incredible
joy, and fancied, that Don Sebastian fought with no less advantage against
Moluc. She slattered her self with the hopes of seeing her Brother within a
little time again upon the Throne, and her Lover covered with Glory: But these
thoughts did not last long, Souza quickly received the News of the Kings
Defeat, and the rout of all his Army; he instantly acquainted Almeida
therewith, and told her, it was necessary of thinking to secure themselves.
What a sad piece of News was this to that Princess! she remained as motionless,
and lost the use of her Senses at this Discourse. After which she made
reflection upon the Valor of Don Sebastian, upon the ardour he had made appear
to revenge her; and not being able to figure to her self, that he was to be
Conquered, having so much Courage and so much Love, she sent for him, who had
brought the sad Tidings to Souza, who confirmed what Souza had told her. He
related to her all had past in that Battle; and when she saw this misfortune
was no longer to be doubted of, and that she had lost her Brother and her
Lover, she fell into such a despair, as gave reason to fear it would cost her
her life.

She had ever loved Mahumet very tenderly, and often shed Tears for his death,
but when she remembered his Interest had caused the ruin of Don Sebastian, she
murmured against that Brother, and imputed to him all the misfortunes of this
King. It is I alone, alas, said she a moment after, who am the cause of Don
Sebastians ruin; had it not been for the Love of me, he would not have
succored my Brother, nor lost his life. It is I that drew him out of the Heart
of his Dominions, to Sacrifice him to my Ambition, and the Cruelties of Moluc:
He was adored by his People, contined she, beloved by his Allies, feared by his
Enemies. Never any Prince gave such hopes of a happy Reign as he did. He was
ardent in Glory, fearless in Dangers, indefatigable in labor, and all these
fine Qualities have only helped to advance the misfortunes I have plunged him
into. How fatal was the Conquest of Arsilla to him, it was there I saw him
Victoriously Charming; he saw me, and loved me; I fancied that Victory would
ever have attended him, he did not think, I was to be so fatal to him; into
what an abyss of mischiefs has this interview precipitated us? While Almeida
made all these Reflections, the Count de Souza, sensibly concerned at the Kings
loss, was thinking with a great deal of prudence and care of the means of
repairing, or at least, hindering its fatal Consequences; he raised the Siege of
Alarache, to go Rescue the Portugals that were beaten; he reassured the
Governors of those places Portugal had in Africa; he augmented the Garrisons
with all the Troops he could put into the City; he gave out, that Don Sebastian
was not dead, and the Christians assured he was only taken Prisoner. He
promised the Colonels and Officers, who had escaped this Defeat, that the Kings
Ransom should be shortly Treated for, and that he would recompense at his
return the fidelity of those, who should have rendered him service during his
absence. He run over all the Coasts as far as Tangier, to gather up the
Remnants of the Portugal Army, which that Defeat had dispersed. He was
acquainted by those, who had escaped from the Battle, that above three thousand
Christians were killed upon the place, that above six thousand Portuguezes were
taken Prisoners, and above four thousand wounded; that all the Foreign Officers
had lost their lives; that entire Families of People of Quality were
extinguished there, that the Bishops of Porto and Coimbra, were likewise dead,
that Don Lewis was killed, that the Dukes de Braganza and d'Avero had lost
their lives; that the Duke de Barcellos, and Anthony Son of Don Lewis were
Prisoners, and that Don Henry was dead.

Souza having still a strong Passion for Eugenia, and having never been able to
forbear looking upon Don Henry's happiness but with Envy, was overjoyed at
first, when he heard his Rival was dead, but his Reason correcting immediately
the first motions of his Passion, he deplored Don Henry's misfortune. He was
extremely concerned at the grief this piece of News would cause in Eugenia, and
was more sensible of the loss the State had by this accident, than of the
particular advantage his death might be of to him in the sequel. But he could
not forbear entertaining some hopes, and fancied that if ever Eugenia could be
capable of a second engagement, all he had done for her, would move her to some
acknowledgement; in the impatience he was to see her again, he suddenly
Embarked all the Portugals, who had escaped from the Battle; he thought of
securing Almeida, and stillre specting her the King had loved, and had
committed to his care, he asked her what place she would choose for her retreat,
that he might Conduct her to it, even to the hazard of his life.

Almeida without Brother, King, Lover, Relations, Friends and Succors; odious
to all the Nations, who had interessed themselves in that Quarrel, knew not to
what place to carry her misfortunes. Of all the Train she had brought into
Portugal, she had only left a Venetian Maid, who came into her Service a little
before Mahumet was drove out of his Dominions. This young Person had been taken
at Sea by the Moorish Pirates some time after that Almeida was returned from
Spain; she was given to that Princess, because she had a thousand fine
Qualities, that distinguished her from other Slaves, and her Relations had not
yet been able to Ransom her, by reason of the troubles that were in that
Kingdom, which caused Almeida to wander into several places. The Princess had
taken an affection for her, and treated her with a great deal of kindness. This
Slave seeing her in so great a perplexity, told her, that in acknowledgment of
the favors she had received, she offered her a Retreat at Venice, that the
Bailo of that Republic was her Relation, and she was sure, if she would become
a Christian, as she had promised Don Sebastian she would, her Family would
willingly grant her a Refuge that would not be altogether unworthy of her.
Almeida willingly accepted the proffer, Souza caused her to be conducted to
Venice, and then made Sail toward Lisbon.

The whole Kingdom was in an extreme Consternation. The People knew not if Don
Sebastian was dead or alive: All the World lamented his misfortunes, and no
body knew his fate. Those who were well intentioned, maintained he was still
alive, and a Prisoner in Africa. The Seditious said, that though that were
true, they could not reprieve him from Captivity, because War had drained the
Revenues, and they could not find Money enough in the Kingdom for his Ransom.
Others caused a report to run, how he was dead: The People would have a King;
the best Politicians, and those that were most honest, doubted of all, and said
nothing. There was nothing seen but Relations, which seemed all to confirm the
News of the Kings Death. Spain had several places upon the Confines of Africa,
that bordered Portugal: Those who were Governors of them stopped all the
Pacquets that were sent into Portugal. There were daily seen new Lists of the
dead; the whole Kingdom was in Mourning; each City in Tears; all Families
regretted the loss of a Father, a Hsuband, a Son, or a Brother; oftentimes one
alone deplored all these Persons together; and the Council was at length
constrained to appease the Murmurs of the People, to cause Cardinal Henry to
come out of the Abbey of Calcobassa, to which place he was retired, and to
proclaim him Governor General of the Kingdom, in the absence of Don Sebastian
his Successor to the Crown.

Eugenia using all her endeavors to have certain News of her Husband, was
assured after several very exact enquiries, that he had lost his life in that
Battle. The grief she was in surpassed that of all other Widows; her Affliction
was not confounded in the Public Desolation; she made it be distinguished by
its excess. Souza was no sooner arrived, than he would render the Devoirs that
Decency exacts on such occasions: He was told she was returned into a Religious
House, where she admitted of no Visits: He had promised to himself so much
pleasure in seeing Eugenia again, and disengaged from Don Henry, that he could
not without an extreme trouble, find himself disappointed of that happiness.
The Abbess of that Convent was his Aunt: He went to beg she would obtain of
Eugenia, that he might see her for a moment; but this Widow prescribed her self
too severe Rules to consent to that interview, which she fancied would injure
the fidelity she owed the Memory of her Husband, and she still so firmly
opposed the measures that Souza took to discourse her, that he was afraid, he
should be wanting in the respect he owed her, if he still endeavored to
procure himself that satisfaction.

While all Portugal was in Tears, Africa echoed with shouts of joy for so great
a Victory. Hamet, Molucs Brother, was proclaimed King: He made an Entry into
Fez, he brought thither in triumph Mahumets Body, with a great number of
Prisoners. After which he bethought himself to acquire the favor of the King
of Spain. He had means in his hands, that were sure to obtain it: Several
Spaniards were among his Prisoners; he was Master of Don Sebastian, whose fate
no Body knew. Philip stood in need of him: These two Kings sent Ambassadors to
one another. The King of Spain gave to the Value of a hundred thousand Ducates
in Jewels to the King of Fez; who likewise restored to Philip, without any
Ransom, all the Spaniards that had been taken Prisoners in that War. The
report of Don Sebastian's death was renewed every where. New Circumstances of
it were made Public: It was said, that he had not been met withal amongst the
Prisoners, and that having sought for him amongst the dead, a naked Man had
been found, whose Body resembled his, and was known to be so by some Portugal
Prisoners. Hamet delivered this Corpse into the Spanish Governors hands of
Ceuta. He likewise restored to Philip the Duke of Barcellos without Ransom;
and the Council thought fit at length to proclaim at Lisbon, that Don Sebastian
was dead, and to perform the Public Ceremonies, that those People are used to
practice on such occasions, for the appeasing the murmurs and the disorders,
that were caused by the Doubtful Fate of that unhappy King.

Cardinal Henry was Crowned King of Portugal. At first great hopes were
conceived from his age and his probity; but besides that the Virtues of one
Condition are oftentimes Vices in another, the change of our Fortune almost
always changes the disposition of our Mind. Henry became Haughty, Revengeful
and Jealous. Few of the late Kings Courtiers kept in favor under this new
Reign. He Persecuted all those who had shared in the pleasures of Don
Sebastian; he revenged himself on all, who had not shown him respect enough,
and had only applied themselves to the Kings Person. The Duchess of Braganza
was the only one of the Ancient Court, whose Credit was augmented under Henry.
He had for her a great inclination; her Complaisance, her Eagernesses, and the
Affectionate Air she made appear to those she had a mind to please, had engaged
Henry. She came to Lisbon upon the first report of the loss of the Battle, to
know News of her Son, and Husband; she deplored the loss of the one's Liberty,
and the Life of the other; and King Henry used all his endeavors to divert her
Grief. Violanta was not beloved by this Cardinal, but as he had measures to
keep with her, by reason of the Pretensions of Don Anthony her Son, he did not
show her any hatred: She was gone into Mourning for the Death of Don Lewis; the
better part of the Court had been to Condole with her upon her loss. Henry had
not seen her, because he had not consented to Don Lewis his Marrying her, for
fear of being constrained to acknowledge Don Lewis for the Legitimate
Successor of the Crown. The Count de Souza was more in Favor than he had ever
been: Henry knew his Prudence, esteemed his Merit, and often followed his
Counsels in the Government of the State: Don Lewis had ever shared in the
pleasures of Don Sebastian, and had ever applied himself only to the Person of
that King. The hatred that Henry bore him for that reason, did not die with
him; he was resolved to make his Widow sensible of the effects of it: He
brought Suits at Law against her, that were capable of ruining her, and
maintained that the better part of her Husbands Estate had been alienated from
the Crown, and ought to be reunited to it. Eugenia had plunged her self into
such an affliction, that she neither thought of State nor of Life, and believed
she ought not to manage any of those things, after having lost what she loved.
Her Relations were not favorites enough at Court to undertake her defense.
Souza Employed all his Credit to preserve to her the Estate they would have
deprived her of, and did it with Success. Henry Sacrificed his Resentment to
the Prayers of this Count, and took pity of Eugenia. But as the Count de Souza
durst not hazard seeing her, since she had sent him Word, that he would
disoblige her, if he seemed to have that Design; he contented himself with
desiring one of that Widows Relations to acquaint her on the part of Henry,
that he restored to her all her Estate, without declaring to this Relation,
that Henry had only granted this Act of Grace to Eugenia upon his solicitation;
but the noise thereof was already spread through all the City; which Eugenia
was informed of the the same time, they acquainted her with this News; she
appeared as little sensible of the Services of Souza, as the kindnesses of
Henry, so full was her Soul of Grief, and so unconcerned was she for things of
this World.

The King of Spain having had Advice, that Don Sebastian's death had been
Proclaimed in Portugal, and Cardinal Henry made King, resolved to join the
powerful Motives of Religion and Justice to the secret Practices he entertained
in all parts, for the maintaining the Pretensions he had upon that Crown.
Conscience in Spain is an Actress, that has ever a Principal Part in all
things, and had the greatest share in this Intrigue. Philip caused the most
Learned and Famous Casuists to be Consulted, and Civil Layers of his Kingdom,
and they unanimously declared, that Don Sebastian being dead, he might Seize on
the Kindom of Portugal to the prejudice of Henry: But whether Philip having
other Wars to maintain, feared that the Portuguezes would by force of Arms
defend the Crown, they had newly placed upon Henry's head, or was afraid this
War would give those People new remembrances of Don Sebastian, whom without any
difficulty they had believed to be dead, because they saw a Prince of their
Country Succeed him, and of whose death they should not so easily persuade
themselves, if a stranger should Seize on the Throne; the King of Spain found
the ways of Artifice, more sure than those of open Force, and thought it
convenient to let Henry Reign, for the little time he had to live, rather than
disgust those People by too much Precipitation.

As soon as the Duke of Barcellos was got out of Hamets Prisons, he passed the
Straits to go into Portugal, and promised himself to satisfy in a little time,
the tender impatience of Leonora, who had so long sighed for his return. But
Philip, fearing this Duke might occasion new obstacles to the Spaniards
Pretensions, by reason of the Right the Quality of the Duchess of Braganza's
Heir gave him to that Crown, resolved to retard as much as he could his
Arrival. He employed all manner of Artifices to hinder the Duke from going to
Lisbon: And as he knew that he was to pass by Saint Lucar, he sent Orders to
the Duke of Medina Sidonia, who was Governor of that place, to detain him in
that City as long as was possible for him. Some New Diversion was daily
invented to cause him to stay, and he ever found something New and Magnificent
to invite a delay. Several Pretexts had already been found out to stop him,
when the Duke not being able to resist any longer Leonora's impatience, who
desired him incessantly by tender and pressing Letters to return to Lisbon,
resolved at length to depart from Saint Lucar, and made known with much
firmness to the Duke of Medina Sidonia, that he was resolved to depart the next
day. This Governor still endeavored to persuade him; but seeing the Duke was
obstinate to be gone, he caused all his Equipage to be seized on with absolute
Authority, and told the Duke of Barcellos as gently as was possible for him,
that being Governor of that place for the King of Spain, he could not suffer
him to go away without Order from his Master; that he would write to him about
it the next day, and that as soon as he received an answer, all the ways should
be open to him. The Duke surprised at this procedure, gave notice thereof to
the Duchess his Mother. She complained of that Violence to Henry: He assured
her, he would solicit her Sons Liberty with all the ardour he was capable of,
and received this occasion of obliging the Duchess, with so much joy, and so
much eagerness, that she no longer doubted, that what she had suspected of him
was real.

This Duchess had already remarqued how the other Virtue the Cardinal had ever
made profession of, suffered it self to be insensibly seduced by Pleasures,
which attend a Crown. She was extremely Complaisant to him; she seemed young;
was still Beautiful, and having a Design upon the Crown of Portugal, she was
willing to procure Henry's suffrage, and used all her endeavors to insinuate
her self into that Kings Favor. Old Men as well as Children are usually won by
those who flatter them: Cardinal Henry took great delight in the Complaisances
of that Duchess, and fancying that Sixty seven Years, with a long Practice of
all Virtues, were a sure Preservative against Love, he let his Eyes continually
enjoy the Pleasures of seeing that Duchess, and abandoned himself entirely to
the Charms that seduced him, without foreseeing what it would come to. A Heart
that never loved, is as much a Novice at Sixty years old, as in the tenderest
youth; and the frequent Conversations of a Beautiful Person, have the Art of
taming the most Savage Virtue; that of Henry became susceptible by little and
little: The Duchess perceived his Love sooner than he himself, she saw it bud
with joy, and applauded her self in secret for that Conquest, that might be of
such advantage to her Designs. As soon as the King knew, that the inclination
he had for the Duchess, was love attended with all its disquiets, he was
extremely concerned; he would have called his reason to his Rescue; but love
had drove it away; 'twas too far off to understand him, or to return, and all
he could do against that Passion, was to shut it up in his Heart, to conceal it
with care from the Eyes of all the Court, and to declare nothing of it to her
who caused it. He had the pleasure of seeing the Duchess, and she was ever
Complaisant. She seemed to know nothing of his Passion, but what he was willing
to acquaint her with. He insensibly explained to her all he was sensible of
after this manner. And as the kindness of Old Men is not so furious as ordinary
love, and that it is rather a sweet folly than a strong Passion, the violence he
used upon himself, did not put him in too much pain, and he enjoyed with
tranquillity enough the Pleasure of being near what one loves.

Souza's Passion was not so Calm, what respect soever he had for Eugenia's
Orders, it was not without an extreme constraint, that he obeyed them: He
ardently desired to see her; could not forbear making frequent Visits to his
Aunt, and the other Friends he had in that Convent; took delight in being under
the same Roof with his Mistress: They talked of her often to him, and the
violence he used upon himself to conceal his love from all the World, did not
hinder him from taking a great deal of Pleasure in those Conversations: He had
a Sister whom he tenderly loved: She desired him one day to accompany her to
her Aunts, whom she had a mind to Visit, which he consented to with joy. When
they came to the Convent, they were told, that the Abbess was in a Parlour with
Eugenia, who could not refuse seeing one of her Relations, who was lately
arrived at Lisbon: Souza was full of joy at the News, and was going hastily
into the Parlour; but the fear of displeasing her he loved immediately
withheld him, and made him think sometime upon that Design He let the Abbess
know, that her Niece asked to see her; and as there was no mention made of
Souza, Eugenia stayed without thinking he was to come with his Sister; he
perceived she was vexed and surprised to see him: The grief of having
displeased Eugenia, and the Luster of her Beauty, which seemed to be augmented
since her Widowhood, caused so much trouble in that Lover, that Eugenia could
not forbear having some pity, though at the first sight of him, she resolved to
withdraw: The disorder, love, respect, and repentance that the Count made
appear in his Eyes, and the remembrance of all he had done for her, staid her
for some moments, and after having thought upon what was her Devoir in that
Rencounter, she judged it more convenient to remain, than make it believed by
her retreat, that she took a particular care to avoid Souza. The Conversation
was general; the Count durst not speak of his Passion otherwise than by tender
looks, which a respectful fear sometimes curbed, and which Eugenia's severity
often refused to understand. This Interview perplexing her, she quickly found a
pretext to withdraw: The Abbess being called away by some Duties of her
profession, retired presently after: This Visit was somewhat short, and Souza
parted from thence more charmed with Eugenia than he had ever been.

This Widow was afterward something concerned she had staid in a Company where
Souza was present, and reproaching her self sometimes for having seen a Man,
who had loved her in her Husbands life time. The Abbess having already
observed, that her Nephew had a great Passion for Eugenia, discoursed her often
about Souza, and sometimes told her, that Young and Beautiful as she was she
could not remain long a Widow, that the Affairs of her Family would oblige her
to Marry again some one, whose Credit and Prudence might support her Interest,
that she saw in the Count de Souza all that could render her happy, and that if
she found she had the least inclination for him, she ought to consent to their
Marriage. But Eugenia possessed with the Memory of her Husband, could not
suffer any other Idea. The Niceness of her Virtue fancied it Criminal to give
Ear to such propositions: She repulsed them with all the firmness that the
Civility she owed the Abbess, and the esteem she had for the Count de Souza
could permit her, and made them so well know, that such Discourses were not
pleasing to her, as they ceased to be importunate.

The Pleasure Cardinal Henry enjoyed with the Duchess of Braganza did not last
long. Anthony, who was then in Africa, and had cunningly concealed his Quality
from all the Moors, found the means of escaping, and returned to Lisbon, but
was but coldly received by King Henry. All the Court immediately asked him News
of Don Sebastian; but as he had been amongst the Common Prisoners, was one of
the first that that had freed himself from Slavery, and the Fate of this King
had ever been kept very secret in Africa, he could say nothing particular
thereof. He saw the Duchess, she charmed him, and he fancied she might be
useful to him in regard of the Pretensions he had to the Crown: He thought, if
she joined the right she had to that Kingdom to his, they should carry it from
all others. He paid respects to the Duchess, which met with a favorable
reception; she considered his Pretensions in the same Design as he had done
hers. Great Intrigues were formed between them; and though she kept great
measures with Henry, he conceived so strong a Jealousy of that Union, that he
made his Complaint to the Duchess, and fell in a rage against Anthony. The one
without disowning his Passion, promised the King to Renounce it in his Favor,
and the other denied she had any Correspondence with that Prince.

Every thing Alarmed this Jealous King: Anthony durst not be in any place where
the Duchess went; and as forbidding to see one another, does surnish those who
have any disposition to love, with the occasion of making secret assignations
which ever advances the aims of a Passion: Anthony who could not see the
Duchess in Public, saw her in Private; he desired secret Rendezvouzes of her,
which she was not able to refuse him. They had mutual Interests that concerned
the State; Policy served Love in that occasion, as Love serves Policy in
others. The Duchess aimed at a Crown: Anthony employed all his cares to make
himself King. He was very much beloved by the People, he gained the Suffrages
of the Principal Inhabitants of the City, who went to desire Henry to name a
Successor to the Throne, and to consider in that Nomination the Rights of
Anthony and the Voice of the People, who declared themselves in his favor.
This Harangue frighted Henry; he had conceived a mortal hatred to his Nephew,
since he had sancied him his Rival. He resolved to deprive him at one Cast of
the Kingdom, and of the Duchess, by Marrying that Princess. He colored this
Design with the necessity of giving a Successor to the Throne, for the
preventing those Wars the pretenders to that Crown, threatened the State withal.
He Communicated this Design to the Duchess of Braganza: He flattered her
Ambition; she consented to it, notwithstanding the inclination she had for
Anthony. This pretext did lure the simple; but there were two great obstacles
to this Marriage. Henry was a Priest, and sixty years old. Kings never want
able Men, who remove the Scruples and Difficulties that are contrary to their
Designs. The Physiicans told him, he was capable of getting Successors. Some
Casuists assured him, that he might easily obtain a Dispensation from the Pope
for a Match so necessary to the State; and Edward of Castle Bianco was
nominated Ambassador to his Holiness, for the obtaining that Dispensation.

The King of Spain having Advice thereof, was very much alarmed. His Partisans
talked publicly, that Henry was incapable of Marriage, and he could never have
any Children, but such as were imposed upon him. Philip caused the Pope to be
desired he would not grant that Dispensation, and sent to Lisbon a certain
Jacobin, called Ferrand du Castilio, a very subtle Divine and Cunning Monk, who
by the free and good Reception the Fathers of his Order had at Court,
insinuated himself cunningly into Henry's Favor, without making known to any
one soever, that he came from the Court of Spain, and without acquainting any
body with the occasion of his Journey; he labored under the Cloak of his
Monkiship Habbit, and under the appearence of Piety, to effect and bring to
pass the Designs of Philip. He colored all his Practices with a great Zeal for
the Church, and devoutly represented to Henry, that his Marrying would utterly
destroy the Catholic Religion; that the Heresies which then Reigned, would be
more Spirited by that Action; that the Heretics, who pretend that Marriage is
not incompatible with the Service of our Altars, would cite him amongst all
Christian People, as an Example that would autherise their belief, and would
Scandalize the Romanists, and that it would be much better to lose all the
Kingdoms of the World, than to make the least breach in the Catholic Faith.

But what care soever the Pretenders to the Crown of Portugal had taken since
the Defeat in Africa, to persuade the People that Don Sebastian was dead, they
had not been able to establish that belife so well amongst them, but there
always ran some report in that Kingdom, how this King was still alive. They
learnt from time to time, some News of his Captivity: One of the Principal
Inhabitants of the Isles of Tercera, who had accompanied that unfortunate
Prince in his Voyage, and had escaped out of the Moors Prisons, had so well
persuaded it to the People of those Islands, that they ever made mention of Don
Sebastian, as of a King who was living, in the Public Prayers. He went to
Lisbon himself to warrant this News, and to assure it to all the Court; but
Cardinal Henry would give no Credit to it, and fancied this rumor was only a
New Artifice for the putting by his Marriage. This Man was treated as an
Imposture; his Person was secured without any noise, and secretly dispatched
into the other World: Almeida being still at Venice, heard all these rumors,
and as she desired with more Passion than any other, that they were real, she
gave easier Credit to them than any Body else, and by Letters desired those
Friends she had left at Lisbon, to Contrive some means of Delivering Don
Sebastian. But all that came from that African Princess was odious to the
Portuguezes, and this News was so ill entertained at Court, that the most
disinteressed Politicians stisled it in its Birth.

Anthony was yet more alarmed at Henrys Projects, than the King of Spain was,
he redoubled his Efforts to become King of Portugal, and to render himself
worthy of the Duchess of Braganza. He continually endeavored to acquire new
Partisans; he sent to Solicit the Magistrates of all the Cities; he made known
to the People, that it was for them to choose a King, because the Salick Law
being received in that Kingdom, the Crown wanting Heirs Males in a direct Line,
the Election belonged to them, and that John I, one of their Kings, on such
another occasion, had been chosen by the People. He supported the Malcontents,
flattered the Bold, and seduced the Weak: But his Love was yet more troublesome
than his Ambition; he loved the Duchess as much as the Throne, and was no more
sure of the Possession of the one than of the Love of the other. When he had
learnt that she consented to the Match which Henry Projected, he went to her
privately, and told her, after having entertained her with the Progresses he
made upon the Peoples Minds: Heaven is my Witness, Madam, that I less esteem
the Conquest of a Kingdom than that of your Heart, and if I did not believe
that the Throne would one day advance me up to you, I should never think of
raising my self up to it; I know you are worthy of a Crown, I also know you
cannot fail of it; but I know not whether you had not rather choose to receive
it from the Hands of Henry than from mine; and if preferring a certain
Possession before doubtful Hopes, you are not more inclined to that King, as
old and decrepit as he is, than to a young Prince, who loves you to odoration:
But Madam, without particularizing the difficulties that oppose the Match you
have consented to -- Sir, interupted the Duchess, those would be useless, I
know all that is contrary to this Union on the Kings part, and am willing to
acquaint you with all those that opposes it on mine; I do not find that Henry
is lovely; you have all that is requisite to please, I would prefer you with
delight before that King, and in fine, I should love you, if I believed my
Heart; but Prince, better regulated Motions are to be Consul^ed for our Union,
Love must be silent, and Reason ought alone to speak when we aim at a Crown: My
endeavors are to reign, and tho I am not vain enough to abandon my self to
that fancy, I am so ambitious as not to neglect any thing that may place me
upon the Throne. Ah! Madam, answered Anthony after a Passionate manner, when we
are sensible of Love, Ambition has not that Power over our Actions, and for my
part, I call Heaven to Witness, I hardly ever dream of Reigning, but I think
incessantly of you. That is not the way to please me, replied the, the Affairs
of the Kingdom are much more pressing than those of our Love. When you have
employed your thoughts with advantage upon the Throne, you will have time to
think agreeably of me: Procure, Sir, your self a Crown, and leave the Care to
me of making you be beloved: If I am not as sensible as you, I am at least more
sincere, and am willing to avow to you, that with a Crown you would please me
more than the King; but that the King will please me more than you as long as
you are not Crowned. As to the rest, if you believe these Sentiments too severe
for your love, think that it is not to be very indifferent to hear you in
private and without anger, and to declare my self in favor of your uncertain
Cabals and doubtful hopes, against the sincere and sure Offers which the King
makes me of his Crown. But, Madam, answered Anthony, you have continual favors
for Henry. This is all I can do for you Prince, replied she, I will not openly
fall out with the King, (nor would you Counsel me to do so) I have neither
Forces nor Friends to offer you, we have both of us some Pretensions to the
Crown, I am willing to join mine to yours: Endeavor on your fide, while I
shall Act on mine, and be persuaded, that if I could be Mistress of the
Kingdom, without sharing it with Henry, I would share it with you.

These last Wards filled Anthony full of joy: He made a thousand Passionate
acknowledgments to the Duchess, they both agreed at parting to use their
Efforts for the procuring Father Ferrand to be of their Cabal: Anthony
perceiving, that opposing as he did Henry's Marriage, he would not be contrary
to their Union, and the Duchess, believing, that being Anthonies Friend, as he
had declared himself he was, he would sometimes facilitate their interview.

This Good Father, who did not so much fear the Marriage of the Duchess with
Anthony, as with Henry, consented to favor the Passion of those two Lovers.
After having exacted from them an authentic Declaration of the purity of their
intentions, believing he should ever have means and time enough to destroy the
tender Commerce he thought fit to entertain, if it should once happen to be
contrary to his Masters Designs, this Religious acquitted himself worthily of
that Commission Anthony not thinking Father Ferrand to be a Pensioner of Spain,
and daily receiving a thousand good Offices from him, declared to him part of
his Projects, which the zealous Father, immediately gave notice to of Philip.
He was very diligent, and rendered himself necessary to the Duchess, insomuch
as she only concealed to him her most secret Designs.

An occasion that offered of serving her, augmented the Confidence she had in
him. The King of Spain was in no haste to answer the Letters that Henry had
writ to him concerning the Liberty of the Duke of Barcellos. He was still
detained at St. Lucars; the Duchess his Mother was extremely vexed, the People
murmured, and the Jacobin seeing that this Detension might have ill
Consequences, wrote secretly to Philip, and at the same time promised the
Duchess, that the Duke of Medina, whose particular Friend he said he was,
would doubtless give Liberty to her Son, upon his desire. And indeed the Duke
of Barcellos went presently after from St. Lucars. 'Twas given out, that the
Duke of Medina out of too much precaution had detained him without any Order
from Court. Father Ferrand seemed to be principal Agent in that Affair. The
Duchess was full of acknowledgment, and the King of Spain by very obliging
Letters, desired this young Duke to pass into Spain, and come and divert
himself at that Court, pretending to be very desirous of seeing him. But the
Duke of Barcellos distrusted the Spaniards Carress, and thought not fitting to
undertake that Journey. The Duchess his Mother not being willing, he should
engage himself further with Leonora, sent him word, that it was as unsafe for
him to be at Lisbon, as at St. Lucar, ordered him to retire to Villa Visola,
where he would be Master, and have nothing to fear. What Instances soever
Leonora had made to this Duke, he was forced to obey; War, Ambition, Absence
and Pleasures had almost effaced her out of his Heart; and times and the cares
of his Fortune, quite disengaged him from that Passion which had never been
very violent.

After Eugenia had passed some Months in the Monastry she was retired into, the
Counsels of her Relations, the Prayers of her Friends, and the necessity of her
Affairs obliged her to return to Lisbon. All the Court Ladies made her their
Visits. The Duchess of Braganza was of this number; she made her some obliging
reproaches upon the difficulties there was to see her, where she was in that
Convent. You would hardly consent to see your Relations, said that Duchess to
her smiling, and of all the Men in the World, the Count of Souza had only the
happiness of Discoursing you there. Tho Eugenia had nothing to reproach her
self for that interview, she was however out of Countenance and Confused at
this Discourse; she was afraid, they would suspect her of having some intrigue
with a Man who had loved her so long a time, and defended her self as well as
she could from this Reproach. But the Duchess having observed her Disorder and
Blushing, fancyed there was some intelligence betwixt those two Persons. Lewis
of Granada who formerly justified Souza, acquainted the King, that he was in
love with Eugenia: The Duchess had been told it, and as Gallant Women are ever
glad to make it believed, that the most severe are engaged in some Intrigue of
Galantry, this Duchess continued maliciously that Railery, and reported every
where, that Eugenia had a long time had a kindness for Souza.

This Widow was extremely Jealous of her Honor; she was extremely vexed at
Souza for having brought upon her that Disgrace, tho she very well knew it was
not his fault. She resolved never to see him more, and let him know every time
he came to Visit her, that she was indisposed, and could not see any Body.
Souza knew not by what Crime he had merited all these Cruelties: He was sure,
he had never failed in his Respect to Eugenia, and had ever Sacrificed all
things to her: he perceived, that she could not be ignorant of what he had done
for her, and knew too well the severity of her Virtue, to dare to undertake to
write to her. She had left off seeing the Abbess of the Convent she had made
her retreat to, because she was ever talking to her in favor of him. The
Relations of that Widow knowing what the Count had done for her, and seeing the
Credit he had at Court, were desirous she should consent to Marry him; the
Sister of Don Henry her Husband, and for whom she had ever had a great
inclination, was a great Friend of Souza's Sister. They both went to see her,
and Souza declared to her his love, and his despair. He desired her to know
what Eugenia could accuse him of, and to procure him a moment of Discourse with
her. And this Friend promised Souza and his Sister to employ all the Power she
had over her, to their satisfaction.

The End of the Third Part.
Don Sebastian KING OF Portugal.

An Historical Novel.

PART IV.

Done out of French by Mr. FERRAND SPENCE.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley and S. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, 1683.

Don Sebastian, KING OF PORTUGAL.
IN the mean time, the Pope made no great haste to grant Henry the Dispensation
that his Ambassador demanded of him. The Cabals of Spain were stronger than
the Solicitations of Castle Bianco. The People grew impatient, and feared the
Wars, which the Pretenders to the Crown threatened Portugal with after the Death
of Henry. Anthony in all places excited the murmurs; he had gained the Peoples
Favor, and the suffrages of the Court. Philip had notice of all that passed:
He ordered Father Ferrand to seek out the means of stopping his Progresses;
which the Father had Infallible ones to do, and refolved to procure his being
Banished from Lisbon. Henry was but too much disposed to hate him; the Cabals
he raised every where, and the love he had for the Duchess, were such Crimes,
in respect of that King, as could not fail of drawing down his vengeance; but
Father Ferrand was not willing to be the Informer, this was too contrary to the
good and devout Character he affected; he would not involve the Duchess in
this Affair, he had particular Considerations for her: The Friendship and
Confidence of those two Lovers were necessary to him; wherefore he so behaved
himself as to keep them both his Friends. Leonora was vexed at the Duchess,
being she had hindered her Son from corning to Lisbon, and fancied, that she
alone was the cause of this change: The peeks that Love causes between persons
of that Sex, become irreconcilable aversions. Father Ferrand had some
acquaintance with Leanora, from the time he so licited the Liberty of the Duke
of Barcello^: She had made several Visits to this good Father, to learn News of
her Lover, and he had discovered the hatred she had for the Duchess, when he
acquainted her, that the Duke of Barcellos had Order to go to Villa Visola.

Chance had put into the Jacobi^^ hands a Letter that Anthony wrote to it he
Duchess, in which he let her know, that he had learnt, that his Holiness would
spin out the business of the Dispensation so long a time, that Henry should be
dead before an answer would be given to it; that she was too good to suffer the
persecutions of so useless an Amor, as was that of the Old Cardinal, and too
Cruel if she did not declare her self in favor of a Prince, who would
infallibly put the Crown upon her head. This Letter said enough against the
Duke, and too little against the Duchess, to accuse her of a Formal Intrigue.
There needed no more than to show it the King. Father Ferrand showed it
Leonora, as if he had found it by chance. She desired the Father to give her
that Letter: He obstinately denied it, till he had made her promise, she would
never declare from whom she had it; and after having given it her, he desired
her not to make any noise with it, but to show it the King with as much caution
and moderation as was possible, if the good of the State obliged her so to do.
As soon as she had this Letter, she bethought her self of the means to show it
to Henry, and made choice of Phoebus Monis, who was Vereador of Lisbon, and had
great access to the King, and was entirely devoted to Leonora, having been one
of Christopher de Tavora her Fathers Officers. She sent for him, and told him,
that it was important for the good of the State, and for his particular
Interests, that the King were acquainted with a Letter, which was come to her
Hands: And after having showed it him, she begged him to let Henry see it, and
told him, that she found it in the Jacobin's Church, which was the very place
where the Duchess had let it fall. Monis executed this Commission very
punctually. The King saw that Letter, and was in an extreme fury against
Anthony: He Banished him from Court, and sent him to his Priory of Crato. But
notwithstanding all the measures the King took to hinder the Interviews of
these two Lovers, Anthony did not fail to take his leave of the Duchess,
through the industry of the Jacobin; they took measures to write to one
another, and it was this good Father, who received and conveyed the Letters
from and to either party, he was their dearest Confident, and best Friend. They
fancied they could not choose a more faithful Correspondent in their Commerce;
they imagined, that they would sooner open the Pacquets of all the Court, than
those that were addressed to the Religious, who have ever had in Spain and
Portugal, particular Privileges and Prerogatives.

Eugenia's Sister-in-law, often Discoursed her about Count de Souza as she had
promised him to do, and desired her with so much earnestness to permit the
Count to come and see her, that notwithstanding the repugnance her Scruples
gave her to that Visit, she consented to it, yet upon Condition, that it should
be in presence of that mutual Friend; she immediately sent Word to the Count de
Souza to come to Eugenia's: How great was the joy of this Lover, who had sighed
so long a time for this happiness! He run thither with eagerness, but how great
was the trouble, when after having Saluted that Beautiful Widow, he saw more
severity in her looks than she had ever shown him; he likewise fancied he saw
there some anger, and was extremely surpised, when Eugenia's Sister being
willing to withdraw a little to give them the Liberty of entertaining one
another, she staying her, told her, Is it to abandon me, Sister, that you have
engaged me to this Interview? And the violence I did to my self for your sake,
does it not deserve you should be as good as your Word to me? I am very
unhappy, Madam, answered the Count full of grief and respect, that the sight of
me is so great a constraint to you: The love I have so long had for you, the
endeavors I have used, and the care I have taken to conceal it even from your
Eyes, ought not they to have appeased your Anger? You have not so well
concealed your Passion, said Eugenia, but that all the Court has known it, it
has even since some few days caused reports to run, that are injurious to my
Reputation; and notwithstanding all the pressing Solicitations of my Sister, I
should not at present have consented to see you, if I had not had the Design of
begging you to stifle that Passion, and to avoid carefully for the future the
occasions of seeing me, far from seeking them as you do? Ah! Madam, cried the
Count, could you put me to a more cruel Torture? Have you forgotten my past
respects? Do you complain of my present Carriage? And do you think it is in my
power to forbear loving you in the future? My Lord, replied she, I remember
with an extreme acknowledgment, all you have done for me; I should even see at
present your affection without displeasure, and should with joy persuade my
self, that you would ever love me: But I love my Honor, and will follow my
Devoir. If I approved your Passion, it would be believed, that I suffered it in
my Husbands Life time. It has been already but too much talked of, and I will
not give ground for those Calumnies. I loved Don Henry, and he loved me; I
deplore his death; I thought ever to cherish his Memory, and never elsewhere
engage a Heart that I have given him. Does not Death break all manner of
Engagements, Madam, replied Souza? Don Henry 's Ashes, do they exact any
fidelity from you? You have ever lived after such a manner, that the most
bespattering Persons could not suspect your Conducts: All the World does but
too well know, what an excess of kindness you had for Don Henry. It Is well
enough known, what a veneration I have ever had for you; and if you would
render me happy, those Reproaches which you are so much afraid of, and which
have only been the light suspicion of a Malicious Person, would be dissipated
by our Union. The Count endeavored by these reasons and all others his Wit and
Passion could inspire him with, to render Eugenia more favorable to his
Passion, and less sensible of the Memory of Don Henry; but the austerity of her
Virtue made her inflexible: And her Sister-in-law, who knew the Credit, Passion
and Desert of Souza, had all the trouble imaginable to obtain from her Sister,
that the Count might see her sometimes; and Eugenia would not consent to it,
till he had promised he would see her but seldom, not speak to her of love, nor
make any Propositions of Marriage as long as her Mourning lasted. Souza obeyed
her, he saw her very rarely, and said not a Word to her of his Passion. But
Love knows how to make it self understood without the help of Words, and
Discourses the fullest of kindness are not those that are the most persuasive:
Tho his Visits were very regular, his Assiduities, his Cares, and all his
Actions spoke in favor of a Passion, that his Mouth durst not Explain.
Eugenia, who had refused to understand the ordinary Language of Love, hearkened
to these Interpreters, without being displeased, and was very glad that the
severity of her Devoir was deceived by these little Artifices, and that the
Carriage of so respectful a Lover stifled all manner of reproaches.

Henry's Love being something reassured by the removal of Anthony, he employed
himself entirely to the Pretensions that the Duchess had to the Throne,
against the Cabals of all aspiring Candidates to that Crown: He made known to
the Deputies of the States, that he would favor that Duchess in all that
should be possible; he Solicited the Clergy for her; he Prayed the Nobility;
Flattered the Commons; promised some, threatened others, and at length made so
many Cabals for the Duchess, that part of the States declared themselves
already in Favor of her Pretensions. The King of Spain caused forty thousand
Men to March to the Frontiers of Portugal, to join Force to the Reasons and
Artifices he had already employed. And that nothing might be neglected, he sent
two Persons of great knowledge to Lisbon, in the Quality of Ambassadors, that
they might make known the Right of his Pretensions to the King and the States
of Portugal, with Order however not to make any Act, by which they should
acknowledge the Jurisdiction of Henry. All these Agents made no progress with
him in their Negouation: His heart had preingaged his Mind in favor of the
Duchess; they in vain made Presents and Promises to Persons of Quality, and to
the People for procuring their Suffrages: The Voice of a King how feeble
soever, has more power than the strongest Cabals, and what is most difficult to
other Men, is ever easy to Lovers.

None but the Jacobin was capapable of warding the blow that threatened the
Pretensions of the King of Spain. The Duchess put that entire Confidence in
him, as that she gave him the Letters she wrote to Anthony, for the Conveying
them to him: And as she one day told this Good Father, she would send him one
the next morning for that Prince, he acquainted Leonora with it the same day,
that she might cause that Letter to be taken from the Man, who used to bring
them him. Leonora seeking all occasions of injuring the Duchess, went to find
out Monis, and told him, that she knew an infallible means of augmenting his
Credit with Henry, by rendering him a Signal Service; that he needed only to
Way-lay one of the Duchess of Braganza's Servants, and take from him by force
or consent a Letter he was to carry the next morning to the Jacobin; and that
if he let the King see it, it would procure him a Recompense above his hopes.
Monis was one of those Ambitious Men, who desiring to advance themselves at
Court, employed all manner of means to get into Favor. He accepted the
proposition with joy, and found it no difficult task to get that Letter out of
the Man's hands, when he spoke to him in the Kings Name. It was very kind, and
made appear Correspondence enough with Anthny, to reduce the King into utter
despair. This Letter made a great noise at Court: Father Ferrand saw that the
Sequels of it could not be safe for him. And as People of that Profession are
ever ready to change place, without much noise and Equipage, he departed the
same day to return into Spain: And all those who were acquainted with this
precipitated departure, sancied the King not taking in good part the Advices
that this Good Father gave him upon his Marriage, had Commanded him to retire.

Henry being become desperate with what he had learnt of the Duchess, went to
her House in the violence of his Transport, and told her all that Choler can
inspire a Jealous Husband with. She endeavored at first to persuade him, that
her Enemies had forged that Letter for the preventing the Effect of his
kindnesses. She would then, not being able to deny her own Hand Writing, make
Henry believe, that she had been put upon by surprise to write that Letter, and
had been persuaded it was necessary to her Interests. But the King not
relishing any of her Excuses, and still loading her with reproaches, she told
him very haughtily, that he could not complain of her with Justice, that not
having made him any promise, he had no right to ask her any thing; and that if
she had had any Complaisance for him, he ought to be obliged to her for it, and
not pretend it was an engagement in her. He would have represented to her, all
the Cares he had taken to cause her to be preferred before the other Pretenders
to the Crown; he vowed to her the Ardour of his Passion, and the Design he had
taken of Marrying her; but she would not suffer him to talk long upon that
Subject. I know you would Marry me, answered she him very firmly, I likewise
disposed my self to give you my Hand; but you also know if love had begun that
Union on your side, Policy endeavored to Complete it on mine, and you have too
much Understanding and Experience to believe that a Blind Love made me seek for
this Marriage: If I have any Inclination for Anthony, I have yet much more for
my Grandeur and my Devoir: If you would have made me Queen, I would have
Married you, and never have seen him. If he could have Crowned me, I would have
given him my Hand, and never listened to your siighs: I have considered, that
the thoughts of my Grandeur requires I should manage both; I thought I might
without deceiving you, and without doing my self an injury, have some
Complaisance for your Highness, and I fancied, my Devoir would permit me to
have some inclination for a Prince, who showed a great deal of love for me.
Your thoughts deceived you, answered Henry haughtily, the Bastard of a Prince,
is but a mere Gentleman, Madam, and it it is to want Discretion and Respect, to
place Anthony in your Heart under that Quality in parallel with me. I never
make Comparison, replied the Duchess to him, nettled at this Discourse,
Anthony hath-his Merit, you have yours, and I know how to do Justice to both.
Mine shall not be so favorable to that Rebel, as yours, answered the King,
going away in a rage, and time will make appear, how much you are mistaken in
your Projects.

Cardinal Henry retired in the cruelest vexation he had ever been; he shut
himself up for two hours in his Closet, without suffering any body to see him:
How unhappy am I, said he, that I have not been able to defend my heart against
the Duchess of Braganza? Her pretended Affection only aimed at seducing me,
and my Age and Experience have not been able to defend me against her
Artifices; I fancied she had some inclination for me; and I knew not, that she
was only sensible to Ambition, and that a Man of my years, was not likely to
inflame any Woman with love: Why had I the Capricious Design of Marrying? What
is become of the severe Virtue I ever made profession of? I formerly served for
an example to all the Kingdom, and am at present the Subject of its Laughter:
How fatal is my Throne to me! it costs me my Repose, Innocence and Liberty.
What Crimes have not Ambition: and Love made me already Commit? I have deprived
some of their Estates, Banished others; I persecute my Nephew with Gruelty; I
frustrate the Rights of all those who pretend to the Crown, and all this in
favor of an ungrateful Woman, who despises me, and Sacrifices me to a Rival. I
must abandone that Perfidious Woman, see her no more, and recall into my heart
the Virtue that I have Banished thence: Alas! it rendered me happy and
peaceable, and I am at present the most unfortunate of all Men. It was by these
and such other like Reflections, that Henry endeavored to Exhale his Grief, and
Cure his Love; he ceased seeing the Duchess, and no longer favored her
Pretensions. He resolved to give to the Right of the King of Spain the
Suffrages and Cares he had done to the Pretensions of the Duchess of Braganza.
He proposed to the States, to Name Philip for his Successor; but as the
Portuguezes have ever been Enemies to the Government of Spain, that Proposition
was not kindly received, and the King of Spain continued to send Forces upon
the Frontiers of Portugal. These Warlike Preparations alarmed all the
Neighboring Princes: The Pope being willing to take advantage of that
occasion, to become Arbitrator of the Christian Princes, caused his Mediation
to be offered to Philip for the pacifying mutters, and reconciling those
differences. But the King of Spain, who would appear as Submissive to the Pope
as he was Fixed to his Interests, did not refuse his Offers, he made his
acknowledgments to the Nuncio; he likewise accepted them in General terms; he
was too much a Politician openly to refuse that Mediation; but not being
willing to give New Examples to Christian Princes of acknowledging the
Apostolic See for the Judge of Kingdoms, he spun things out to length, without
giving any Positive answer to his Holinesses Nuncio; and when he could no
longer excuse making Reply, he told him, that the Justice of his Pretensions
were so well grounded, and so manifest, that there was no occasion for a
Mediator in that Affair; that Henry was too well intentioned toward him, and
the States of Portugal did sufficiently acknowledge his Right: However, that if
any Change happened in Affairs, and it grew necessary to choose an Arbitratour
of that Difference, he would not fail to have recourse to the Holy Father, as
to the Refuge and Judge of all true Christians, and to make use in that
occasion of his Holinesses Zeal.

During all these Negotiations, Henry whom Age and Truobles had very much
weakened, fell Sick, and died about four days after, almost in the Arms of the
Duchess of Braganza, who was reconciled to him, but had however employed all
her Address in vain to persuade him to make her Succeed in the Kingdom of
Portugal by his Will. They had not yet had time to think of the Funerals of
this Cardinal, when four Deputies from the Isles of Terceras, came to Court to
Inform that Don Sebastian was newly Landed in their Island, and was lodged in
the Convent of the Cordeliers: That he was Royally Served, and that those
Religious had borrowed the most precious Movables they could find in that
Country, and a great quantity of Plate for his use. These News excited New
Troubles amongst the People, and new Alarms in the Minds of the Pretenders.
Souza was sent into those Islands with two Deputies from the Governors of
Lisbon, to verify all these things; and the Count had the joy before his
departure, to learn from the Mouth of Eugenia her self, that he should find her
less severe at his return, and she would permit him to propose their Marriage
to her Relations. He departed with these hopes, his Voyage was not long; he
learnt as soon as he was arrived at the Isles of Terceras, that Don Sebastian
was gone from thence incognito the Night before; that he would not suffer any
one to attend him, nor make known to what place he designed to go. The Envoys
who were with Souza, asked those Religious, who had entertained the King, if
they had heard no talk of Don Henry? They assured them, that he was killed in
Battle. The Envoys returned to Lisbon, after having to no purpose made exact
enquiry after the King: They assured Eugenia and all her Relations of Don
Henry's death: That Widow was out of Mourning: Her Relations and her Friends
knowing the Merit and Birth of Souza, pressed her with so much earnestness to
conclude that Match, that she suffered her self to be vanquished by the Counts
Constancy, and the desires of all his acquaintance. This Marriage was
accomplished with great satisfaction on both parts. And nothing had been
comparable to the Count of Souza's happiness, if its continuance had been equal
to its Charms.

Anthony made still new efforts to mount the Throne, and to Marry the Duchess,
and his love enflamed his Ambition. He was Elected for the Defendour of the
Public Liberty in some Cities; he caused himself to be Proclaimed King in
others, and having drawn together some few Troops, he Marched toward Lisbon,
where they would have refused to let him in. But the Duchess of Braganza and
her Friends, augmenting the disorder that the approach of those Forces caused
in the City, Anthony entered it without much resistance, and caused himself to
be Proclaimed King by main Force. The Duke of Alva, who Commanded the King of
Spains Forces, being entered Portugal, seized all the Cities he met with in his
passage: The Pope hearing of the Consternation the Portuguezes were reduced to,
set Cardinal Alexander Riano as his Legate to Philip. This King having notice
thereof, concluded, that besides the great authority which the Title of Peace
maker of Christendom would bring to the Apostolic See, the Pope would make a
Vassal of him who should be Crowned by his Arbitrage. He resolved to take
Possession of the Kingdom of Portugal, before the Popes Legate could arrive in
Spain: He sent to the Duke of Alva to advance his Conquests with all possible
Expedition: Gave Order, that in all places in his Dominions, through which the
Legate was to pass, they should detain him there as long as they could, he
pretended to be Sick, and sent word to the Legate, when near Badage^, that his
indisposition had delayed the Entry he ought to make him, and he desired him to
wait some time longer. The Legate desired his leave to come to him incognito,
which he could not deny; but he handsomely declined the Popes Mediation, and
told his Legate, that Affairs were too far advanced by Arms, that very few
Cities remained for him to Conquer in Portugal, and all Kings would repute as
weakness the regard he should have for his Holiness. After this Civil refusal
the Legate would have had his Audience of leave to have gone into Portugal, in
pursuance of his Orders from the Holy See: But Philip, fearing that Anthony and
the Duchess of Braganza, whom the Pope seemed to favor, might draw some
advantage from the Legates presence, would not consent to his departure before
he had made his Entry in Form.

In these Public Calamities, no body was happy but the Count de Souza; and yet
it may be said, that the Zeal he had for the State hindered him from relishing
perfectly the delights of his Marriage. He was not born for the Pleasures of
Love, and as he was one day talking amorously with Eugenia, he was told that a
Merchant who came from Africa, asked to speak with him; Souza troubled at this
News, without knowing any reason; all Eugenia's Blood was frozen, without being
able to tell why, and the Merchant being brought in told Eugenia, that he had
lately seen Don Henry: She fainted away at that Name. Souza, in an extreme
Surprise, answered the Merchant, that what he said was false, that Don Henry
was killed in the Battle of Don Sebastian, and that all the News they had
received from Africa, had but too well confirmed his death. All the World
believed it, my Lord, answered the Merchant, because Don Henry was not seen
amongst the other Captives, and Hamet for important and secret Designs, caused
Persons of the greatest Confideration, who had been taken in that War, to be
drawn out from amongst the Common Prisoners, and concealed apart in unknown
Places. The Africans set on foot the rumors of their Deaths among the Portugal
Prisoners: Don Henry was of this number, and as these secret Prisoners have at
present something more Liberty, he found the means of seeing me the day before
my departure, and desired me to go find out Eugenia at Lisbon, and desire her
from him, to use her endeavors to free him out of so long a Captivity. Souza
asked the Merchant why Don Henry did not write: The Merchant answered, because
he wanted the means of doing it, and was only able to say to him four Words.
The Count not knowing what Credit to give to the Words of this Merchant, seeing
on the one side great appearance of Truth, and wishing on the other that it
were all False, found an expedient to get out of that uncertainty; and after
having taken care to recover Eugenia out of her Swoon, and given Order to her
Maids to get her to Bed; he led that Merchant into a Gallery of his House,
where Don Henry's Picture hung amongst several other Pieces which that Gallery
was Adorned with. I shall not believe you, said Souza to him, except you
discover amongst these Pieces, the Pourtraict of Don Henry, whom you say, you
lately spoke to: The Merchant would have at first exempted himself from that
Trial, and told Souza, that the Troubles Don Henry had suffered in his
Captivity, might have so changed him, that he did not resemble what he was
formerly: However having cast his Eyes upon his Picture, he knew him again
immediately, and cried: Ah! my Lord, there is Don Henry 's Portraict, and his
misfortunes have not changed his Features.

These words quite ruined Souza; he had till that moment questioned his
unhappiness; but when he saw this Merchant knew that Portraict to be Don
Henry's Picture, he had no hopes left him. He was penetrated with all the grief
that a Lover can be sensible of, when his beloved Object is forced from him,
and he deprived of the delights of a perfect Love: Eugenia's Beauties, and the
Pleasures he had enjoyed with her came crowding into his Mind. The Idea of so
many Charms raising the value of the happiness he had possessed, made him know
the greatness of the loss he was going to have, and made his grief excessively
stinging. This Blow, and those first Reflections rendered him at first
motionless; then walking apace some moments in that Gallery, he told the
Merchant, after being something recovered from his disorder, That he saw a
great many Difficulties in what he now informed him of, that he would send into
Africa to know the Truth of that Affair, and desired him on his side to make
use of the Correspondence he had in that Country for the procuring more certain
proofs of Don Henry's being still alive. The Merchant promised to use his
utmost endeavors to procure those Informations; and Souza returned to Eugenia,
whom they had put to Bed, and who did not remember the News that had so much
surprised her, and occasioned so long a Swoon. What ailes you, My Lord, said
she to him, seeing him oppressed with grief, must my fainting needs make you so
very sad? or has some accident happened to you, that we have reason to deplore?
Ah! Madam, answered Souza, overcome with Grief, and letting himself fall into a
Chair that was near him, have you forgotten Don Henry -- No, no, I remember it
very well, he is still alive, and you are my Husband Eugenia could not resist
the anguish that this Reflection oppressed her with; she fell again into a Swoon;
Souza was not in a condition to relieve her, and her Women had all the pains
imaginable to recover her out of it. Madam, said he to her, when she had
recovered the use of her Senses, and he had sent all those out who were in the
Chamber, you must not abandon your self to Grief; perhaps this News is not
true, the Merchant who brought it us, could give no proofs of it, and you know
that a thousand such false reports ran abroad of all those who perished in that
Battle. No, no, replied she, Don Henry is living, he is living, he is my
Husband, and I am Married to you. Her tears and her sighs hindered her for some
moments, and repeating from time to time, Don Henry is living, and I am Married
again; Don Henry is living and you are my Husband; she abandoned her self to
such a Despair as deprived her of her reason. She thought it Criminal to look
upon Souza; she durst not pronounce his Name; she could not think without
horror of the Engagements they had made. How unhappy am I, or rather, how
guilty, my Lord, spare me the Confusion of seeing you, said she to Souza, begone
from hence, never see me more, I can no longer suffer your Presence. She had
hardly finished these Words, than that she would have recalled them: What she
was to Souza, what he had done for her, returned into her thoughts, and fearing
she had failed in the respect she owed so good a Husband, she would have
repared that fault by some kindness, but the remembrance of Don Henry
reproached her immediately with that tender motion, as if it had been the
greatest of Crimes. Yes, Madam, I must leave you, said Souza to her, being
something recovered from his amazement, the delights of love are no part of my
fate. It is not the will of Heaven that I find my happiness here below; I
should have believed it perfect might I have been beloved by you, and tho my
grief be never so great, I must renounce it for ever. Do but form to your self
all the horrors that this separation gives me, Madam? My Lord, I feell their
violence as much as you do, answered Eugenia, who could not forbear melting
into tears. Your love is very different from mine, replied he, and I have
occasion for more Constancy than you; regulate yours according to mine; let us
both endeavor to free Don Henry, who is no less to be pitied than we: He will
comfort you for the loss of me, and nothing can comfort me for yours.

While Eugenia and Souza deplored their particular misfortunes, the Portuguezes
lamented the Public distresses. The Spanish Army was all about Lishon: Anthony
was fled under a Disguised habit, and the Duchess of Braganza was retired to
Villa Bohen. Philip went to her thither in Person; he promised her great
advantages for her Son, if she would retire to Villa Visola, and recall some
Forces she had furnished Anthony withal. That Duchess having lost all hopes of
Reigning, and fearing to be involved in Anthonies Ruin, and yet not being
willing to abandon that Prince quite to his misfortunes, retired to Visola,
upon condition of leaving her Forces with Anthony, who fled into France, after
having made some useless Efforts against Philip, who shortly after entered
Lisbon, was saluted King of Portugal; and they stifled with great care, the
News which the Inhabitants of the Terceras spread abroad of Don Sebastian's
being alive.

The Spaniards were in a peaceablepossession of the Kingdom of Portugal:
Almeida led a private and solitary life at Venice, and would not hearken to the
vows of any Lover since she had lost Don Sebastian: She often deplored the
misfortunes she was the cause of, and as she was one day all alone in her
Chamber, thinking of the several accidents of her life, she was told, that a
Portugal Gentleman asked to speak with her. She caused him to come in; but how
great was her surprise at the sight of that Portugueze? she gave a great
shrick, and retired in a fright. How Princess, said the Portugal to her, does
Don Sebastian make you afraid? Ah Heavens, is it you, said she, turning
languishingly toward that Stranger, is it your Shade that comes to comfort me,
or renew my Griefs? I am no Shade my Princess, interupted he, and I come once
more to offer you a Life, which you shall ever be Mistress of. Almeida having
recovered the use of her Senses, told the Maids that came to help her, that she
would be alone; and when they were withdrawn, May, I assure my self, said she
trembling, that I see Don Sebastian once again, and his Death that I so much
bewailed, and the News of which has for so long a time been spread through all
the World, should it not be real? No, replied she immediately, Don Sebastian
died in my Quarrel, Europe and Africa knew it, I am but too certain it is so,
and I cannot give tears enough to his death: Impostor, leave me to deplore what
you cannot restore me. No, my Princess, answered he, casting himself at her
Knees, and kissing her Hand a thousand times, that she had not the force to
take away; I am no Impostor, I am that Don Sebastian, who am come to dry up the
Tears you honor his loss with, and who redemands the affection that you have
promised him. If you do not know again my Shape, my Voice, and the Features of
my Face; at least remember my Love, it is not at all changed, and you have too
many testimonies to be mistaken. Ah! Pardon, replied Almeida, after having well
examined him, I know you again by that Love that was so fatal to you: How many
Tears have I shed for your loss, Sir, and how often have I wished to die? But
tell me for Heavens sake, by what miracle you could save your Life and your
Liberty, from the sury of the Moors. Recover from your fright, my Princess,
said the King to her, and when you shall have taken some repose, I will relate
to you all that has happened to me, since I left you in charge with Souza. My
fright is vanished, Sir, replied she, and offering him a Chair, and I
impatiently long to know your adventures. Since you will not put off this
recital till a more Convenient time, said Don Sebastian to her, and taking a
Seat, I will give you an account of the misfortunes that happened to me since
my absence from you.

You have learnt without doubt, how basely all those, who were ranged under my
Standard, to fight on the day of Battle, abandoned me, when Fire was set on our
Ammunition: I found my self alone in the midst of the Moors, who attacqued me on
all sides: I fought a long time against a great number, and I resolved rather
to lose my life, than be taken Prisoner; but the Wound I had received in my
Right-shoulder, being unbound in the heat of the Fight, the Blood I lost through
that Wound, so weakened my Arm, that I could no longer lift it up to defend my
self: I sought with my Left Arm, till that wearied with so many Efforts, I fell
almost without life, amongst the Bodies of the Enemies I had Slain. Some
Troopers of the Regiment of Mulei Magdelec, a Prince of the Blood Royal of
Morocco, having seen me fall, surrounded me, to strip me of my Clothes; and as
the first, who approached me, was in my reach, I run my Sword through his Body,
and made him fall dead by me: The others irritated at their Companions death,
would not have left me long alive, if they had not found it more advantageous
to make me their Prisoner, than deprive me of life. They drew me from that
place into a little Wood near Tamista; that violence, and the fatigues I had
suffered, making me faint away, they could not recover me in a long time. I had
laid aside in the danger I ran, the marks that might have discovered my
Quality. But my Armor made those People judge I was a considerable Person;
some of them fell to Disputing with their Companions the gain they might
pretend to from this Prize; others pretended to have the better share in it,
because they had first laid hands on me; and not being able to agree about
their shares, several of them resolved to kill me, when Abdeliza, Magdelec's
Sister, who being informed, that her Brother was dead, whom she tenderly loved,
came all in tears at the Head of thirty Troopers, in the place where we were,
and demanded of the Men that held me, whom she saw to be of her Brothers
Regiment, what was become of him: They assured her, that he had not been so
much as wounded, and his Lieutenant being killed by a Musket Bullet, and
falling down at his Feet, it was believed, that it had been Magdelec, who had
been killed by that shot. Abdeliza cast her Eyes upon me, the state I was in,
raised her pity, and after having learnt by some other particulars, that her
brother was living, she asked those Troopers who I was, if I was still alive,
and why they misused, with so much Crnelty, a Man who could not defend himself.
They told her, to animate her to my ruin, that I had killed above twenty of
their Companions; that I was only in a Swoon: But this Discourse, far from
inspiring her with any hatred to me, as those Barbarians had promised
themselves, she had an admiration and an esteem for my Courage, and Commanded
them to treat me more gently. She Examined me more strictly: Kings ever wear
certain Characters upon their Faces, that make them distinguished from other
Men: she knew I was no Common Person, and the pity she took of my Fate, being
joined to the esteem she had already conceived for me, gave birth in her Heart
to some tender Motions, that interessed her in my misfortunes. She perceived
that I lost all my Blood, and Commanded they should bind up my wounds, and I
received help, by her Order, even from those who would have deprived me of life.

When I recovered out of my Swoon, I was surpised to meet with so charitable
hands, which were zealous to give me ease, instead of Enemies, who before would
have destroyed me; but my surprise became much greater, when I saw in the midst
of all those People, a Woman who set them at work, and who appeared by her
Habit and Air, to be a Person of a high Rank. Magdelec happened to come into
the same place, as I was attentive to all these things. He had been told the
disquiets and ardour with which his Sister sought for him. Brother, said she,
after having Embraced him, and shown him the joy she had for his return,
Brother, the state this wretch is in, has raised my Compassion: I beg you would
grant me this Prisoner, and I will take care to reward your Men for that loss.
Magdelec was called away by other Cares, he did not stay to look upon me, and
gave me to his Sister, who caused me to be carried to her Palace, and had a
particular care of me during all the time I was constrained to keep my Bed. I
got up as soon as I found I had a little Strength, I caused my self to be led
to Abdeliza's Appartment, and made her a thousand acknowledgments for her
Favors. She answered me very obligingly, and told me, that the Noble and Great
Air she had observed in my Person, had obliged her to Succor me; that she had
conceived a great esteem for me at first, and did not doubt, but in the sequel,
I would answer as I ought, so many good Sentiments. She spoke these words with
a great deal of goodness, but with a certain Air of Haughtiness, that made me
know she knew not who I was: I answered her with all possible Submission, to
keep her in her Error. She would know who I was; I told her, that I was a
Volunteer of an Illustrious Extraction, and I acted my part so well,
notwithstanding all the Questions she asked me upon that point, that she did
not at all suspect I was the King of Portugal.

I quickly perceived, that the cares she took in my Favor, surpassed ordinary
kindnesses, she did not long conceal from me her Sentiments. She believed her
self to be of that Rank and Merit, as I should look upon her Passion as an
honor: She made me a sincere Confession of it, and promised me a Considerable
Fortune if I was not ungrateful to her kindnesses. Pardon, dear Princess, said
Don Sebastian to Almeida, if I seemed to have some kindness for her: The state
I was in reduced to, and the desire I had of seeing you again, obliged me to
that fiction: My Complaisances abused her; I did out of policy, all that I
could have done out of Love.

Ah! how afraid am I, Sir, interrupted Almeida, you loved that Princess? I know
her, she is young, she is tender, she has Wit; and though of the Color of the
Negroes, her Face is not without Beauties. Don Sebastian vowed he had never
loved her, and removed her suspicions.

What kindness soever, pursued he, that Abdaliza had for me, my Prison was not
the less rigorous: That Princess did not believe that she had chained me so
fast as that she might rely upon the assurance of the Fetters she had given me,
and the more Passion she had for me; the more afraid she was to lose me; and I
was observed and kept so strict, that I could not give any notice of my
Captivity.

In the mean time I learnt that the Portuguezes sought for me every where, that
they had asked leave of Hamet to search amongst the dead and wounded, to see if
they could find me. Hamet likewise fearing some surprise on my part, and being
desirous to be fully informed of my fate, made strict inquiries through all the
Army. Some reported I was Drowned in the River of Meucasen as I fled away; but
he had seen me fight, and could not persuade himself, I could be capable of
running. Some of 'em again said, that I must needs be unknown amongst the
Common Prisoners; and others assured, that they had seen some Troopers seize
me, and they must needs have taken away my life. Abdeliza was at the King of
Morocco's when these accounts were given: These last words filled her full of
fear and joy; she could have wished her Prisoner was a King; but she feared he
should be taken from her under that Title. She had often commended at Court,
the Wit and Gracefulness of her Prisoner; which sometimes made them railly her;
and Hamet turning toward her: Do not you detain the King of Portugal in your
Chains, Madam, said he to her smiling, and is it not to that Quality you have
given so high an esteem? Abdeliza blushed at this Discourse, and her Confusion
confirmed the King in that Opinion. He was afraid I should escape him, and told
that Princess, taking her by the hand: Let us go see that Illustrious Captive
Madam, whom your esteem renders worthy of a Throne, if he be not already a
King. Hamet came to Abdeliza's Palace, I was brought before him, judge what a
Confusion it was to such a heart as mine: I had never till then been sensible
of the shame of my Captivity; I had only appeared before a Woman, who loved me,
and knew me not; but when I saw Hamet, and that he knew me, Rage and Despair
seized my Soul; and I spoke to him with so much Haughtiness, that he
immediately Commanded, I should be loaded with Irons, and be dragged to the
Tower of the Old Castle. 'Twas in vain that Abdeliza cast her self at his Feet,
and shed tears; I was forced away from that Place, and put into that Tower,
where no Body durst approach within a hundred Paces.

Hamet judged that the rumor which had been spread abroad of my death, might
be of advantage to his Designs, so that he would not undeceive the People: And
as he was followed but by very few Courtiers when he went to Abdeliza's, he
fancied he might easily hinder what passed there from being known. He forbade
all those who attended him, to speak of my being alive, upon pain of Death, and
likewise flattered that Princess to oblige her to keep silence. However when a
Month was near passed since the day of my Imprisonment, she had leave to see
me. She came thither accompanied only by one of her Women, and told me, after
having drawn me aside, How little sensible are you of my kindness, Sir, and how
Cruel are you to your self, to have so obstinately concealed from me your
Quality? You should have been perhaps at present in Peace in your own
Territories, and you are instead of that in cares and in troubles. I have ever
been very sensible of your Favors, Madam, said I, and I was desirour to see
their Effects continue, but was afraid that a Confession of what I was might
have interrupted their Course: Pardon that fear, Madam, it is the sole Motion of
my heart, that you were not Mistress of, and you see I endure a very severe
Penance for it. She assured me, she would think of the means to deliver me: I
prayed her to make it known in Portugal that I was alive; without daring to
speak of you for fear of displeasing her: But these Advices were too contrary
to her and Hamet's Designs, to employ her self for the making them known: She
feared I should escape her, if I was delivered by any other than her self. She
came to see me as often as they would give her leave, and ever gave me some new
hopes of recovering my Liberty.

Magdelec perceived the love his Sister had for me; he spoke to her of it, and
she did not deny it; as he tenderly loved her, and as that Passion was not
unbecoming her, he endeavored to second her Designs. He told Hamet, when he
had learnt the Conquests the King of Spain made in my Territories, that he
ought to oppose that growth of Power: That there was a great kindness between
Abdeliza and me; that this Business might be of advantage to his State, and
that if they could make me consent to Marry that Princess, the Moorish King
would be sure of me by this Match, and might make use of my Right and Power
against Spain, and place me at the Head of some Troops for the stopping his
Projects. Hamet seemed to relish these reasons; but he had secret Engagements
with Spain, that hindered him from acting openly: Then Magdelec, who ardently
desired to place his Sister upon a Throne, told her that the King Consented to
their Projects; that he would grant me both Liberty and Forces, if I would
Marry her, and that she needed only to make me those Propositions. She came to
see me, and sounded me upon the point. The Love I had for you, and the Faith I
had promised you, my Princess, pursued he, addressing himself to Almeida, were
too powerful over my Mind to approve of such like Propositions: My Captivity
and the Complaisances I owed Abdeliza, did likewise hinder me from denying them
roughly; and nor thinking fit either to reject or receive 'em, I told her that
a Match made in Chains would become neither her nor me, and the Consequences of
it could not be promising; that she ought to be so well persuaded of my
acknowledgments, as to believe I should never forget her, though I were at
Liberty; and that if she could procure me that advantage, and my return into my
Dominions, she should be absolute Mistress of my Kingdom. She sometimes let her
self be moved with these weak reason; but Suspicion and Jealousy seizing her
on a sudden, she reproached me as ungrateful and perfidious; that I had never
loved her, and that the tenderest Motions of my heart were for her who had
caused me so many misfortunes: Go perish then, Cruel Man, said she, at parting,
in the slavery you refule to be delivered out of. Almeida sighed at those
words, and could not forbear shedding tears at at that reflection. Cease to
bewail misfortunes, for which I am but too well rewarded, Madam, said Don
Sebastian, seeing her Tears trickle down her Face, and let the sincerity of my
Relation procure me Pardon for the trouble my indiscretion has newly given you.

Her vexation increased the rigours of my Prison, continued Don Sebastian; the
more she was enraged, the worse was I Treated: I was oppressed with a thousand
different troubles; I suffered all the ills of the severest Imprisonment; I had
all the trouble and concern that a King who loves his People can be capable of,
when he has caused the ruin of his State. But what lay more heavy upon my
heart than all this, was the grief of being absent from you, and not to know
what was become of you. I sometimes had a Design of giving some hopes to
Abdeliza, that the rigours of my Prison might be abated and oblige her to
endeavor the procuring my Liberty. But what Resolution soever I had taken, I
could not constrain my self to make her any promise, contrary to the fidelity I
had vowed to you, and all my endeavors did only serve to make her the more
remark how constrained and forced all my kindnesses to her was. Tho the
refusals I had made of Marrying Abdeliza had ever been colored with some
reason, and attended with kindnesses; they however brought her into despair.
She vowed every time she left me, she would never see me more, and yet still
returned. Sometimes she would make me the bitterest Reproaches, and in an
instant after load me with Caresses; I sometimes flattered my self with
believing, that in the different Motions which agitated her, had she been
absolute Mistress of my Fate, she would have set me at Liberty, notwithstanding
her vexation and my refusals; which I was sure of one day, when after having
made me the highest Reproaches as her Custom was, she told me with the most
passionate Air imaginable, Well Cruel Man, be insensible of my Passion, since
you are willing; but do not hinder me at least from loving you, and do not
oppose my endeavors. Do thou love thy Prison better than thy Throne? Cannot
you make some attempts to second my desires? Thy Kingdom and my Kindnesses are
not they worth thy dissembling for some moments; pretend to love me, promise to
Marry me; deceive me, I consent to it, provided thou deliverest thy self out of
Slavery, and flatterest but my Error. I own I was moved at this Discourse, and
her so tenderly desiring to be deceived would have hindered me, though I could
have been capable of abusing her. No, Princess, said I to her, the pains you
take in my favor, and the Tenderness you have for me, ought to be otherwise
Recompensed than by Fiction. I cannot consent to deceive any Body, and less you
than any one soever: I have for you all the tenderest acknowledgment that a
heart can be capable of; I have no repugnance for the Match you propose to me;
but I am born free, and I have seen my self a King; I cannot suffer to be
constrained; and your forcing me to love, is enough to make me hate, set me at
Liberty and promise your self all things from my Acknowledgments. Well, Sir,
answered she, I must endeavor to satisfy you; I must Solicit your freedom,
tho you fly from me, and make me pass the rest of my Days in the affliction of
not seeing you. Having said these words, she left me, and gave me reason to
believe she would do all that was possible, to procure me my Liberty, without
exacting any of the Conditions she had proposed to me. She came to tell me some
days after, that she had made very pressing Solicitations for my Libery; that
the King had at length consented to my enlargment; and that he had only asked
eight days to take measures in that Affair; that this time being expired, I
should be no longer in so strict a Prison, and I might then write, and speak,
and do all that was necessary for the procuring my Ransom. You shall be free as
you desired, said she to me sighing, and you may leave me and forget me too, if
you will, without fearing my reproaches or my presence, which I have so often
wearied you withal. This News gave me all the joy I was capable of in my
misfortunes. I kissed Abdeliza's hands a thousand times, and assured her I
should never forget her Favors: However, she told me languishingly, you will
abandon and quit me with all the joy a heart can be capable of. You already
feell the Motions of it, and cannot deny them. You never was so kind, nor I
more Charmed, and Transported with the delight of it; and yet, alas! you never
gave me so many marks of your aversion. I easily perceived, I had seemed too
much pleased. I was sorry, and used my endeavors to persuade her, that this
joy had no other Object than Liberty, and I was at first so transported with
those hopes, that I was not able to consider the Consequences. I reassured her
as well as I could. I wiped of the Tears which trickled from her Eyes. I
desired her to send Letters into Portugal in my name, being they would neither
give me leave to write, or suffer me to have either Paper or Pens, which she
promised me to do, and did indeed write thither: But I have been since
informed, that all the Letters were Intercepted, and no Passage was given to
any News of me into my Dominions.

You may judge with what impatience I waited till the term was expired, when my
Slavery was to end, and what a delight it was to me to fancy, I should return
to you. But the eight days were not yet at an end when the Princess came to me,
and told me with a great deal of Grief, that her Brother enraged at my
Refusals, had dissuaded the King from sending me back; that he had given him to
understand, that I had rendered my self unworthy of that Favor, by despising to
Alie my my self to his Blood; and that as long as he detained me in his
Prisons, I should serve for an Hostage to him against the Enterprises of the
King of Spain, and against the Risings of the Portugals. These Reasons, said
she to me, have been too hard for my Prayers, and the King has Commanded me to
tell you for the last time, that our Marriage was the only means that could
restore you to your Liberty. Well, Madam, if there are no other means to become
free, answered I her hastily, I must resolve to die in Slavery. That is too
much, replied she to me in a Transport, your obstinacy proceeds even to
outrage; do you think that what I say is only an Artifice of my Passion? Can
you be ignorant of what I have done for you, Cruel Man as you are? If I had not
loved you more than my self, would I have Solicited your enlargement? Who
obliged me to do that violence to my self? I Reproached her with the little
love she had for me; that she should never make me consent to our Union by that
constraint; that she onght to be well enough acquainted with the Delicacy of my
Virtue in that point; and that in fine, if I did not recover my Liberty by her
means, I should ever believe, she alone detained me in Prison, and this thought
would quickly cause my Death. In short, I so moved and persuaded her, that she
assured me at parting, she would lose her life, but she would procure my
Liberty, and when she saw me again, it should be to bring me News of my
Delivery.

And indeed I was near fifteen days without seeing her, and was astonished,
that one Evening very late she came into my Chamber, accompanied with the
Keeper of the Tower I was in, and bid me softly be ready the next morning very
early, and follow with Considence the Person, who should show me her Ciphers. I
durst not return her thanks for fear of being heard by the Keeper, she
withdrew, and I passed the Night in such an uncertainty, that it was as
tiresome as my troubles, not being able to persuade my self, that Abdeliza
would favor my Escape. As soon as the day began to appear a Renegado entered my
Chamber, and took off my Irons, telling me, You are free, Sir, if you will but
follow me. I promised to Reward Nobly this good Office, and followed him. We
went down into the Ditch of the Castle by Ladders and Ropes which were prepared
for that purpose, and passing under the Port-Cullis, we entered into a little
Sandy Sink, that the Sea fills when the Tide comes in, but it having been two
hours Ebb, it had left dry. This Sink brought us in less than a quarter of an
hour to a great Road, where we found a Man waiting for us with two Horses. I
mounted one, and my Guide another. We came in less than two hours upon the
Seashore, where I found with a great deal of Grief and amazement, Abdeliza in a
Christian Habit, giving order for the fitting of a Ship, she had prepared for
us. Well, Sir, said she accosting me, will you believe that I constrain you at
present, and will you have as much aversion for Abdeliza in a Christian Habit,
as in the Dress of an African? Madam, I am so Confused, as I cannot make you an
answer, replied I, let us think of getting from this Shore, and we will see
afterward what is to be done.

I had hardly finished these Words, than Magdalec appeared upon the Sea shore
at the Head of Sixty Troopers. Abdeliza called out to hoist up Soils; but the
Ship was still at Anchor, and not one of the Seamen durst offer to weigh it.
Hearing Magdalec's Voice they went in their Boat to bring him him on Board.
Some of them Seized Abdeliza, who would have cast her self into the Sea. Others
fell upon me, without knowing me, and I was hurried back to Prison, without
knowing what was become of that unfortunate Princess. What sad Reflections was I
loaded withal in that Place! The hopes I had of being suddenly at Liberty
enhanced the afflictions of my Prison: I fancied, that after so dangerous an
attempt, I should never have again the opportunity to escape. They kept me ever
in sight: I no longer saw Abdeliza; no one Comforted me in my misfortunes, and
I had no hopes left of getting out. I sometimes feared, that the Cruelty of
Hamet might cause that Princess to to be put to Death; I repented my having so
little Complaisance for her, I reproached my self incessantly for being the
cause of her mifortune: All these thoughts put me into mortal Agonies, and yet
it was not these that were the most sensible, when I considered on the horror
of being separated from my Dear Almeida, when I thought of your Charms, when I
made Reflection on the Delights we enjoyed at the beginning of our Love, when I
figured to my self the mortal disquiets you would be in, hearing no Tidings of
me; when I considered, that I could not learn any thing of you, and that you
were perhaps dead of Grief, Despair seized my Soul, and made me lose my Reason.

However, as in the greatest misfortunes there ever remains some glimpse of
hopes, which seems only to support us for the prolonging our sufferings; I
remembered the kindnesses of Abdeliza, the power she had over her Brother, the
Credit he had at the Court of Morocco, and told my self, that while she was
living, I ought not despair of my safety. I one day ventured to ask my Keeper,
what was become of that Princess: She is dead, said he to me surlily, and
you will undergo the same Fate very suddenly. Death will never afright me,
answered I, if it only aims at me. But I should be extremely grieved if I had
been the cause of her Ruin. Then you are never to be Comforted, replied he,
she died for the Love of you. I Conjured this Keeper by all that I fancied had
the most power over him, to make me a faithful recital of all had happened to
Abdeliza. I could learn nothing, but what he had already told me, and he would
no longer hear me, nor speak to me. I had an extreme regret for her loss; I had
all the Grief I could have been sensible of for her Death, if I had really
loved her: Pity, Acknowledgment, my own Interest, and my Remorses met all in my
Mind to torment me, and never was Grief equal to that I groaned under in my
Prison after this Information. About the same time I was told, that Magdelec
supposing I had Seduced his Sister; and justly irritated against her Enterprise
would punish me by a very rigorous sort of Death. I prepared my self for all,
that the Cruelty of those Barbarians could make me suffer, and Death seemed to
me, the mildest punishment that could happen to me. And in truth, I have been
since acquainted, that Magdelec employed all the Credit he had with the King,
to put me to Death, and Hamet had even consented to Sign the Bill; but that his
Counsel had not judged it for his Interest to take away my life, and the
posture which the Affairs of Portugal and Spain were in, they fancied I should
not be unuseful to the King of Morocco.

I had been near a Year in this despair, when they came and told me, that I had
leave to return into Portugal: The King of Spain had made considerable
preparations for War; his Conquests in my Kingdom were very Successful and
Great; there ran a Rumor every where, that he would carry the War into Africa;
they likewise believed in that Country, that he had a Design of Besieging
Alarache and Tangier. Hamet alarmed at the News, repented he had helped to
persuade the World I was dead. His Counsel resolved to set me at Liberty, to
the intent, that my Person might reduce the Portugals to their Duty, and
interrupt the Course of the Spaniards Victories. I was not sensible of the joy
that my delivery ought to give me; my hopes had been so often crossed, and had
been so often turned into Despair, that I durst not trust them. I saw without
Emotion my Prison Doors opened; I followed my Leader without speaking; but
seeing he led me to a Tower, of almost as difficult an access as that I had
been Imprisoned in, I asked my Guide in a rage, if they only changed my Prison,
and if they believed an alteration of sufferings would be a Comfort to me; he
bid me follow him, without informing me whither I went; and when I was entered a
Chamber neat enough for a Prison, he left me alone, and returning, shut all the
Doors. I had hardly been there a Quarter of an Hour, but I saw Abdeliza come
out of a Neighboring Chamber, leaning upon one of her Slaves, and was so
changed and so dejected, that I fancied I rather saw her Ghost than her Person.
What! an Enchantment! cried I at the sight of her, and casting my self at her
Feet, Princess is it possible that I see you again? I am Comforted for all my
misfortunes, seeing you are still alive, tho I had been told the contrary, and
can delare to you how sensible I am of all you have done for me. Sir, said she
to me, raising me, and embracing me tenderly, I could have wished to have freed
you out of Captivity even at the Expense of my life, I have suffered my Prison
with patience, when I considered the occasion of it, and I have been more
sensible of the rigours of yours than of all I have endured in mine. I Pardon
my Brother, continued she, bathing my Face with her Tears, all that his anger
could make me suffer, since he has granted me the happiness of seeing you once
again. Go, begone, Sir, I will not regard your Joy nor your Liberty, you have
been too long in our Prisons, and I ask you Pardon for all the Cruelties you
have suffered there; Pardon them for my loves sake; it is violence enough to
renounce the happiness of seeing you, for you to make it that Sacrifice.
Begone, Sir, said she to me, Embracing me, my Confinement is not so strict, but
that I have given Orders for all which is necessary for your departure: You
will find at your going from hence a Slave, who will Conduct you to a Ship I
have caused to be prepared for you, and will furnish you with all you have
occasion for in the Voyage. This Slave is faithful to me, give him leave to
follow you every where, that he may send me Tidings of you, and put you in Mind
of me, if you should forget me. Adieu, Sir, I am loath to detain you any longer
in Prison; the pleasure I have had costs you very dear. Adieu, repeated she
several times, sheding a torrent of Tears; live happy, and remember me. After
having said these Words she quitted me, leaning upon the Maid that attended
her; I saw her fall into a Swoon a moment after upthe Cushions of her Chamber,
that were nearest to the Door: I would have run to have helped her, but my Guide
forced me from thence, and told me he had orders not to suffer me any longer in
that place.

Having much more pity of the Condition I left that poor Princess in, than joy
for having recovered my Liberty, I enquired secretly at the Port, as soon as I
was arrived there, of the Place you were retreated to: No one could tell me any
thing certain, and some Mariners acquainted me, they had seen you in the Isles
of Terceras. I Embarked in the Vessel the Slave Abdeliza had given me had
brought me to: We arrived at Angra, where the rumor of my return being arrived
sooner than my self, I perceived a far off, being still at Sea, that all the
People were at the Port to see us Disembarque. I did not think it convenient to
make known my arrival to all that Populace, who are more Inconstant and
Seditious in that Country than in any other place. I went into the long Boat,
after having told the Captain of the Ship, that he should go ashore with all
his Equipage at an Island farther of, and not divulge my arrival; and I went in
the Night to a Convent the Cordeliers have in that Island. I remained there
eight days, causing search to be made for you in all the Neighboring Islands;
but Abdeliza's Slave venturing to go out, was of a sudden environed by a Crowd
of People, who asking him where I was, taking him for King Mahumet, and
reproaching him that he was the cause of all the Wars, they assassinated him
Cruelly in that place. This Sedition made me know, there was no safety for me
in those Ports; and hearing you were not there, I went from thence as unknown
as I came thither. I Embarked again in my Ship, and having at length learnt
with a great deal of pain and care, that you were at Venice, preferring the
pleasure of seeing you, before the Care of my re-establishment, and longing
with impatience to know what share I had in your heart, I come to render you
all my love, and assure you, that I shall only endeavor to get again upon the
Throne for the placing you there with me.

Almeida transported with joy, to see the Constancy and return of Don
Sebastian, had all those Complaisances for him, that a tender and an
acknowledging heart can be capable of. They Deliberated together about
returning into his Kingdom, of making Cabals in Portugal, and procuring Troops
for the re-entring it. He resolved to give notice of his return to the
Ministers of his Kingdom, whom he had found the most Zealous, and sent into
several places to demand Succors of the Princes who had been his Friends.

Don Henry was released out of Slavery by the Cares of Eugenia and Souza in
that time. Upon his return he learnt that Eugenia was Married again; and when
he was arrived at Lisbon, not daring to enter his own House, nor ask to see his
Wife, he went to lodge at one of his Friends, who acquainted him with all the
particulars that could Justify her, and give him some Consolation in this
misfortune. She came to him as soon as she had learnt where he was; cast her
self at his Feet, and watered them with Floods of Tears. She told him all that
her Affection and Innocence could Suggest in her Vindication. He was moved; but
her delicacy could not rely upon all these reasons: She prayed him with all the
earnestness imaginable, to permit her to pass the rest of her time in a
Convent; and he could not refuse her so just a demand, notwithstanding all the
kindnesses he had for her. The Count of Souza, who, since the News of Don
Henry's being alive, had passed his days in the greatest Grief imaginable, and
had abstained from seeing Eugenia since that time, disgusted with the World,
and having no tie that could retain him, resolved to put himself into the Order
of S. Dominick, and was shut up the rest of his days in the Convent of
Benesiges, half a League from Lisbon, where he died in the Sweets of a Holy
Life, as the Gravest Authors do assure, who have written the History of
Portugal.

What Care soever Don Sebastian had taken to conceal his return, the reumour
ran quickly at Venice, that a Stranger was arrived there, who had the Name and
Resemblance of Don Sebastian. Even some Portugals, who were in that City having
Examined his Shape, his Face, and his Voice, knew him for their King. The News
of which being come to the Ears of the Republic, and the Venetians fearing a
Quarrel with the Spaniards, thought themselves obliged to seize Don Sebastian,
and give notice to the Court of Spain of all that passed amongst them upon that
account. The Spaniards assured the Republic, that this Don Sebastian was an
Impostour, and desired he might be proceeded against as such, Commissioners
were deputed before whom he maintained with firmness, that he was Don
Sebastian; that he had been detained till then in the Prisons of Africa; and
that he came to recover the Crown that was due to him by his Birth. The
Portuguezes, who were in that City maintained his asseverations: Almeida
ascertained he had told her things that only Don Sebastian could know. He
showed upon his Body very particular Marks that Nature had Imprinted there, and
which he was observed to have when he was King of Portugal. He appealed to his
Judges, the Venetians of great Consideration, who had been Ambassadors for the
Republic in his Kingdom, and told them the most secret Affairs they had
particularly treated of at that time with him. In fine, he so well represented
all the Proofs, and all the Circumstances that might make him known to be the
King, that Don Sebastians Judges could not do any thing more than Banish him
from Venice. Almeida would have followed him, to help him to support his
misfortunes; but he caused her to stay in that City, till he should have
settled his Affairs. He made toward Tuscany, where he thought to meet with
some Friends, and some favorable Witnesses who had been at the Battle.

The Great Duke of Tuscany promised to furnish him with some Troops. The
Duchess of Parma was his Cousin; he went to implore her Succors: She received
him with all the Joy and all the Kindness that a Good Relation can be capable
of; but she could neither grant him Forces nor Money: All the Favor she could
do him, was to give him an Equipage becoming his Quality. He thought convenient
to send to the Cortes or States of Portugal, to give them notice of the state
he was in, and where he was. The Duchess furnished him with People of great
Experience in those kind of Negotiations. They went and acquainted the States
of Portugal with the Fate of their King. This Deputation caused great joy and
surprise through all the Kingdom. They sent to Don Sebastian, six of the
Principal Men of their Assemblies. They saw him; the respect which the Majesty
of Kings occasions, seized them at first sight: Don Henry and Phoebus Monis
were of the Number of these Envoy's, they could not mistake him, and Embracing
his Knees, they conjured him to deliver them from the oppression of the
Spaniards. The others for fear of being mistaken by too much resemblance, asked
the King several Questions, which no one but Don Sebastian could reply to. They
were likewise surpised to see so much presence of Mind, and so much Memory in
his Answers. These Envoys returned into Portugal, and reported, that it was the
real Don Sebastian they had spoke to. The Partisans of Spain, whom all the
Kingdom was full of, accused these Envoys of Imposture, and mantained that they
had suffered themselves to be Suborned by an Impostour. Others demanded that
Don Sebastian should come in Person himself to the Assembly of the States
General, to be Examined there in all the Forms. He was ready to depart to be
present there, but the Duchess of Parma, and some of his Priends, who were
about him, hindered him, telling him, that the States were only Composed of
People Pentioners to the Spaniards, that the true Portugals were no longer
Masters there, and that there was no safety for him.

As Don Sebastian was preparing to enter Spain at the head of some Forces, the
Spaniards caused him to be Seized, to prevent his doing so, he was carried to
Naples, and notwithstanding the Public Ignominies they made him suffer, he
always made appear the greatness of his Soul, and never belied his Character in
the least. They drew up his Process anew, they would have put him to death in
the Forms; but notwithstanding all that the worst of Envy was capable of
inventing against him, the injustice of his Judges durst not attempt the life
of so great a King, and Condemned him to the Galleys for to appease in some
manner the rage of his Enemies. Almeida entered the Prison just after the
Sentence had been read to him. What a Desolation for her and for him! The Grief
of those two Lovers is not to be expressed. But that Princess more lively
resenting that Don Sebastian had all those outrages done to him, died in his
Arms of Grief and Regret, for having reduced so Great a King into so deplorable
a Condition. He was Shaved and carried to the Galleys. The most Tragical
Historians durst never offer to our Eyes, such a spectacle, as to see Chained,
in the midst of a hundred Malefactors of the Scum of the People, a Formidable
and Powerful King, whose Mind and Body were enriched with a thousand Beautiful
Qualities, and to whom no other Crime can be imputed than his misfortunes.

In the mean time the Portuguezes being impatient of the Spanish Yoke, and ever
bestowing some sighs to the memory of Don Sebastian, leagued together, and
openly demanded their King, but it was in vain; one rarely consents to restore
a Crown, and Policy abhors that effeminate Virtue. The Spaniards foreseeing the
ill Consequences of these Cabals and Leagues, and fearing that Don Sebastian,
whom they ever took for an Impostour, might be still capable, notwithstanding
the deplorable Condition he was reduced to, to deprive them of the Crown of
Portugal, resolved to make sure of his Person. They took him from the Galleys,
they caused him to be carried secretly into Spain, and Imprisoned him in the
Castle of Saint Lucar, where it is reported, this deplorable King was Poisoned
in a short time after, and with so Tragical an End did Crown a Life that had
been filled with so many Misfortunes.

FINIS.

