Once more A WARNING To Thee O ENGLAND: But more perticularly to the
Inhabitants of the City of BRISTOL.

Amos Chap. 6. Verse. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, ye
that put far away the Evil Day, and cause the Seat of Violence to come near,
that lie upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches, and eat
the Lambs out of the Flocks, and the Calves out of the midst of the Stall, that
Chaunt to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves Instruments of
Music, like David, that drink Wine in Bowls, and anoint themselves with the
chief Ointments, but they are not grieved for the Afflictions of Joseph,
therefore now shall they go Captive with the first that go Captive, and the
Banquet of them that stretched themselves shall be removed.

Printed in the Year, 1683.

A Warning to England, etc.
NOtwithstanding many Warnings in the true love of God, have been sent to thee,
O Nation of England, from the highest to the lowest; yet once more in the
tender Love of God, is my heart opened for thy Everlasting Welfare and
Prosperity, that so the day of Gods Judgments may not overtake you at unawares.
And thee O City of Bristol in particular; for thy ^nhabitants have greatly
provoked the Lord against them, and without they do speedily return unto the
Lord with true and unfeigned Repentance, the Wrath of God will break forth upon
thee, and there shall be none able to deliver thee from the Stroke of his Hand,
of what he has decreed to bring upon thee; for thy Sins have reached unto
Heaven, and thy Abomination stands as a great Record against thee; for some of
thy Inhabitants have committed no less Evil then Great Rebellion against the
God of Heaven, in that they have not only rejected, but also despised the
Appearance of Christ in themselves and others, who is come and comeing to
Overturn, Overturn, and Overturn, till he come whose right it is to take unto
himself his great Power, and Reign in every Conscience, according to the
Promise of God, in Psalm. 2. 8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for
thy Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession. O
therefore be ye warned, you Great Men of the Earth, from the highest to the
lowest, what Laws and Decrees you make and execute against the Lords Innocent
People, whom you have nothing against, but in matter of Worship to our God; as
Daniels Enemies had no other cause, who drawed in the King by their Flatterys,
pretending Honor for him, to fulfill their hearts Lust; and so caused him to
Seal the Decree against Daniel, which made the Kings heart sorrowful, but mark
what became of them that laid the Snare privily to destroy the Innocent; for
the Snare that they had laid for him, became a Pit of Destruction to them, and
the Kings Eyes were opened to see who was his greatest Friends, and could do no
less then testify, That Daniels God, was the Lord of Lords, and king of kings,
and has all Power in Heaven and Earth in his Hand.

O therefore Fear and Tremble before the Great God of Heaven and Earth, whose
Almighty power is able to dash you in pieces like a Potters Vessel, and to cast
you as Dung upon the Face of the Earth, and give your Flesh to the Fouls of the
Air; for asuredly the God of Daniel, and of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego is
our God, and his Arm is not at all shortened, that it cannot Save; nor his Ear
heavy, that it cannot Hear; but he will asuredly hear the Cry of the Oppressed,
and will deliver us in his own appointed time, as he did Israel of Old; for he
is a God hearing Prayer, and to whom every Knee must Bow. O therefore take
Warning you Inhabitants of this Nation of England, before the day of your
Visitation be quite over; for without speedy Repentance be found in thee, the
overflowing Scourge will asuredly pass through thee, as it did over Jerusalem
of Old. For what Sins were there committed in her, that are not found in thee
at this day* for they pleaded highly for the Law and the Prophets, and had the
Scriptures of Truth, and said, Had they been in the days of their
Forefathers, they would not have killed the Prophets* yet being ignorant of
what the Prophets testified of in the Scriptures of Truth concerning Christ,
they Reviled him, and Despised him, and put him to Death, notwithstanding he
turned them to the Holy Scriptures, and bid them, Search them, for they are
they (said he) that testify of me, but you will not come to me that you may
have Life* and he also said, That he was not come to destroy the Law nor the
Prophets, but to fulfill them* And he was the end of the Law for Righteousness
sake, to all that did believe in him; and to as many as did believe in his Name
in that day, to them he gave Power to become Sons and Daughters of the most
high God, and established his second Covenant in them, according to his
Promise, by writing his Law in their hearts, and putting his Truth in their
Inward parts; and so they were no more under the Law, but under Grace, and for
this end was the Gospel Preached, that Sin might be condemned in the Flesh,
that we might be justified in the Spirit. The Law of the Spirit of Life which
Christ Jesus our Lord is setting up in the Hearts of his People, is beyond the
outward Law; for thereby he purifieth the Conscience, and makes it void of
Offense toward God and Man; and it is beyond the Law of Moses (which the Jews
appeared so strickt for) which was Gods Ordinance in its time, till Christ came
(who is full of Grace and Truth) to put an end to Sin, and finish
Transgression, and bring in everlasting Righteousness, and set up his
everlasting Government in his People, of which there is to be no end; and those
that do live under his Government, can do no less then Fear God, and Honor the
King; giving unto God that which is his, and to the King that which is his; but
as pertaining to the Conscience, it is the King of Heavens Prerogative alone,
to sit upon his (...) in every one of our Hearts, and to rule and reign there,
and to lead and guide us in his Counsel, that after we have obeyed him in all
his Commandments, he may bring us unto Glory; and therefore we dare not bow to
any other Worship, but the Spiritual Worship that Jesus spoke of to the Woman
of Samaria, (when he found her out there in her Ignorance, by Jacobs Well,)
whose Meat and Drink it was to Preach the Everlasting Gospel, which is the
Power of God to Salvation, and was to the poor Woman, that she might be an
Instrument in his hand, to go and Preach unto her Neighbors, and to call them
unto him, that they might hear him themselves; and is the same Christ that we
do invite all to this day, that he may set your Sins in order before you, and
bring all to your Remembrance whatsoever you have done from your Youth unwards,
as he did to this Woman.

O therefore you that have any tenderness for your own Souls; prize your time,
and the day of Gods Love to your Immortal Souls, lest the Midnight Cry overtake
you at unawares, in the Night of Apostasy, before you come to own and submit to
the Ministration of Condemnation against Sin, which is glorious in its time,
here is the strait and narrow way, that is hard to that Birth that lives in
Sin, therefore this is the strait way that Christ spoke of, that all must walk
in that come to know the Ministration of Justification in the sight of God,
which is far more glorious in its time; those who thus come to receive and
submit to Gods Visitation, the way that was once strait and narrow, does become
a Path of Pleasantness to them, and all his ways peace to that Birth which
Christ spoke of to Nicodemus, which is of his own nature; and he that is
begotten and brought forth in his Heavenly Divine Nature, as the Scripture
says in 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin; for his
Seed remains in him; and he cannot Sin, because he is born of God. So there
is not a good Thought, nor a good Desire, but what is of the Lords begetting in
us; and he that begets these good desires in us, is able to fulfill the desires
of them that fear him, according to his promise in the Holy Scriptures of
Truth; and those he makes able rather to choose, as Moses did, to suffer
Affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin which is
but for a Season.

O therefore you Priests and People of all sorts, that are pleading for Sin
term of Life, search the Scriptures, for they are they that testify against
you, in all your Ungodly Actions; for you are not only under the Condemnation
of the Law of Moses, but also Transgressors of the Law of Grace, that do live
and act in Sin, in Persecuting your honest Neighbors, who for Conscience sake
cannot bow to the wills of Men, in things relating to Gods Worship; for the Law
of Moses was added because of Transgression; for before Sin entered there was no
need of an outward Law to punish for Sin, but to keep to the Law of the Spirit
of Truth within, in which state Man would have been happy had he kept therein;
for Christ is the Resurrection and the Life, that was promised after the Fall
of Adam and Eve, that should redeem fallen Man out of that Estate into the
Restoration and Image of God again. Therefore you that are pleading to be saved
by Christ's Death and Sufferings, and yet keep in the Image of the Earthly, and
are not come to suffer with Christ, and to be buried with him in Baptism, that
you may know the Resurrection of his Life to raise up your Souls that are dead
in Trespasses and Sins, that you may put off the Old Man with his Deeds, and so
come to bear the Image of the Heavenly, and so live in newness of Life, you are
but deceiving your own Souls, for the end of Christ's comeing was, To Redeem his
People out of Sin, and not to save them in their Sins* for as Christ said, If
you Dye in your Sins, whither I go you cannot come; for he is of purer Eyes
then to behold Iniquity, as to let it go unreproved, or to dwell with
Uncleanness; (therefore) as the Prophet said, He was a Man of Sorrow, and
acquainted with Grief, in that prepared Body of which it was said, He went
about doing good, and healing all manner of Diseases, for them that did believe
in him; but where unbelief was, he did not many mighty works there; for there
is nothing unpossible to those that do believe in his Name.

O! therefore fear and tremble ye Inhabitants of the Earth, and wait to know
the Judgments of the Lord to be set up in you, that you may learn Righteousness
through them; for the unlimitted Power of the Lord is going through this
Nation, and it is in vain for mortal Men, whose Breath is in their Nostrils, to
set themselves in battle array against the Lamb and his Followers, for the Lamb
and his Followers shall have the Victory; for he is that great Prophet which
Moses Prophesied of, That should be raised up like unto him, and said, Him
shall ye hear in all things; and those that will not hear this Prophet, shall
be cut off from among the People: For the mighty Power of the Lord is going
through this Nation, and the day that is at hand will burn as an Oven against
all the Proud, and all that do wickedly; for they shall be as Stubble before
Devouring Fire; For the best of them is as a Bryar, and the most Upright as a
Thorn Hedge; therefore the day will be very terrible in breaking down the
Pleasant Pictures and Gilded Cup of vain Religion, that have been held out (to
deceive the Nations) full of Abominations.

And against you Priests and Teachers also, that are not come so far as the
Pharisaical Righteousness, to make the outside clean; for there is a fire
kindled in the Wrath of God, which will burn in his sore Displeasure, against
all you that are covering your selves with a covering, but not of Gods Eternal
Spirit; for all other coverings will be too narrow, and the Bed too short to
stretch your selves on; for there is a Cloud of Witnesses against you, the Law,
the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles; your Persecution exceeds Saul's, which
was a Man that walked as to the Law blameless, and he Persecuted in Zeal for
the Law which Moses received from the Mouth of God, and was Ignorant that
Christ was come, who was the end of the Law for Righteousness sake, to as many
as did believe in his Name; and so his Zeal was for the Law and the Temple,
(where) Gods Holiness once appeared; so the Lord smote him down in mercy, that
he might pass thorough the Ministration of Condemnation, which is glorious in
its time, and be raised up in the Administration of Justification, which came
by Jesus Christ, which is far more glorious; For the Law came by Moses, but
Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ; and if they escaped not that refused him that
spoke on Earth, of how much sorer Punishment shall they be thought worthy that
refuses him that speaks from Heaven? whose Grace has appeared unto all Men,
to bring Pardon for Sin to them that do obey it, and to teach them to deny all
Ungodliness and Wordly Lusts, and to live a Righteous and Godly Life in this
present Evil World: And so such come to witness. that Christ did not come to
destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill all Righteousness within, and
to cut down Sin in the motion, by the true Circumcision within, and then such
comes to witness the Apostles words, who said, That neither Circumcision, which
was outward, nor Uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new Creature.

But Ah! you Priests, Rulers and Persecutors, that are risen up against the
People of God in these times, how have you appeared against the Law and the
Gospel? and by your Fruits you are known to be those that Christ spoke of to
his Disciples, who said, By their Fruits ye shall know them; and he also bid
them, (that had the Everlasting Gospel to Preach) As they had freely received,
freely give: but wherein has your Love appeared to God or to your Neighbors,
To Love the Lord your God with all your Hearts, and with all your Souls, and
your Neighbors as your selves: On which two great Commandments hang all the
Law and the Prophets, which must be fulfilled in the Royal Law of Christ
within; but you have rather appeared like them that came forth out of the City,
Desireing Christ to depart out of their Coast, for the loss of a few Swine,
notwithstanding the great Miracle which he did for their Neighbor, in casting
out Legions of Devils that did torment him, and he sat by Jesus clothed, and
in his right mind.

O! therefore blush and be ashamed, you that pretend the Scripture is your only
Rule, and live so contrary to it; for have you not appeared worse then those
who prayed Christ to depart out from their Coast, to save their outward
Substance, and would have none of the Knowledge of his ways? for you have
rejected and despised Christ in his appearance, who has waited long to be
gracious to your Souls, though he has knocked so long at the door of your
Hearts, till his Locks have been wet with the Dew of the Night, and yet you
still refuse him, and the knowledge of his ways, and had rather entertain your
Legion of Unclean Thoughts and Ungodly Deeds, and have also said, That there is
no living without Sin on this side the Grave; and so have made a Covenant with
Hell and Death, which must be broken, if ever you come to know the travail of
your Souls, as David did, when he cried under the sense of Gods Judgments for
Sin, That he would give no sleep to his Eyes, nor slumber to his Eyelids, till
he had found a Habitation for the God of Jacob to dwell in; for he must have
the whole Heart where he takes up his abode, and no room left for Uncleanness;
O therefore search and see, whether you be not worse then they that desired
Christ to depart from them to save self, that will give no room for Christ in
your own Hearts to reign there, nor no room for his Subjects that are under the
reign of his Power; though we would eat our own Bread, and wear our own
Apparel; but you are taking away our outward Substance, which the Lord has
blessed us with to nourish us and our Familys, and taking of us to Prison, and
then come to disturb us in the Prison, for no other cause but for meeting
together in the Name of Jesus, to worship the Father and the Son in the Spirit
and in the Truth; and for this cause are we put into Prison; and for the same
cause are we still sufferers in the Prison, for several times was I pulled out
of the Meeting while I was a Prisoner at Bridewel, and kept from the rest of my
Friends till the Meeting was done, for no other cause, but being at Prayer to
the Living God, before the now Sheriffs came into their places; and since they
have come in, they have also bent their Bow against the Righteous, and gone
from Prison to Prison, to disturb us in our Spiritual Worship in the Prison,
and gave the Keepers Orders, That we should not be suffered to come together to
Preach and Pray: And according to their Orders were we Locked asunder. But
blessed be the Name of the Lord, our Teacher cannot be removed into a Corner,
and therefore they cannot separate us from his Presence, which is life to our
Souls; if they put us one by one into a stinking Dungeon, there will our God
hear our Prayers, and send the Angel of his Presence down amongst us, to
sweeten our Souls with the sweet Ointment of his love, as blessed be his Name,
he did at that time amongst us; and in the sense of his living Presence and
Power, my Heart and Mouth was opened to Praise the Lord for his Goodness and
Mercy to our Souls, and in Prayer, That he might preserve us in the living
sense of the same to the end of our days, that so we might receive the end of
our Hope and Faith, even the Salvation of our Souls; and in the mean time came
in Sheriff Arnold with others in his Company, who took me off my Knees from
Prayer, and sent me away by his man to Newgate, and he and the rest followed
after to disturb Friends here; and when they came in, they were very fierce to
thrust in through Friends that sat in the outward rooms, that they might come
to the innermost room in the Prison, to see if they could find any Preaching or
Praying, but Friends being sitting in silence, they could hear no Words till
after they came in; a Friend spoke to them, To Fear the Lord, because his Name
is Great, and for these words, or such like, was he commanded to be taken away
out of his lodging room, (from the rest of Friends) and put him down into a
dark Room, called the West-house; and they commanded that I should be put from
the rest of Friends also, and not be suffered to meet with them; and so I told
them, They were but Mortal Men, and that the Sword of Mortality hanged over
their Heads, which was near ready to cut them down, and therefore my desire to
them was to Repent.

So the Turn-key took me down into a place, called Paul's, and put me into a
dark hole; and Thomas Lugg an Informer, and now a Constable, one of the company
that came along with the Sheriff, followed after, and spoke of Chaining of me,
and that I should have neither Bread nor Water,; and the next Meeting day,
being locked and kept one from another in several Rooms, I being at Prayer, the
Jailer and his Man came where I was, and took me off my Knees, and would not
suffer me to stay with the rest of my Friends that lodged in the same dark
Room, it being a place where Felloners use to lodge, and would not suffer one
Friend to go along with me, but put me among the Felloners and Debtors, where I
was Derided and shamefully Entreated, and Water thrown on me, for no other
cause but Praying to the Living God; and ever since I am not suffered to stay
in the Room with my Friends on our Meeting days, but in a little time taken
forth and put from the rest of my Friends, though Drunkards and Swearers are
suffered frequently to meet and make themselves drunk, without being used after
the manner that we are used.

What is above written, is not written boastingly, or to exalt self, but that
all may know our Innocence, and the true cause wherefore and by whom we suffer;
and it is great pity that Men Professing Religion, should bring forth no
better Fruits, which is no way inducing to any sober People, who have any
regard to Gods Honor, or the good of their own Souls, to come to be of their
Religion, the thing that they in words so much press for. And blessed be the
Name of the Lord, we have no cause to complain, that our sufferings are too
hard for the Testimony of Jesus, who suffered Death for us; neither have we any
thing to glory in, but in the Lord Jesus, that is giving us strength in
weakness; for of our selves we have nothing to glory in, but our Infirmities;
but glory be to his Name for Evermore, that is redeeming of us out of
Imperfection, and making our Hearts sound in his Statutes, who works in us,
both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure, and so let his own works live
to praise him, says my Soul, forever and for evermore; for it is by Grace we
stand, and not by any works of ours; but that Faith that does not bring forth
good works is a dead Faith, and is not the Faith which the Just lives by, which
stands in the Power of God, Oh! therefore consider before it be too late, ye
Rulers and Teachers of the People, what Fruits there are brought forth in this
Nation, that Preaching and Praying to the Living God is become a Crime in this
Nation; and hasten to put a stop to this great Current of Wickedness, that is
running down the Streets like a mighty Stream; for the Determination of Isreal's
God is to Humble this Nation, and to thinn the Land of Evildoers; and those
that will not bring their works before death to Judgment, the Lord will send
forth his Destroying Angel, to cut them down by Mortality; for as sure as he
did send forth his Angel in Jerusalem, to mark all that Mourn and Sigh for the
Abominations of the times; so is the Angel of his Presence sent forth this day
to mark all the Upright Heatted, that our Souls may rest in the day of Trouble,
that is coming upon the Wicked, that will not come to see Sin to be exceeding
Sinful, and so come to cry out under the Body of Sin and Death, as the Apostle
once did in the sense of his wretchedness, till he came to witness Victory
through Christ Jesus his Lord, and a resting place in him for his Soul; for as
to an outward Callamity, the Lord may suffer the Righteous to partake with the
Wicked, the Miraculous Works of God in this day are inward, an Inward Change
and a through Translation out of the Kingdom of Satan, into the Kingdom of the
Lord Jesus Christ within; for the King of Heaven suffers Violence in and
until the Violent (...) it by force.

O! you that are gazing after Christ and his Miracles, in the outward
Observations, like unto the Wise Professing Jews, notwithstanding they had seen
many Miracles that Jesus had done, yet nothing would serve them but their own
Wills, Without he would come down from the Cross, they would not believe in
him; and many Miracles have been wrought by Christ in this day, not only among
the mean ones, but also some among the great and mighty of the Earth that have
believed on him, and have parted with their Legions of Unclean Thoughts and
Actions to entertain Christ, and when this through Change has been made, your
Visible Eyes have beheld, that they have lived in Newness of Life outwardly
also, and yet you will not understand that Scripture, John 14. 12. where Christ
said, Verily, Verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me, the works that
I do, shall he do also, and greater work then these shall he do, because I go
unto my Father. And what greater works can be done in the sight of the Visible
Eye, then was done by him in that prepared Body, which suffered without the
Gates of Jerusalem; for as many as did believe in his Name, and seek him in
Brokenness of Heart, as Mary Magdalen did (out of whom he cast seven Devils)
when she sought him at the Sepulcher, if she could see his Body, but he was
risen out of the sight of all Visibles; for though she had seen that Body but
three days before, yet her Visible Eyes could not discern the Lords Body, but
thought it had been the Gardener, (which indeed he is the true Gardener, which
pulls up every Plant and Weed in his People, which is not of his own Right
Hands Planting, that their Sacrifice may be Pleasant and Sweet in his sight)
but he saw the Integrity of her Heart, that she was sick of Love after him, and
therefore in his tender Bowels of Mercy and tender Compassion, he could not
refrain himself any longer, but made himself known unto her, and said, Woman,
why weepest thou? whom seek thou? and when she asked for her Lord in the
Resurrection of Life and Power he appeared unto her, and endued her with Wisdom
and Power, and sent her to Preach the Resurrection to his Disciples; for if
Christ send us in a Message, whether the Words be few or many, it is Preaching
the Everlasting Gospel, whether it be Male or Female, they are all one in
Christ; for as the Woman fell first into the Transgression, so in the
Restoration Christ first appeared unto her, and sent her to declare unto the
Men that he was risen; and afterward he appeared unto the two Men, as they
were walking on the way, and their Hearts burned within them, while he was
opening the Scriptures to them; but their Visible Eyes could not discern the
Lords Body that was risien out of the sight of all Visibles, though they knew
him a little before, until he made himself known in breaking of Bread with
them: And he is the Resurrection and the Life at this day, that opens the
understandings of his People, whereby they understand the Scriptures of Truth,
and causes the dead to hear his Voice and live.

Oh! therefore my counsel is unto you, both Professor and Profane, that you do
not trifle away your precious time, to sit under the Ministry of the Idol
Shepherds this day, which do feed you with a Form of Words without the Power;
for the Book is Sealed to the Learned and Unlearned, till the Lion of the Tribe
of Judah open the Book, and unloose the Seals. Oh! therefore hearken no more to
the corrupt teachings of Men, who have gotten the words of the Prophets, Christ
and his Apostles, but are ignorant of the Power that preserves from Sin, and
speaks, (saying) Thus says the Lord, whereas the Lord has not spoken unto
them, therefore they do not profit the People at all, for they have nothing to
do to take the Name of the Lord in their Mouths, who do hate to be reformed in
themselves; for what were they the better that went to deck themselves with the
Apostles words, and spoke the same words as they did, in the Name of Jesus,
(saying) We abjure you to come out of the Man; but the Devils would not be
subject unto them, because they wanted the Power; but said unto them, Jesus we
know, and Paul we know, but who are ye? and so run upon them and wounded them:
And therefore let every one that names the Name of Jesus, depart from
Iniquity; for the Scripture says, That there is none can call Jesus, Lord, but
by the Holy Ghost; and the Lord said by the mouth of his Prophet to Rebellious
Israel, That though they said the Lord lives, yet they Swore falsely, because
they did not witness him to be their Redeemer to live in them. Oh! therefore be
awakened to Righteousness you Professors of all sorts, and sit no longer under
this dead Ministry, that stands only in a Form of words, without the Power; for
the Kingdom of God is come in Power, and there is room enough for all that do
follow Christ in the Regeneration, in inward Tribulation; and those that have
passed through this Inward Tribulation, have no cause to fear the Outward
Sufferings, nor what Man can do unto them, although it be to the laying down of
our outward lives; for the Wrath of Man shall go no further then what shall
make for Gods glory, and the residue he will restrain; for we know from whom
that Religion did arise, that would take Money to forgive Sin, and for the gift
of God which is not to bought with Money; and therefore the Devils Subjects are
so greedy after it, who makes it their God, and their glory is their shame; for
they have manifested that they have no love to God nor to their Neighbors, in
keeping of us all this while in Prison, and neither to send Priest nor Prophet
amongst us, to exhort us, or to show us by plain Scripture that we are out of
the way; I have spoken to the Keeper several times, That if ^hey were in the
right, and we in the wrong, that he would get one of the Priests to come
amongst us, according to Gospel Order; but he would not without we would
promise to hear him Preach, and say nothing to contradict him: Therefore we
look upon them to be such that are either afraid or ashamed to stand by their
Ministry, being such as the Prophet Ezekiel testified against, Ezekiel. 34. 2. and
also the Apostle further testifying, That they are allienated from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers to the Covenant of Grace; the day of the
Lord is going over them all, and the Songs of their Temples, which they have
sung in Babylon, shall be turned into Howling and bitter Lamentation, because
they did not first learn to Roar and Weep, as David did, in the sense of Gods
Judgments, till they come to be quickened by his Judgments and Mercys, and so
to Sing of Judgment and Mercy.

Oh! therefore in the love of God, I warn you all, my Neighbors and
Acquaintance, and my Heart is in travail for you, that you may not return back
again to bow down to the Imaginations of Men, which is no better then the
Worshippings of Idols: Oh! therefore you that love your own Souls, and your
Children, wait to feel the Blood of Sprinkling over your Hearts, that you may
be spared in the day that is at Hand, when nothing will stand by you, but the
Witness of God in your own Consciences, bearing witness to your Spirits, that
you are the Lords.

If the witness of God in your own Hearts testify against you, then neither
Husband, nor Wife, nor Children can speak true Peace to you, nor appease the
wrath of God that will come upon you, but (...) Weeping and Wailing on every
hand; a wounded Body one may bear, but a wounded Soul who can bear?

Oh! therefore in the true love of God, once more in particular to you that are
Professors, and have in measure separated from the public, as you love your
own Souls, and Children, and near Relations, which are near and dear unto you;
that you may have a care that you do not bring a burden upon your own Souls,
and upon your near Relations, that may behold you upon your rolling dying
Pillows, in going back again to the Worship of the Time, for sear of Man; but
rather dread and fear the living God, who is able in a moment of time by the
stroke of his Hand to cut down you and your Familys, both Souls and Bodies, and
cast you into Everlasting Misery, where the great Gulf is fixed between the
Righteous and the Wicked, that although they may weep and wail, there will not
be one drop of Mercy for them. Oh! therefore the desire of my Soul is, that
England may choose the Fast that God has chosen, (viz) To visit the Widow and
the Fatherless, and let the Oppressed go free, and as the Apostle says, Keep
Unspotted from the World; for the Lord is Great, and greatly to be feared; and
he will not clear the Guilty, that have made a Profession in vain; for there
was cause enough Thirty Years ago to separate from the National Worship, and
much more now; for the Wicked grow worse and worse, and the measure of their
Iniquity is almost full; and the Cup that they have filled to others, shall
they drink double from the hand of the Lord themselves, without any mixture of
Mercy, if they repent not.

Oh! therefore let none think it is so easy to take up Religion, as a Child
does a Play-Game, and so lay it down again, and think there is no Evil in so
doing: for if you had no Zeal for God when you took up your Religion first, it
is high time for you now to begin; for our God is a Jealous God, whose Name is
Profaned amongst the Heathen, and he will send forth his Destroying Angel to
smite the firstborn in Egypt, the Region of Darkness, where Sin is multiplied
and reigns; then Blessed and Happy will all they be, that know the Blood of
Sprinkling upon the Lentils of the doors of their Hearts, that so they may be
spared in the day of the fierce anger of the Lord: For if the Anger of the Lord
is kindled never so little, then Blessed are all they that put their trust in
him.

So in true love to your Immortal Souls, have I cleared my Conscience of what
lay upon me from the Lord, and shall leave the effect to him, for whether you
will hear or forbear, I am clear: for as the Apostle said, Having known the
Terrors of God for Sin, he could do no less then warn all Men every where to
Repent; and as the Lord said to the Prophet Ezekiel, (viz.) When I say to the
Wicked, thou shall surely Dye, and thou giv'st him not warning, nor speak to
warn the Wicked from his Wicked way, to save his Life; the same Wicked Man
shall dye in his Iniquity, but his Blood will I require at thy Hand; yet if
thou warn the Wicked, and he turn not from his Wickedness, nor from his Wicked
way, he shall Dye in his Iniquity, but thou have delivered thy Soul, Ezekiel, 33.
8, 9.

So with my Hearty Desires and Prayers to God for England's Prosperity, that
all might partake of the Universal Love of God, which is offered to all Men in
the day of their Visitation. This from one who is a Sufferer for the Testimony
of Jesus, and desires the Universal Welfare of all Men.

Newgate Prison in Bristol, the 17th of the 9th Month, 1683. Dorcas Dole.

THE END.

