THE Second Part OF AN APOSTATE-CONSCIENCE EXPOSED: Being an ANSWER to a
Scurrilous Pamphlet, Dated the 11th of April, 1699.

Written and Published, by F. Bugg, ENTITLED, Jezabel withstood, and her
Daughter Ann Docwra reproved for her Lies and Lightness, in her Book, styled,
An Apostate Conscience Exposed, etc.

By ANN DOCWRA.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-hart-court in Gracious-street,
1700.

THE PREFACE.
I will pass by his Whimsical and Ridiculous Title, not troubling my Reader
with any Comment upon it, but refer him to what I have writ already, in my
Book, entitled, An Apostate Conscience Exposed, and the miserable Consequences
thereof disclosed. Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court, in
Gracious-Street, and at the Bible in Leaden-Hall-Street, 1699. And also, to
what I do here offer in Defense of the Truth, I stand here to maintain, against
this Apostate Quaker, a Mercenary Agent, belonging to such of the Clergy, as
are uneasy under the Liberty granted to Protestant Dissenters, they attempting
to break the Unity and Interest of the Kingdom, which has been so long
endeavored by Wise and Honest Men; as also does appear in a printed
Declaration, of King Charles II. bearing date the 8th of April, 1681. and there
is a Vote of the 10th of January, 1680. made by the Parliament, then sitting,
in these words, Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, that the
prosecuting of Protestant Dissenters, upon Penal Laws, is at this time grievous
to the Subject, a weakening of the Protestant Interest, an encouragement of
Popery, and dangerous to the Peace of the Kingdom.

And further, to Illustrate this most rational and just Vote, I shall refer my
Reader to the Act of Parliament, made by King William and Queen Mary,
entitled, An Act for exempting their Majesty's Protestant Subjects, Dissenters
from the Church of England, from the Penalties of certain Laws. This Act, in
the first Paragraph (which is the Preamble, and is as a Key to open the
Intendment of the Law) says, That the Liberty granted may be an effectual means
to Unite their Maje-Protestant Subjects in Interest and Affection. This is a
certain way to do it, with all honest plain-hearted People, and has in some
measure done it with such; but F. Bugg, and his Abettors of the Clergy, have
raised a New Persecution, with Tongue and Pen, it being out of their power to
proceed any further, although they have used their endeavors to do it; this
shows what Subjects they are to the King, that have no respect to the Act for
Uniting the Kings Subjects in Interest and Affection.

This F. Bugg has been of a Seared Conscience, and Shattered Head, many Years,
as appears by the Rambling Stuff he has written against the Quakers (so
called.) He has printed Twenty Three Books and Papers that I have seen, which
have been mostly answered; some of these Books are of a pretty large Volume, of
several Hundred Pages, and in them so many Repetitions of Lies, that they are
Numerous: He writes the same thing over and over again, mostly as to Religion
and Government, and many other things also.

When he first began his Controversy, he joined himself with some others, that
were Contentious Apostates, like himself, then joined together in a Cabal; the
Books they writ against us were very many, and the Sum of the whole matter was,
to render us Popishly Affected, and very Obnoxious, in the time of the
Persecution, with high Conceits, both in their Conferences and Writings, hoping
they should by that means over-master us, and bring us under them: Thus F. Bugg
went on, until he had scribled away a good Estate, and run many Hundred Pounds
in Debt, and then fled to the Clergy for Relief.

I have said to some of the Clergy, That it was matter of Admiration to me,
that they should entertain F. Bugg's Books, and give Credit to them, as some of
them had done, there being so much Rambling, Angry Stuff in them, without Truth
or Method: Their Reply was, That they did not look at his Books; but he was a
bold Fellow to oppose the Quakers. There may be several things assigned for his
Boldness; First, His Seared Conscience; Secondly, His Desperate Fortunes;
Thirdly, His Shattered Head.

First, His Seared Conscience imboldens him to write any thing, although it be
all manner of Forgeries, Lies, and Deceit, without any scruple.

Secondly, His Desperate Fortunes imboldens him to say or write any thing,
although never so false, to get Money of the Clergy, and others also, that
gives any Credit to what he says, or writes; Who are more Bold and Resolute
than Highway-Men, that Robs the King's Subjects at Noonday, to get Money to
maintain them in their Idleness and Wickedness?

Thirdly, His Shattered Head makes him Bold and Resolute in any thing his
Imagination suggests, or his Malice can invent, that he may be always at work
to do Mischief, which has fallen upon himself at last; Who are more Bold and
Resolute than some of the People in Bedlam, to do Mischief, if they were not
restrained?

I believe there is few Shatter-headed People that are so very much given to
Mischief, as F. Bugg is; yet I have observed, that such People are Malicious,
and are not to be pacified: It is F. Bugg's Seared Conscience, and Desperate
Fortunes, that set his Shattered Head at work, more in Malice and Deceit than
others.

A. D.

THE Second Part OF AN Apostate Conscience EXPOSED, etc.
Now I come to Answer his Scurrilous Pamphlet, entitled, Jezabel withstood,
etc.
HE begins with a Preamble, against me and others, after his usual manner, and
then says, My business was to render F. Bugg a poor indigent Person that went
about a Begging; a grand Lie, says F. Bugg.

Reply, That was not my Business; I had not writ upon that account, if he had
not forged Letters, as from me to him, and printed them, with my name to them;
and also, his cheating some of the Clergy with false Informations, to get Money
of them; and for his Begging about to get Money to pay his Debts: I suppose
that none that knows him will deny it, that are acquainted with his Concerns:
If any do it, it is easy to be proved; see the Bishop of Norwich's
Certificate, bearing date, the 22d of October, School. which he has Printed in
his Book entitled, The Pilgrim's Progress, etc. page 149. That shows his
indigency, and his traveling about with it, through the Bishop's Diocese, the
Universities, and diverse other Places, for Relief of his Necessities, do
witness against him; also a begging Petition, dated, the 25th of August, School.
with three Clergy-mens hands to it, his Neighboring Ministers, as he says;
this Petition shows, that what Relief he had received formerly, was not
sufficient to pay his Debts by one Hundred Pounds; neither was he able to
subsist to get a livelihood for himself and Family, without further Relief;
with this Petition he went about Cambridge, and other places also, as I
suppose: I had a Copy sent me of this Petition, and I showed it to some of the
Clergy; one of them took it and read it, and said, He did believe it might be a
true Copy of F. Bugg's Petition. Also, the last Summer, 1699. he was at
Cambridge for more Money: A Burser of a College, and some other Collegians,
told me, That they had given him some more Money then, to go home and set up
his Trade. He charges me with Eighteen Lies more, besides this, which I shall
return upon himself: I may be mistaken in some small Circumstances, but the
Matter is true, I do not yet find any mistake in that.

Lie 1. Is, that I said, He was but a poor Man when he first came amongst us;
and that he had not 30 l. a Year until after his Father's Death.

Reply, What I writ I had partly out of his own Book, and some from his own
near Relations; he writ but of 6 l. a Year, and boasts much how he saved the
Rent, which I suppose was to set up his Trade, when his Apprenticeship was out,
for he speaks of no more, until after he came of Age, which was about six Years
after his Grandfathers Death, and near four Years after he came amongst us:
This may be found in his Books; see his Picture of Quakerism, etc. and his
Pilgrim's Progress, etc. but he now says, That his Grand father died in 1655.
and left him 30 l. a Year, of good House and Land, in Milden-hall. I have heard
by one of his own Relations, that knew the Estate as well as himself, that it
was not so much; but after he came of Age, he had an Augmentation added to the
aforesaid 6 l. a Year; if his Grandfathers Will were searched into by some
credible Persons, I suppose there will not be found 30 l. a Year given him in
the Year 1655. he had a good Estate when he began to Scribble against us; but
it was mostly purchased whilst he was amongst us, and now has brought himself
to Beggary.

Lie 2. F. Bugg gave Bond to make his Wife a Jointure.

Reply, He told me so himself, and I was also so told by an honest Woman, his
near Relation; that it was true, he did make some writing to make his Wife a
Jointure; but he says, He had but 20 l. in Money for his Wife's Portion. I do
not believe him, because he told me, many years ago, That when he bought the
great House at Mildenhall, (where his Son now dwells) that his Wife's Father
helped him to buy it, and made his Wife's Portion better than 100 l. which was
as much as any of the younger Children had; this he told me, when he was
accounted an honest Man, although he denies it now.

Lie 3. F. Bugg says, I say, He sold his Estate to his Son: To this he Replies,
That no Knight of the Post, ever uttered a more manifest Lie.

And I may Reply, Knights of the Post are Mercenary Agents, and take Money for
bearing false Witness, and how far F. Bugg is guilty of that Offense, let God
and his own Conscience judge: That he has conveyed his Estate to his Son,
young Francis Bugg, is no Lie: His Son had 700 l. with his Wife, by all
relation; and her Friends and Relations, upon enquiry, do affirm, That it was
settled upon the Marriage, as firm as the Law can make it: It were a barefaced
Cheat indeed, to go about a begging to the Clergy for Money to pay his Debts,
and have an Estate to sell.

Lie 4. F. Bugg quotes my Book, p. 26. That his Father, Robert Bugg, dwelt with
him some Years after he was married, etc. This, he says, is a Lie upon a Lie,
four Stories high.


Reply, Those were not the words in my Book, see p. 26, 27. where my words are
these, viz. That Robert Bugg ( Father to this Francis Bugg that writes now
against us) was a melancholy down-look'd Man by Relation, and dwelt with his
Son, this Bugg; ( some Years after F. Bugg was married) and rose from Dinner,
and went out, and was found drowned in a Water where he had no occasion to go
to that place; as F. Bugg and his Wife related it; she to me, and he to others,
yet living: I heard my Brother Barnardistone speak of it many Years ago, that
F. Bugg's Father drowned himself, as most People believed; but the Coroners
Jury did not find it Wilful Murder, because there was some Grass found in one
of his hands, when he was taken out of the Water, which they said, was an
Argument that he laid hold of, to save himself; such things are sudden Motions;
I believe that many have repented their so doing, before the Breath departed
their Bodies: But F. Bugg says, He was not so drowned, the Record in the Crown
Office will witness against him; none of the King's Subjects that come to an
untimely end, but are recorded there: This happened in or about the Month
called January, 1666. at Fridham in Cambridge-shire. I writ not this to upbraid
F. Bugg, but to warn those that have encouraged him in scribbling his Estate
away, to be bountiful to him, in relieving his Necessities, lest he should come
to an untimely end, through Despair.

Lie 5. and 6. F. Bugg mentions two Letters that I should write to him; these
Letters are both forged, one of them proved so to be, by a Certificate under an
honest Man's hand; see my Book, p. 19, 20, 21. and in p. 31, 32. And indeed
there are things in them, that I never writ, said, or thought.

Lie 7. F. Bugg was not the Author of his 20th Book, etc.

Reply, I do say, I suppose that he was not the Author of the Book, called his
20th Book, see my Book, p. 36.

Lie 8. F. Bugg was seen at Oxford in the time when he writ his 20th Book, etc.

Reply, This is true, and easy to be proved.

Lie 9. F. Bugg was sixteen Weeks from Home when he writ the aforesaid Book.

Reply, This was reported by some of his own Family.

Lie 10. F. Bugg said in his last Book, that Oxford exceeded Cambridge in their
Bounty to him.

Reply, This may be true, I heard a very credible Clergyman say, that he had
read the same thing in some of his Books, as well as my self.

Lie 11. F. Bugg says, I writ Verses of G. Fox.

Reply, He knows this to be a Lie, I have told him so diverse times, both of
late Years, and formerly, yet he goes on, and has printed them so several
times; this is answered before, see my Book, p. 37, 38. but he says, I will not
bestow much upon this crazy old piece, which is now creeping into Unity with
the Quakers, etc.

Reply, I have been not only in Unity, but in Community with them, above 36
Years, even those F. Bugg call G. Fox's Party, which are the most steadfast and
real Quakers, so called, and am not so crazy as he reports me: Although I am
entered into the 76th Year of my Age, yet, through Mercy, I can walk the Streets
to visit the Sick, and my Friends and Relations also, and can see without
Spectacles still, to read F. Bugg's Lies and Deceit, he has used to cheat the
Clergy of their Money.

Lie 12. Sam. Cater does affirm, He never had his Timber again; this is a Lie
in Ann, or Sam. or both, says F. Bugg, etc.

Reply, I have taken upon me to discover his Hypocrisy and Deceit; Sam. Cater
was fined in three days time, for Preaching, at two Meetings, one at Faukenham,
the other at Thurling in Norfolk, 20 l. the first fine, and 40 l. the second
fine; Warrants were sent, and served, by the Kings Officers, upon his Goods,
both within doors and without, and carried away all, excepting one Bed; his
Children were forced to lie upon Straw, for a long time, the Household Goods
lay in the Officers hands for a long time, laid up carelessly, so the Goods were
much spoiled, the Bed, Blankets, much Moth-eaten; then a Neighbor bought them
of the Officers, and sent them home to S. Cater; but for his Timber, he never
had it; the Kings Officers Sold it, and did not give S. Cater an account whom
they Sold it to; his Children were old enough to remember this, and how they
lay in Straw for a long time: When Warrants are once served, and the Goods
carried away, they are not to be had again without Money, except there were
more than would raise the Sum, which they were strained for; but S. Cater was
not so Rich, as to have such plenty, as all his Neighbors may witness.

Lie 13. F. Bugg conformed to the Church of England for fear of the Statute of
20 l. a Month.

Reply, Although he says, It is a Lie, yet it is really true; see my Book, to
prove his Confession of it before Witnesses, p. 13.

But F. Bugg says, He did not go to Church, or Home, until 1685. and then the
Statute was not put in Execution; but he says, He went to other Churches above
a Year before.

Reply, That will not serve his turn, to bring him off, if it were so; that
Statute says, That every Person above the Age of 16 Years, which shall not
repair to some Church, or Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer, shall pay
20 l. a Month, etc. See the Statute of the 23d of Eliz. Chap. I. there is no
confinement to their Parish Church, in the Statute of 20 l. a Month.

Lie 14. F. Bugg was a Presbyterian when he came amongst the Quakers.

Reply, He told me so above twenty Years ago, when he was accounted an honest
Man.

Lie 15. F. Bugg's Grandfather was a poor Boy, bound out to the Wool-Trade by
the Docwra's.

Reply, I do not believe it is a Lie; see my Book, p. 26. But F. Bugg says,
This is another Lie, he was not of my Trade. Reply, I did not say he was; he
was a Clothier, which is a Wooll-Trade. F. Bugg was but a Wooll-Comber, which
is a Wooll-Trade also. He goes on, Boasting of his Grandfathers Wealth and
Virtues: I dwelt at Icklingham-Sands, in Wintertime, within three computed
Miles of Milden-hall, many Years; my Husband was well acquainted with his
Grandfather; and I, with many others in the Town of Milden-hall, also, and can
give a truer account of him, then F. Bugg has done; his account is but mere
Boasts, and he but a young Lad when his Grandfather died, and not in his
Favor, by reason he refused to be bound to such a Trade as his Grand-fater had
chose for him.

Lie 16. My Aunt said, That George Whitehead was a Gentleman Born, or brought
up so.

Reply, This is no Lie; my Aunt did say, That she did believe that G. Whitehead
was a Gentleman Born, or brought up under the same Education; see my Book, p.
41, 42. F. Bugg replies, This must needs be another Lie, no Gentleman ever
lived in a poor Cottage, standing on Mud-walls, not worth 50 s. as G. Whitehead
did, as I am credibly informed by a Person of Note that saw it: He goes on,
Clamouring and Lying, and says, No Gentleman's Son walked about the Country on
foot, and lived upon Alms, as he did.

Reply, Although G. Whitehead traveled on foot, as all, or most of our
Preachers did at first, yet he took no Alms, although F. Bugg does; and he had
very good Clothes on his back, by the account I had of him, from more credible
Persons than F. Bugg is: But he has published this false Report of G.
Whitehead, to get Money of the Clergy, that he might have his own Alms
continued.

F. Bugg says in his Pilgrims Progress, etc. p. 32. That when G. Whitehead came
out of the North, He came from Penury to Plenty, from Labor and Toil, to Ease
and Plenty, from his Father's poor Cottage not worth 50 s. And so goes on with
much more Romantic Stuff in that page.

Reply, G. Whitehead's Father's House, and Freehold Estate, was the best in the
Town where he dwelt, by the relation I have had upon strict Inquiry; neither
was he brought up to Labor and Toil, as F. Bugg says; but was brought up with
the better sort of Education, intended for Oxford, from that Eminent
Free School in Cumberland, called Blencoe-School, where he had his last
Education.

The Whitehead's were some of them Gentlemen of good Repute, and some of them
accounted the best Yeomen; and these were G. Whitehead's Relations: This I had
from more credible Persons than F. Bugg: And for his Father's House, or any
Houses standing on Mud-Walls in Westmerland, that is not true; they build all
with Stone there, although the Cottages are never so mean; they may have plenty
of Stone for nothing, it being a Mountainous Country. I have heard my Brother
Barnardistone, and my Sister (that traveled through that Country into
Scotland) say, That the Buildings were all of Stone, although they were never
so poor Cottages. F. Bugg's Story of G. Whitehead's Father's House, is a mere
Fiction.

Lie 17. Now Liberty is granted, we stand upon equal terms with our Opposers in
matters of Religion,

Reply, These are not my words; my words are, Now Liberty is granted, we stand
upon equal terms with our Opposers; and in matters that concerns Religion, we
are accountable to God, and have as much Right to common and civil Privileges,
as other Persuasions have, etc. see my Book, p. 17. But F. Bugg Replies, and
says, He denies it, the Law tells you that this is a Lie; but shows me no Law
that tells me so, but goes on Clamouring some lines, and then he says, Remember
you stand but upon your good Behavior.

Reply, This may be true, and so do all other Persuasions; so has the Church
of England her self done: I can remember since she was turned out of door, and
was fain to go travel for a livelihood; many of the Episcopal Clergy kept
Conventicles in private Houses, in many places in this Nation, and in their
Travels they read the Common Prayer, and sometimes Preached: I was a Follower
of those Priests in those days, and was acquainted with diverse of them.

In those times there was diverse Books in Print of all the Priests that were
sequestered, and the Reasons why; also there was a Pamphlet in Print, much
admired by some of the Priests of those times, and their Followers, entitled,
Lambeth Fair proclaimed, etc. It was a mere Fiction, much like F. Bugg's New
Rome Arraigned: This Fair was pretended to be kept at the Bishop's Palace at
Lambeth, where the Bishop's Pontifical Robes were to be Sold, naming every
particular of them with great Derision: In the Front of this Scurrilous
Pamphlet, was the Picture of the Pope, setting all on a heap in a Chair, with
these following Verses under it, Here I sit grubling, in St. Peter's Chair,
Oppressed with Grief, to think on Lambeth-Fair.


In those days the Common Prayer Book was tied to the Troopers Horses Tails in
some places, and the Boys run after it; this made Sport for those Priests that
clamoured against it in the Pulpit, and their Followers; this was F. Bugg's
established Church and Ministry, that he Clamours so much against the Quakers,
for their going into their Steeple Houses, in many of his Books: I never heard
that the Quakers, so called, disturbed the Episcopal Clergy in their Worship,
by going in amongst them; they only disturbed F. Bugg's established Ministers,
of the late professing times.

I remember when King Charles II. came in, and the other Government was turned
out, the Chancellor made a Speech in the Parliament House, which was printed,
wherein he declared the sad Condition the Church of England was in for many
Years, and used this Expression, that She had been buried in her own Rubbish
for a long time: This shows She was Subject to Accidents; it must be her
Moderation, and the Divine Wisdom, that can uphold her: If She be good in her
Office, She will stay the longer in it.

Lie 18. If Friends were so charitable as to send S. Cater 10 l. to help to pay
his Debts, or carry on his Trade, they did well, better than F. Bugg in
upbraiding him.

Reply, This has been answered already, see my Book, p. 40, 41. He has
worried S. Cater about this 10 l. in diverse of his Books, and not one Penny of
it out of his Purse, if he had any Money sent him.

But F. Bugg says, When did they, or I, account S. Cater a Beggar, an Indigent
Fellow, a Judas, a Man of a Desperate Fortune? Because you supplied, His Needs,
and helped to pay his Debts.

Reply, S. Cater never went about a begging, either with Certificate or
Petition, nor any other ways; there was no Beggars in Israel of Old, neither is
there any Beggars in the True Church now; the weighty things of the old Law are
not Abolished, but fulfilled, in our making Provision for our Poor, without
Begging: S. Cater has been a great Sufferer diverse ways and times, not only by
Fines, but Imprisonment seven or eight times; and a Prisoner six Years
together; at one of these times, not suffered to stir out of the Prison doors
for three Years or more; and at this time he had a Wife and two or three small
small Children to provide for; and in this condition his Friends could not with
good Conscience see him want.

F. Bugg says, in p. 8. How came you so bold as to meddle with the Bishop's
Certificate.

Reply, It was to undeceive the Bishop and others, that had been deceived by
him, and some other Concerns also, that may be found in my Book, p. 63, to 66.

After he had clamoured against the Quakers many lines, and repeated some
things as have been answered already; about his Losses by the Quakers, and his
defrauding a near Relation of 15 l. see my Book, p. 51, to 54. then he says,
Come, Cousin Docwra, for so I Will call you, since we had the misfortune to have
a Liar drop into our Family.

Reply, This* F. Bugg is not related to me, nor my Husband; my Husband was
descended from the Hartford Docwra's, known by the name of the Docwra's of
Puttridge; there are three Brothers, Ancient Men, now living together; these
were my Husband's nearest Relations of the Docwras; one of them has been at my
House several times this Year I asked him if they knew F. Bugg? His answer was,
That he knew him not, neither did he ever hear of the name Bugg: It is likely
his Grandfather was something related to the ancient Cambridge-shire Docwra's,
I have heard so; but they were not of my Husband's Relations, as I understand.

He goes on with his old repetitions of his Sufferings upon the account of his
Religion, his Imprisonments and Fines. I can say little of his Imprisonments,
that being before I was acquainted with him; but for his Fines, he has printed
them, all being but 25 l. by his own Relation, excepting 5 s. and 10 s. Fines,
which poor Friends were strained for as well as he: He suffered the least of
any I know, that had Estates to lose; the Fines were two, one was 15 l. for an
unknown Preacher; the other was 10 l. for the Poverty of the Man that kept the
Meeting at his House; of this 25 l. he got the 15 l. of it of a near Relation
by Fraud, and the Justice that prosecuted him gave him 5 l. of the Money again,
so that his whole loss was but 5 l. He had several ways to escape Sufferings,
for when he dwelt at Ely, and the Persecution grew hot there, then he fled to
Milden-hall; and when the Persecution grew hot there, then he fled to the
Church of England; see my Book concerning his Fines, where it is related more
at large p. 51, 52. concerning the 15 l. where he got 20 l. for it.

But F. Bugg says, He clothed some of our poor Preachers, and put Money in
their Pockets.

He has sounded his Trumpet of this in several of his Books; but I could never
hear any body besides himself say so; yet it is possible he might give a poor
Man some Cloth out of his Shop to make him a Coat, such as is called Old
Shopkeepers, and will sell for little; but for Money, I do not believe he gave
any, but what he gave in a Meeting as other Friends usually do, to relieve our
Poor, as well Preachers as others: His Charity is but a proud Pharisaical Boast.

But F. Bugg says, He was at great Charges entertaining our Preachers.

I do not believe him; I have answered this in my Book, p. 33, 34. for he
writes but the same thing over and over again.

But he says, That my Brother, Giles Barnardistone, would have scorned to have
dipped his Pen in such muddy Ink as I have done.

Reply, If my Brother had lived to see his Contentious Apostasy, he would not
have spared him no more than I have done; the Forgery and Deceit that he has
practiced against me, would have obliged him to vindicate me, his so near
Relation, although he was very tender of F. Bugg, whilst he was amongst us, and
had any show of Honesty; he was very careful to keep his Wits together, knowing
him to be a Shatter-headed Man.

But F. Bugg says, That my Brother Barnardistone, and my Sister, have been
often at his House, sometimes near a Week together, and my Brother Waldegrave
as their Serving-man, etc.

He goes on Clamouring and Lying about fourteen lines after this, which I pass
by, and Reply to this aforesaid matter:

I never knew my Brother Barnardistone, and my Sister, stay above two Nights at
any Friends House in their Travels, nor at my House at any time, although I was
their near Relation, therefore I do not believe him: My Brother was a
traveling Preacher, and observed the Rules that other of our Preachers do, not
to stay above one Night, or two at most, at any Friends House; and for my
Brother Waldegrave, he does affirm, That he never was at F. Bugg's House with
my Brother and Sister, but only when my Brother Barnardistone traveled alone,
he sometimes went with him as a Companion, and might lodge a Night or two at F.
Bugg's House: Although my Brother Waldegrave was defrauded by his Godfathers
and God-mother, so called, of a great Estate, as some others may remember
besides my self, yet he always had an Estate to maintain him and his Family,
without going to Service, or using any Trade or Calling to get a livelihood.

After much Clamouring and Lying, he goes on against G. Whitehead, and others,
and says,

What I now offer to your consideration, is from certain Letters, and a printed
Paper, of your Friend Ann Docwra's, that she writ to Mr. Crisp, etc. First out
of a Broadside, entitled, The New Projecting Formalist Characterized, etc.

This Paper was not writ against G. Whitehead, nor any of those F. Bugg
suggests it was writ against, as may be seen in the second Paragraph of it; but
it was writ against some Presbyterians and Anabaptists, pretended Quakers,
which were Contentious at that time, and sought Pre-eminence over us, and would
have broken our Rules and Method concerning Marriages, that were friendly
recommended to us from a General Yearly Meeting at London; also against a
Certificate that was said to be forged, concerning a Marriage, which
Certificate came out of the furthest part of the Isle of Ely, into Cumbridge to
us, and not from G. Whitehead, as F. Bugg suggests; neither did that
Certificate concern F. Bugg, nor was his name in it: Although he pretends that I
writ in his behalf, against G. Whitehead and others, which was not in my
thoughts when I writ that Paper, nor so intended.

This aforesaid Paper F. Bugg suggests, in his Book, entitled, The Christian
Ministry of the Church of England Vindicated, etc. and he says, This Paper was
printed about the Year 1683. See his Book p. 3. But this, and all that he has
writ against me, are feigned Stories; for this Paper was writ several Years
after 1683. I had no accasion offered me to write against several things
mentioned in that Paper, until the Year 1685. which was occasioned by reason of
a Book that came out in Print, written against me, printed 1685. which I
answered in that Paper, and some other things that were occasioned about that
time; the Title of that Book was, The good Order of Truth Justified. This Man
that writ the Book was wholly a Stranger to me, and a Countryman; he did not
so much as send to me, before he printed it, to Admonish me, if he thought I
was in an Error, which was not according to The good Order of Truth; but I
afterward suspected by what he writ, it might be occasioned by F. Bugg, and
his Cabal's former Forgery, mentioned in my Book, p. 11, 12. which he might
think to be mine, because they had set my name to it; although I had disowned
it in Print, near two Years before this Book was printed; yet that printed
Advertisement might not come to his hand, for he mentions nothing of it in his
Book; if he had seen that, I suppose it would have stopped his Printing against
me: The Paper that I writ against that Book had no Date to it; this I omitted,
to see what manner of Forgery F. Bugg and his Cabal would make out of it, which
I shall show before I end.

I have the aforesaid Book by me, and all the Papers I printed, to show the
former Forgery of F. Bugg, and his Cabal, and this latter also.

F. Bugg speaks of Letters: He says, I writ to Thomas Crisp; but before I will
enter upon that Subject, I will say something of three Letters I received
lately, one with Francis Bugg's name to it, and two with Thomas Crisp's name to
them. F. Bugg's Letter dated London, August 26. 1699. he begins thus,

Cousin Docwra, I have acquainted Mr. Crisp with your charging him and me, viz.
with Forging your Letters, etc.

Reply, I never charged T. Crisp with Forging any of them, in my Book or
otherwise, neither shall I, until I see it printed with his name to it; I only
charged F. Bugg of Forging my Letters that he printed, pretending I writ them
to him. I have answered them in my Book, and proved his Forgery, p. 19, 20. and
31, 32. The rest of his Letter is Clamor and Threats, if I will not Retract my
Book, which I do not intend.

The first Letter with Tho. Crisp's name to it, dated The 26th of the 7the
Month 1699. this is a long Letter, the other writ since is a short one; there
is little in it but desiring an answer of the former long Letter: I suppose
they were forged by F. Bugg, there is so much of F. Bugg's Projects against me
in it, although it is writ in a different Hand from his; yet I am not free to
answer F. Bugg, or any of his Cabal, but in Print, least they should put false
Constructions of them, or add some Forgery to them; I must not expect any thing
else from them.

I saw two Letters, writ in a hand much like mine, with my name to them, which
had things in them which I never writ, said, or thought; these were brought
from F. Bugg, to me, by a Clergyman that seemed to be F. Bugg's Friend; I
utterly disowned them before him; these Letters F. Bugg has printed, and I
have answered to them already.

Now I come to the four Letters F. Bugg has printed in his late Book against
me, and set my name to them; they are all forged; the aforesaid long Letter, as
from Tho. Crisp, has this passage in it, That the four Letters are not forged,
because they have diverse things in them that is in my Paper, entitled, The New
Projecting Formalist Characterized, etc. This is plain that the four Letters
are forged, for some of them are dated 1683. and the last of them August 6.
1684. But my Paper was not printed until 1685. as I said before; and what I
writ was not thought on before the Year 1685. this proves plainly that they
were forged; F. Bugg has taken many things out of that Paper, and made
exceeding false Applications and Paraphrases upon it, applying them to G.
Whitehead, S. Cater, and others, which I never meant, nor thought so, as F.
Bugg has suggested, both in the four forged Letters, and otherwise.

I complained to a Clergyman that the Letters which he had seen with my name
to them, F. Bugg had forged; he answered, That the Bishop of Rochester was so
served; there was a Letter counterfeited with the Bishop's hand to it so
exactly, that the Bishop did think at the first sight he had writ it himself,
until he had heard it, and then he knew he never wrote those things in that
Letter. Since I discovered F. Bugg's Forgery, I have heard this Story of the
Bishops from diverse, and one of them a Magistrate, an eminent Man. He and I had
some Discourse about it; also Alderman Jermin, late Mayor of Cambridge, told
me, That he had diverse false Passes and Certificates came to his hand, and some
Justices names to them counterfeited very exactly; these shows that such things
may be done, and F. Bugg cannot clear himself in this case.

F. Bugg in this Book he writ against me, says, in p. 45. That Mr. Crisp and he
has more Letters of mine still by them, that will fill another half Sheet.
Most, if not all the Letters I writ to T. Crisp, did only concern a Paper that
F. Bugg, and his Cabal, had forged some things in it, in the Year 1683. with my
name to it in Print: I am sure I never writ to him any thing else, but
concerning that Paper, of any consequence; and for F. Bugg, he can show nothing
under my hand, except he Forges it, that I am ashamed or afraid of; but I
perceive by his Writing, that he has prepared a large Magazine of Forgery
against me, if his Clergy will pay for printing it.

And in p. 4. F. Bugg says, Mr. Crisp and Mr. Keith are the Correctors of the
Press, when he writes against us. It may be so; I perceive by George Keith's
Writings in Print, he is in that Cabal with Tho. Crisp, and if F. Bugg says
true, with him also; but I will now leave F. Bugg, and enter upon something of
G. Keith's proceedings: He is a Man of Contention and Strife, as appears by his
Books in Print; he is so lifted up with his Scholarship, that he boasts himself
to be Wiser than others, and has sought pre-eminence over the People called
Quakers, as may appear in his printed Books, and other Practices; this has
been some cause of his Strife, Debate and Contention, in which he has shown
more Folly than Wisdom; it is a common saying, That a learned Fool is the most
Troublesome and Contentious of all Men; although his Craft is the principal
Instrument of the proceedings in his undertakings; yet he has made but small
progress in his Designs, as may appear, for I do not yet hear that he is taken
into real Community with any known Persuasion, either Presbyterian,
Independent, Baptists, or Church of England, but has endeavored to gather a
loose unstable People to himself, by his Delusions, to make them believe that
the Light or Grace of God, is not sufficient, if obeyed, to bring Man to
Salvation: His undervaluing the Heavenly and Divine Light, has brought him
into Darkness, and his Followers also into great Delusions.

This G. Keith in the time of the Persecution fled into America, and left the
Flock to the Wolf; and now Liberty is granted in the Exercise of our Religion,
he and his Followers have disturbed our Meetings in diverse places, as appears
by his own printed Relation of his Journey to Bristol, and other places; he
showed himself in our Meeting at Cambridge, without our consents, and took up
the Meeting for a long time, and some part of the time in Sophistry and Clamor
against some of our Ministers; at last he met with opposition, which caused him
to give over; but he was so tedious, that some of the Scholars that were
present said, If this Fellow had not been opposed, he would have babbled until
Midnight.

He also lays claim to our Meeting Houses, and says, They are as common for him
as for others to Preach in: This is not true; our Meeting Houses are common for
all Hearers, but they are not common to all Preachers, they are not common for
Jesuits, nor to G. Keith an Apostate- Quaker, nor any others that are not in
Unity and Community with us; such have no lawful pretense to Preach amongst us,
and the Magistrate may (to keep the Peace) take notice of such, upon complaint,
for they do but disturb our Meetings, contrary to the Liberty granted in the
Exercise of Religion.

I have been in Community with the People called Quakers above 36 Years, and
have observed there were many restless Spirits under diverse Persuasions, these
sometimes joined against us; and some Apostate- Quakers also, and others that
were under a large Profession of Religion, yet their Principles were not
powerful to bear them up in the time of Persecution, but they skulk'd in holes
and corners to perform their Worship to God, and called it Humane Prudence;
these People were more Prudent than Pudent, for they were not at ease there,
but were envious against us, and were often scribbling against us, and raising
Controversies, and Disputes, in matters of Religion. I write not these things
to upbraid the proceedings of these worldly fearful Professors in general, for
there was some in Community with them, that were an honest plain-hearted
People, that loved Peace, and did not approve of their Contention, although they
lay still skulking, until the Storm of Persecution was over, and when the Sun
shined, then every Viper crept out of his hole, then came forth George Keith
and his Followers, disturbing our Meetings, with Clamouring against us in them,
and stirring up Disputes and Controversy, in our Meetings for Worship, which
was a thing that was never known amongst us, and where ever he appears, this
has been his common practice, pretending to discover Errors; but this is but
makebate Opinion, falsely called Religion, that lives by Jangling and
Contention, and Knows not the pleasant Paths of Peace, that the Children of
Light walks in; but God will blast the Expectations of all such turbulent
Spirits, and bring them to Confusion, and exalt his Light and Grace in the
Hearts of his Peaceable People, which is sufficient to bring Salvation to all
Mankind, that yield obedience to it, to bring them to heavenly Peace and
Prosperity, both in this Life, and the Life which is to come: Hasten this thy
work, O God.

The 22d of the Month called November, 1699. Ann Docwra.

A Treatise concerning Enthusiasm, or Inspiration, of the Holy Spirit of God.
By A. D.
There is a Spirit in Man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding, Job 32. 8.
THE certainty of all true happiness consists in the true knowledge of God, and
his dear Son Jesus Christ: This is Life Eternal, that they might know thee, the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John 17. 3. who shines, in
the Hearts of Men, enlightening every Man, etc. John 1. 9. The true and right
understanding of all Mankind, is to come to the Light that shines in the dark
Heart of fallen Man, and to observe the motions of it; for the Light of Christ
shines in all Men's Hearts, in some measure, to Reprove for Sin, and Exhort them
to that which is Good; it is given, and sown or inspired, into all Mankind, and
convincingly appearing at certain times and seasons: This is an infallible
Teacher, that never deceived any Man, and is sufficicient to bring all Mankind
out of Darkness, and out of their Sins, that yield true obedience to it; it
works gradually in Man, it reproves some Sins first, and if they forsake them,
it shows them in order all their Sins; and as they are obedient, it still goes
on more powerfully in its work, until it has put an end to Sin, and brought
Man to know the work of his Redemption, so from all Iniquity: Christ Jesus who
is that true Light, that shows to Man his Transgression, puts an end to it,
and brings in the room of it, everlasting Righteousness, which is a blessed
State and Condition.

But it is usual with fallen Man to plead, that there is no Man without
Temptations; this may be true, but it is no Sin to be tempted, if they yield
not to those Temptations: Our Savior, Jesus Christ, himself, was tempted in
the days of his Flesh, upon Earth, but sinned not: It Is Man's yielding to
Temptations is the cause of Sin, and it is their Iniquity that separates from
the true knowledge of God, and from Jesus Christ, whom he has sent to redeem
Mankind out of Sin, and not in Sin. The Light, Grace, and Inspiration, of the
Almighty, is that only which can teach Man his Duty to God, and is one divine
Principle in Man, although it is declared under several Denominations, and has
diverse Operations, according to 1 Cor. 12. 4. read the Chapter at large, and
you will find this to be true. But some do say, That these Gifts are ceased
now, that are spoken of in that Chapter, and the work of the Ministry is from
Books of Learned Men, and not from Enthusiasts, as they call those that Preach
extempory from the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit of God, as all ought to do.

Now I come to show the Legerdemain that has been used in this Nation, by some
of the Learned, concerning this strange word Enthusiasm, which they have
frighted the Ignoranto People with, making them believe that there is dangerous
matter contained in it, and of bad consequence in matters of Religion; this
strange word Enthusiasm, is from a Greek word, and signifies in English,
Inspiration; I suppose none that understand Greek will deny this; we read not
of any Inspiration in the Holy Scriptures but what is Divine, both in the Old
and New Testament, and the Scriptures are a good Witness against any Opposers,
see Job 32. 8. and 2 Timothy 3. 16. And though there be an evil Spirit Ruling in the
Rebellious, yet Inspiration is commonly taken for the Good: But some do say,
That there is Fantastical Enthusiasm or Inspiration: That which is Fantastical,
is not Real, and they find no such Inspiration mentioned in the Holy
Scriptures: I wish that Men would not make themselves wise above what is
written.

Their English Dictionaries says, That the word Enthusiasm, or Enthysiasm,
signifies an Inspiration, or a Ravishment, of the Spirit, Divine Motion,
Poetical Fury; this last Exposition is Babel indeed: What Confusion can be more
manifest than this, to confound Divine Motions with Poetical Fury? This shows
what Darkness raigns in the World, to Print such manifest Contradictions; as if
Divine Motions and Poetical Fury were one and the same thing; but some will
have it so, and that the word Enthusiasm has a twofold Signification, and
that there is a Fantastical Enthusiasm or Inspiration: we read of no such thing
in the Scriptures of Truth: We read of some possessed with evil Spirits, but
that did not proceed from Divine Inspiration, but Satan's Temptations: The
Apostle says, That every one is tempted when they are drawn away by their own
Lusts, and enticed, James 1. 13, 14, 15. We read also of false Prophets, and
Deceivers, in the Scriptures of Truth; but our Savior gives a true Character
of them, he did not call them Enthusiasts, but said, Ye shall know them by
their Fruits; Do Men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Mat. 7. 15,
16. Luke 6. 44. These were a Persecuting People, and much complained of, in the
Holy Scriptures, in diverse places, both Magistrates and Priests, which are
sometimes called Watchmen, as in Mic. 7. 4. he says, That the best of them is
as a Bryar, and the most upright as a Thorny Hedge. The Church of England, in
their 39 Articles, called, The Faith and Doctrine of the Church of England,
they declare, That the Scriptures are a sufficient Rule both of Faith and
Manners; see the 6th Article: And further, in the 20th Article they say, That
they must not expound one place of Scripture, to make it repugnant to another,
etc. If they keep to their Articles, they will find no Enthusiasm or
Inspiration in the Scriptures, but what is really Divine.

Now I come to give an account of what some of the Learned have said concerning
Enthusiasm or Inspiration, wherein they are divided amongst themselves
concerning it: some say, That it is a Disease in the Soul of Man, and that the
Soul has Diseases as well as the Body. That the Souls of wicked Men have no
Health in them, is certain; but that proceeds not from Enthusiasm or
Inspiration, but from Sin; and nothing but the Inspiration of the Almighty,
will Cleanse and Heal them: Some others of the Learned say, That Enthusiasm or
Inspiration is a natural thing, and neither good nor harm in it self; and that
some of the Poets of Old, were such Rhetorical Enthusiasts, that they believed
they were Divinely Inspired; it is likely they were so, the Apostle Paul quotes
some of the Poets to convince the Athenians that worshipped an unknown God, and
were much given to Idolatry, Acts 17. 27. where he advises them To seek the
Lord, if happily they might feel after him, though he be not far from every one of
us: For in him we live, and move, and have our being; as certain of your own
Poets have said, For we are also his Offspring, etc. This shows that these
Poets had some knowledge revealed to them from God: We do not read that they
had their knowledge from the Scriptures then, to make a Trade on, as some do
nowadays.

Revelation or Inspiration proceed from one Fountain, and is really Divine,
although some of the Learned have used their endeavors to debase Inspiration;
but let us see what the Church of England says, in this case, in their
Common Prayers; first in the Collect for the Communion, they Pray That God
would cleanse their Hearts by the Inspiration of his Holy Spirit, etc. I really
believe that the Hearts of all Mankind cannot be cleansed by any other means,
but by the Inspiration of the Holy Spirit of God: And further, in the Collect
for the first Sunday after Easter, they Pray for the Inspiration of the Holy
Spirit, that they may think those things that be good, and by God's mercyful
Guidance may perform the same, etc. This I am sure cannot be done but by the
Inspiration of the Almighty: And in diverse of the other Collects they Pray for
the Light and Grace of God also: Certainly these Men that writ the Liturgy of
the Church of England, did believe that the Light, Grace and Inspiration of the
Almighty, was Sufficient to Illuminate, Inspire and Teach, all Mankind, or they
would not have inserted it so plainly as they have done: It were a work very
unprofitable, to Pray for that which is not attainable: And further, in the
aforesaid Articles of the Church of England, ye shall find in the 13th Article,
that they say, That Works done before the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration
of his Holy Spirit, are not pleasing to God, for as much as they spring not of
Faith in Jesus Christ, neither do they make Men meet to receive Grace, etc.
This is a Truth that will stand for ever with all true Christians.

Let Men consider with themselves, how they should come to the true knowledge
of God, and turn their Mind inward, with a serious desire after Eternal
Happiness, and empty themselves of their imaginary Wisdom, and wait upon God in
Silence, to obtain Wisdom of him, from whom every good and perfect Gift comes,
which is not to be obtained, but by God's Gracious Help and Assistance, which
will not be wanting on his part, to bring them into Covenant with him, under
the most Glorious Dispensation of the Everlasting Gospel, which is initiated
under the New Covenant, to be taught of God, as the Scriptures of Truth do
plentifully witness, both in the Old and New Testament: The Prophet Isaiah
begins with these words, Cease ye from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils;
Wherein is he to be accounted of? etc. Isa. 2. 22. And further, the same
Prophet says, in chap. 45. 13. All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord,
and great shall be the Peace of thy Children. Also the Prophet Jeremiah
expresses himself fully concerning the New Covenant, Jer. 31. 32, 33, 34. for
shortness I shall repeat but part of it, This is the Covenant that I will make
with the House of Israel, after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law
in their inward parts, and write it in their Hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my People, etc. The same New Covenant is testified of, at large,
in Heb. 8. 8. so to the end of that Chap. Our Blessed Lord and Savior, Jesus
Christ, confirmed it himself, John 6. 45. saying, As it is written in the
Prophets, They shall all be taught of God; every Man that has heard, and has
learned of the Father, comes to me, etc. As many as are taught of God, can set
their Seals to this Truth as it is in Jesus.

But some have said, That if the Quakers be under the New Covenant, Taught of
God, What need have they of Men to Preach amongst them?

They who are in that Covenant need not be taught of Men, saying, Know the
Lord; whose Ministers teach as they are taught of him; whose Spirit must not be
limited from its own Ministry, either in the Church, or in the World; as there
are diverse States, so there are diverse Ministrations suitable: All Hearers are
not come into that Covenant, neither are all Israel, which are of Israel; and
some are in Bondage to Sin still, seeking after Deliverance; and such have need
to be instructed, in order to turn them to the Light, and to gather them to
God, and not to Men into outward Forms and Observations of Carnal Ordinances,
as many do at this day, seeing all such Ordinances are put an End to under the
New and Everlasting Covenant of Life and Peace with God.

Let none despise the Teachings of God, under such vain Pretenses as some have
done, to debase it, or hide the weighty things of the Gospel from People, for
Wordly Interest and Profit, keeping People always in Teaching, that they may be
always Paying them; and bring them not to be Taught of God: I have no enmity in
my Heart against any, but desire the good of all Mankind, and that they may
know the things belonging to their Peace, before the day of God's Visitation be
over with them.

If we look into the History of former Ages, we shall find, that the chief
Obstructers of the Blessed Truth have been some of the Learned, and are so
still.

F. Malebranch, that famous Frenchman, in his Book, entitled, A Search after
Truth, says, That Learned Men are most subject to Error; and shows diverse
Reasons for it, p. 75. Also in the Preface of his Book, and several other
places, wherein are many excellent things worth the regarding. In p. 121. he
treats of the Divine Light, and says, It was God himself that enlightened the
Wise Men in their Science, which ungrateful Man calls Natural, although it is
derived to them from Heaven; and brings diverse places of Scripture to prove
that the Light that all Men is enlightened withal, is Divine; and in many other
places of his Book he writes to the same purpose: This Man is said to be in
Community with the Church of Rome, but how his Book will relish with them, I
know not; because he writes much against the Errors of the Learned, and
Superstition also: Although I do not approve of all that he has written, yet his
Testimony of the Divine Light, which he confesses is the Light of the Mind,
and not of the Body: Also his Testimony of God's Teaching in Man is worth the
regarding, and ought not to be slighted: The Man that Translated this Book into
English, I suppose was a Protestant; he was one of the Fellows of Magdalen
College in Oxford, as appears by the Title of that Book. I have heard it much
commended by some sober Clergymen of the Church of England.

This Divine Light, Grace and Inspiration, of the Almighty, has been the Rule
and Guide of the People of God, called Quakers; they are come under the New
Covenant, to be taught of God, by that inward Principle of the Divine Life,
whereby all good People governs their Actions; and such are come to the
Everlasting Gospel, so as they use no empty professing words without Life, in
their Praying and Preaching, as some high Professors have done, which are but
as a decoy to catch the World, making a Money-Trade of Religion; such
superficial words have no Substance in them, although they be the most glorious
Expressions that Man can invent, yet they are but Pictures for the Ears, as
Images are for the Eyes, and there may be as much Idolatry in the one as the
other; although they make their Phylacteries never so large, yet it is but
Will Worship at best, if it proceeds not from the Inspiration of the Almighty.

The Love of God constrains all true Christians to seek the good of others; and
I have no other ends in writing this Treatise, but to put People in mind of
their Eternal Welfare, that they may seek after it; and not to spend their
precious time in the Vanities and Deceits of this present evil World, but to
come to seek after God, in his Light, with an humble and contrite Heart, that
they may be prepared to receive an Eternal Reward, and to come to have a true
Understanding of the holy Scriptures, for they are a Sealed Book; so that the
Learned, and Unlearned, cannot understand them truly, to make right use of
them, without the Inspiration of the Spirit of God; this is witnessed by the
People called Quakers, in the Principles of their Religion, called Truths
Principles, printed diverse times within these 38 Years, the last Impression
printed. 1699. and Sold by T. Soul in White-hart-court in Gracious-Street:
These Principles treats of the Substance of true Religion in general: Let none
deceive themselves; God will not be mocked: For whatsoever a Man sows, that
shall he reap also. For he that sows to his Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap
Corruption: But he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap
Everlasting Life, Gal. 6. 7, 8. This is a real Truth; for as the Tree falls,
so it lies; and as Death leaves them, so Judgment will find them; therefore it
concerns all Men to make their Calling and Election sure; and spend their time
in exercising their Consciences void of Offense toward God, and toward Man,
that they may lay down their Heads in Peace with God, and enjoy heavenly Peace
and Prosperity both in this Life, and the Life to come; which is the Desire of
my Heart for all Mankind, that they may be delivered from the Bondage of
Corruption, and received into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God.

The 30th of the Month, called October, 1699. Ann Docwra.

Note, Reader, the Reason of the so long Delay of the Publication of this
Answer, was,

1st, Not the Author 's Omission, but other Matters of greater Importance
employing the Press, that required more speedy Publication.

2dly, It being not so much known before, as of late, what Improvement the
Adversaries make of the said Clamorous Book, Styled, An Old Penitent
(...)isciple, etc. and their Boasting for want of an Answer to it.


