THE DANGER AND Unreasonableness OF A TOLERATION: In reference to some late
Papers which have passed concerning LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE.

He who breaks the Pence and Agreement of the Church, sets himself against
Christ.

They cannot receive the reward of Peace, who by their mad discord have broke
the Lords Peace.

Whereas Heresies and Schisms had their birth and original from men's making
distinct Conventicles for themselves, etc.

The heinous and inexpiable crime of Discord is not to be purged away, no not
with Death.

St. Cyprian, of the Unity of the Church. London, Printed for Walter Davis, in
Amen-corner. 1685.

THE DANGER AND Unreasonableness OF TOLERATION.
A Man of ordinary Parts, and but meanly versed in the Transactions of these
forty last years, cannot certainly but admire at the Request of some Persons,
who keep such a noise at present for Liberty of Conscience; especially if he
considers, that they know his Majesty to be a Person of Experience, as well as
Reason and Judgment.

What manner of men these are who desire such a Toleration, is not hard to
judge; but what is their reason for this their desire? Why, their tender
Consciences, forsooth, cannot dispense with a few innocent and harmless
Ceremonies of the Church of England, from which they differ in things not
necessary to Salvation, as they cannot deny; but with which, rather than
comply, (tho in things which they confess to be indifferent) they will depart from
her Communion, and continue in an endless Schism.

It is strange to reflect upon the many methods which have been used to reduce
these People to Unity with us; and it is deplorable to consider the small
effect, which the hard labors and solid Reasons of so many Charitable and
Learned Persons have had upon these intractable Spirits. Dr. Still. Misch. of
Sep. p. 1.
At the first time of our Reformation from the Church of Rome, such as thought
not so well of many of our Ceremonies, were not yet drawn to such a dislike of
our Church, as to separate from it, upon consideration of the evil Effects of
Division. Our Church has added nothing since, to render it self more
intolerable, and therefore this pretense to Separation can be no greater now
than it was at that time, and yet the Clamor is daily louder against our
Constitutions, and every Generation puts it self into a farther degree of
Separation than the former, and all their Defense is Scrupulosity to
Conscience. But we desire them seriously to consider, whether this can be a
sufficient Plea for their Separation, (which now it seems they desire to
continue for ever) will this clear them from the guilt of wilful Schism? will
their Ignorance be a Defense for them, when they have had all considerable
means for their better Information? have not all their Objections been
answered, and the Constitutions of our Church, with solid (I Am sure unanswered)
Reasons vindicated? If they are not satisfied with the Reasons which are
produced, why do they not answer them? why do they not desire a more full
satisfaction for their Doubts, in charitable Language, and with a desire to be
resolved? They have the liberty of the Press to set down their Scruples, and to
let us know wherein they desire to be satisfied, as well as to vent Libels
which tend to the disturbance of the Nation, and Mischief of the Church?
Methinks it should become Folks under such Scrupulosities as they pretend to,
to be meek, and willing to be resolved in such Points as they differ from us
(especially when the Peace of the Church lies at stake) and to consider, that
it is possible for them to be in the wrong as well as others. But the
Disposition of our Modern Separatist is quite contrary to this; let the Public
Peace be ever so much concerned, his Pride and Self-conceit (for which he has
been ever famous) will not suffer him to suspect himself under a mistake, or to
weigh rightly those reasons which are against his Humor. He thinks it a shame
to be convinced of his Error, and rather than show himself confuted, chooses
to persist in his Obstinacy, and desires a Toleration herein.

How pernicious both to Church and State such a Toleration would prove, is
easily ghess'd. We have not been ignorant what some Consciences at their proper
opportunities can dispense with, tho in such cases as tend to Peace and the
Public good, they are extraordinary tender. Those that strained at the Cap and
Surplice, could well enough digest Rapine, Sacrilege, and Regicide. Conscience
and Christian Liberty were the specious pretenses for their most Unchristian
and Uncharatable Proceedings. I need say no more, than that the like Effects
must proceed from the same Causes. Irreverence toward Gods Ministers, and
Contempt of the King's Magistrates, are some of the least Evils that may justly
be expected from the wonted Meekness of our weak Brethren; and this would soon
be every man's Answer, in case of being enjoined any thing concerning God or
Men, how holy or just soever it were, that did dislike him, that his Conscience
is against it. If you please, you shall hear the words of a Presbyterian
Minister, in the late rebellious Times, Mr. Edwards.
concerning the Dissenters at that time; That he was consident, that for this
many hundred years, there had not been a Party that pretended to so much
Holiness, and tenderness of Conscience above all other men, as this Party has
done, that has been guilty of so great sins, horrible Wickedness, provoking
abominations, as they are. You may remember likewise, that his late Majesty, of
ever blessed memory, at his happy Restoration, spontaneously condescended to
grant Liberty of Conscience to such as dissented from the established Religion,
provided they would not disturb the Peace of the Nation; you may think the King
was in a fair way of gratifying them, and that the Conditions were but
reasonable; but how little operation it had upon the Dissenters, the Commotion
of the Fifth-Monarchy-men did afterward demonstrate; as also, the following
Plot of some of those men of Conscience, that were concerned in the foregoing
Rebellion; which verified the Observation of King James, That the men of these
Principles are not obliged by kindnesses, nor won by frequently repeated
favors.

But these Persons may do well to consider, what a number of Sects are likely
to spring up upon this desired Liberty. There are many Folks who much delight
in Novelty, and many to whom nothing is dearer than their own singular
Opinions; now when every man is thus free to set up for himself, we shall be
daily pestered with new Doctrines, and every one will be seeking for
Subscribers to his own Model, be it ever so absurd. There can be no better way
of judging what will ensue upon such a Toleration, than by looking back, and
considering what has followed already, when there has been such a Liberty; and
if we will consult the same fore-quoted Presbyterian Minister, he will acquaint
us with several Opinions that were maintained in his time; amongst a great
number of which, these are some; That the Scriptures cannot be said to be the
Word of God, and are no more to be credited than the Writings of Men, being not
a Divine but Humane Tradition; that God has a hand in, and is the Author of the
sinfulness of his People, not of the Actions alone, but of the very Pravity
which is in them; and afterward, That the Soul of man is mortal, as the Soul
of a Beast, and that there is no Resurrection at all of the Bodies of Men, nor
Heaven nor Hell after this Life. You may perceive hereby, how such a Liberty as
this, of maintaining publicly whatsoever a man's depraved Fancy suggests to
him, cannot but tend to the great propagation of Religion, the edification of
the People, and glory of the Church.

But what do they desire under this name of Liberty of Conscience, or a
Toleration? Is it a free Liberty to stick close to their old Principles, and
continue in their professed Opinions? if this be it, let them reflect upon
those Tenets that have been maintained among them, and which I hear not as yet
recanted; if these are destructive to Government, and tend to the upholding of
Rebellion, it seems a little unreasonable for them to require a persistance in
them. What they are, and how likely to produce Loyal and peaceable Effects,
would be a long work to show; I shall only send you to a Collection of many of
them, by a Loyal and Laborious Subject of this Nation, L'Estrange.
where you may have a full view of the Separatist's Opinions, and where you are
directed to their Author's; You may also find some of them in the sheet that
came out at the burning of Seditious Libels in Oxford the last year; in both of
which you may learn, what it is that keeps them in as good a posture as they
are in at present, and that if they had power proportionable to their desires,
(to the augmentation of which, such a Toleration must necessarily contribute
much) we should have them fight the Lord's Battles, and try again to set King
Jesus upon his Throne. It Is easily known who I mean, and it is observable, that
there was never such oppression exercised over men's Consciences by Christians,
as was by those who so much pretended to an abhorrence of Ecclesiastical
Tyranny, and who have, not many years since, been sticklers for a Toleration.

I shall not trouble my self with answering any of those late Papers concerning
Liberty of Conscience; neither weighing whether they are in the right when they
say, the great Oppression they are under is purely for their Religion, nor
confuting that irrefragable Argument in case of Hypocrisy, to which men should
be forced if they comply with us, nor examining what one of them says
concerning Qu. Elizabeth's time, conceiving that none of these belong to my
purpose, my intent is only to hint at the unreasonableness of their desire, and
the dangerous consequences that would ensue upon it; I Will only desire to know
of them, whether it were not better (if it were possible) for us to be united,
than to widen our Breaches? I believe none is such an Enemy to Peace, but will
at least grant me this; if so, we beseech them to use such means as may conduce
to it. They are easy enough to men of unbiased Affections, and unprejudiced
Spirits, that are Friends to Peace, and desirers of Unity. The case is plain
and brief, the Constitutions of our Church are known, and wherein Dissenters
differ from us; our Request therefore to them is, that they would lay open the
Reasons why they desire such an unbrotherly Separation from us, but we also
desire them to avoid Repetitions, and that they produce not Arguments answered
long ago, unless they give their Replies to them; we desire them with
unprejudiced affections to peruse the late Writings of our Ministers, in
defense of our Church, and to acquaint us wherein their Reasons are deficient
and unfatisfying; let this be done with a Christian Spirit, and a desire that
their Judgments may be rectified in all things, and I doubt not but God (who is
not the God of Confusion, but of Unity; who is the Author of Peace and Lover of
Concord) will grant us a Remedy for these sores, that we need not enter upon
actions of utter Desperation.

FINIS.

