A DEFENSE OF THE VINDICATION OF THE Deprived Bishops. Wherein The Case of
Abiathar is particularly considered, and the Invaliditly of Lay-Deprivations is
further proved, from the Doctrine received under the Old Testament, continued
in the first Ages of Christianity, and from our own Fundamental Laws. IN A
REPLY to Dr. Hody and another Author. To which is Annexed, The Doctrine of the
Church of England, concerning the Independency of the Clergy on the Lay-Power,
as to those Rights of theirs which are purely Spiritual, reconciled with our
Oath of supremacy, and the Lay-Deprivations of the Popish Bishops in the
beginning of the Reformation.

By the Author of the Vindication of the Deprived Bishops.

LONDON, Printed MDCXCV.

THE CONTENTS.
I. THE Doctor's late Book no answer to the Vindication. Page 1 II. The
Baroccian M. S. disproved by the Vindicator, and not defended by the Doctor P.
2. III. The Doctor has not offered, at any Answer to the Argument against him
in the first part of the Vindication. P. 3. IV. He grants the Proposition
principally disputed between us, concerning the Invalidity of Lay-deprivations,
and takes no care to prevent the Consequences of that Confession P. 4 V. The
Doctor gains nothing by his changing the State of the Question* P. 4. VI. The
Doctor's whole Proof unconclusive, admitting the invalidity of
Lay-deprivations. P. 5. VII. The Doctor's Limitation of his own pretended
self-evident maxims do all of them prove our Case unconcerned in it. Chap. I P.
6. VIII. Submission of Subjects to the Ecclesiastical Usurpers is sinful by the
Law of God. P. 7. IX. Such submissions would make the Ecclesiastical Subjects,
Accomplices in the Injustice. P. 9. X. The same Submission in the Clergy is
sinful, on account of the Oaths of Canonical obedience they have taken to the
rightful Possession. P. 10. XI. Our Principles afford better Reasons why the
unjust Deprivations of Synods may be received without the Deprived Bishops
consent, than those insisted on by the Doctor. P. 12. XII. There is great
disparity between the obligations of a competent and an incompetent Authority.
P. 13. XIII. No reason to reckon on the presumed consent of the Injured Bishops
by an invalid deprivation, for discharging their Subjects Consciences, from
Duty to them. P. 14. XIV. Our Deprived Fathers gives public Significations,
that they do challenge their Old Rights, as far as is necessary in their
circumstances. P. 15. XV. The Oaths of canonical Obedience to our Fathers still
obliging. P. 17. XVI. The compliance with Usurpers is also therefore sinful,
because Usurping Bishops are really no Bishops at all. P. 20. XVII. The evil of
Sin and Scandal in complying, greater than that of Persecution which is avoided
by it. P. 22. XVIII. The Evil of Schism not avoided, but incurred by complying
with the Usurper P. 24. XIX. The abuses that may follow on compliance, are a
just reason to refuse it, where it is not otherwise in Conscience due. P. 25.
XX. No security that have compliance will not be abused. P. 26. XXI. That abuse
is a greater mischief, than, that it can be made amends for by the Doctor's
expedients. P. 29. XXII. The main design of the Doctor's New Book, in arguing
from Facts already overthrown by the Vindicator. P. 32. XXIII. The Doctor
himself is unwilling to stand by the consequences of such Facts as himself
produces. P. 33. XXIV. The Doctor's remarks against the reasoning of the first
part of the Vindication concerning the possession of Cornelius, turned against
himself. P. 33. XXV. The Doctor's Book afforded no Subject for a Reply, but
what would be Personal. P. 35. XXVI. The Doctor's turning the dispute, to later
Facts draws it from a short and Decisive, to a tedious and litigious Issue. P.
35. XXVII. We have no reason to suffer our selves to be overruled by him in
these Arts of diverting us. P. 36. XXVIII. We decline his Topic of Facts
rather because it is undecisive, than because we think it dis, advantageous to
us. P. 36. XXIX. For want of some other Subject relating to the Vindication, we
pitch on the Case of Abiathar. P. 37. XXX. This Fact is not commended in the
Scripturs as a Precedent. P. 37. XXXI. The Magistrate could not by the Doctrine
of that Age have any direct Power over the Priesthood. P. 38. XXXII. The
Benefits of the Priesthood out of the Power, and far greater than any in the
Power, of the Civil Magistrate P. 39. XXXIII. The Ancient Jews, of the
Apostle's Age did believe their Priesthood available to a future and eternal
State. P. 40. XXXIV. And consequently did expressly own it far more Honorable
than the Magistracy its self. P. 42. XXXV, This same reasoning holds on account
of the Priesthood representing God though without relation to a future State. P.
45. XXXVI. And that also according to the opinions of those Times. P. 46.
XXXVII. Solomon's Act of Abiathar was only of force, P. 47. XXXVIII. Which
force might in the consequence render the exercise of his Right unpracticable.
P. 48. XXXIX. Yet Solomon was in Conscience obliged to be cautious in
exercising this Force against the Priesthood. P. 49 XL. What Solomon did was
only to fulfill, what God has before Threatened against the House of Eli. P. 51.
XLI. Abiathar was not then the High Priest, properly so called, but Zadoc. P.
53. XLII. There were in those times two High Priest at once; the chief, such as
Zadoc was, of the Family of Eleazar, the lower such as Abiathar, of the Family
of Ithamar. P. 54. XLIII. No Deprivation of the Posterity of Phineas in those
Times. P. 56. XLIV. Zadoc put in the room of Abiathar, as to the Courses of
Ithamar, which were not under him before. P. 58. XLV. The Jews by our
Principles could not justify a Separation, on account of Abiathar. Their Case
not like ours. P. 59 XLVI. When Invasion had passed into a Prescription, as in
our Saviors time, he that was in Possession had really the best Title. P. 60.
XLVII. Among the Jews the true High Priest was to be known by his possessing
the One Altar: Among the Christians the true Altar was known by its being
possessed by the true Bishop. P. 62. XLVIII. The Reasons for exemption from the
Power of the Prince stronger in our deprived Fathers Case, than in the Case of
Abiathar. Our Bishops are properly Priests P. 64. XLIX. The Gospel Priesthood
more noble than that of Abiathar, etc. P. 66. L. This Reasoning admitted in the
Apostolical Age, etc. by Clemens Romanus, etc. P. 68. LI. He does it by the
same Principles, as agreeable to the Constitution of the Gospel. P. 70. LII. He
draws the like Inferences, in Practice as we do. P. 72. LIII. The Laity cannot
now pretend to any indirect Right of depriving Bishops, as the Jewish Princes
could in the Case of the Jewish Priesthood. P. 75. LIVE. Our Reasoning against
the Magistrates Rights of deprivation in Spirituals proceeds universally, and
therefore in the Case of temporal Crimes; also the owning such a Power would
have been pernicious to the Primitive Christians also, whowere charg de with
Temporal Crimes. P. 77. LV. The Spiritual Rights of our Fathers have been now
invaded by Civil Force. Bare Characters without Districts not sufficient to
preserve the Church as a Body. P. 79. LVI. Supposing the Church and Christian
State had made one Body, ret more had been required to make that Supposition
applicable to our present Case, which is not yet taken notice of. P. 82. LVII.
The Prince on account of his being a Christian, has no Title to any Spiritual
Authority. P. 83. LVIII. A whole Nation by Baptism may be made one Society in
the Church, without prejudice to their being still a Society distinct from it.
P. 85. LIX. The Churches Obligations are more necessary for the subsisting of
the State, than these she receives from the State are for hers. P. 87. LX. The
Benefits received by the State from the Church, are also greater then those
which the Church receives from the State. P. 89. LXI. If the State had been
capable of conferring the greater Obligations, yet a good Pious Magistrate
could not in reason, desire such a recompense as should oblige the Church to
yield any of her ancient Rights. P. 90. LXII. Princes have been allowed by the
Church a Right to keep persons out, not yet Canonically possessed, but not to
turn any out, who were already in Possession of Bishoprics. And that without
any proper Cession of Right on the Church's part. P. 92. LXIII. The Power of
turning out Bishops once possessed too great to be granted on any consideration
whatsoever. P. 94. LXIV. In this Case particularly no Temporal Favor
whatsoever can make amends for the loss of the Benefits of the Spiritual
Society. There can therefore be no implicit Contracts for such an Exchange
that can in Equity oblige the Ecclesiastical Governors to performance, though it
had been in their Power to make such a Contract. P. 96. LXV. But here it is not
in the Power of Ecclesiastical Governors to make such a Contract. P. 98. LXVI.
It is not agreeable to the mind of God; that the Church should so incorporate
with the State, as that the Bishops should be deprivable at the pleasure of the
Civil Magistrate P. 100. LXVII. The Magistate is by no means a Competent Judge
of the Church's Interests. P. 102. LXVIII. The Surrender of the Clergy in Henry
the VIIIths. time, cannot oblige their Posterity now LXIX. No reasoning from
the rights of the Jewish Princes to the Rights of Christian Princes now. LXX.
Our present deprivations not justifiable by even our present Secular Laws. P.
107. LXXI. The Conclusion. P. 110.
A DEFENSE OF THE VINDICATION OF THE Deprived Bishops.
I. The Doctor's late Book, no Answer to the Vindication.
WHAT the Vindicator thinks of the Answers that have been made to his Defense
of our Deprived Fathers, himself best knows. For my part, I should not have
concerned my self for him, if I had not been overruled by the Judgments of
others, for whom I profess a Veneration, rather than my own. I have that due
esteem for his Adversaries, which their excellent Abilities deserve,
particularly for Dr. Hody. His diligence in History none questions that I know
of. I also value his Skill and Judgment in it, much more than many who are
concerned on his side of the Question here debated. Nor do I deny but several
things are very well observed by him in this very Work I am now considering at
present; though I think it more hastily and tumultuarily laid together than
several of his other Writings. The only thing that made me think a Reply
needless, was that in all the Learning he has shown, I could find nothing that
I thought any indifferent Person could think proper for satisfying Conscience
in the single point here in Question, nothing that could give me the least
reason to doubt of the Arguments principally insisted on by the Vindicator. For
other things not relating to that, I thought our candid Adversaries themselves
would excuse us when they considered the Disadvantages on our side, the
Difficulties of the Press, the Displeasure of our pretended Superiors, much
more considerable than any Argument that I could find produced either by him or
any other Adversary.

II. The Baroccian M S, disproved by the Vindicator, and not defended by the
Doctor.
So far I am from trusting my own Opinion in this matter, that I would gladly
know some particular of the Doctor's Book, that even our Adversaries, who are
so clamorous for a Reply, think sufficient to excuse their Schism against the
Charge of the Vindicator. His Baroccain M S has already been proved impertinent
to our present Dispute. The Vindicator has shown that the occasion of his
writing did not oblige his Author to defend the validity of Lay-deprivations;
he might have added, that his Author himself was not ignorant, that Synods did
intervene in several of his Instances, which must have made so many of them
perfectly impertinent to his design, if that had been to vindicate the Validity
of Lay deprivations. That is not all: The Vindicator has also shown from the
Canons subjoyned at the end, and suppressed by the Doctor, that the Author
could not design the Defense of Lay Deprivations. Nor has the Doctor offered at
any thing that might show such a Design consistent with those Canons, or the
Author's Subjection to them. Yet those Canons alone are decisive to our
purpose, both as to the sense of the Constantinoplitane Church, and of that
Author as a Member of it, whether they were part of his Work or not; concerning
which, the Impartial Reader is to judge whether what the Doctor has said, be
sufficient to purge his wilful suppressing them. The Vindicator has also shown
the Author not only remoteness from, but ignorance of the times he writes of.
Nor has the Doctor proved, or pretended any thing to the contrary. Nay, even of
the Facts enumerated by him, there are but few that the Doctor has thought fit,
on second thoughts, to assert independently on his Authority. It cannot
therefore be on this account, of vindicating his M S, that any Impartial Reader
can judge the Doctor's performance to be a just Reply to the Vindicatoin

III. He has not offered at any Answer to the Arguments against him in the
first part of the Vindication.
But whatever becomes of the so boasted M. S, a Conscientious Person, who was
only sollicitous for Truth, not Victory, will easily excuse the Doctor, if he
had at least been pleased to clear our present Case, relating to the
Lay-deprivation of our Holy Fathers, and the Schism that necessarily followed
upon it. Yet even here I could find nothing that could pass for Answer, with an
indifferent Conscientious Arbitrator. Facts without Right, none can think
proper for satisfying Conscience; yet this is all which is so much as pretended
in this Book. The whole Question of the Preface to the Reader: The Vindication
of the Civil Power, in depriving a Bishop for Political Crimes, I reserve for a
particular Treatise
Magistrates Right, for doing what has been done, is reserved for another Book.
And then I thought it seasonable enough to Reply, when a Question was debated,
that did indeed concern our Consciences. So far his Book is from being a just
Answer, as to the proving what himself asserts. But for that also, we can wait
his Leisure, if the Doctor had been pleased in the mean time, at least, to
weaken what had been produced for our Cause by the Vindicator. We would gladly
have been excused from the Violence we have offered our selves, in forbearing
their Communion, and we should have thought our selves obliged to him for it,
if he had cleared what was objected to the contrary in that very Book which he
pretends to Answer; if he had shown, that notwithstanding what is there
objected, we might still continue in their Communion, with safety to our Souls,
and consistency to the discharge of a good Conscience. What we had to say on
this point, was professedly insisted on in the former part of the Vindication.
This ought in the first place to have been considered by him, if he had
regarded our Consciences, as that which was necessary to dispose us for
considering his other Proofs or Answers. But in vain we have expected it. He
does not so much as pretend to consider that first Part in his whole Book. How
then can any unprejudiced Judge take the Doctor's Book for an Answer to the
Vindication?

He also grants the Proposition principally disputed between Us concerning the
Invalidity of Lay-deprivations, and takes no care to prevent the Consequences
of that Confession.
That is not all: He also grants that which the Vindicator designed in that
place principally to prove, the Pref. to the Reader. I grant at present, that
all Lay-deprivations are invalid.
invalidity of Lay-deprivations. This concession the Vindicator has drawn into
its just Consequences, that then the deprived Bishops must still be Bishops,
and Bishops of the same Jurisdictions, and retain their Right to their Subjects
Obedience in their several respective Jurisdictions, as much (with regard to
Conscience) as if such depriving Sentences had nevre been decreed. None can
doubt, who knows what invalidity imports, but that invalid Censures, leave
Cases exactly in the same condition as to Conscience, in which they find them:
That therefore as it would have been Schismatical to have set up Altars and
Anti-Bishops in the same districts against our H. Fathers, in case the
depriving Act had never passed, on the same account it is so still, in case the
deprivation proves invalid. That, as in that Case, that the depriving Act had
not passed, communicating with the Schismatical Altars, had involved the
Bishops and Churches that had been guilty of it, in the same Schism with the
principal and original Schismatics; so also it must, by the same parity of
Reason, do so now, invalid Sentences not being capable of making a disparity.
Now what can any one preteud, that has been suggested by the Doctor for
securing himself against these just Inferences, from so unwary a Concession?
For my part, I can find no place where he does so much as offer at it. Where
then can be his Answer, if even himself grants all that we are concerned to
assert in the Question principally disputed between us?

V. The Doctor gains nothing by his changing the state of the Qustion.
This being so, what advantage can the Doctor propose to himself, by changing
the state of our present Question, from a Dispute concerning the Magistrates
Pre. to the Reader.
Right of Deprivation, to another concerning the Lawfulness of Submission in
the Ecclesiastical Subjests, to the Invaders and Intruders? I grant indeed,
that these Two Questions are not directly the same. But it is abundantly
sufficient to the Vindicators purpose, if the disproof of the Magistrates
Rights, do by necessary consequence infer the Unlawfulness of Submission in the
Subjects to the Invaders of Ecclesiastical Districts, not otherwise vacated
than by such Lay-deprivations. And this it does by the inferences now
mentioned. Invalid Deprivations leave as much right in Conscience as they
found, and therefore as much obligation to Duty in the Subjects. The Subjects
therefore still owing duty to the invalidly Deprived Bishops, must be guilty of
Sin, if they pay the same duty to their Rivals: And for committing Sin, the
Doctor does not, nay, dares not own, even an Irresistible force to be
sufficient. If he should, I know none of his mind, besides the old Gnostik and
Elcesaite Heretics. Thus pertinent it is to disprove the Magistrates Right of
deprivation, in order to the disproving the Lawfulness of Submission in the
Ecclasiastical Subjects, on the pretense of Irresistible force.

VI. The Doctor's whole Proof unconclusive, admitting the Invalidity of
Lay-deprivations.
But the Doctor pretends that it was neither the design of the Author of his
Baroccian M. S. in writing it, nor his own in publishing it, to prove the Right
of the Lay Magistrate for Spiritual De privations I easily agree with him, that
it was not the design of the Author of this M. S. And I shall as easily excuse
him from designing it, if it be consistent with the exigency of his Cause which
engaged him to the publication. But can he deny at least, that his design in
publishing it, was to purge his party from the guilt of the present Schism? Can
he deny that in order hereunto, his design was to prove the Lawfulness of
Submission in the Subjects of the deprived destricts to the Ecclesiastical
Intruders? His own words in these particulars are too manifest to leave him to
the liberty of denying them. Let him then try his skill, wether he can from
this M. S. or from any thing offered in his Book, prove the Lawfulness of such
Submission in the Ecclesiastical Subjects on the Supposal now mentioned, of the
Invalidity of Lay deprivations. If he can, he may then indeed, but not till
then, call the disproof of the Magistrates Right for Spiritual deprivation, and
the consequent proof of the Invalidity of such deprivations, when attempted
impertinent to his design in publishing his M S. But how will he undertake to
do this? Does he think the Facts alone, either of his M. S. or his Book,
sufficient for this purpose, supposing them such as he is concerned they should
be, instances of Submission, upon Lay, or otherwise Invalid deprivations, to
Usurpers of the vacated Thrones? Dare he stand by the consequence, that a like
enumeration of as many Facts in as large a distance of the like times, is
sufficient to prove the Practice allowable, nay, exemplary, to succeeding
Generations? If he dare not, he must think of some other way of proving them
well done, than barely this, that they were done. This will reduce him, whether
he will or no, to the merit of the cause. And how is it possible for him to
prove Submission to the Usurper lawful and unsinful, till the Subjects be first
fairly discharged from their duty to the first Incumbent? How can he prove them
discharged from their first duty, if the Lay deprivation be not sufficient to
discharge them? And how can he pretend it sufficient for that purpose, if it
was from the beginning null and invalid? Thus he will find the disproof of the
Power of the Lay-Magistrate for Spiritual deprivations to be more pertinent,
than perhaps himself could wish it, for overthrowing his pretended Lawfulness
of Submission in the Ecclesiastical Subjects to Persons obtruded on Sees no
other way vacated, than by the Authority of a Lay-deprivation of the Civil
Magistrate.

VII. The Doctor's limitations of his own pretended self-evident Maxim, do all
of them prove our Case unconcerned in it. Chap. 1.
But the Doctor pretends to demonstrate (no softer word it seems would serve
his turn) the Truth of his Proposition; and God forbid we should not yield to
Demonstration. But I confess, I very rarely find great solidity joined with
great confidence: However, we must not prejudge it, but examine whether it will
answer the Character with which he has possessed us concerning it. His
demonstration therefore he draws First, From the Reasonableness of it.
Secondly, From the Authority and Practice of the Autients. The Reasonableness
of it, he grounds on this certain and self eviden-Maxime, That whatsoever is
necessary for the present Peace and Tranquillity of the Church, that ought to
be made use of, provided it is not in it self sinful; and the ill Consequences
which may possibly attend it, are either not somischievous to the Church, or at
least not so likely to happen as the Evils we endeavor to avoid. But upon the
supposed Invalidity of Lay-deprivations this Submission of the Ecclesiastical
Subjects to the Usurper of the Ecclesiastical Throne, will not come under the
limitations proposed by the Dr. himself, of his self evident Maxim. I have
already shown that, on this supposal, this Submission to the Usurper will be in
it self sinful. And the same Observation may be applied to his other
limitations, if the Case proposed be judged by our Principles. The Consequences
which we think will follow from this Obligation he layson our Ecclesiastical
Superiors, to yield their Rights as often as they are invaded, where nothing
but the Right is concerned; and the liberty he allows Ecclesiastical Subjects
to desert their Superiors, if they think fit to assert their Rights; we think
tend, by inevitable Consequence, to the perfect subvertion of the Church as a
Society. And this Consequence is worse than can be feared from the Persecutions
of erresistible force (if we can agree, as the Primitive Christians did, to
keep our stations) or from the divisions of them who will not agree to maintain
Society with us in a state of Independance on the Civil Magistrate. And natural
Consequences from Principles, are Evils more likely to hapen, than any that
depend on the wills of mutable Men. So that be his Maxim never so self-evident,
yet there is not one of the Doctor's own limitations, but excludes his own
Case, as judged by our Principles from being concerned in it. This perfectly
discharges us from all concern in the Instances by which he pretends to prove
his Maxim received by the Ancients as self-evident. Yet it were easy to answer
them, if we were concerned to do so. They are generally in things indifferent,
and changeable by their different Circumstances; and the Dispensations were
made by Persons in Authority, without prejudice to any Third Persons Right. So
that not one of his Instances reach our Case. But the Subjects of our Dispute
are not mutable, nor depend on Circumstances. As the Ecclesiastical Society was
designed by Christ not temporary, but perpetual; so the Essenital cements of it
must have been so too. And such are the Rights of Governors, and the Duties of
Subjects. These if they be taken away for a moment, dissolve the Society, and
therefore cannot be left to the Prudence of Governors for the time being,
because the very supposal of the Case, destroys the very being of the
Government and of the Society, and therefore leaves no Governors in being,
that may consider such Circumstances, and suit their Practices accordingly.

VIII. Submission of Subjects to the Ecclesiastical Usurpers is sinful by the
Law of God.
But though the Doctor answers nothing produced by the Vindicator for proving
such submission of the Subjects to an Intruder sinful; yet he pretends to prove
it unsinful. But so unhappily, that not one of his proofs hold for the purpose
for which he has produced them. First, He pretends the Scripture silent in our
Case; and therefore that such Submission is not forbidden by any express Law of
God. Yet he denies not but that the Law of God commands us 1 Thessalonians. v. ^^. ^^^.
XIII. ^^.
to be Obedient to our Governors, to them also who are over us in the Lord.
But where there are two Competitors, and both claim our Obedience, to which of
these two our Obedience ought to be paid, this he says, it leaves to our
wisdom to determine. But will he therefore pretend that disobedience to any
particular Governor in our Age, is not against the express Law of God, because
no Law of God is express in determing any particular Person now living to be
our Governor? This will overthrow all Divine Obligations to any since the
Apostles Age. Now only in this but in most other duties relating to Men, the
determining Circumstances are settled by Human Authority; Yet none does
therefore pretend, but that the Offense against the Duty so Circumstantiated,
is against the Law of God. The Law of God requires Duty to Parents. But who are
to be taken for our Parents, not only Nature, but the Laws of Men have
determined in several Cases, as in that of Adoption, which is ancienter then
Moses himself, and in the other of our Civil and Spiritual Parents, who are
generally concluded in that Divine Commandment. So in the Case of Murder, it
is certain, that only Illegal Killing, by a Person not authorized, or for an
unjust Cause, is forbidden in the 6th Commandment. But they are Human Laws
which pitch upon the Person who is to be vested with the Authority of Life and
Death, and which determine the Cases wherein Death is to be inflicted. So also
in the Case of Adultery, it cannot be jugded what Facts are chargeable with
that Crime, but by the Laws of Matrimony, which depend on the particular
Constitutions of the Places, and are accordingly various. But in no Case this
is more evident, than in that of the 8th Commandment. Theft is all that is
there forbidden, which cannot be applied to any Fact, but by supposing the
determination of Human Laws concerning Property, which are again very various.
For some Persons have been excluded from all Property, as Slaves, and
unemancipated Children. And the determinations of Property in Persons capable
of it, are so different in different Places, that what is Property and the
violation of it, Theft in one Country, is not so in another. Yet what Casuist
has ever doubted, but that Disobedience to Parents, Murder, Adultery and
Theft, are still violations of the Law of God, notwithstanding that the
Imputation of these Crimes to particular Facts, does now generally depend on
Circumstances determined by Human Law? If therefore by our, Wisdom, the Doctor
means the Wisdom of the Subjects themselves, as if the Scriptures had left the
determination of these Circumstances to that, his Observation it not true. The
Subjects are to be concluded by the wisdom of their Superiors; and that upon
account of the Divine Law, which obliges them to duty to Superiors in general,
which is to be so expounded, that it may extend to all our Superiors for the
time being, in what time or place soever. This therefore will oblige us to take
all the ways of conveying Power to particular Persons by the constitutions of
particular Societies, not only for Human, but Divine Establishments. I am sure
St. Cyprian looks on all particular Bishops in his own time, as appointed by
God and Christ. And in this way it is manifest, that they who are intruded into
places vacated by an incompetent Authority, cannot be taken for the Bishops to
whom the Subjects Obedience is due by Divine Law. This also is as certain from
the Reasonings and Principles, as well as the Sayings, of St. Cyperian.

IX. Such Submission would make the Ecclesiastical Subjects Accomplices in the
Injustice.
The Doctor adds Secondly, That Submission to the Usurpars does not make us
Accomplices in the Injustice. But why, if our duty still be owing to the
Rightful Claimers, as it must notwithstanding an invalid deprivation? The only
reason he pretends, is that refusal of Duty to the Usurpers would only draw
Ruin; upon the Clergy themselves who should refuse it, and cannot restore the
Rightful Owners whom the state has deposed Thus this Divine takes Persecution,
and Deprivation of Revenues, for Ruin; and sufficient to excuse from the Duty
which may still remain, notwithstanding any thing he has pleased, or can plead,
from a Deprivation which himself has granted to be Invaild. I am sure his Texts
teaches us otherwise, that Persecutions incurred for Duty, are not Matthew. XIX.
e^. Mark 10. 31.
Ruin, but gain, a Hundred fold even here, besides the future Eternal Rewards.
Nor can any one believe otherwise, who believes our Revealed Religion. Nothing
but flesh and blood, and a carnal prospect, can make these things appear as the
Doctor has represented them. But he says, their refusal of Obedience to the
Intrudors, cannot restore the true owners to their Rightful Possession. What
then? will this therefore excuse them for joining with the Usurpers, for
thereby maintaining their unjust Possession in opposition to those who have a
better Title, which Title themselves were Obliged to maintain? Can he reconcile
this with their old Duty, or excuse themselves, for violating that Duty, from
being Accomplices in the Injustice? But the Suggestion is not true which he
insists on, that the refusal of Obedience to the Intruders, and paying it to
the lawful Pastors, would not continue the Rightful Poslesiors. It would not
indeed continue them in their Possession of their Secular dues, or of any thing
of which the State could deprive them. But it would continue them in a
Possession of those things for which our Consciences are concerned, I mean of
Spiritual; in such a Possession as is consistent with a Persecution from the
State; in such a Possession as was enjoined by their holy Ancestors in the
first and purest Ages. This we might continue to them, whether the State would
or no, if we could find in our hearts to agree among our selves, as the
Primitive Christians did, to be Unanimous in performing our Duty to them. And
so far is the prospect of the Public good from obliging us, as the Doctor
pretends, to the contrary; that that very consideration of the Public good, is
that which we principally insist on for our purpose. It is certainly for the
Public good of the Spiritual Society, that the Rights of its Governors, and
the Duties of its Subjects, should be preserved inviolable. And it is for the
Public good also, that the Interest of less valuable Societies, should give
way to the Interests of that Society which is more valuable. And it is withal,
as certain, that the Spiritual, is the more valuable Society. I cannot foresee
what part of this Reasoning the Doctor can question, if he will be true to the
Interests of Revealed Religion.

X. The same submission in the Clergy is sinful, on account of the Oaths they
have taken to the of Rightful Possessors Canonical Obedience.
He proceeds, and says Thirdly, That such compliance with an Usurping
Ecclesiastic Governor, is not sinful on account of the Oath of Canonical
Obedience to the Lawful Possessor. And why so? Because the Bishop so deprived,
can no longer govern. But GOD be praised, our Bishops can still govern, if
their Clergy and Laity would obey. And that the Clergy will not obey, the
Doctor ought to show how it is reconcilable with their Oaths of Obedience, by
some other Topic than what he has here insisted on. Our Bishops are not
banished, are not imprisoned, are not confined, nor any way disabled from
exercising that actual Government, which relates to Conscience, and which is
practicable in a Persecution. Yet the Primitive Christians did not think their
Bishops disabled for Governing, when they were in Exile, as long as they
maintained a correspondence with their Clergy. So St. Cyprian, even in his
Exile, exercised his Authority, and was obeyed by his. Carthaginian Clergy St.
Athanasius was banished further into the West, which perfectly disabled him for
keeping up that Ordinary Correspondence with his Alexandrian Clergy which was
requisite for actual Government. Yet this was not then thought sufficient,
either to give them leave to join with any of those who were substituted into
his place by suspected Arian Synods, as well as by the Imperial Authority; or
to set up any Person, without his leave, of as unsuspected Orthodoxy as
himself. While he was living, and might return to a capacity of governing, they
did not think themselves discharged from their duty to him, on the Doctor's
pretense of the public good. I have already also shown, how that pretense in
this Case, makes against him, and am not willing to repeat what has been there
said. If the Church's intention be regarded, as the Doctor seems to regard it
here, she certainly could never intend that her Governors should be robbed of
their Spiritual Right, and her Subjects discharged from their Spiritual
Subjection, and her Body thereby dissolved at the pleasure of the sacrilegious
encroaching Magistrate. This dependence of the Subjects is so universally the
Interest of all Churches and Bishops in general, and indeed of all Societies,
as that I know not any show of reason the Doctor has, to make it the private
intention of the Bishop, in opposition to the public intention of the Church.
It is an invidious Interpretation, and a very false one, which he gives of the
Oath, when he makes it in effect the same as if they should swear, That they
will for the Bishop's sake, oppose the welfare of the Public, and break the
Union of the Church, and leave the Communion of it, and adhere to the Bishop,
though they should have no reason to do so, besides this bare Oath. No need of
this. The welfare of the Public, and the Union of the Church require that in
affairs of Public Spiritual Interest the judgment of the Subject ought to be
concluded by the judgment of the Bishop, at least to the practice, which
perfectly overthrows the Doctor's Interpretation, and makes it impossible that
those considerations should ever really interfere, which the Doctor makes so
opposite. And St. Cyprian's definition of a Church, that it is a flock united
with the Bishop, makes it impossible that the true Church's Communion can ever
be left in adhering to the Bishop. But this perhaps the Doctor will call a
Saying of St. Cyprian, and a sort of Theological Pedantry, as he is used to Chapter
1. p. 2. 9.
style other, the like Doctrines and Principales of the Cyprianick and purest
Ages, when they are urged to oblige him to any thing that may give him occasion
to show, what he calls, his fortitude. What he pretends with his usual
confidence, without the least offer of proof, that particularly here in the
Church of England, the Oath of Canonical Obe P. 5.
dience is always taken with this supposition, That the Civil Power as well as
the Ecclesiastical, do allow the Bishop to govern, we shall then believe, when
he shall be pleased to prove it by some stronger Topic than his own Authority.
The Oath it self has no such matter expressed in it. And he should have pitched
on some expression in it, if there had been any, which (in his opinion) might
seem to imply it. Our Civil Laws require that our Ecclesiastical Causes should
be determined by Ecclesiastical Judges, which, if they had been observed, had
left no room for the Case of Lay deprivations.

XI. Our Principles afford better Reasons why the unjust deprivations of Synods
may be received without the deprivea Bishops consent, than those insisted on by
the Doctor.
That a Synodical deprivation, though unjust, discharges the Subjects from the
Obligation of the Oath of Cononical Obedience, is usually admitted. But not for
that reason which the Doctor has given for it. The division which might
otherwise follow in the Church, and the public disturbance which might follow
thereupon, if they were not so discharged, are equally applicable to the
opposite Pretenders, and could afford the Subjects no directions with whether
of them they ought to join. The true reason ought to decide the Title, and
therefore ought to be such as one only of the Rivals can pretend to. That is,
that the Synod, however unjust in its way of proceeding, is notwithstanding to
be allowed as a conpetent Judge; and therefore that, on that account, its
Sentences ought to hold in Practice, till repealed by a higher Authority of the
same kind, that is, by a greater Synod. But an incompetent Jude leaves things
in the same condition in which it found them, and ought not, in Conscience or
Equity, to have an effect at all. Nor can it therefore impose on the
Consciences of the Subjects any, the least, Obligation, even to acquiescence.
Nor does it follow, that because the Bishop's conscent may not be necessary to
oblige him to stand to the unjust Sentence, that therefore the reason of his
obligation to acquiescences is not grounded on Episcopal consent. The consent
of his Predecessors on the valuable consideration of having the conveniences of
Synodical debates, may conclude him while he enjoys the same valuable
considerations. And the consent of his Colleagues may oblige him also, who have
the Right of judging with whom they will observe the Commerce of their
Communicatory Letters. Their agreement in denying him their Communicatory
Letters, is, in effect, a Deprivation, when what he does is not ratified in the
Catholic Church. This will go far to hinder his Cummunion from being
Catholic, which may go far also toward the absolving his Subjects from Duty
to him, if by joining with any other, they may have the benefit of Catholic
Communion. But this following the judgment of Episcopal Predecessors, or of the
Episcopal College, will by no means, allow the Subject that Liberty which the
Doctor disputes for, of deserting their Bishops on their own private Judgments
concerning the public good. It will not follow, that that Necessity must
excuse them, which has no other consideration on which it may be grounded,
desides that of an irresistible force.

XII. There is gre^^ disparity between the Obligations of a competent, and an
incompetent, Authority.
But the Doctor (it seems) can see no difference, as to Acquiescence in a Case
of Necessity, between what is done by a competent, and what by an incompetent,
Authority. It is strange that a Person so able to judge in other Cases, where
Interest permits him to judge impertially, should not see it. The obvious
difference now mentioned is, that the Deprivation by an incompetent Authority
leaves Subjects under obligation to Duty, from which they are discharged, when
the Authority, though acting unjustly, is notwithstanding competent. Thence it
plainly follows that, where the obligation to Duty is taken away, there
compliance is not sinful. And where it is not sinful, it may be born with in
the Case of that Necessity, which is the result of an irresistible Force. But
where the Obligation to Duty remains, and the compliance is therefore sinful; I
know no tolerable Casuisty that allows it upon such Necessity. The Doctor
himself, as we have seen already, excepts it in his own stating of the Case.
Tenants do not usually hold their Tenures by Oaths: But where they do; I am
sure all creditable Antiquity thought them under stricter Obligations to
performance than (it seems) the Doctor does. The Peace and Tranquillity of the
Public are, no doubt, useful considerations for understanding the sense of
Oaths, in which they oblige to performance. But the Doctor might have been
pleased to consider that here are two public, oftentimes incompareble,
Interests concerned in the Obligation of Oaths. There is the public Interest
of those to whom, as well as of those by whom, the Faith is given. And all fair
and equal dealing Casuists prefer the former before the later in Oaths given
for the Security of others. How than can the Doctor make the good of Sworn
Tenants in general to put restrictions on Oaths given for the Security not of
the Sworn Tenants, but of the liege Lords in general, for whose Security the
Obligations are undertaken? He ought to prove that a Conqueror can daprive a
Bishop of his Spiritual Power if he be pleased to reason upon it. That the
Church of Jerusalem supplied the place of Narcissus, when they thought him
dead, does not prove that they had thought themselves at liberty to have done
so, if they had known him to have been living. Whatever present incapacity he
might have been under for the administration of his Office, they might have
thought themselves obliged to Stay for him, as the Alexandrians did for St.
Athanisius. St. Chrysostomes Case is less for his purpose. He only desired his
People to Submit to the Bishop See Unity of Priesthood Nec. to Unity of Comm.
p. 63. etc.
that should be substituted after his decease. Yet even in that he prevailed
not with them, the Schism of the Joannites being continued many years after,
till an honorable amends was made to his memory. During his own life time he
was so far from it that he challenged their duty to himself, and dissuaded
their complying with the Schismatics.

XIII No reason to reckon on the persumed consent of the Bishops injured by an
Invalid deprivation, for discharging their Subjects Consciences from Duty to
them.
The Doctor here foresees an answer, that I do not find was ever admitted by
the Vindicator, and therefore will only concern them on whose Principles it is
made. That is, that in such difficult Cases, it is presumed that the deprived
Bishop gives his consent, and that this presumption must be reckoned on to
discharge the Subjects from their Duty to him with regard to Conscience. It is
a most extravagant remissness thus to permit the interpretation of the Oaths to
the desires and interests of those who are to be obliged by them, That whenever
the observing them puts them upon any Straights, they shall then be at liberty
to betray their own Faith, and his Security for whose sake they had undertaken
them; and that by so unreasonable a persumtion of his consent whose Security
was thus provided for. It utterly ruins the whole design of giving this
Security by the way of Oaths. That is, to oblige them in such Cases wherein no
considerations can oblige them, but those of Conscience, where their corrupt
affections, should incline them to the contrary, and where there is no visible
force appearing that may make the inconveniences of breaking their Faith
greater than those of keeping it. That is, perfectly to disoblige them in that
very Case wherein the Psalmist does most commend the Observation of Oaths,
Psalm. XV. 4.
That is, when they are to the hindrance of those who must observe them: Nor
does it follow that because the consent of an injured Governor may indeed be
presumed in Acts of Government, for a time, which do not by any consequence
affect his Title; therefore it may be presumed also in Acts wherein his consent
would be inconsistent with his design of continuing his Claim, when he neither
has, nor intends to relinquish it. Nor does it follow that, because in some
Cases, wherein public considerations may prevail with them, good men may
patiently submit to the prejudice of their own Right; therefore they cannot be
good men, who do not submit in Cases, wherein the same considerations of the
Public (of which they only have a Right to judge who have a Right to Authority)
do, in their Judgments, make the insisting of their Rights more necessary and
becoming them. If Rights must always be surrendered by good men as often as ill
men are pleased to invade them; In vain are Laws for determining or defending
them. In vain at least must good men (who ought to be the favorites of wise
and just Lawmakers) expect the benifit of Laws, if they must never plead their
Rights. In vain are good men trusted with such Rights as are the Public
Interests of their Societyes, if they, who are otherwise the more trusty for
being good, must here upon that same consideration of their being good men, be
obnoxious to those impressions of Conscience which must make them think
themselves obliged to betray them; if that very consideration that the public
and their own private Interests are coincident, must make them as prodigal of
the public Interests as they would be of their own. Nor has the Doctor, nor
any other that I know of, insisted on any considerations particular to our
present Case, but only on such general ones, as (if they proved any thing)
would prove in general, that all good men are obliged to surrender their Rights
whenever Wicked men are pleased to invade them.

XIV. Our deprived Fathers give public Significations that they do challenge
their old Rights, as far as is necessary in their Circumstances.
Upon these terms the Doctor is pleased to tell us, that he is fully persuaded
that our ejected Fathers are very worthy and good men. But not without a
manifest design. They must, if they will maintain the place he has admitted
them to in his good opinion, be true to that Idea of good men by which he is
resolved to try them; give up those Rights whose maintenance may oblige him and
his Brethren to any temporal loss. And is not this a very obliging reason to
induce them to it, that they must give up the trust committed to them of the
public Interests of God and of Religion, rather than he and his Brethren
should hazard their Temporal and private Interests in maintaining those Rights,
by contributing no more on their own parts than what is otherwise their duty to
them? They must have agreat stock indeed of that which he is pleased to call
goodness, if this way of Reasoning can make them think themselves obliged to
him. Much more, if, upon this pretense of kindness, he may be allowed to beg,
what he can never be able to prove, that they are obliged in Conscience rather
to surrender their Rights, than that he and his obliged Brethren should be
obliged to any hazard in maintaining them. This one would think too much for
him to persume till he were better able to prove it. But the greater easiness
of presuming, than proving, makes him very hold indeed, when he prosumes that
our H. Fathers themselves give their consent that their Successors should be
acknowledged. Yet he pretends reason why we ought to presume it. And what may
that be? P. ^^
That they have never by any pablick Signification of their wills, laid claim
to the Obedience of their People; and do not now exercise their Episcopal power
as before. But truly Conscienticus Observers of Oaths would rather persume on
the Oaths side than against, it, least otherwise if God should help them no
otherwise than they perform what they have Sworn by him, the from of the Oath
it self should prove a dreadful imprecation. This was, I am sure, regarded in
the Cases of Edward the II. and Richard the II. The Subjects did not content
themselves with a presumed consent to what was done in deposing them, gathered
only from their silence; but they desired and procured an express renonciation
of their Rights, and an express releastment from the Oaths which they had taken
to them formerly. This reason therefore alone would hinder such Persons from
undertaking second inconsistent engagements, that they had not yet been
expressly discharged from the first. So far they would be from reckoning on
their silence alone as sufficient to discharge them. For there are besides,
especially in such Circumstances as ours, obvious reasons why silence only
should not be taken for an Argument of a presumed consent. The fear of those
under whose violence they suffer may hinder them from public Signification of
their dissent, and yet, (it seems) nothing under a public Signification will
satisfy the Doctor. If this fear should less influence so worthy and good Men,
yet the fear of miscarrying might, in Prudence, discourage them from attempting
what they might easily foresee that they should never be able to go thorough
with. And how could our H. Fathert hope to succeed under so manifest and
general a desertion of those who owe Duty to them, and know they do so? But it
is not very Human in our Adversaries by their notorious undutifulness to oblige
our Fathers to this silence, and than Ironically to turn their silence into an
Argument of a presumed consent. In the mean time these considerations make it
plain that it is very possible for them to continue their Claim, though they
should give no public Significations of doing so. And their cnotinuing it,
though without any public Signification, is Sufficient to our obligation with
regard to Conscience, till they give a public Signification that they will
discharge us. For that is sufficient to continue their old notorious Claim they
had to our Duty before the pretended deprivation. I know no other Case wherein
our Advarsaries where concerned, in which they would think it just to presume
that Persons living under a notorious force do therefore surrender their Rights
because they do not further provoke their Oppressors by an open Signification
of their Claim. But if nothing less than a public Signification of their Claim
will content the Doctor, methinks he should have acquainted us what Acts they
are of Episcopal Power which he expects from our H. Fathers as public
Significations of it. Does he expect that they must signify their minds herein
Juridically, as they did formerly, from their Courts and their Cathedrals? But
he knows these are in the Power of those who have pretended to deprive them. He
knows their Officers and Subordinate Governors will not now obey them. Must
they publicly warn those who are in possession of their Cures and Parishes?
But how can they expect more Duty from them who follow the revenues into the
Schism, and who are in actual Communion with, and under the pretended
Obligation of Oaths of Canonical Obedience to, their Rival Schismatics? What
could they expect from such a publication of their dissent, (besides their
gratifying the Doctor) but to expose their own Authority, without any prospect
of public benefit that might countervail it? What but a fruitless exasperation
of their Persecutors? Would he have them fix public Protestations against what
has been done, in public places? But the worthy Dean of Worcester's Case is a
notorious Instance how such a publication would be resented. I hope he will not
own any design of urging them to such difficulties only to gratify him, if he
has really that veneration for them which he Professes to have. By all the
Episcopal Acts that are necessary, and of which their Circumstances are
capable, they do already publicly signify their insisting on their old Title.
I know no Episcopal Acts, necessary for our present condition, but what they
readily exercise as they see occasion for them. They exercise them in Dioceses
not otherwise vacated than by the Schism, without the Ordinaries leave, and to
Persons not owning the Ordinaries Communion, which also our H. Fathers
themselves abstain from. These are public Significations that they do disown
the state communion as Schismatical (not only as using unlawful Offices) which
cannot be justified on any other terms but their challenging their old Rights,
and condemning their Schismatical Rivals.

XV. The Oaths of canonical Obedience to our Fathers still obliging.
So, unreasonable are the gratifications expected by the Doctor from their
Lordships, whereas, all things considered, there is no reason why he should
expect any gratification at all. For if they will not discharge him from his
Duty, he is however resolved not to pay them any. For he puts the Case of a
Bishop forbidding his People, on their Oaths, to accept of any other Bishop,
and then asks, what must be done in such Cases? Is the Church perjured if she
accept of another? will our Adversaries say that she is? He knows our mind very
well that we know not how to excuse her. And what has he to prove the contrary?
Nothing but the voice of flesh and blood; A hard saying! who can bear it? But
this learned divine knows very well that the hardness of a saying (especially
if it be only so to flesh and blood) is no Argument to prove it false. He knows
it was not so in that very passage whence he borrows the Expressions. He knows
it is not so in all Cases of Persecution, and of Doctrins that may deserve to
be maintained by suffering. And he urges nothing peculiar in our present Case.
But he cannot imagine that the welfare and prosperity of mankind does depend
upon so ticklish and uncertain a point as that of an ejected Governors consent.
That, if he refuses to give his Consent, all the Church, or the Nation, must be
made a Sacrifice to him. So he represents the Case very Invidiously. As if the
Competition were between the private Interests of the Governor and the Good of
the Community. He therefore fancies that the false Principles on which this
Nation is built is this, That the Oath that is taken to the Governor, is taken
only for his sake. But though that Principle which he calls folse be really in
the Constitution of some particular Governments, and therefore is not
universally false; yet neither, on the contrary, is it universally true.
Particularly, it is not true in the Case of the Ecclesiastical Government. This
Government is not a Property of the Governors, but a Trust committed to their
management for the Good of others, rather than of themselves. Yet though this
be the Case, it is the public Interest of the whole Society, that all the
Members of it be unanimous in defending the particular Persons in whom the
Government is vested, against a forcible Dispossession. It is the public
Interest, that no Rights whatsoever be overpowered, because if they be, no
Rights whatsoever neither private nor public, can be secure; but may be also
overpowered by the same Precedent. It is yet more particularly the Public
Interest, that those Rights be secured against all force, upon which the
Security of all the Particular Rights of the whole Society depend. Such are
those of the Supreme Governors who if they be not enabled to defend
themselves, can never be able to protect either the whole Body, or any
particular Members of it, in Possession of the Rights to which they were
Entitled by the Constitution. Upon this account it has been accounted the
Interest of Societies in general, that they be unanimous in defending it. For
this will make the Government better able to defend it self, and protect its
Subjects in their Rights, if it have the united assistance of the whole
Society, not subdivided into several little Interests. It has also been thought
the public Interest of Societies rather to be concluded by their Governors,
as to their Practice, in their Judgment concerning the public good, than to be
permited to embroyl their whole Bodies by forming subdivided Factions and
intestine animosities, which is the natural consequence of being allowed the
use of their private Judgments, even concerning the public good in a Society
already constituted. Thus the Doctor may see how even the regard of the public
good may oblige him to hazard all that he calls Ruin, in asserting the Rights
of Suprem Governors, by reasons anticedent to the Oath it self, and
independent on his pretended false Principle, that Oaths are taken only for the
sake of Governors. These Reasons proceed, though the Government of the
Churches had been like many Humane Governments, founded on Humane Institution,
and the agreeing consent of its respective Members. But the reason of hazarding
all for the Rights of our Ecclesiastical Superiors holds more strongly. For God
himself has so constituted his own Church as to oblige us, in regard of all
Interests, to the strict dependence on our Ecclesiastical Governors. As Schism
is the greatest mischief that can befall any Society; so a Society, such as the
Church is, that must subsist over all the World, independent on the Secular
arm, nay under Pesecution from it, must be in the greatest danger of Schism.
And God has accordingly most wisely contrived his Spiritual Society so as to
secure it from that danger, by making it the greatest Interest of the Church in
general, and of all its Members considered severally, to adhere to their
Spiritual Monarch. It is certainly their greatest Interest to keep their
Mystical Communion with God the head of Christ, and with Christ the head of his
Mystical Body the Church. But this, God has made no otherwise attainable but by
maintaining a Communion with his visible Body by visible Sacraments, obliging
himself to ratify in Heaven what is transacted by the visible Governors of the
Church on Earth. Thus he admits to his Mystical Union those who are admitted by
the visible Governors of his Church into his visible Body, and excludes from
the Mystical Union those who are by the Church Governors excluded from the
Union that is visible. So the Apostle St. John reasons that whosoever would
have (...) Communion with the Father and the Son, must not expect it otherwise
than by the Communion with that visible Body of which the Apostle himself was a
Member 1 St. Joh. I. 3. So our Savior himself makes the despising of those who
are Authorized by him to be the despising of himself, and not only so, but of
him also who sent him. And in St. Joh. XVII. he makes his Mystical Union to be
of Christians among themselves as well as with himself and the Father. And upon
this dependend the dreadfulness of Excommunication, and indeed all obligation
to Discipline, and the Penances imposed by it in the Primitive Church But there
was none in the visible constitution of the Church that represented God and
Christ under the Notion of a Head but the Biship. And therefore he was taken
for the principle of Unity, without Union to whom there could be no pretensions
to Union with God and Christ. This was the Doctrine of St. Cyprians Age, and
not his only, but of that of Ignatius, and not only of Ignatius, but of that
which was Apostolical, grounded on the Notions then received among the Jews
concerning their Union with the (...) as the Archetypal High Priest, by their
Union with the High Priest who was visible. How then can the Doctor make any
Interests either public or private, separable from those of adhering to our
Bishops, and thereby avoiding Schism by discountenancing Usurpers of their
lawful Thrones?

XVI. The compliance with Usurpers is also therefore sinful, because Usurping
Bishops are really no Bishops at all.
The Doctor now proceeds in the 4th and last place, to show that this
compliance with the new Intruders is not sinful on account of the Objection
insisted on by the Vindicator, that the Usurpers are in reality no Bishops at
all. This matter were indeed very easy if all the Vindicator had produced for
his purpose had been only a saying of St. Cyprian, and a saying nothing to his
purpose. He might then indeed wonder that the Vindicator should pretend to
raise so great a structure on so weak a foundation. But considering what the
Vindicator had said to prove the saying true, one might rather wonder at the
Doctors confidence in slighting and overlooking what one would therefore think
him conscious that his Cause would not afford an Answer to. The Vindicator had
proved it more than a saying, that it was the Sense, not only of St. Cyprian,
but of all the Bishops of that Age, who all of them denied their Communicatory
Letters to such an Intruder into a Throne not validly vacated, thereby
implying, that they did not own him of their Episcopal College, and therefore
took him for no Bishop at all. The Vindicator showed withal that it was
agreeable to the Principles and Traditions of that Age, derived by Tradition
from the Apostles, and therefore that they had reason to say and think so too.
The Vindicator farther proved it independently on their saying or thoughts
(however otherwise creditable in an affair of this kind) from the nature of the
thing it self, that where there could be but one of a kind, and two Pretenders
could not therefore be both genuine, the validity of one Title is to be
gathered from the invalidity of the other. But to what purpose is it to produce
proofs if the Doctor will take no notice of them? But Cornelious (with relation
to whose Case St. Cyprian uses this Expression, that the latr Bishop is not
second, but none) the Doctor says, had never been deposed, but was still the
possessor, which he takes for a disparity P.
from our deprived Fathers Case. He was deposed as much as it lay in the Power
of the Pagan Emperor to do so. He was set up, not only as the Christian
Bishops then generally were, without his consent, but notoriously against it.
He was as much grieved at it as if a Rival had been set up against him for the
Empire. And he had kept the Sea vacant for a considerable time after the
Martyrdom of Fabianus, doing all that he could do to hinder the Clergy from
meeting in such a See P. 18.
way as was requisite for supplying the vacancy. Let the Doctor himself Judge
what Decius could have done more for deposing him. However the Doctor tells us
that Cornelius was the Possessor. Very true. But not in regard of any
Possession of which the Emperor could deprive him. And indeed in no higher
sense than ours are, as shall appear hereafter. Cornelius was possessed of no
more Temporals of which the State could deprive him. And our H. Fathers are
still, notwithstanding the invaled deprivation, in as firm and indisputable a
Possession with regard to Conscience, as Cornelius. So unhappy the Doctor is in
proving the Doctrine, which he calls the Saying of St. Cyprian, nothing to to
the Vindicators purpose. What the Doctor adds that he cannot believe so great
and wise a Man as St. Cyprian could have been of P. 10.
another opinion from himself, we are not much concerned for till he shall be
pleased to produce some better Arguments why he should not be so. One would
think he wanted better Arguments when he insists upon the fairness of the
Elections of the Usurpers for legitimating their Call. He knows very well the
liberty our Laws allow the Canonical Electors, that they must choose the Person
proposed, or a Praemunire, But he must never expect to be restored to the Rights
of his function if he, and such as he, will not only betray their own Rights,
but plead for their Adversaries Invasion of them. The Doctor Enthymeme the
Vindicator will then be concerned to take notice of when the Doctor can show it
in his Book. But the Doctor thinks he has got an Argument to prove that an
unjust Synod can deprive no more than an incompetent Authority. And why?
Because a Synod proceeding unjustly cannot deprive of the Right. For to him, he
says, it is absurd that any P. 11.
unjust sentence should take away the Right. Hence he iners that a Bishop
substituted in the place of another unjustly deprived by a Synod, must also be
no Bishop, if a Bishop substituted into a place vacated by a Lay deprivation be
also none. This would indeed hold if a Bishop deprived wrongfully by a
competent Authority retained as much Right as he who had been deprived no
otherwise than by an Authority that were incompetent. But the Doctor, methinks,
might easily have discerned the difference if he would have been pleased to
Judge impartially. All the Right that he has who is deprived unjustly, is only
a Right to a juster sentence, either by an Appeal to a Superior Authority, if
the Authority which has deprived him be subordinate; or in the Conscience of
that same Authority which had deprived him, if it be it self Supreme. But till
the competent Authority put him into Possession, he has no Right to the
consequences of Possession, the duties of the Subjects, and the actual
benefits* of his Office. Nor has he any Right to Possess himself of the place
by violence, but must use Legal means of recovering what is already his due in
Conscience. This he knows is the sense of our Legal Courts concerning Sentences
pronunced by competent, though corrupt, Judges. But where the dispossession is
by a Judge not competent, the injured Person may make use of force for
regaining his Possession, and in the mean time he retains an actual Right to
all the duties and benefits of his Office during his dispossession. This our
Laws would allow the Doctor, if the King of France, or any other force not
seconded with a Legal Right to use that force, should dispossess him of his
Fellowship of Wadham College, and substitute a Successor into his Place. Our
Laws would notwithstanding own him as the true Fellow, Entitled to all the
Duties and Privileges of the Fellowship, and would not allow his Rival as a
Fellow, nor indemnify any that should pay him the Dues belonging to the Place,
not allow him the Plea of a forcible entry, if the Doctor should recover his
Possession by force. But none of these things would be allowed him, if himself
had been ajected, and his Rival substituted by the unjust Sentence of a corrupt
Judge, but in a Legal Court. Thus he may see a better Reason than what is given
by him for our Submission to an unjust Deprivation of a Synod. The actual Right
of the Bishop so deprived to the Duty of his Ecclesiastic Subjects, and the
Privileges of his Place, are really taken from him, till he be again possessed
by the Acts of those who are empowered by the Laws of the Society to give
Possession. And all the Right he has, is only in the Consciences of those who
are empowered by the Laws for it, first to be put into the possession, and than
to all the other Benefits and Privildges annexed by the Law to be Legal
Possession. This is very consistent with a paying the Rights consequent to
Possession, to another, till the Possession be Legally restored. But even the
Legal Possession by the Laws of the Church, and with regard to Conscience,
cannot be affected by an invalid deprivation of an incompetent Judge.

XVII. The Evil of Sin, and Scandal in complying, greater than that of
Persecution which is avoided by it.
Having thus, as well as he could, proved this compliance with the Usurper's
unsinful, the Doctor now proceeds to the other limitations of his self evident
Maxim. He therefore endeavors to prove that the Evils following upon disowning
the Intruders are greater and more like to fall out than those which are likely
to follow upon complying with them. I have already proved the contrary. What
now remains, is only to answer what he produces to prove his own Assertion. The
Evils they pretend to avoid by complying, are a SCHISM and a PERSECUTION. These
he says are two Evils as great as can possiably befall the Church. I P. 11
easily agree with him concerning the former, that it is an Evil of the first
Magnitude. But the latter was never counted so by truly Christian Spirits in
the flourishing times of our Religion, Then Martyrdoms were courted with as
much ardency and ambition as Preferments have been since, as Sulpitius Severus
has long since observed. Then the Sulp. Sever. Sacr. Hist. L. 11.
Apologists tell their Persecutors that it was rather for their sakes than
their own that they vouchsafed to write Apologies. Then they always gave thanks
when they received the sentance of death for so glorious a Cause. Then they
bemoaned the unhappiness of their own times if they had no Persecutions, as
Origin expressly: Then nothing troubled them more Orig in Number. Hom. X.
than that they lost their lives cheaply upon their beds, as appears in St.
Cyprian de Mortalitate. The Doctor is no doubt well acquainted with Ignatiu's
Epistle to the Romans, full of an ardent zeal of losing his Life for Christ,
and earnest expostolations with the Romans that they might not so much as use
their interest with God in Prayers for his deliverance, telling them that he
would take it for an Argument of their good will to him if they would not be so
desirous of saving his Flesh, and of their ill will if they should prevail with
God for his safety, even by an interposition of an extraordinary and miraculous
Providence. And when Blondel takes upon him to judge of the Heroical ardor of
that Age by the cold and degenerous Notions of his own; our most learned Bishop
Pearson has proved his Actions far from bei^ng singular by many Pearson, vind.
Ign, Part 11. c. 9
more very express Testimonies of those most glorious times of our Christian
Religion. Nor are the Canons against the provoking Persecutors, which the
Doctor takes notice of, near so old as these great examples of desiring and
meeting Persecution, nor indeed till the abatement of the first zeal appeared
in the scandalous lapses of warm pretenders. None such were made whilst they
were true to their profession, so that the consenting Practice of the best
times was far from the Doctors mind in reckoning Persecution among the greatest
Evils that can possibly befall the Church. They did not take it for an evil, but
rather for a favor and a benefit. And though it were allowed to be an evil,
yet the utmost that can be made of it is that it is an evil only of Calamity,
the greatest of which kind Conscientious Casuists have never thought comparable
with the least evil of Sin. I might add also, that Scandal also, as it is a
cause of Sin, is a greater Evil than Persecution. Our Savior himself
pronounces woe to him by whom the Scandel comes, and the Fire of Hell which
never shall he quenched. And these are Evils which the Doctor himself must own
to be worse than that of Persecution. The Doctor therefore must not insist on
the Persecution avoided by this compliance with the Intruders, till he has
cleared the condition of avoiding it, from not only Sin, but Scandal also. If
he thinks deposing all Bishops in general, to be in earnest a just cause for
him to show his fortitude, let him bethink himself how the matter is now in
Scotland. It were easy by just consequences from the Grounds and Principles of
Ecclesiastical Commerce, to show how that Case would concern him in England, if
it were convenient. If Christ were equally to be enjoyed in the Communion of
the true Bishops and their Schismatical Rivals, we should be as willing as he
to keep off the Evil day as long as we could. Flesh and Blood would easily
persuade us to it, if it were safe. But he knows very well, that the Catholic
Church in the purest Ages, never believed our mordern Latitudinarian Fancies,
that Schismatics have any Union with Christ, whilst they are divided from his
Mystical Body the Church. If this were true, or if he thought it himself true;
I do not understand how he could reckon Schism among the greatest Evils that
can befall the Church, if even Schismatics may enjoy Christ, though they be in
open Hostility with his Authorized Representative.

. XVIII. The Evil of Schism not avoided, but incurred, by complying with the
Usurpers.
As for the Case of Schism which he pretends to be avoided by them by their
compliance with the Usurpers, this Evil is so far from being avoided, as that
it has been occasioned by it. The Doctor cannot deny but that their
communicating with the Intruders, has occasioned a notorious breach of
Communion, which on one side or the other, must needs be Schismatical. All
therefore that he can pretend, is, that they, by complying, are not chargable
with the crime of the Schism that has been occasioned by it. How so? it is
because if we had also done as they have done, there had been no Schism. Very
true. But it had been full as true, if they had done as we have done. This
pretense therefore leaves the Criminalness of the breach as uncertain as
before, and necessarily puts them (for trial of that) on the merit of the
Cause. And if that be enquired into, all the Presumptions, as well as the
particular Proofs, are in favor of us, and against them. We were plainly one
before this breach. As therefore the branch it self is new, so the guilt of it
must be resolved into the Innovations that occasioned it, which will, by
unavoidable consequence, make them chargeable with the breach who were guilty
of the Innovations. The Innovations that have caused the breach, are the
disowning our old Bishops, and substituting others in their Places, whilst
themselves are living, and continue their Claim, and are not deprived by any
Authority that had really a Power to deprive them. But in these instances,
they, not we, have been the Aggressors and Innovators. Do we own the Old
Bishops for the true Bishops of these Sees, of which they have pretended to
deprive them? And did not they do so too, as well as we, before the
Deprivation? And what had they to pretend for themselves, why they do not so
still. Besides this very Sentence of Deprivation, which the Doctor owns to be
invalid? And how can they justify their disowning them upon a Sentence
confessedly invalid? This new behavior of theirs, they must wholly own, as it
is new, to be their own. We only continue to own our Holy Fathers, as Dr. Hody
himself and his Brethren did formerly. As for the Second Act, the setting up
new Bishops in opposition to our Fathers, they cannot excuse themselves from
being the Innovators, and concerning us, they cannot pretend it. They have made
the new Bishops who consecrated them, and they also who own them by
communicating with them, or their Consecrators, These have entirely been the
Acts of the Ecclesiastics. Yet without these, all that the Lay-Power could
have done, could never have formed a Schism, nor divided our Communion. And as
to what has been done on both sides, we can better excuse our selves, than they
can. Could they and we have consented to have acted Uniformly, there could have
been no Schism: But we can better account for our not complying with them, than
they can for not complying with us. On their side, they have nothing to plead
but worldly Considerations. They could not doubt of the Lawfulness with regard
to conscience, of doing that on their side, which, if done, had prevented the
Schism. They can pretend no obligation in Conscience, for setting up other
Bishops, as we can, for not owning them; till they can prove us fairly
discharged in Conscience, which they, as well as we, were obliged in, in regard
of the old true Proprietors. They could pretend no cementing Principles
essential to the subsistence of the Church, as a Society, and a Communion
independent on the State, obliging them to comply with these encroachments of
the Politicions, for making Spiritual considerations to give way to Temporals.
They could pretend no Catholic Authority of the Church, in any Age, approving
what was done by them, as we can of the best and purest Ages, for what has been
done by Us. They could not pretend any such united Authority, of even the
Church of England, before this change, for many things wherein we differ now,
as we can. So far they have been from avoiding Schism by these compliances, or
from purging themselves from the guilt of the Schism which has followed
thereupon.

XXI. The abuses that may follow on Compliance, are a just reason to refuse it,
where it is not otherwise, in Conscience, due
One Inconvenience the Doctor himself foresees, which he seems to own as justly
chargeable on their Principle: That by a submission to the Possessor, the Civil
Governor is like to be encouraged to tyrannize over the Church, and to turn
out such Bishops as he does not like, whenever he pleases, though never so
unjustly. This must necessarily be the Consequence of defending such Practices
in such a way as the Doctor has done, not by conside rations particular to the
present Case, but by such Topics as the Doctor has insisted on, which (if they
prove any thing) proceed in general, that is, prove Bishops obliged in general,
to yield their Rights as often as they are invaded, and Subjects as generally
absolved from their Duty to such Bishops though the Bishop should think fit to
assert their Rights. Both of these are asserted by him on account of the
irresistibleness of the force which brings on the violence, which is an
Argument that must always hold on the side of the State, in all Disputes that
she has with the Church. These things asserted by Ecclesiastics, such as the
Doctor is, must for ever encourage the Laity, who are not acted by great skill,
as well as good inclinations to Religion, to believe they do well in what they
do of this kind, and therefore to repeat it without any scruple. But how does
the Doctor pretend to avoid this Consequence? He first pretends that the same
Inconvenience is in all manner of Government. Particularly, that a Synod may
also be encouraged to ^. 12.
unjust Sentences by our acknowledging an Obligation to submit to such
Sentences, if passed Synodically. But we are far from making Abuses Arguments
for denying just Rights: Nor does our Cause require it. We are only for denying
Obedience to an incompetent Authority, that invades Rights which do not belong
to it. And for this it is certainly a very just reason for denying them what
they have no Right to, if yielding will encourage them to the like Injuries and
Usurpations frequently, which it must needs do, if they must never expect
opposition, how frequently soever they are pleased to renew the Injuries; nay,
if Persons concerned against them, shall encourage them in the belief that they
are no Injuries at all. However if the Injustice had been equal in the
encroachments of incompetent Judges and Synods; yet the danger is not. In
Synods nothing can be transacted but by a majority of the Episcopal Order. So
the Episcopacy it self is secured by a majority of Suffrages against any
mischief that can be acted against it Synodically. But in a Lay Judicatory, the
whole Authority may combine against them, and (God knows) is too likely to do
so in these days of Irreligion, when their Revenues are more regarded than
their Function. This Authority therefore is not to be trusted to dearest
Friends, who are in any disposition to be otherwise. Much less to those who are
under present jealousies and disaffections to their whole Order.

XX. No security ^ere that compliance will not be abused.
The Doctor adds Secondly, that here in England it is not the will of the
Prince that can turn out a Bishop. And that King and Parliament may by
compliance be encouraged to depose Bishops at pleasure, that Supposition, he
says, is wild and extravagant. As if he had never heard of a Parliament, even
in England, that did not only deprive Bishops at pleasure, but Episcopacy it
self. As if he knew not that Men of the same principles are notwithstanding
qualified to serve in our Parliaments As if he were perfectly ignorant of the
Case of Scotland, where notwithstanding the interest the Bishop have by the
Fundamentals of the Government, as on of the Three States in which the
Legistative Power is seated; Yet not Bishops only, but Episcopacy has been
extirpated, as far as the Votes of the Laity can contribute to the extirpation
of it. There the Doctor may see, what he seys he cannot imagine, that what he
calls King and Parliament can concur for the deprivation, not of a Bishop only,
but of Episcopacy. And we have little security that it shall not be put in
Practice, if we must by Principles, as he does, allow them to do it here, upon
an occasion that they shall judge Extraordinary. That Extraordinary occasion is
not very difficult to be found by them, who make Spiritual considerations give
way to Temporal. The use of the Cathedral Revenues for carrying on the present
expensive War, is likely enough to be judged so. And the Psalmist, who was
himself a King, has warned us not to put confidence in Princes. The Doctor
indeed tells us, that the Bishops here have the same Security that other
Subjects have. I am sure they ought to have it, not only for the reason of the
things, but by our Constitution. Their Rights ought to be accounted more sacred
than any other Rights or Liberties of the Subjects and therefore more
inviolable. All the Sacredness that has been made use of by our Legislators for
securing them, has been derived from the interposition of the Clergy, who, if
they be not treated as sacred themselves, can never secure other Rights which
have no other sacredness than what they derive from the intervention of the
Clergy. But if he considers how little Laws often signify considering those who
are allowed the Authority of Authentically Interpreting and Executing them, and
what Principles are now allowed in those who are thought qualified for that
Authentical Interpretation and Execution; I know no sort of Subject that he
could pitch on that either have been, or are likely to be, treated so
arbitrarily by our Legislators. The Laity in Henry the VIIIths time, dissolved
whole Bodies of the Clergy, and alienated their revenues, without any consent
of those Bodies, or of any Authorized to represent them, without any Legal
trial or eviction in any form of Law. When has any such thing been ever
attempted against any Lay Bodies by their Representatives in Parliament, who
were chosen to preserve, not to oppress, the Liberties of those who chose them.
The other States have presumed to eject the Spiritual State, who as a State,
have as sacred a Right in the Fundamental Constitution of the Legislative Power
as themselves. And the Commons have turned that President against the Temporal
Lords. What if the Lords Spiritual and Temporal should turn it upon the Commons
also? Could they think this agreeable to the design of the Constitution? The
Law certainly never intended such violences between those who are equally
fundamental to the Legislative Power, and who have no Legal Judges or Tribunals
appointed by the Law for determining differences between them by way of
Judicial process and Authority. Thus the Doctor may plainly see, that in the
Opinion of those who justify these proceedings, and who are therefore likely to
plead them as Precedents, Clergymen have not the same Securities that oath
Subjects have, if Persons so Principled, make a Majority in our Legislative
Assemblies. I say no more at present for making Application, how probable it is
for such Principles to gain acceptance with the majority. I should be as
willing as any to presume better things, if I could see reason to believe them.
But our best security is certainly to assert Principles that my not put it in
the power of any to ruin our Spiritual Society, and to be true to them. He
adds, There is nothing more manifest than that this Inconvenience is not so
likely to happen P. 12.
as those Evils we endeavor to avoid. Why so? These, he says, are certain and
present, That only possible. If they be certain and present how can they
pretend that, by their compliance, they have avoided them? If they have not
avoided them by complying; how can they pretend that the benefits of their
compliance can have made amends for all the further Injuries they may expose
the Church to for the future, by suffering such ill practices to pass into
Precedents for want of a timely opposition? Methinks he should have made the
avoidal of the feared evils certain and present, not the Evils themselves, if
he would have spoken consequently to the exigence of his Case. But it is too
true, that the Evils themselves are present, and that their Compliance has not
avoided them: The Schism is so notoriously. And so is the Persecution also to
all that will be true to their old Principles, and to their old Communion. For,
what favor has been shown on condition of deserting old Principles, can by no
fair Interpretation be extended to that Church, whose Principles they were. So
far as they hold firm to their old Principles, they are still liable to the
Persecution; and so far as they desert them, so far they also cease to be of
the Church, whose Principles they have deserted. Few Persecutions have been so
severe, but that they might have been avoided by desertion. But the further
Inconvenience likely to follw on this compliance, is more than possible. It is
as probable as most events are that depend on Humane Wills. It is a natural
Consequence, and a Consequence likely to be drawn by Persons so Principled; and
there are but too many that are so, and too tempting occasions to put them in
mind of, and to engage them on, such Inferences.

XXI. That abuse it a greater mischief than that it can be made a mends for by
the Doctors Expedients.
Yet 3ly, should this Inconveniences follow; the Doctor thinks himself provided
against it. Though the Government should be so very dissolute as to turn out
frequently the Bishops of the Church without any just Cause; yet who (says he)
can look upon that mischief to be comparable to that of a Schism and a
Persecution? If he could find in his heart to be as much concerned for a more
noble Society, when it can entitle him to nothing but sufferings, as he is for
a less noble one, that can give him revenues; I cannot think he could be so
indifferent for bearing frequent Injuries by invalid Deprivations of its
Governors, which cannot discharge Subjects from their Duty in Conscience to
those which are so deprived, He would be sensible, how this would tend to the
dissolving such a Society that must have its Governors removable at the
pleasure of a hostile Society, whenever but pleased to invade Rights not
belonging to it, without any remedy or relief by insisting on their own Rights,
which the Doctors Principles make unpracticable. And what Schisms or
Persecutions can be worse to a Society than dissolution? He would be sensible,
there is now a Schism, and a Persecution. That our late common Body is now
divided, that his late Brethren upon Principles of Conscience are now
Persecuted; if he could not otherwise believe, he would feel, if he had the
compassion of a living Member: If he had the Zeal of the Apostle, when he used
that passionate Expression, Who is offended, and I burn not? If he had any
sense of the afflictions of Joseph. He would be sensible of the many future
Schisms that must follow upon the frequency of these Encroachments, upon his
own loose Principles, that neither allow Bishops to assert their own just
Rights, nor oblige Subjects to stand by them when they do so, as long as there
shall be any Bishops that shall think themselves obliged to assert them, and
Subjects that think their doing so will not discharge themselves from Duty to
them; that is, as long as there are any that are true to the concenting
Principles of the Church as it is a Society and a Communion. He would be
sensible, that upon such Brethren as these, such frequent encroachments would
draw frequent Persecutions. So far his Principles and Practices are from
securing our common Body from Schisms and Persecutions. But it seems he has
forgot all concern for his old Brethren upon the surest most uniting Principles
of Brotherhood; nay for our common Body, and of the terms upon which it was
common to us formerly. If he had not, he would not think our Common Body so
unconcerned in our Divisions, and our Persecutions. But what, says the Doctor,
can the suffering of a few P. ^^.
particular men be, when compared with the Peace and Tranquillity of the whole
Church besides? Not so much undoubtedly, if the few had been Men of singular
Opinions, of no consequence for the good of the whole; if they had not been
such as all ought to have been, if they would cement into a Body by any solid
uniting Principles. The suffering of such, how few soever, would have involved
the whole Church, if all its Members had been such as they should have been. It
is therefore the unhappiness of a Church that such Members are but few. So far
it is from being a Consideration to be boasted of that the Majority avoids
sufferings by doing otherwise than becomes them. If the Doctors regard to
Multitude alone had been true; then whenever there was an Apostaoy, the Church
would be, by so much, the more happy, by how much, the more had been engaged in
the Apostasy. These Multitudes would call themselves the Church as confidently
as the Doctor and his Party do now, and would as little regard the sufferings
of a few particular Men as our late Brethren do. I am sure the ancient
Catholics did not so little regard the sufferings of a few particular Men, in
a common Cause. In the Eastern Empire there were very few that incurred the
displeasure of Constantius besides Athanasius and Paulus. In the West no more
than five Bishops are reckoned that suffered for their constancy. The rest
might have pretended generally to as much Peace and Tranquillity as our
Adversaries do now. Yet he was not than taken for a true Catholic, who was as
unconcerned as the Doctor is, for the few particular Men that suffered. Nor do
I see but that the Cause of Episcopal Authority, and Ecclesiastical Subjection,
is of as great and common importance to the Church in general as any one
Article of the Faith can be. This the Vindicator has proved, nor has the Doctor
vouchsafed any Answer to what he has produced for it. Indeed the whole
Expedient insisted on by the Doctor seems very strange to me, that he should
think to secure the Church from Schism by allowing Subjects to desert their
Ecclesiastical Superiors on pretense of irresistible force, and by by
renouncing all Principles that may oblige Ecclesiastical Subjects to adhere to
their Ecclesiastical Governors, whenever the State shall be pleased to
refuse to pretect them, and thereby renouncing all Principles that may oblige
them in Conscience to continue a Society independent on the State. These
Principles and Practices leave them at liberty to form and maintain as many
Schisms as they please, when the Decrees as the Church are not seconded by the
Civil Power. How then can the maintaining so licentious Principles be taken for
an Expedient for preventing Schism? The Doctor withal would have us consider,
That it was not for the Bishops that P. ^^.
the Church was established; but the Bishops were appointed for the sake of the
Church. Hence he concludes, that it is not the welfare of the Bishops as the
Bishops are these or or those Men, much lose of some few particular Bishops but
the welfare of the whole Church in general that is chiefly to be regarded. This
is a pretense for all Rebellions and Innovations whatsoever, to make the
Persons invested with Authority, to be regarded only as private Persons, whose
Interests are different from those of the Public, which the Innovators pretend
to promote by removing their private Persons, and substituting others in their
stead. Nor indeed need any Rebel desire any more. Let the Head of the Rebellion
be the particular Person, and the controversy is soon determined. He will
pretend no quarrel with the Public, but only whether he or the present
Possessor shall be the particular Person that is to be entrusted with the
Public; and to be sure, will pretend it to be for the Public Interest, that
of the two, himself should rather be the Man, if for no other reasons, at least
for those of the Doctor, viz. Irresistible force, and the Peace and
Tranquillity of the whole, which he is otherwise resolved to disturb. And the
same pretense is applicable to any other from of Government as well as that
which is Monarchical. The Administration of it cannot be managed but by some
few chosen out of the whole Body, and then those few are only so many
particular Persons, against whom the Public Good may still be pretended, if
others may judge of it. But this is so general a Principle of Rebellions and
intestine discords, that all well constituted Societies have used all means
they could think of, to secure themselves against it. How private soever the
Interest might seem to particular Persons to have the Government committed to
them, or to be invested in a Right to it, yet when once they were possessed, or
had a Right, the Public has thought it self concerned to oppose, and to
provide against, a violent dispossession, and has allowed no pretenses of
Public Good, where the dispossession could not be compassed by any other means
than by force. Hence these very severe Laws against any thing that might look
like force to the Persons of Governors, especially those that were Supreme,
Hence their Arts of making their Persons Sacred, to secure them from those
violences against which the force even of the Community it self was not able to
Secure them. What need of all this care, if they had thought it fit still to
have regarded them only as particular Persons? The Book of Judith, when it
would express how the Nations despised King Nabuchodonosor, does it thus: He
was before them as one Man Jud. I. 11. What difference is there between this
language, and that of the Doctor? The same Societies, have also taken security
that no pretense of public good should ever be made use of against the Persons
of Governors, by allowing none others for Judges of the public good besides
the Persons invested with the Government, and allowing them so to Judge as to
conclude all Private Persons. And there was reason why Societies should be so
concerned against violent removals of their Governors, because they cannot be
violently removed whithout violence to the whole Societies which are obliged to
defend them. If therefore they do their duties, the whole Societies must suffer
violence, and he overpowered in the removal, which must consequently subject
them to the arbitrary pleasure of the forcible Usurper. And to take the Doctors
way is yet worse, to desert their Governors. This perfectly dissolves the
Government and disables the Governor to do any thing of his Duty to the
Public. Thus it appears how destructive it is to his whole Cause to own the
deprivations of our H. Fathers invalid. Where then can be his Answer, if even
himself grants all that we are concerned to assert in the Question principally
disputed between us?

XXII. The main dedsign of the Doctors new Book in arguing from Facts already
overthrown by the Vindicator, yet no notice taken of what was there said.
But far be it from me that I should oblige him to any unwary Concessions, if
at the same time he has produced any thing solid in his Book to prove them
unwary. I am therefore willing to consider the main design of his Book, if I
can even there find any thing that can deserve the name of an Answer, that is,
That is not either acknowledged to be unsufficient by himself, or that had not
before been prevented by his Adversary. And what is, upon these accounts, made
unserviceable, cannot certainly, in the sense of any just Judge, be taken for a
solid and satisfactory Answer. The main design of his Answer to the Vindication
is still to carry on the Argument by him imputed to his Baroccian M. S. to
prove by an enumeration of Facts (which the Doctor will needs have pass for
Precedents) that Deprivations by the Lay-Power have been Submitted, to, and the
Intruders owned by the Subjects of the Dioceses out of which the Lawful
Possessiors had been Uncanonically ejected. Now this being nothing but the old
Argument, I cannot, for my part, see any reason the Doctor can pretend, why the
old Answer of the former part of the Vindication may not still be insisted on
as sufficient, till at least, he offer at something to the contray, which he
has not as yet so much as attempted. The Vindicator has there shown the
Unconclusiveness of that whole Topic from naked Facts, without something more
particularly insisted on for proving them Justifiable by true and defensible
Principles. Especially in those lower Ages in which the Author of the Baroccian
M. S. deals, and to which the Doctors new Examples are reducible, the
Vindicator has shown, that nothing is to be presumed to be well done, which has
no other Evidence of its being so than that it was actually practiced in those
degenerous Ages. And what has the Doctor attempted to the contrary? Nothing,
but that he has added some New Facts to those enumerated by his Baroccian
Author, and that he has endeavored to defend some of the old Facts that they
were such as he pretended them. But neither of these things can pass for
Answers, whilst that Part of the Vindication remains unanswered. For how can he
secure his New Facts when all of their kind have been proved unconclusive? And
to what purpose does he endeavor to prove those few, he has meddled with, of
his Authors Facts, to have been for his purpose, when the former Part of the
Vindication has already evidenced that though they were so, that would not be
sufficient for carrying his Cause?

XXIII. The Doctor himself is unwilling to stand by the Consequences of such
like Facts as himself produces.
So far he has been from Answering, that himself confirms the Vindicator's
sense upon this Argument. Preface to the Reader: Should our Adversaries be able
to produce such an Example (as I think they will never be able) 'twill
advantage their Cause but little, especially if it be one of the LATER AGES,
since it is not agreeable to the Practice of the Church in GENERAL.
He professes beforehand his own unwillingness to be concluded by such
Instances as himself has produced, though they should appear to be against him.
Why so, if there had been any reason that he should have been concluded by
them? Why so, if he did not thereby own that the Reasons given by the
Vindicator against the Argumentativeness of such Facts were Solid and
concluding? And how then can he find in his heart to insist principally in his
following Book on that very kind of Facts, which he has acknowledged so unsafe
to be relied on in his Preface? He cannot pretend to argue ad Hominem, when the
Vindicator had so expressly entered his Exceptions against that whole Argument.
He cannot do it in his own Person, when he professes himself unwilling to stand
by the consequen ces of it. And how can he have the confidence to obtrude that
upon Us, which he does not believe himself? In what sense can he take this
whole reasoning for Argumentative when it does not proceed ex concessis; when
it proceeds on one Premiss, at least, not granted by either of the Parties
cancern'd in the Dispute, neither by Us, nor even by himself? How can he
possibly mistake a Book, which proceeds principally on such Reasoning as this,
for a Solid and satisfying Answer.

XXIV. The Doctors remark against the Reasoning of the First Parts of the
Vindication concerning the Possession of Cornelius turned against himself.
Thus it appears that the Principal Answer of the Vindicator to the Doctors
Book remains still in its full strength untouched and unconcerned in all the
Doctor has said in his new Book. What is it therefore that he can pretend to
have Answered in it? What is it that either makes his Book need, or his
Brethren so clamorous for, a Reply? Has he Answered the Vindicators Argument
for Us, from Facts more justifiable, more agreeable to Principles, and to
Principles more certain and indisputable in the times of greatest
Ecclesiastical Authority, in the earliest, and purest, and unanimous Ages? On
this he has bestowed one single Paragraph, in which he has offered nothing that
can affect the principal Lines of the Vindicators Reasoning and Hypothesis. C.
1.. 9 P. 9. 10.
All that he pretends is to observe one single disparity between the Case of
the Primative Christian Bishops and OURS. Yet so unhappily, that even that
disparity, upon a closer examination is likely to prove none at all. He tells
Us that Cornelious was in Poffession when Novatian was set up against him. Very
true. But how can he deny that our Fathers were in as true a Possession, with
regard to Conscience, when their Rivals Usurped their Thrones, as Cornelius
was? He can pretend no Possession of which our Fathers were deprived but such
as depended on the pleasure of the pretended Secular Magistrate. The Secular
Act could not pretend to deprive them of any thing but what was Secular, their
Baronies, their Revenues, the Privileges annexed to their Function by the
fovour of the Secular Powers. And can he pretend that Cornelius was possessed
of any thing of which the Magistrate could deprive him? As for Spiritual
Rights, I cannot see the least disparity but that OUR Fathers were as properly
possessed of them as HE was; as properly as any can be in a State of
Persecution and independence on the Civil Magestrate. OUR Bishops were
Consecrated and Installed with all the Solemnities requisite for a complete
Possession, before the contrary encroachments were thought of. That Possession
was acknowledged and ratified by all the Acts of intercourse and Spiritual
Correspondence, by which any Spiritual possession can be acknowledged by our
Natinal Church of England. This Possession of Spirituals has not been touched
by any Spiritual Authority, that can be pretended a proper Judge of Spirituals,
that might discontinue this Possession as to Spirituals, and with regard to
Conscience. All this OUR H. Fathers can truly plead, for their Possession as to
Spirituals, at the time of the Schismatical Consecrations. And what can the
Doctor say more for the Possession of Cornelius against Novation? His District
and Jurisdiction as to Spirituals, were manifestly not owned by Cornelius for
favors of the Magistrate. This being so, we need not depend on a SAYING (the
Vindicator proved it independently on St. Cyprian's saying it) that SECOND
BISHOPS are NO BISHOPS for proving his Intruders to be NONE. The Doctor C. 1.
P. 10.
himself confesses, that a Second, that is, a Schismatical Bishop, an Intruder
into a See already filled and possessed, is no Bishop, is confessed to be St.
Cyprian' s Doctrine. And this has now appeared to be their Case for whom he is
here concerned.

XXV. The Doctor's Book offorded no Subject for a Reply, but what would be
Personal.
Besides; these great neglects and omissions of the Doctor were so separable
from an accurate management of the Cause and so peculiar to his Person, that I
knew not how to secure my Answer from meddling with his Person, with whom I had
no mind to deal in any other way than that of Civility and Respect. In
reference to the Principal Argument relating to Conscience, he has brought so
little New, as would hardly afford Subject for a useful Answer. Yet the showing
that he did so, which was requisite to be done, if an Answer were made at all,
methought looked like a design of exposing his Person, which I was willing to
be excused from. I have always liked those Defenses best, which had the least
mixture of Personal considerations, not only as more Christian, but also as
more useful to those who are disengaged. This made me think it more advisable
to wait till either the Doctor himself, or some other able Author would be
pleased to attacque the principal strength of the Vindication.

XXVI. The Doctor's turning the Dispute to later Facts draws it from a short
and decisive, to a tedious and litigious, Issue.
But the principal discouragement of all from Answering was, that the Doctor
seemed to me to draw the whole management of this Cause from a shorter and
decisive, to a tedious and unconclusive, Issue. The Doctor's Talent lies in
History, and therefore he is willing to bring this Question also to an Argument
that may give him an occasion to show his skill in History. Had not this been
his Case, why could he not be prevailed on, to say something to the reason of
the thing? Especially having in the Title of his Book, promised a stating of
the Question. But where he pretends to have performed his Promise, I cannot
guess. I can find nothing in his Book, but what concerns bare matter of Fact.
Had he offered at any stating of the Question, why would be not at least take
notice of the distinction of Facts observed by the Vindicator, of the Facts
excepted against, and the Facts allowed by him, for Argumentative? Had he not
allowed the Distinction, at least he ought not to have produced more Facts of
the Exceptionable kind, till he had either answered the Vindicator's Exceptions
against them, or at least produced stronger Arguments of his own, to prove his
own Facts also Argumentative. If he did not think fit, either to Answer the
Vindicator's Reasons, or to produce his own, why did he not confine himself to
the Practice of the first Ages proceeding on Pinciples than received by the
whole Catholic Church, and Fundamental to all the Discipline then practiced?
Had he done so, the Vindicator professing himself ready to join issue with him
on those Terms, had been indeed obliged to Answer him But how can he expect an
Answer, when the Vindicator's Exceptions against the whold kind of Facts he
deals in, remain, I do not say unanswered only, but, not so much as attempted
by him.

XXVII. We have no reason to suffer our selves to be overruled by him in these
Arts of diverting Us.
What himself designed in so unreasonable ways of proceeding, I will not
pretend my self so privy to his thoughts, as to be able to determine. But it is
easy to observe the interest of his Cause in it. It shows indeed a greater
variety of his Reading, than if he had confined himself to the Precedents of
more decisive times But withal, it obliges Us, if we follow him in all his
Instances, to write larger Books than we can ever hope to get printed in the
Difficulties of the Press on our side. We cannot hope to satisfy him, by
answering some of his Instances, if we do not all. And why must we be obliged
to follow a way of his prescribing, which we cannot hope to go through, when we
can reduce the whole Dispute to narrower, and yet more conclusive bounds? He
gives us small encouragement to gratify him in this Case, when he tells us that
he will not be concluded by what we See above, XXIII.
can say upon it, though we should prove the Practice of these later Ages, from
which he will not be restrained, otherwise than he pretends it was. And why
must we take so much pains to no purpose? Why should he desire it of us, it his
design had been to satisfy Conscience, either his own, or ours?

XXVIII. We decline his Topic of Facts, rather because it is undecisive than
because we think it disadvantageous to Us.
Considering the difficulties of our Case, how hard it is even to get small
Discourses printed, it concerns Us to endeavor all prudent Arts of contracting
the Question into as narrow a compass as we can, and by no means to suffer our
selves to be distracted to impertinent Arguments, till what we have to say on
pertinent ones be first satisfied. This will be sufficient, perhaps more than
so, to fill up what can be allowed, whilst the Intruders have the power of the
Press. We shall not envy the Doctor the pleasure of seeing his Challenges and
Gantlets refused, if he will not be pleased to confine them to more useful
Subjects. He has already seen a Specimen of what might have been answered to
all the Facts he has or can produce, in what the Vindicator has said to the
Facts insisted on in his Baroccian M. S. The Ages he deals in, were very
degenerous from the Piety and Skill of their Primitive Ancestors, to whose
Judgments we appeal. Yet I do not think any of them so far debased, as that
they either did, or would have insisted on the Doctor's Plea, that Lay
Deprivations were sufficient to discharge them from their Duty to their
Spiritual Superiors. He that is so forward to make Challenges, would do well to
show us one single Instance wherein this Doctrine was directly defended, I do
not say by the Ecclesiastics only, whom I take for the most competent Judges
of Ecclesiastical Doctrines, but even by the Parasites of the Lay Power. For my
part, I remember not one single one. The Emperors themselves who acted so
precipitantly as to deprive without Synods, did however after use their
uttermost endeavors to get a Synodical ratification of what they had done
before by violence and indirect artifices. So far even they were sensible how
little what they did of that kind, would be regarded in relation to Conscience.
This is sufficient to let the Doctor see that our declining this Topic, is not
for want of sufficient advantage against him in it, if the Press had been as
free for Us, as it is for him; but because it is impertinent and unsatisfactory.

XXIX. For want of some other Subject relating to the Vindication, we here
pitch on the Case of Abiathar.
This I thought sufficient to show how little the Vindicator is obliged to
return any Reply to the Doctor's pretended Answer, till the Doctor can be
prevailed on to try his skill on the former and principal part of the
Vindication. But this is so particular to the Doctor's Personal management of
the Cause, that I could not think this alone worthy the Reader's trouble in
perusal of it, without some other Subject of more importance to the Cause it
self. This therefore made me think of selecting something of the Doctor's Book,
which (though it cannot be taken for an Answer to the Vindication, which had
said nothing concerning it) yet might give an occasion for clearing a
particular Prejudice against us, insisted on by many more besides him,
abstracting from the Principal Topic of his Book concerning Facts in general.
Of his kind, I take the Case to be of Solomon's deposing Abiathar, which may,
even on the Doctor's account, deserve a more particular consideration, because
he seems to have taken the greatest pains, in amassing the several Hypotheses
relating to it, of any one particular in his Book. Here they find a High Priest
1 Kings II. 1.
removed from his Office by Solomon, and another, that is Zadoc, V. 35.
put in his room, yet without the least scruple concerning the Validity and
Acceptableness of Zadok's Ministry, with relation to God and Conscience. This
they think exactly parallel to our present Case.

XXX. This Fact is not commended in the Scripture as a Precedent.
But Fist, This Fact is barely related in the Scripture, without any Censure on
it, whether it was well, or ill done. And it is not indeed condemned, so
neither is it excused or justified from any Right asserted in Solomon to do it.
Yet the whole force of Reasoning from it as a Pre sedent, must suppose it well
done, for which they have not the least intimation in the Holy Writers. The
whole Enquiry, whether it was well, or ill done, must therefore be derived from
other Reasonings from the sense of that Age, by which it may appear whether
Solomon had any Right in Offices of the Priesthood, by which he might be
enabled to grant, or hinder, the Practice of it, so as to oblige God to ratify
what he did concerning it. And for this it is much more certain.

XXXI. The Magistrate could not by the Doctrine of that Age, have any direct
Power over the Priesthood.
2dly, That the Magistrate had no direct Power of intermedding in the Offices
of the Priesthood, according to the sense of the Sacred Writers. This appears
not only from Facts much more Argumentative than this is, but also from
Principals professedly asserted in those times The Facts are, Readiness being
deprived of his Kingdom, for presuming to sacrifice in the Absence of Samuel,
though he pretended a 1 Samuel XIII. 12.
force that obliged him to do so. Then also the Fact relating to Uzzah, 2 Samuel
VII. 6, 7.
who was struck dead upon the Place, for presuming out of good will, to stay
the Ark, in danger (ash thought) of being overturned, only because he was not
one of the Priests by Office, who were alone allowed by GOD even to touch it. A
Third is that of King Uzziah, 2 Kings XV. 5. 2 Chronicles. XXVII. 16. to 21.
who likewise, for presuming to Sacrifice, was punished by GOD with Leprosy,
(which in those times was taken for a (...), and plainly supposed as such in
all the Discipline of Moses relating to it) and by being so, removed from the
Administration of the Government, of which he was thereby rendered incapable.
Here are Facts attested by the same Authority as the other of Abiathar was; but
not so nakedly related. The Facts themselves discover not only the sense of the
Writers, but of GOD himself. His interposing his own Authority in the Cases,
shows plainly that those Facts were highly displeasing to him, and piacular;
than which, what can be more decisive for our purpose? Nay GOD took particular
care, through that whole dispensation, to assert the Rights of the Pry sthood,
as immediately depending on himself, more than he did, even for the Magistracy.
In the Numb. XVI.
Rebellion of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, he asserted the Priesthood, not only
against the Reubenties, but the Levites also. And Numb. XVII. 8, 9, 10.
Aaron's Rod that blossomed, was laid up for a Monument against such Mutiniers
for all suceding Generations. Plainly to exclude the whole Body of the Laity,
from ever more presuming to pretend to it, Numb. XVI. 40.
that no Stranger that was not of the seed of Aaron, come near to offer Incense
before the LORD; that he be not as Corah, and as his Company. So the Holy
Writer expressly. And that even Kings were not excepted, appeared manifestly in
the Examples now mentioned of Saul and Uzziah. And before the Institution of
Kings, the Cause was carried against the whole Body of the People, in the Cases
of Corah and Aaron's Rod. Nay to cut off all pretensions of the Priest hood
being virtually at least, and eminently included in the Regal Office, the Holy
Writers do still suppose the Priest hood to be the Nobler Office of the Two. As
it advanced the Dignity of the Peculiar People that GOD had separated them to
himself from all other Nations, so in the same way of Reasoning, it is a
preference of the Tribe of Levi above all other Tribes, that GOD had Numb. XVI.
9
separated them from the Congregation of Israel. Accordingly, when the Right of
Primogeniture was taken from Reuben, and divided between Levi and Judah; the
Priest hood, as the principal part of it, was given to the Elder Brother of the
Two. And as it advanced the whole Nation of the Israellites above all the
Nations of the Earth that GOD himself, the Supreme infinitely perfect Being,
was their Portion, and the Lot of their Inheritance; and that indeed it was the
Segullah or Peculium in contradistinction to all other Nations; so when the
same GOD is pleased to style himself the Levites portion, that very Appellative
imports their Excellency above all the other Tribes out of which the Kings were
chosen, and makes them a Peculium in contradistinction to the other Peculium,
which had no other Title to that style, but what was common to the whole Nation
in general.

. XXXII. The Benefits of the Priesthood out of the Power, and far greater than
any in the Power, of the Civil Magistrate.
Nor can this be thought strange, if we consider the Opinions than generally
received concerning the Benefits then expected from their Perist-hood, far
greater than could be pretended to by the Civil Magistrate. This was
indisputable, when its benefits were believed to extend to the Future Life as
well as this, as it was generally believed by the Jews of the Apostolical Age
(excepting only the Sect of the Sadducees,) and as we Christians are assured of
it now in the times of the Gospel. Whether those Rewards were by GOD eexpresly
Cove nanted for, or only as a Divine gratuity reserved for the Peculium as his
Favorites, more than could be expected from the Letter of the Covenant; or
whether they were implicitly understood, as included in the Mystical sense of
the Covenant it self, as either discovered by the Mystical Reasonings, or the
Oral Traditions of their Ancestors, is not perhaps so easy to determine. Yet
certain it is, that they were actually and generally believed by the Jews of
the Apostolical Age. This appears in that it is noted as a singularity in the
Sadducees to deny them; Thence it appears, that the Three other Sects of the
Pharisees, Essens, and Galilaeans, were all agreed against the Sadducees in
asserting them. And how inconsiderable the interest of the Sadducees was then,
appears in the Apostle's taking Sanctuary in the single Sect of the (...)
XXIII. 6.
Pharisees alone for securing himself against them. Now all the Challenge of
the. Benefits proper to the Peculium, depended on the Right they had to partake
in the public Sacrifices, and the Covenant transacted in them. God's Promises
were his part of that Covenant, and the Covenant is expressly said to have been
by Sacrifice, Psalm. L. 5. that being the Ordinary way used in those times of
transacting Covenants between Mankind also. As therefore it was in the Power of
the Priesthood, to which the Right of Sacrificing was then confined, to admit
to, or exclude from, the participation of the Sacrifice, so it must
consequently have been in the power of that Sacred Function, to grant or deny,
these Benefits, which were not attainable otherwise than by those Sacrifices
But these are Benefits manifestly beyond the Power of the Magistrate, and
manifestly greater than any to which his Power does extend. The Magistrate can
conser no Title to Future and Eternal Rewards to Persons otherwise never so
well qualified for receiving them. He cannot oblige the (...) to ratify in
Heaven, what is transacted by him on Earth, as the High Priest could, who was
(in the sense of those times) taken for his Authorized Representative. GOD, at
his first permission of Kings, neither suppressed the Priest hood, nor united
it in the Person of the King: And therefore there can be no pretense that what
was not otherwise in his Power, was put in his Power thence forward by any
particular provision or gift of GOD. How than could he pretend to to that
Power? How could he give or take away a Power from others, to which himself
could not pretend? How could he suppose his Act would be ratified in Heaven? Or
how imagine GOD obliged by it, to reject the Priest whom he as Prince was
pleased to reject, and accept of others who were permitted only by his
Authority to officiate at GOD's Altar? And what could all his intermedling in
these matters signify, if he cannot oblige God to ratify what is done by him?
if notwithstanding GOD should accept of the Person rejected by him, and reject
the Person obtruded by the Civil Magistrate? Nothing certainly, with regard to
Conscience, which is the principal consideration in this Case.

XXXIII. The ancient Jews of the Apostle's Age did believe their Priest hood
available to a future and a eternal state.
I cannot for my Life, conceive how our Adversaries can avoid the force of this
Argument, if the Benefits procured by the Sacerdotal Office were thought
Spiritual, and principally relating to a future and eternal state; things
perfectly out of the Power of the Magistrate, and incomparably exceeding
whatsoever is within it. And that this was the sense of that Age, I need not
insist on the Article of our own Church. It sufficiently appears from the
earliest coaeval Monuments of that Age, not only that they thought the
Sacerdotal Office to have influence on the future state; but that they did on
that very account, believe it superior to the Office of the Civil Magistrate.
Besides what I now mentioned concerning their agreement against the Sadduces,
the Two only Jewish Authors that we have undoubtedly coaeval with the Apostles,
Philo and Josephus, are both of them sufficiently clear in these particulars,
That the Priests Ministry was thought available for the future state, what can
be clearer than those Words of Philo? Where he tells us, that (...) Philo de
Gigantib. p. 292. Ed. Paris. 1640.
Priests and Prophets were Men of God, and therefore did not vouchsafe to
account themselves of any particular City in this World, or Citizens of the
World in general (as some of the Philosophers did) but soared above all that
was sensible, and being translated to the Intellectual World, fixed their
Habitations there, being registered in the City of Incorruptible Incorporeal
Ideas. And it were easy to show, that the Language and Notions of the N. T.
concerning the correspondence between the visible Priest hood on Earth, and the
Archetypal Heb. IV. 14. VII. 26. IX. 23. 24.
Priesthood of the (...) in Heaven, and between the visible Tabernacle in
Jerusalem, and the true Heb. VIII. 1, 2,
Tabernacle in Heaven, not pitched by Men but God, were perfectly agreeable to
these Notions of Philo, who was such as the Apostles were before their
Conversion to the Christian Religion; and that all the Benefits of their
outward Ministry, were thought due to this Mystical Communication with that
which was Invisible; by which it may appear, that those words of Philo were
perfectly agreeable to his avowed Principles. Now how could the Magistrate
pretend to promote or interrupt this Mystical communication between the Earthly
and Heavenly Offices? How could he therefore advance any Person to that
Dignity, or exclude him from it? Josephus also is as clear in owning a future
state, which by these Principles could not be claimed by any but on account of
this Mystical Communication, and consequently of that Priest hood, which was
thought to have a just Title to it. He also expresses that state by the
Laaguage of the (...) Joseph. Macab. c, 13. [See Mat. v ii. 11. S Luke xiii.
28, 29] Again, (...). cap. 16. [St. Luke XX. 38.] The Bosom of Abrahan is
there mentioned in the Translation of that Work by Erasmus p. 1090 Edit. Colon.
Whether from any Greek he had I know not. But I think it is in the MS. of
New-Colledge. See also Josephus' s Oration, L. III. Bell Jud. c. p. 852.
Christians also of that Age. To these I might add the Testimony of a third
Tewish Hellenist, the Author of the Apocryphal Book of Wisdom. He also,
Personates Solomom making the Temple built by himself to be a Resemblance of
the Holy Wisdom IX. 8.
Tabernacle which God had prepared from the beginning. Which shows, that this
Mystical Communication was understood, even then when that Author lived, who
seems to have been elder than even the Apostles themselves. How could the
Magistrate pretend to any Right in Affairs of this nature?

XXXIV. And consequently, did expressly own it for mor Honorable than the
Magistracy it self.
So far is he from any Right to intermeddle in these matters, that if these
things be true, the Priest hood must needs be owned for an Authority of a
higher nature, and more Noble than even the Magistracy it self. Nay, this very
Consequence was inferred from those Principles, and owned as true in that very
Age. Philo owns it for the highest honor possible: Speaking concerning the
Words of Moses there mentioned, (...) Philo de Praem. Sacerd. p. 830. Edit,
Paris. 1640.
Using (says he) an Hyperbolical Expression of Honor, GOD, he says, is their
lot, with relation to the Consecrated Gifts, on Two Account: one, of the
Highest Honor, because they are Partakers of those things which are by way of
gratitude, allotted to GOD: The other, because they are employed on those
things alone which belong to Expiations, as if they were Guardians (or
Gurators, that is the Roman Word) of the Inheritances. The Similitude seems to
be taken from the Roman Custom of making Tutors and Curators of young Heirs,
whose Estates, till they themselves came to Age, were said to be the (...) of
such Tutors and Curators, being till then, at their disposal Supposing that the
Revenues of GOD were so at the disposal of the Priest, as the Estates of the
Young Heirs were so at the disposal of the Curators. This Philo takes to be the
reason why GOD was pleased to call himself the (...) of the Priests, as if GOD
himself had been their Pupil, which was indeed a very Hyperbolical Expression
of the HIGHEST HONOR that could be ascribed to Mortals. But this is general
only. He else where expressly equals, nay prefers the Dignity of the Sacerdocal
Office to the Regal. He equals them in that same Discourse. It is manifest,
says he, that * (...) ibid p. 832.
the Law prescribes that reverence and honor to the Priests, which is proper
to the King. In another place he prefers the Priest hood. These are his Words;
Priest hood is the properest reward of a Pious * (...). Philo de Monarcia, p.
819.
Man, who professes himself to serve the Father, whose service is better, not
only than Liberty, but also than a KINGDOM. Nor was this a singular Opinion of
Philo. Jesephus also is of the same mind. The Scripture it self owns the Power
of Moses to have been Regal, when it calls him a Deuteronomy. XXXIII. 5.
King in Jeshurum; when it says, that the Numb. XXIII. 21.
Voice of a King was among the Israelites, there being no other besides Moses
who could pretend to it. And his Right was as absolute, and as free from any
Judicatory then established, that could call him to an Account, as any of the
Kings themselves. This, at least, is manifest, that the Supreme Power of the
Jews as to Seculars, which is all that I am concerned for at present, was
lodged in him, and in him alone, and that he had no Rival in it. Yet Moses
himself, as Josephus Personates him, owns his Brother's Priesthood as
preferable to his own Office of the Magistracy. For so he makes him speak
concernig his disposal of the Priesthood: If I had not had regard to God and
his Laws in giving this * (...). Joseph. Antiquit. Lib. iv. Cap. 2 page 104.
Honor. I would not have endured to pass my self by, to give it to any other.
For I am more nearly related to my self, than I am even to my Brother, and more
disposed to love my self them him. He plainly supposes him to have denied
himself in what he had done in distribution of those Offices, which he could
never have said, with any consistency, if See also Lib. III. Cap. 9. Page 87.
Edit. Colon. 1691.
he had reserved himself the nobler Office of the Two. This Mr. Seldom was not
aware of, when he therefore conceives the Author of the Testaments of the
Patriarchs to have lived in modern times, because he prefers the Priest hood
before the Civil Magistracy, as if that Doctrine had been first brought in, in
the times of the Popes Encroachments on the Right of Princes in the West. Had
he recollected himself, he might have found the same Doctrine in the East, and
in those Earlier Ages, wherein no Examples could be found of such
Encroachments. He might have remembered that the Work he there disputes of, was
brought by Lincolnieufis first from the East to these Western parts, and
therefore was written by an Eastern Author, where there were no Bishops
pretending to a Civil Independency on the Empire, or to a Right of deposing
Princes, and absolving Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, who might have
been gratified by such Doctrines. For my part, I take that work to have been
written in the Apostolical Age. It is expressly quoted by Origin, long before
such Encorachments on Temporal Rights were thought of It is written in the
Hellenistical Greek Hebrew Style, then ordinarily used, when the Apostolical
Converts had formerly been for the most part Jews, bevond the skill of the
Modern Times to have imitated it. Besides, it mentions the Apostolical times as
the last times, a mistake frequent in the Reasonings of those times, but which
could not have been believed by any who lived at an Age's distance from them.
It has very little; if any thing, relating to the Destruction of the Temple by
Titus, which the Design of the Author would have obliged him to have been large
in, if he had lived after it. These things considered, will make that Work also
fit to be considered, as another Testimony of the Sense of the Jews in the Ages
of the Apostles; the Style and Notions of the Author making it, every way, seem
probable that he was a Convert from them. This Doctrine therefore being then
believed, must perfectly have destroyed all Pretensions of the Magistrate in
Affairs of this Nature, at least, in the Opinion of those who believed it. The
Magistrate of this World, could not, in his own Right, challenge any Power in
things relating to the other World. The only way therefore left him, by which
he might challenge it, must have been some Donation of GOD. Yet niether for
this was there any the least Pretense. No Text of written Revelation ever so
much, that I know of, as Pretended for it. And no likelihood for it, in the
Nature of the thing it self. No probability, that GOD would entrust
Concernments of a Nature incomparably more Noble, with a Magistracy less Noble
than the Trusts committed to it. No probability, that GOD would hereby expose
interests so much in themselves more valuable and dearer to himself, to the
hazard of being postponed to those less noble ends for which the Secular
Magistrate was principally concerned. These things supposed, cut off all
Pretensions of Right, imaginable in such Cases. And the dreadful Examples of
GOD's Severity against meddling in Holy things without Right; even in the Cases
of Saul and Uzziah, who were themselves invested with the Supreme Civil
Authority, must have been thought sufficient to deter all Posterity from
intermedling in such matters, without very just and evident Claims of Right for
doing so.

XXXV. This same Reasonning holds on account of the Priest representing GOD,
though without relation to a Future State.
Nor did this Reasoning hold only our Supposition that the Benefits of the
Priesthood were thought to extend to a future State. Though it had only
related to this World, as all other Priest hood besides that of the Jews, did
undoubtedly; yet even so, there was no reason to believe the Civil Magistrate
had any Rights to dispose of it. This at least was thought certain that the
High Priest who could oblige GOD to accept him and his Obligations, (without
which all his Ministry must have been unavailable) must first have been
supposed to derive Authority from God. Had the Priest only represented the
People, there might have been some pretense for the Magistrates interest in
appointing and removing the Person of the Priest, as being himself invested
with all the Power that can be derived from an Original purely Humane. But as
the Priest has a Power of Blessing and Cursing Authoritatively, so as to oblige
GOD to ratify his Blessing and Curses, as Men have qualified themselves
respectively; so it is certain that he cannot oblige GOD, unless he represent
GOD, which he can never do, unless GOD have granted him Authority to do so. And
as he does not only offer the Peoples Prayers and Sacrifices, but offers them
with a Title to acceptance, so he must himself be a Person acceptable to GOD on
account of his Office, which he cannot be presumed to be if he come into his
Office any other way than GOD has appointed for his Admission. Indeed the whole
ground of his obliging GOD depends on GOD'S Promise, which is GOD'S Part of the
Covenant. And in this regard none can oblige GOD but the Priest, and no Priest
but he who has before been appointed by God to do so. Covenants are mutual, and
therefore require, and give Security, on both Parts concerned in them. The
Priest therefore, as, in a lower sense, mediating in this Covenant between GOD
and Man, is to procure Security on GODS side, as well as on ours. This he
cannot do but by obliging GOD to promise Performance on his part, of what is to
be done by him as his part of the Covenant. And that Promise being GOD'S part
of the Covenant, he cannot be obliged to it any other way than as he is obliged
to the Covenant it self. Nor can he be obliged by the Covenant, if the Priest
be not first Authorized by him to Covenant for him, and to oblige him by that
Act of his own Authority. Thus there, fore it appears that the Priest as a
Common Mediator in a Covenant between GOD and Man, must therefore be invested
with a Divine, as well a Humane, Authority.

XXXVI. And that also according to the Opinions of those times.
Nor was this Reasoning only true, but also believed to be so in the times I am
now discoursing of. St. Paul plainly supposes it as true of Priests in general,
in his Reasonings in the Epistle to the Hebrews, That Priests ought to be
Authorized by the GOD for whom they are to Officiate. Every High Priests taken
from among Men is ordained for Men in things pertaining to GOD, that he may
offer both gifts and Sacrifices for Sin. Heb. V. I. And he tells us by whom
they were so taken and ordained, v. 4. No Man takes this honor to himself;
but he that was called of GOD, as was Aaron. The Proposition is Universal.
Accordingly he observes that CHRIST also glorified not himself; to be made an
High Priest: But he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten
thee, v. 5. And that he also was called of GOD an High Priest, though of the
Order of Melchisedec. v. 10. The Duty must be Universal, when he Reasons thus
upon it from the Aaronical Priesthood (which himself counts of another Order
Chap. VII. 11.) to that of Melchisedec. The Apostle here Speaks exactly
according to the sense of the Old Testament. GOD there also says concerning
Aaron and his Sons: I have given your Priests Office unto You. Numb. XVIII. 7.
And again: Behold I also have given Thee the Charge of mine ^eave offerings, of
all the hallowed things of the Children of Israel. Unto thee have I given them
by reason of the Anointing, and to thy Sons, by an Ordinance for ever. v. 8.
This was said after the punishment of Korah, and the Second confirmation of the
Priesthood to them, by the blossoming of Aarons Rod. No doubt with a design to
intimate that they who should come in otherwise, should be as Korah and his
Company (so it is expressed Chap XVI. 40) though not in the Miraculousness of
their Punishment, yet at least in the Unacceptableness of their Ministry. It is
withal observable further, that GODS giving the Priest hood is said to have
been by reason of the Anointing, that is, by the Rites of Consecration. It is
certain. GOD did intend, as in other things, so particularly in his Priests, on
occasion of whom he says it, to be Sanctified in them that come nigh him, Lev.
X. 3. In order whereunto it was requisite that they also should be Holy as he
was Holy: This was a federal and external Holiness, upon account of their being
initiated into their Office by the external and federal Rites of Consecration,
among which this of the Anointing was the principal. Whosoever therefore was
not thus Anointed, was, for that very reason, presumed not to be Holy, nor
therefore acceptable to GOD, and consequently incapable of the Priesthood. But
this Anointing required not only the Holiness of the Ointment, but of the
Person also that administered it, and that in a higher degree than could belong
to the Civil Magistrate. The Princes indeed had an Unction, and were by that
enabled to perform some lower Acts of Consecration. So Solomon makes the Prayer
of Dedication of the Temple. But the principal Consecration of the Temple was
by the Sacrifices, in which the forementioned examples of Saul and Uzziah show
that the Prince had no Right to intermeddle. What Moses did in the Consecrating
Aaron and his Sons, was by special direction from GOD, and before GOD had
confined to Priest hood, and therefore could not be made a Precedent
afterward. After that first Consecration was performed, we never find Moses
any further intermeddling, but he leaves all the Acts of Priest hood afterward
to them who, by that first Consecration, were Authorized for them. The Unction
and Holiness of the Priesthood did so far exceed the Unction and Holiness of
the Regal Power, that the Princes intervention in the Consecrating of a Priest
could not, in the sense of those times, be taken for the Act of GOD, requisite
for giving a Priesthood. It is very true, the King, on account of his
Anointing, was counted Holy. And so were all the Congregation holy. Numb. XVI.
3. And it is reckoned among the Privildeges of the Peculium in General, that
they were a Holy-Priest-hood. Yet that did not excuse them from a great
Piacular crime, whenever they invaded any Offices of their own Priesthood.
Every lower degree of Holiness was counted Profane in comparison of that which
was above it. As therefore the Gentiles were reputed Profane in comparison of
the Jews, who were equal in Holiness to the Gentiles Priest hood; so the Laity
of the Jews were reckoned Profane in Comparison of the Levites, as the Levites
also, in comparison of the Ordinary Priests, and those also in comparison of
the High Priest; and were accordingly treated by GOD, it they presumed on
Offices higher than those committed to them. Though therefore the Prince was
more Holy than the Laity. yet that did not warrant his invasion of the Office
of the meanest Levite. So far it was from giving him any Power over the High
Priesthood it self. He had no Power of Inaugurating, and therefore had none of
Exaugurating, to speak in the old Roman Pontifical Style.

XXXVII. Solomon's Act on Abiathar was only of Force.
Thus it appears on all accounts, that judging by the Doctrines received in
that Age, Solomon could not pretend any direct Power, for depriving Abiathor of
his Priest hood. Hence it follows 3ly, That all that Solomon could do, on
account of his Regal Power, was only to exercise that external Force on him,
which he might justify, on consideration of his Secular Crime, as his Sovereign
in Seculars, which though it could not in Conscience deprive Abiathar of his
Right yet might (in the Consequence) make all the exercise of his Right
impracticable. And indeed the words of the Text imply no more than what was the
effect of pure force. So Solomon THRUST out Abia thar from being Priest unto
the Lord, 1 Kings 11. 27. And that very agreeably to the true importance of the
Word there used. The vulgar Latin renders it ejecit. The LXXII. (...). The
Hebrew roo is (...) which the LXXII. render (...), but most frequently, as in
this very place, by (...), words all of them denoting violence. Nor can we
think that this Word, rather than any other that might have been used, was
chosen without a particular design. That seems to be to let us understand, what
I have now been proving, that Solomon could not make Abiathar cease to be a
Priest unto the Lord by any Judicial determination that might directly affect
his Right, but by the force now mentioned, which might make the Exercise of his
Right impracticable. This Solomon might do by banishing him from Jerusalem, and
confining him to Anathoth.

XXXVIII. Which Force might, in the Consequence render the Exercise of his
Right impracticable.
For it is to be remembered, that the Jewish Priesthood included seveveral
Secular Rights, which must therefore have been in the Power of the Secular
Magistracy; and as to the Spiritual Offices, was so confined to places, which
the Magistrate could hinder the Priests from by his Power of External Force,
that, in case he would make use of his Force to hinder them, the whole Exercise
of the Right of Priesthood would thereby be rendered impractable. It included,
by Divine Institution, many Secular Rights. Particularly, as to the Oracle of
Urim, by which many Secular Causes were to be determined, and by which, (on
account of the Governments being Theocratical) the Supreme Civil Magistrate as
well as the Subject, was in Conscience to be concluded. This was consulted by
the Elders of Israel concerning their designed Expedition against the Judge XX.
27. 28. 1 Samuel, XIV. 18, 19.
Benjamits, by Saul on the miraculous victory of 1 Samuel XXIII. 9, ^0, 11, 12. 2 Samuel V. 23, 4. 1 Chr. XIV. 14. 15.
Jonathan, by David in the Cases of Saul's Exepedition against him, and the
treachery of the Men of Keilah, and his own Expedition against the Philistians.
And the Elders of Israel, even in the time of Joshua, are blamed for not Josh.
IX. 15.
Asking Counsel at the Mouth of the Lord in the Case of the Peace made with the
Gibeonites, by which we understand the Obligation of the Civil Magistrate, as
well to consult, as to observe this Oracle. And in private Cases, when a Cause
fell out Deuteronomy. XVII. 8, 11, 12, 13.
too hard in Judgment, that is, for the Decision of the Ordinary Judges,
between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke,
as in the time of Moses, they consulted him, and he consulted GOD; so
afterward the ordinary course was, to make the Ultimate Appeal to the Priests
(no doubt the High Priest more principally,) and to stand to their award under
of pain Death. These Causes which concerned blood and blood, and stroke and
stroke, were undoubtedly Secular, as also the Capital punishment to be
afflicted on those that proved refactory. These Secular Rights GOD annexed
inseparably to the Priesthood. But the execution of them wholly depended on
the Power of the Sword, which GOD was pleased entirely to permit to the Civil
Magistrate, whom the Priests could therefore only oblige in Conscience, which
obligation if the Magistrate would not regard, it was fully in his Power to
hinder the Execution of such Decrees. So also, even the Spirituals of that
Sacerdotal Office depended on things in the Power of the Civil Magistrate. The
Lawful Priest himself could Sacrifice no where but in the Temple, and at the
Altar of Jerusalem, and in the particular Vestments prescribed by the Law. If
he did, such Sacrifices would not only be unacceptable, but Piacular. This the
Romans very well understood, when, by locking up the Vestments in the Fort
Antonia, and by keeping a guard there that should command the Temple, to which
the Fort was contiguous, they engrossed the disposal of the High Priest hood
entirely to themselves. And it was also in the Power of Solomon to make the
whole Exercise of Abiathar's Priesthood impracticable, by the like force which
he had a Right, as a Prince, to exercise, where he should judge it necessary
for the good of the Secular Society, for which he was principally concerned.
This was an indirect Power over Abiathar's Spirituals in order to his own
Temporals.

XXXIX. Yet Solomon was in Conscience obliged to be cautions in exercising this
Force against the Priesthood.
But then it is to be considered further 4ly, (by the opinions of those times
grounded on Reasons lasting still) Princes, though they had that Power annexed
to their Office, were notwithstanding obliged in Conscience, to be sparing in
the Use of it against such Holy Persons as Abiathar was. Holy places were every
where, by the consent of Civilized Nations, allowed the Right of protecting
such as fled to them, if they were not guilty of the highest Piacular Crimes.
Thus it was in the Case of 1 Kings I. 50.
Adonijah, and others mentioned in the Old Testament. Thus, in the Cases of the
(...) and Supplices, among the Greeks and Romans, The Piaculum Cylonianum among
the Athenians was famous. Though Thucyd. Lib. 1.
Cylon justly deserved what he suffered, yet because some of his party were
killed in the Sanctuary, the displeasure of the Deity, on that account, was to
be atoned by a Solemn Expiation, which was performed by Epimenides. And if the
places were thus reverenced on account of their Consecration, much more the
Priests from whom they received it. This is exactly the Reasoning of our
Blessed Savior in a St Matt. XXIII. 17, 19.
Like Case. Accordingly it was a general Rule: 1 Chr. XVI. 12. Ps. CV. 15.
Touch not mine Anointed, for whose sakes even 1 Chr. XVI. 21. Ps. CV. 14.
Kings also are said to have been reproved. This was the Security of the whole
Peculium of Israel, among the many Nations through whom they passed in their
Expedition from Egypt to Canaan. This was the Security of the Prince himself,
that none could 1 Samuel XXIV. 10. XXVI. 9, 11, 23.
Stretch out his hand against the Lord's Anointed, and be guiltless, That is,
without being guilty of a Piacular Crime. And how could Solomon hope that
Assassinates would regard his own Anointing, if himself had violated an
Anointing so much greater and Holyer then his own, from whence his own was
derived? This reverance also to Holy Persons obtained by the consent of
Civilized Nations, which is to us an Argument of the Law of Nations. Aesop as a
Person Holy and beloved of the GODS was revenged by them. The like was their
Opinion of several Poets also, as Pindar, Stesichorus, etc. And this also was
among them Translated to the Interests of the Civil Magestrate, The Tribunes of
the People among the Romans were first secured by it. Afterward the Emperors
were so also, by having the Tribunitian Power and the Pontificate annexed to
their Office. And how far this opinion prevailed, even among the Jews of those
Earlier Ages, appears plainly in the Murder of Abimeleck and the Priests by
Saul. His own 1 Samuel XXII. 1. 7.
Servants could not be prevailed upon to do it. None indeed but v. 18.
Doeg the Edomite, who being of an other Nations might be supposed to have less
regard for the Jewish Consecration. And there was particular reason for this
revernce to the Priesthood in the Jewish Governments as it was Theocratical.
As it was such, the Magistrate was more particularly obliged to do every thing
according to the mind of GOD himself whose Vicegerent he was. And GOD being the
principal and Supreme Governor, he was as much concerned in every thing, to
take care that it were performed according to his pleasure, as every inferior
Magistrate is bound, at his peril, to do every thing according to the mind of
the Supreme Legislator, rather than his own. This would oblige the Prince to
value every thing according to the esteem that GOD was pleased to put upon it.
and therefore to make Religion his Principal Care as it was certain GOD did,
and to make his own Interest to give way to the Interests of Religion, and the
Honor of his own Function, to the Honor of the Priesthood, as he would
approve himself faithful in the Trusts committed to him. That GOD had given the
less Noble Office a more effectual Security, as to this world, against
encroachments, he had reason to look on as a Wise provision for the Public,
that where there might otherwise have been the most Specious pretentions, and
consequently the greatest Temptations to encroaching, there might be the lesser
advantage for it. But it ought by no means to embolden him to be the first
aggressor. He had reason to fear, in those Ages so Famous for the frequency of
Divine interpositions, GOD himself might the rather think himself the more
obliged, by the Rules of his own Providence, to vindicate the Sacred Power, by
how much the more he had left it destitute of Humane Patronage. Uzziah
afterward found it so. This therefore must have obliged Solomom to use the
Coercive Power granted him, rather in his own defense, than in a way that
might, even in consequence, look like violence to so Holy an Office,

XL. What Solomon did was only to fulfill what GOD had before threatened
against the Family of Eli.
And to make it probable that Solomon had these very considerations before him,
to contribute nothing by his Legal Force to this deprivation, but what was
agreeable to his own Station and the mind of GOD; I observe 5ly that the Text
it self gives a Reason of what he did, perfectly Suitable to such thoughts,
that he did it only as an Executioner of the Prediction of Samuel concerning
the removal of the Priesthood from the House of Ithamar. The Words are these:
1 Kings II ^7.
So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being Priest to the Lord, THAT he might
fulfill the Word of the Lord, which he spoke concerning the house of Eli in
Shilo. I know very well that this particle that, is used in the N. T. when a
Prophesy was fullfilled in the Event, though he who fulfilled it knew nothing
of the Matter. But the circumstances of this place make it probable that
Solomon knew what he did, and intended the accomplishment of that Prophesy, and
that what he did was done by him purposely, for that very end, that he might
fulfill it. The Prediction was very notorious, being twice repeated, first by
a Man of GOD, 1 Samuel II. 27, then by Samuel also, Chap. III. 11. as the first
initiation of him into his Prophetic Office, which recommended him to all
Israel from Dan to Beersheba, as one that was established to be a Prophet of
the Lord, v. 20. It was also in both Cases notified to Eli himself, that all,
as well Friends as Enemies, might know it. How therefore can we believe Solomon
ignorant of it? Then the distance of the time between Eli and Abiathar was
such, as that there was reason to expect that it should be fullfilled in
Abiathar, if it were fullfilled at all. Such punishments of the Children for
the Parents were not usually deferred beyond the fourth generation, as appears
from the words of the 2d Commandment. So also in the Heathen History, the
treachery of Gyges against Candaules was punished in Croesus, who was in the
fourth generation descended from Gyges; as Jehu's Conspiracy was also, in his
fourth generation, in the Sacred History. By these Examples we find a consent
in those Traditions of the earlier Times. And the distance between Eli and
Abiathar could not be less. Joseph Anti. Lib. VIII. c. 1
Josephus indeed makes Eli to have been the Grandfather to Abiathar. But it is
certain that they were further removed than so. Abiathar was himself the Son of
Ahimelech, and Ahimelech the Son of Ahitub. So Ahitub must have been his
Grandfather. Thus it appears that Abiathar was, at least, in the fourth
Generation from Eli, whose Sin was to be punished in him. Further yet, Ahitub
is said to have been the Brother of Ichabod, the Son of Phineas, the Son of
Eli, 1 Samuel XIV. 3. Thus Abiathar will be the Vth from Eli, (if both terms be
included) and in the 4th Generation, in the utmost way of counting possible.
There was therefore no reason to expect any further delay of that punishment
which had been so long before predicted. And therefore Abiathar was the Person
in whom it was to be expected. This being so, Solomon could not but look on it
as very Providential, that Abiathar should be permitted by GOD to fall into the
conspiracy of Adonijah, and thereby to incur his Royal displeasure, in whose
Power it was to execute the Divine Sentence on him, by that Power of Force
which GOD had committed to the Prince. It tended withal very much to confirm
the same Observation, that, for above 40 Years since his first evil (for so
many years were contained in David's Reign reckoned from the death of Saul)
Abiathar should have no Posterity that might Succeed him in his Office, if this
was indeed his Case. For by this it appar'd necessary that if he were deprived,
the whole family of Ithamar should be deprived also, at least the Family of
Eli, as the Prophesies forementioned had foretold. For as for the rest of his
Family, Saul seems to have destroyed it universally. These Observations put
together might give reason to believe, that this was the very time designed by
GOD for the accomplishment of this Prophesy. At the same time Zadok was firm to
Solomon's Interests, which seemed to tend to fulfill the Prophesy to Phineas of
an everlasting Priesthood, implying that the time should come, when the whole
succession from Aaron should be confined to the Family of Phineas, which
therefore was not to fail together with the other collateral Branches derived
from Aaron. But I rather believe, that Abiathar's Family did not fail entirely,
which still makes further for my purpose, that what Solomon did in this matter,
was really with a design and prospect on the Prophesy it self. Otherwise, had
he only designed a Personal punishment for Abiathar, that might have been done
by removing him form the Priesthood, and Substituting the next of the Family
of Ithamar in his place. What he did more is not, any other way, so well
accountable, as by supposing him to have had a direct design of fullfilling the
Prophesy. It is otherwise as apparent from the Prophesy it self, that Eli was
to have a Posterity that was to Survive the fulfilling of the Prophesy, as that
they were to be deprived of the Priest hood by it. What else can be the meaning
of those Words? 1 Samuel II. 36.
And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine House, shall
come and crouch to him (the faithful Priest before mentioned, not of Eli's
Family) for a piece of Silver, and a morsel of Bread, and shall say Put me (I
pray thee) into one of the Priests Offices, that I may eat a piece of bread.
Now, in this way of Reasoning here mentioned, GOD himself had declared his
pleasure that Abiathar, and the House of Ithamar too, should be deprived of the
Priesthood; and deprived at that very time. So that Solomon had nothing more
to do in it, than to use that Lawful Power God had given him for forcing him
out of his Possession.

XLI. Abiathar was not then the High Priest* properly so called, but Zadok.
But whatever Solomon's concernment was in the Deprivation of Abiathar, I add
farther, 6ly that it was not an Example, so far it was from being a Precedent,
of a Deprivation of a High Priest properly so called. I deny not but Abiathar
was a High Priest, but not in the appropriated Sense. The N. T. History and
Josephus, mention whole Body of Highpriests, who with the Bodies of the
Scribes, made up the Jewish Judicatories relating to Religion. These might
consist, partly of those who had been Highpriests, partly of the Heads of the
Several Sacerdotal Families, partly of the Heads of the Sacerdotal courses. But
the High Priest concerned in our present despute, is he only who answered our
Christian Bishops, as a Principle of the Unity of the Jewish Communion, as the
Bishops are in the Christian. This could have been only one, the chief of all
who were called by the common name of High Priests, who could be the Principle
of Unity. And I deny Abiathar to have been High Priest simply in this
appropriated Sense. 2 Samuel: XV. 29. 35. XVII. 15, XIX. 11. XX. 25. 1 Kings IV.
4. 1 Chr. XV. 11.
For Zadoc is frequently mentioned with him, yet so, as that he is always
preferred before him. And this, in David's time as well as Solomon's, which
plainly shows that this Superiority did not begin from the Expulsion of
Abiathar. From that time he was alone, and therefore had so little reason to be
reckoned in the first place, that he had no reason to be joined with him at
all. Indeed he was every way Superior to Abiathar, as well in order of time,
as in the Dignity of his Office. In order of time. For he is joined not with
Abiathar only, but with 2 Samuel VIII. 17. 1 Chr. XVIII. 16
Ahimelech also, and so joined with him as still to have the precedence of him
also. If Ahimelech be the true Person designed to be joined* with Zadok in
these places, he cannot be the Son of our Abiathar, Chap. II. S. 3. P. 17.
as the Doctor fancies, because both places refer him to the time of David If
he were his Father, then as it is certain that Ahimelech was put to Death by
Saul, so it must be certain that Zadok who was coaeval with him, must have been
in the time of Saul also, and before Abiathar. But perhaps there may have been
an easy transposition of Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, instead of Abiathar
the Son of Ahimelech, in both Places. So they will be parallel to those other
places now mentioned, where they are so joined, and the time of both will agree
with the time assigned them in the Text, that of David, whose Reign will hardly
admit of any Colleague for Zadok, besides our Abiathar. Besides, as the time of
David is inconsistent with either a Son or a Father of our Abiathar, so neither
was the Father of our Abiathar, the Son of another Abiathar, but of Ahitub.
Unless possibly both Father and Son of had both Names, that of Ahimelech and of
Abiathar also. It is certain that Ahimelech the Father, under whom David did
eat the Show bread, is in the Gospel called St. Mark. II. 26.
Abiathar. But whether I may securely reason from these Readings or not, it is
certain from the Unanimous Consent of so many other places, that Zadok was High
Priest, and Superior to Abiathar in that Office, even in the time of David.
This is at once sufficient to overthrow the Doctor's Fancy, that Zadok's
High Priest hood commenced from the Expulsion of Abiathar, and those of
Josephus also, and of the Rabbis, who made the High Priest hood, for many
Generations, translated from the Family of Eleazar, to that of Ithamar, and not
restored to its true oncient course, till this dishonor of Abiathar.

XLII. There were in those times two Highpriests at once; the chief, such as
Zadok was, of the Family of Eleazar, the lower, such as Abiathar, of the Family
of Ithamar.
They had no Books to inform them in this matter more than we, no other coaeval
Writings but the Scriptures, which no where assert any such matter in plain
terms The only way remaining therefore how they might gather this Opinion
thence, must be by their own Reasoning and Consequences. And it is not very
difficult to guess what those might be. There is indeed no High Priest
mentioned in the interval from Phineas to Abiathar, but Eli, Ahias and
Ahimelech, all of the Race of Ithamar. Thence they conceived that all the stock
of Phineas for that time, were private Persons; not-invested with the
High Priest hood. But the Name of High Priest is never given to any of those
Predecessors of Abiathar, much less in the appropriated Sense of which I am now
discoursing. How then do they come to know that they were Highpriests in the
Sense here disputed? Is it because Ahias ministered before the Ark, and
Ahimelech and Abiathar gave Divine Answers to David? But how do they know that
this Office of giving Responses by Urim, was so the prerogative of the first
High Priest, that it might not in his absence agree to the lower High Priest of
the Junior Family? Why might not the Two Families take their turns, for the
mutual ease, in these Offices of attending the King, as the Ordinary Priests
did afterward in their 24 Courses in attending on the Temple? And why might
not these times fall on the courses of Ithamar? The great occasion of their
mistake is, that judging of the Customs of these more ancient times by more
modern practices, they thought none capable of wearing the Ephod, by which the
Oracle of Urim was given, but the High Priest, properly so called in the
appropriated sense, in which there could be no more at one time, but one. And
that which gave them this Occasion, was, that this Ephod is reckoned among the
Garments peculiar to the High Priest, in contradiction to the Priests of lower
Orders. But upon a closer examination, they might have found that the
High Priesthood, as to the execution of it, was common to Aaron and all his
Sons, and therefore that the Vestments were so too, only with dependence on
him, while he lived, and on him who should afterward succeed him in his
Prerogatives, as first and chief of those who did yet all partake in the
execution of the High-Priest-hood. This seems clear in all the places where the
High Priesthood is spoken of in the Pentaeuch. Aaron is hardly ever mentioned
without his Sons, as joint sharers with him in it. The first Command was, that
Exodus xxviii. 1. 1 Chr. xxiii. 13.
Aaron and his Sons should be taken from among the Children of Israel, that HE
might minister in the Priest Office. They are Exodus xxix. 4, etc. Lev. viii. 2.
etc.
consecrated together, and by one common Form, which seems plain to imply, that
the Power communicated by that Form, was common also, only reserving the Rights
of the Prerogative. Their Exodus xxx. 19. xl. 12. 31.
Washings were the same, and their Exodus xxx. 30.
Unction also, which was the principal Rite of Consecration, which entitled
them to all the Right they could pretend to as the Lord's Anointed. The Lev.
ii. 3. vi. 20. vii. 34. xx iv. 9. 1 Chr. vi. 49.
Offerings were also common among them, both those which were to be shared by
them, and those which were offered for them. The Form of Numb. vi. 23.
Blessing the People prescribed to both, is exactly the same. And from this
power of blessing, the Heb. vii. 7*
Apostle reasons, in judging the greatness and excellency of Priest-hoods. The
Numb. iii. 9. IV. 19. 27. VIII. 13. 19. 22.
Levites also were given in common to Aaron and his Sons. And even in this very
particular of the Vestments, Aaron is not mentioned alone, but his Sons also
are joined with him. The Holy Exodus 11. xxviii. 4. 43.
Garments were for Aaron and his Sons, that he might minister unto GOD in the
Priest's Office. That HE alone is so often said to minister, even when THEY
also are joined with him, shows plainly their dependence on him, as a Principle
of Unity. Accordingly all Aaron's Sons were joined with him in this Affair. So
the Text runs, Exodus xx* viii. 1.
That he may minister unto me in the Priest's Office, even Aaron, Nadab and
Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's Sons. So that all the Four should have had
Highpriests, if they had all of them left Posterity. This is expressly given as
the Reason why the common Rights were only succeeded to in the Families of
Eleazer and Ithamar, that the other Brethren left no Posterity. 1 Chr. xxiv. 2.
Numb. iii. 2, 3, 4.
Nadab and Abihu died before their Father, and had no Children; THEREFORE
Eleazar and Ithamar executed the Priest's Office. Wherein then consisted that
Appropriation of those Vestments to the High Priest properly so called? That
there was but one of those Vestments made, which could therefore, on no
occasions, be worn by any more than one at once: That these were in the
custody, or at least, at the disposal of the first High Priest, and could
therefore be worn by none of the rest, without his particular Favor and
Indulgence: That they were therefore worn only by that High Priest, who was the
principal in the particular respective Ministry: That therefore they were worn
by the first High Priest as often as he ministered, because he never could be
other than principal; but by the second, never but when, by the absence of the
first, he thereby came to be principal. And hereby a clear account is given how
the High-Priest's Office was performed, in case of the Sickness, or
Uncleanness, or any other incapacitating Circumstance, of him whose particular
duty it was. In this Case, the second High Priest might perform it for him.
This was a Case which might probably and frequently fall out, and therefore was
particularly to be provided for in the Constitution. The rather, because in the
day of Expiation it might have been of formidable Consequence to the whole
Nation, if the Solemnity of that great day had been omitted, even on what
account soever, and thereby the Annual Sins of the Peculium had not been
attoned for. The Rabbinical Sagan, is not a Scriptural but Chaldee Term, and
therefore wholly derived not from well-attested Traditions, but later
Reasonings.

XLIII. No deprivation of the Posterity of Phineas in those times.
Thus therefore it appears, that all the Conjectures of the private Life of the
Posterity of Phineas, till the expulsion of Abiathar, are perfectly groundless
and precarious. They who first thought of it, ought to have considered how this
was reconcilable with the Promises made to Phineas of an Numb. xxv. 15.
everlasting Priesthood, if either he, or his immediate Posterity, had been
deprived of the Priesthood, and not restored till so many Ages after. None
could have thought it reconcilable, who had lived in those Ages before the
Restitution. Nor are there any later Demerits of Phineas pretended, that might
occasion, nor any Prophecies that gave the least warning of, even that
Interruption, in an Age whose Rewards and Punishments were particularly adapted
to Men's Behavior in this World. It now appears, that Ithamar's Posterity
might, by this Constitution, officiate as High Priests, without being so in the
strict ense of the Word. It also appears, that on account of the same
Constitution, Zadok was before Abiathar, as being of the Elder Family of
Eleazer, and that therefore his being always mentioned before Abiathar was
grounded on the real greater Dignity of his Priesthood before that of Abiathar.
Whilst Aaron lived, we have seen how his pre-eminence, and his Sons dependence
was maintained, by his being said to do what they all assisted him in. This
therefore being the Prerogative of the Principle of Unity, must have descended
from Aaron to his Successor in the Prerogative. Accordingly we find, at Aaron's
Death, that the Right of his Vestments did not descend to his Sons in common,
but only to Numb. XX. 26, 28. Joseph. Ant. lib. IV. c. 4.
Eleazer. This Josephus himself confesses to have been (...), on account of his
Primogeniture. What made him then not think on some better account than that he
gives, why Zadok is preferred to Abiathar, even in the time of David? All the
Reason he gives for it is, that he was his, that is, David's (...) Joseph. Ant.
lib. VII. c. 6. p. 222.
Friend. How is this reconcilable with what he says elsewhere, that the
Posterity of Phineas did Joseph. Ant. lib. VIII. c. 1. p. 254.
(...), were private Persons till this restitution of the Priesthood by
Solomon, to the Family of Phineas, at the Expulsion of Abiathar? Yet even in
this (...).
later place also, he owns that Zadok was High Priest under David. Could the
Restitution be made by Solomon, and yet Zadok be High Priest in the time of
David? Was it likely that so religious a Prince as David could prefer a private
Person before the High Priest, only because he was his Friend? But it was the
plain Testimony of the Scriptures asserting the Priesthood of Zadok in the time
of David, that forced Josephus to these Contradictions to his own Reasonings.
He might have found a better Title for Zadock than David's Friendship, if he
had but remembered that Zadok had the same Title with Eleazer, which himself had
founded on the Right of Primogeniture. But we need not ground Zadok's Right on
the bare Opinion of so inconsiderate, and therefore so inconsistent, a Writer.
The Scripture it self is sufficiently clear in this matter. Speaking of the
Garment's of Aaron, no doubt those peculiar to the High Pristhood strictly
understood, it adds, Exodus xxix. 30
And that son that is Priest in his stead, shall put them on seven days when he
comes into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, to minister in the holy place.
The Sacred Writer manifestly supposes only one of his Sons that had so
frequently been joined with him in the Administration of his Office, who could
succeed him in the Right to the Vestments: And who could that one Son be, by
the Customs of those times, who could plead the best Title to succeed him in
incommunicable indivisible Prerogatives, but the Eldest? How then can we doubt
of the Title of Zadok before Abiathar, Zadok being descended from the Elder
Brother?

XLIV. Zadok put in the room of Abiathar, as to the Courses of Ithamar, which
were not under him before.
But then the Difficulty will be, how these Words are to be under stood; Zadok
the Priest did the King put in the room of Abiathar, 1 Kin II. 35. Not
certainly, of his being then put first into the High Priest's Office, if what I
have already proved hold true, that Zadok was already possessed of a nobler
station in the Priesthood before, than Abiathar himself was. That had been a
degradation of Zadok, rather than a promotion of him. But we have another, and
an easier and more probable account of it. 2 Chr. XXIV. ^.^.
David had before divided the Two Sacerdotal Families of Eleazar and Ithamar,
into four and twenty Courses, whereof sixteen were of the House of Eleazar, and
only eight of the Family of Ithamar. Those of the Family of Ithamar were
committed then to the Care of Abiathar: For him I understand, as I said before,
by the Name of Abimelech, who was indeed the Son of Abimelech. The room
therefore into which Zadok succeeded upon this Exile of Abiathar, was the
Management of those eight remaining Courses of Ithamar, which were not under
him before. Thence forward therefore, all the twenty four Courses were under
the Disposal of the House of Eleazar. Yet so, that the High Priest of the
Family of Eleazar, did not immediately take care of them, but committed them to
another nominated, as it should seem, by himself, but not one of the House of
Ithamar. This I take to be the Second Priest mentioned, 2 Kin. XXV. 18. Jer.
LII. 24. in contradistinction to the Chief Priest, who was the High Priest
properly so called, in the confined sense of the Word. And these eight Courses
of Ithamar, I take to be meant by them who are elsewhere called the 2 Kin.
XXIII. 4.
Priests of the second Order, not hitherto so commonly understood. And perhaps
the Levites also of the second Degree, 1 Chr. XV. 18. were they whose
particular Office it was to attend these Priests of the second Order, the whole
Tribe of the Levites being given, as I observed before, to Aaron and his Sons,
in common. And that these second Priests, under the House of Eleazar, were not,
as formerly, confined to the House of Ithamar, I take to be the ground of the
Inconvenience the Posterity of Eli were like to be reduced to by this Change,
as it is expressed in the Prophesy concerning it, that they were to crouch to
this second Priest, in order to their being put into one of the Priests Office,
1 Samuel II. 36. There was more necessity of crouching now, when they had to do
with one not so nearly related to them, than when they were always secure of
having one to deal with, who was of their own Family. This might be the Sagan,
mentioned by the Rabbis, in the Language used after the Captivity, who, though
he were more subject to the true High Priest of the House of Eleazar than
formerly, might yet be serviceable to him in the same capacites that those were
in, who had been of the House of Ithamar, in officiating for him, when himself
was under any Legal Impediment for performing his own Duty, in his own Person.

XLV. The Jews, by our Principles, could not justify a separation on account of
Abiathar. Their Case not like Ours.
Hence it follows 7ly, that, even by our Principles, the Jews had no reason to
make any Separation on Abiathar's account, though we should suppose him
deprived, not unjustly only, but invalidly also. For supposing his deprivation
invalid, all that can follow is, that still he retained the same Right as to
Conscience, which he had before. But even that would not have sufficed for to
justify a Separation, on his account. Even before, not he, but Zadok; was the
Principle of Unity. So that, in case of difference, they were still secure in
adhering to Zadok, in opposition to all others whatsoever, whoever he were that
occasioned the Separation. Even before, therefore, Zadok, owed no duty to him,
but he to Zadok; and consequently, not Zadok, but he. had been guilty of the
Schism that would have followed upon the difference. If such an invalid
deprivation could not affect, or weaken, the Title of Abiathar, as to
Conscience, much less can it be pretended to affect that of Zadok, who was not
any way concerned in it. Even before, the Duty of the Communicants, in case of
such division, had been still owing to Zadok; and therefore they also must have
involved themselves in the Schism, if, upon pretense of their duty to Abiathar,
they had violated their more sacred and obliging Duty to Zadok, to whom
Abiathar himself owed Duty, as well as they. Indeed they owed Abiathar no Duty
at all, but in subordination and dependence on their antecedent Duty to Zadok:
And therefore when that subordination and dependence had been taken away, as it
must have been by a notorious Separation, they could not then owe Abiathar any
duty at all; and therefore thy must have broken their duty to Zadok, in paying
any to Abiathar. For thus it is in other subordination also. Whilst a General
does himself observe his own Sovereign, his Soldiers cannot pay their duty to
the common Sovereign, without paying it to the General, who has the Sovereign's
Authority to exact duty from them. But if the General, revolt, they are judged
Rebels, as well as he, to the common Sovereign, if, upon any pretense
whatsoever, they pay him any Duty at all. So far this Case therefore is from
being paralled to that of our present Holy Fathers, that here the Reasoning and
the Duty lie directly contrary. If our Fathers still retain their Right in
Conscience (as they must, if the Sentence of Deprivation be invalid, with
regard to Conscience, as pronounced by them who have no Right to judge them, in
relation to their Spiritual) then their Rivals can have none in the same
Jurisdictions, and the whole charge of Schisms must lie against them, and those
who maintain them in their Invasions of our Father's Rights. How can they then
apply here the Case of Abiathar?

LXVI. When Invasions had passed into a Prescription, as in our Soviour's time,
he that was in Possession had really the best Title.
Thus far I have proceeded on the Sense and Reasonings of those earlier times
of the Jews, which is certainly the truest and solidest way of judging
concerning Obligations and Duties incumbent on the Subjects then. And by these
it has appeared, that the Civil Power could not pretend to any Right of
depriving Priests of their Right as to Spirituals, and with regard to
Conscience. This consideration did restrain Princes of their own Nation, who
had any regard to their Duty to GOD, from putting the Case. But when they were
not under the Government of Princes, who were of their own Nation and Religion,
but under those who did not think themselves obliged by the positive Laws of
GOD, to protect the Priests from the Legal Power of force which GOD had
committed to them; this was the time indeed, wherein we find Examples of true
Highpriests, even properly so called, who were deprived by the Secular Power.
Here therefore were Two Cases; one was, when the Practice of Intrusions was now
grown so frequent, that no High Priest living had a better Title; the other,
upon the first invasion, when the true Predecessor was still living, and had
not renounced his Right. The former, was the Case in the time of our Savior.
The old way of deriving the succession to the next of the Family who was
legally qualified for it, having none of those Corporal blemishes which by the
Law could make him incapable of it, (on which account Eleazar succeeded Aaron)
was long before that laid by a Prescription sufficient to antiquate it. For
many Generations, it had been disposed of by the Secular Princes who had the
Power of the Temple, first by the Macedonians, then by the Romans, to Persons
no otherwise qualified than by their being only of the Family of Aaron. There
was therefore then no Person living who had a better Title as to the
designation of his Person, than the pleasure of the Civil Magistrate who had
the command of the Temple, and the Sacerdotal Vestments. As soon therefore as
any Person was once possessed of the Temple and the Altar, the same way as his
Predessor had been, his Right, was every way, as good as the Right of any
other, who could pretend against him; in which case, the public Interest,
(which is inseparably Right) for ending Controversies, has always given
proference to the Possessor. Both of them were as well consecrated into the
Office by Spiritual Persons, as well as invested by the Lay-Power into the
possession of the Externals requisite for executing the Spiritual Office
committed to them. And that the later was consecrated into his Predecessor's
Place, both without the consent, and by the subjects of his Predecessor, was as
applicable to all his Predecessors as himself, and therefore must as much
weaken their Title also, as it did his, and make them only equal to him, on
this consideration also. This would resolve the Right only into some dead
Person, whose Rights all Laws determine with their Lives, especially were no
Person living is concerned in them. All therefore that can be said in this Case
is, that what ought not to have been done at first, was now done, and ratified
by Providence, the same way as all other Humane Governments, as well Secular as
Sacred, are usually changed by Prescription; which by the Law of Nations, and
with relation to the good of Mankind, and Governments in general, is, in
process of time, judged sufficien to extinguish an Original Right, and to make
that a RIGHT which at first was no other than invasion and Violence. This holds
especcially where the Right is only Personal, as that of the Priesthood was;
and the Person made incapable of holding it. Mutilation alone was sufficient to
have taken away the Right of the Priest hood, by the same Law that gave a Right
to it, and therefore much more Death. This was really the Case, when our
Blessed Savior communicated with the Highpriests, obtruded by the Romans.
Josephus himself observes, that whereas the High Priesthood was before for
Life, then it was not Joseph. Ant. L. xx. c. 8. p. 7^^.
so, but during the pleasure of those who had the Power of the Temple. And I
know no Eternally obliging Law frow the nature of Priesthood in general, that
makes it essential to the Priesthood to be for Life, more than for any other
Humane Office. If it were therefore changeable, such a prescription was
undoubtedly sufficient for actually changing it. And if this Case hold any
where among Christians, it does so, at present, among the Constantinopolitane
Greeks. They also now are brought to that pass, that their Patriarchs have not
their power given them for Life at the time it is given them, but during the
pleasure of the Infidel Magistrate. The Greeks therefore are under no
Obligation of Conscience to assert the Rights of any Predecessor, by refusing
Communion with his Successor, because the Predecessor himself had no better a
Right; and the Successor, has on this account, an equal Right, but, on account
of Possession, a better than he. But this can, by no means, be applied to the
Case of our present Fathers. They, at their Consecration, had a power given and
intended for Life, which is not yet taken from them by the power, that gave it
them; and therefore have manifestly, by our present Constitution, a better
Title than their Successors. They are indeed THRUST out of their Possession as
Abiathar, but with no such evidence of the Divine Sentence passed against them,
as was in his Case. We have, as yet, no Prescription for such Violences; nor
have we to deal with an Infidel Magistracy, as they had. Heathen Governors,
might with more consistency to their own Principles, use such Violences so
frequently, as at length, when all were dead who had a better Title, to make
them pass into a PRESCRIPTION. This can, by no means, become CHRISTIAN PRINCES,
DEFENDERS of the FAITH, nor CHRISTIAN PARLIAMENTS; mueh less, MEMBERS of our
late flourishing CHURCHES in these Dominions. This I say, on Supposition only
of the Legality of our Civil establishment.

XLVII. Among the Jews, the true High Priest was to be known by his possessing
the One Altar. Among th Christians, the true Altar was known by its being
possessed by the true Bishop.
If our Adversaries will needs Reason from Precedents of those times, they must
put a Case exactly Parallel with Ours, of a High Priest possessed of a Title
unquestionably better than his Successors, yet violently forced, as Ours are,
out of his Possession. This Case, I grant, did frequently befall the Jews when
they were Subject to Infidel Magistrates. But it was in such times whose
Practice we cannot reckon upon as Infallible, as we can upon that of our
Blessed SAVIOR and his Apostles. Here therefore we cannot reckon upon their
bare Practice, That, what was done, was as it ought to be, purely on this
account alone, because it was done; but, independently on that, we must enquire
what the Principles then received obliged them to do, if they would approve
themselves true to them. And here, I have already shown that External Force
alone was sufficient to make all exercise of the Priest hood impracticable, to
the Person so deprived by Secular Force. Hence it follows, that it was not in
their Power directly to assert his Right, by communicating with him in Acts of
his Sacerdotal Authority. For him to erect any other Altar, where it might be
in his Power to Officiate, besides that in Jerusalem, was condemned as
Schismatical, by the Doctrines of those Ages, in the Case of the Samaritans,
and upon the same accounts as the Worship in the High places had been condemned
in the Scriptures, and as the Altar built by the Tribes beyond Jordan was
condemned, till they knew the true design of that Altar, that it was only for a
Monument of their Interest in the Altar of Jerusalem, not for opposite
Sacrifices. The only way therefore left them to assert his Right, had been to
have abstained from Communicating in the Sacrifice of his Rival in the Temple.
But there is great reason to believe that that was more than they could justify
then; and that reason, peculiar to their Constitution at that time, which
therefore cannot be drawn into Consequence now under the Gospel, nor applied to
the Case of our present Holy Fathers. It is certain that their Communion then
was as much confined by GOD to the One Altar at Jerusalem, as to the One High
Priest. The only Consideration remaining, is whether of the two Regards was
principal. That is the proper way to determine, whether was to give way to the
other, where both could not be had: That is, whether that Altar was to be taken
for the One Altar designed by GOD, where the true High Priest officiated, who
had the nearest Title in the order of Succession from Aaron? Or, whether that
High Priest was to be taken for the true Representative of GOD, and thereby
could oblige GOD to performance, who officiated at the Altar of Jerusalem,
provided he were otherwise qualified, by being of the Posterity of Aaron, and
of the Line of Phineas, and fairly consecrated by those who had Power to
consecrate him, though he were not the next that was legally qualified, of that
very Line. And we have reason to believe, that the Altar was the principal
Consideration in the Design of GOD, who thereby secured the Communion against
Schismatical Factions, even of the Highpriests themselves, by allowing none
for his authorized Representatives but those who were possessed of that One
Altar. For Jerusalem alone is called the Holy City, St. Matt. IV. 5. XXVII. 53.
and so called in the Jewish Coins for that very Reason, because that was the
place where men ought to worship, St. Joh IV. 20. That only was the place
whither they were to bring their Tithes and Offerings, and where all their
Males were, thrice a Year, to appear in Person. So that all face of public
Worship must have been laid aside at the Pleasure of their Infidel Princes, if
one Obtrusion of a remoter Person, in the order of the Succession, might have
sufficed to hinder their communicating there, which none can think but that GOD
did intend to lay greater stress on, than on the immediate Order of the
Succession. It is certain, they could not, by the Law it self, challenge their
Dues for Maintenance any where else than there, nor eat several of the
Oblations any where else than in that holy place in their Temple. Which shows
plainly, that the Dues of Priesthood were not due to them on any other
Condition, than that of their officiating in that very place designed by GOD
for their Holy Offices. Hence it appears, that what Right they might pretend,
when they were excluded from the Altar of Jerusalem, was only such a remote
Right as Men ordinarily have to Offices, before their Admission into the Legal
Possession of them. They are indeed wronged if they be not admitted as the Law
requires; but till they be admitted, the same Laws allow them no Title to the
Profits, and Duties, and Dependencies annexed to the Office. This was the
Practice of the Jews, when there were Exumples of violent exclusion of those
who by the Law had a Right to possess the Temple and Altar, but did not
actually possess them. And by the Reasoning now mentioned, the Practice appears
to have been agreeable to the Mind of the Divine Legislator, But the Case is
quite different in our Fathers Case under the Gospel. By the Apostolical
Ignatius it appears, that the Bishop is the Standard of our Christian Altars:
That where he is, there the Peculium is to (...) Ignat. Epist. ad Smyrn. n. 8.
(...) Etist. ad Magnes. n. 6. (...), etc. ibid. n. 7. (...). Epist. ad
Philadelph. Inscrip. (...). ibid. n. 3. (...). Epist. ad Trall. n. 7.
Assemble; and they only who do so, can, by the Laws of Christianity, be
properly called the (...) Epist. ad Trall. n. 3.
Church: That his Altar is the True Altar Ut quis (...) sit. quid sit
faciondum, it a hortatur. (...) Epist. ad Ephesians. n. 5. (...) Epist. ad
Philadelph. n. 4. (...). Epist. ad Trall. n. 7.
and his Eucharist the only (...). Epist. ad Smyrn. n. 8.
Valid Eucharist: and that no Acts of Ecclesiastical Authority are (...). Ibid.
acceptable to GOD, or can expect a Ratification by him, which are performed
any where else than where he is, or without his (...). Ibid.
Leave. This ruins all Consequences from their Practice then to our present
Case.

XLVIII. The Reasons for Exemption from the Power of the Prince stronger on our
deprived Fathers Case, than in the Case of Abiathar. Our Bishops are properly
Priests.
Hitherto I have considered the Case of Abiathar in general, as it concerned
the Jews, with some general Strictures only, with relation to our present Case.
I now proceed farther to consider the same Reasonings, insisted on by the
Principles of those Ages, for proving Abiathar exempt, as to his Spirituals,
from the Jurisdiction of Solomon, with relation to the Constitutions of the
Gospel, which are those by which our present Fathers Rights are to be
estimated. Here therefore I design to show that the same Reasonings hold, and
hold with more Evidence and Force, for our deprived Fathers Rights, than they
did for those of Abiathar. First therefore our Episcopal Fathers Rights are as
properly (indeed in a more noble sense) the Rights of a Priesthood as those of
Abiathar were. So that it is very proper to reason from one to the other. I
know how very difficulty this is admitted by many. And yet I wonder it should
be so, considering that it is manifest in the reasonings of the Writers of the
Apostolical Age, who reason from one to the other as plainly as I do, which
Reasonings must be perfectly unconclusive as proceeding on four terms, if the
Notion of Priesthood be not supposed univocally common to ours, as well as the
Jewish Ministry. Thus the Apostle Reasons in the Case of maintenance: Do ye not
know that they which Minister about Holy things, live 1 Chr. ix. 4
of the things of the Temple? And they which wait at the Altar, are partakers
of the Altar? Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. GOD'S ordaining there, is Supposed as known
by them to whom he argues, from what GOD had constituted in relation to the
Jewish Priesthood, and Temple, and Altar; which could by no means be applicable
to his design for proving an Obligation under the Gospel, for maintenance of
the Gospel Ministry, but by supposing our Case the same with theirs, that we
have a Priesthood, a Temple, and an Altar, as properly as they. The same
Apostle Reasons on the same supposal, when he compares our Eucharistical Bread
and 1 Cor. x. 16, 17 18. 21.
Wine, and the Communion we have with CHRIST by them, with the Communion
maintained both by the Jews and the Gentiles, with their respective Deities, by
Sacrifice. With the Jews, in these Words: Behold Israel after the Flesh: Are
not they which eat of the Sacrifices, partakers of the Altar? v. 18. Here
plainly he supposes our partaking of the One Bread, in the Words immediately
preceding, to be the same thing with us, as the eating of the Sacrifices, and
partaking of the Altar. How so, if our Eucharist had not been properly a
Sa^rifice? With the Gentiles. where he compares our drinking the Cup of the
LORD, with drinking the Cup of Devils; and our Partaking of the LORDS Table
with partaking of the Tables of Devils v. 21. and our (...) with Christ v. 16.
with a (...) with Devils, v. 20. It plainly appears, that the Table of Devils
was furnished with no other Feasts but Sacrifical, and they are expressly called
Sacrifices, v. 19, 20. These things also plainly show, that the benefits
expected by the Christians from their Eucharist were transacted, according to
the then received Notions both of Jews and Gentiles, by Sacrifices, as properly
so called as the others were, as to all intents and purposes of Legal
transaction. So again, the same Apostle owns the Sacrifical Style, when he
calls that an Altar which Heb. xiii. 10.
he had elsewhere called the Lords Table: We have an Altar whereof they have no
Right to eat, which serve the Tabernacle. That Altar he compares with meats in
the verse before, and therefore must probably mean the Eucharistical Altar.
Besides the Jews did pretend to the Heavenly Altar, as is clear from the places
formerly produced from Philo. But it was Notorious that their Priests as such
had no Right to the Christian Eucharistical Altar, nor did they ever pretend to
it. This therefore was more unquestionable, and more fit to be Reasoned on, for
the Apostles purpose. So also Clemens Romanus argues from Clem. Romans Ep. ad
Corinth.
the Sacredness of the Jewish Priest hood, to the like Sacredness of the Gospel
Ministry. And from the like Notions of an Altar, Ignatius also Reasons in the
places already mentioned. So many precedents we have of Reasonings of this kind
in the Apostolical times themselves. And if he consider the things themselves
sedately, I see no reason why we should think these Notions strange in that
Age. The Jewish Sacrifices themselves were not then thought available as they
consisted in shedding the Blood of Brutes, but as they represented the
Archcetypal Sacrifice of the (...), and as Covenanting Symbols gave the
Communicants a Right to what was represented by them. This was the truly
beneficial Notion of a Covenant transacted by Sacrifice. And in this Sense, I
cannot conceive how our Adversaries can deny our Eucharist the name of a
Sacrifice, as properly, as it agreed to any used among the Jews. Our Eucharist
also was designed by our Lord to represent his own Archetypal Sacrifice on the
Cross. And not only so, but as a Covenanting Symbol, to convey a Right to that
Sacrifice, so represented, to the Worthy rightly disposed Communicant. What
therefore can our Adversaries desire more for satisfying the proper beneficial
Notion of a Sacrifice? Wine may, by Christ's appointment, signify his Blood to
Covenanting beneficial purposes, as well as real Blood itself.

XLIX. The Gospel Priesthood more Noble than that of Abiathar. The same
Reasoning therefore holds now which did then; but now more strongly.
This therefore being supposed that our Gospel Ministry is a Priestheod; I add
further 2ly, that it is a Nobler one than that of Abiathar This I am sure is
proved or supposed in all the N. T. Reasonings, that whatsoever was Common to
the old and the New Peculiam, was still more excellent under the New Peculium
than that which answered it under the old. I cannot now spare leisure to give
Instances. It is at present sufficient for my purpose, that what was less
certain concerning the Jewish Priesthood, is more certain in Ours; That the
principal design of Ours is to oblige GOD to performance of Promises, as his
part of the New Covenant, explicit and clear, not only implicit as formerly,
in relation to Spiritual and Future and Eternal benefits, which none but GOD is
able to perform. In this regard the new (...) of which our Lord is a Mediator,
is called a better Testament, Hebr. VII. 22. as introductive of a better hope,
v. 19. a better Covenant established 2 Timothy I. 10.
on better Promises. Hebr. VIII 6. Life and Immortality being elsewhere said to
be brought to light by the Gospel. And the Priest hood relating to this new
Covenant is preferred before the other Levitical one, in that Levi in Abraham
paid Tithes and received a blessing from Melchisedec, as the lesser from the
greater. Hebr. VII. 7, 9. In that the Priesthood of the New Testament is an
Everlasting one, as all Archetypal Ideal beings were supposed to be, in the
sense of the Platonic Hellenists, whose Language and Notions the Apostle
alludes to in those places. Not only as it was Eternal in the Individual Person
of the (...), but also as it was to be so in the Succession of the Gospel
Ministry, which was never to give way to any other future dispensation, as that
of the Law did. Besides, in that here the entrance into Heaven the true
Tabernacle, was more immediately performed by the Archetypal High Priest
himself; Hebr. VIII. 1, 2. than under the Law, where it was only shadowed by
the Highpriests entering into the Holy of Holyes Hebr. IX. 7. This also
advanced the Dignity of the Gospel Priesthood, even in the Ministers
themselves as representing the (...) more immediately, and under a Noble
depensation than they did who were of the Order of Aaron. Hebr. VII. 11. To
this also the Apostle adds that the Melchisedekian Priest hood, as it was for
ever, so it was also by an Oath, of which there was no use in the constitution
of the Levitical Priest hood. Hebr. VII. 20, 21. Thus therefore it every way
appears that the Consequences inferred in the Case of Abiathar, must hold here,
but with more Force and Cogency. If the Levitical Priest hood exceeded the
Dignity of the Civil Magistracy, much more the Evangelical Priesthood must do
so too. If that required a Divine call greater than could be given or repealed
by the Civil Magistrate, this must do so also. If the Unction of the Priest
hood then so far exceeded the Unction of the Civil Magistrate, as that the
Magistrate could not invade the Office without Sacrilege and a Piacular Crime,
much less can he now justify his Invasion of a Priesthood, so much Holier than
that was. If the Sacredness of their Office then was thought sufficent to awe
all Conscientiou, Magistrates from offering any thing that might look like
violence to such Holy Persons; a greater Sacredness of our Priest hood now
ought in reason more to awe the Magistrate now under the Gospel Dispensation.
The Punishment of such Encroachments was indeed more frequent and visible then,
but in the Apostle's Reasoning, it is sorer now: Hebr. II. 2, 3. X. 29. I am
sure it must needs be so, if we believe our Religion, that its not being
inflicted here is only a reserving it for the Future State.

L. This Reasoning was admitted in the Apostolical Age. Particularly by Clemens
Romanus. He also Vindicates the Churches Rights against Lay-deprivations from
Jewish Precedents.
Nor are these Consequences only just from this concession, but 3ly, agreeable
also to the actual Sense of even that Apostolical Age. The Necessity of a
Divine Call for Priesthood in General is owned by the Sacred Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, as we have seen formerly, and therefore could not be
denied by him concerning the Gospel Ministry, which I have also shown that he
believed to be a Priesthood. The Dignity also of the Priesthood above the
Magistracy is plainly owned by the Author of the Testaments of the Twelve
Patriarchs. This also will be another Testimony of the Christians of the
Apostolical Age, if what I have said before prove sufficient for showing that
he lived and wrote in that Age. However, we have an Author unquestionably of
that Age, so clear and evident for our purpose, that I cannot foresee what any
of the Vindicators Adversaries can be able to reply to him. That is, the
Apostolical CLEMENS in his famous Epistle to the Corinthians. And which is
more, what he says, he says in prospect of a Case as like ours as those times
were capable of. SOME of the Laity who were inspired with the Spiritual Gifts
mentioned 1 Cor. XII. 8, etc. had then taken upon them to make a Faction
against the established Governuors of the Church, who restrained them from the
disorderly Liberties they had been used to, before the Government had been
introduced and settled among them. Before, they had been used to honors not
suitable to their Station, but their Gifts; but Government being settled, they
were thereby obliged to confine themselves within the decorum of their Station.
Hence that Emulation and Envy he there complains of, when Persons formerly more
regarded for their Gifts, were now engaged in Duty to give way to others less
Gifted, but in a more eminent Station. This made those Gifted Brethren
Mutinous, and the esteem they had acquired by their Gifts so recommended them,
as that a defection followed so universal, that the Governors were forced out
of their Possession. CLEMENS calls it a (...) n. 44.
DEPRIVATION, or by words implying it, and argues against it exactly as we do,
on the Principles already mentioned. He insists on the care that GOD had taken
formerly for asserting the Rights of the Jewish Priest hood, and to let them
see that it was himself who had appointed them to that Honor. (...). n. 43.
When the (...) fell out, (...) he observes how GOD decided it by the
blossoming of Aarons rod. This plainly implies, that the (...) or Emulation so
often by him reproved in the Schismatics, concerned the Priesthood also. He
observes the Care GOD had taken then, that all their (...), etc. n. 40.
Offices should be performed in their due Order. This might be purposely to
warn the gifted Brethren to forbear the (...) 1 Cor. XIV. 16. when now there
was an Order of Men purposely allotted for the Eucharistical Sacrifices. He
enumerates all Ranks of their Subordination, (...) n. 40.
High Priests, Priests and Levites, nay Laics also. He seems therein to
intimate, that they were Laics who were guilty of that invasion of Sacerdotal
Offices, agalnst which he there disputes, That is, who were guilty of the
deprivations now mentioned. Indeed he supposes such a deprivation to be an
invasion of Sacerdotal Offices not tolerable in a Layman. And when he says this
concerning the Laity in general, who can doubt but that Christian Magistrates
must be concluded in the Consequence of what he there discourses? The same
indignity of the Schismatics, as to their Station in the Church, is employed in
what he elsewhere says, that they were (...), dishonorable against those who
were Honorable. Against these therefore he so disputes, that Laymen ought to
be so far from pretending to exclude the Ecclesiastical Governors, That even
inferior Ecclesiastics ought not to presume upon the Offices of those who were
Superior to them in the Ecclesiastical Subordination, as the Levites were not
to intermeddled in the Function of the Common Priests, nor the Common Priests,
with that of the High Priest among the Jews. He therefore obliges them, to
perform their (...). n. 41.
Eucharistical Offices in the Rank and Station wherein GOD had placed them, not
transgressing their bounds as they had done fromerly, as it should seem, in
imitation of the old Prophets, who had, as Prophets, taken upon them, not only
to Communicate, but to Officiate in Sacrifices. This he implys as a thing that
ought no longer to be born with, since the Eucharistical Ministry was now
settled and established. He therefore observes further to this purpose, that
among the Jews, whoever had been guilty of such Invasion, had suffered (...).
n. 41.
Capitally for it. He seems to allude to the known Stories of Corah, Dathan and
Abiram, and Uzzah, among whom were Examples of encroachments of both sorts,
some of the Laity, on the Sacerdotal function in general, such were Dathan and
Abiram, who were Reubenites; some of inferior, on the Superior Sacerdotal
Stations. Thus he argues from these Precedents under the Law, to prove the like
Obligations under the Gospel. So far he was from our late Brethren's Fancies
concerning the Unconclusiveness of such Arguments in this very Case of the
Priest hood.

. LI. He does it also by the same Principles, as by him owned agreeable to the
Constitution of the Gospel.
So far, I say, he was from that, that he makes such Invasions more formidable
now, under so much a Nobler Dispensation. So his following Words imyly: (...)
n. 41.
Take care, my Brethren, lest, by how much our knowledge of the Divine
Mysteries (that is the importance of (...) in that Age) is advanced, by so much
our danger be advanced also. And so far he was from being obliged, by any
exigency of his Cause, to argue as he does, from Precedents under tthe Law, if
that way of Reasoning had not then been judged, solid; that he tells us, that
Christ also had made the like Provision for securing the Gospel Ministry from
the like Encroachments. He tells us therefore, that the Apostles being
forewarned by our Lord, that the like Contentions should arise among the
Christians, concerning the (...). n. 44.
Name of Bishop, as had been before, among the Jews, relating to the (...). n.
43
Priest hood; had therefore, in their (...). n. 44.
foreknowledge of that very event, taken the like care for preserving the
Office from the like Invasions. The Apostles here mentioned, I take to be St.
Peter, and St. Paul, who had by their common Labors planted both Churches,
that of Rome, from whom this Epistle was written, and that of Corinth, to whom.
As therefore, he calls them in this place, (...) n. 44.
our Apostles, so elsewhere he says, that St. Peter and St. Paul had set a
noble Example of patience (...). n. 6.
among us. These Two Places thus compared together, give us to understand who
the Apostles were of whom he there speaks. He therefore further acquaints us
with the Expedients those Apostles took for securing the Holy Office from these
foreseen invasions. He says, they themselves put several of those Persons into
(...). n. 44.
their Office, of whom he was then discoursing; that is, of those who had been
deprived by these Laical Mutiniers. This therefore, it seems he looks on as an
Argument, that they who had been put in possession of their Places by Persons
of the Supreme Ecclesiastical Dignity, should not be dispossessed at the
pleasure of the Laity, who, how great soever their station might be otherwise,
yet were not regarded in their Ecclesiastical Judicatories, but according to
their Ecclesiastical Honors, (St. James II. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.) which in the Laity
were none at all. But there were at that time, in their Ecclesiastical
Presbytery, some substituted in the place of those of the first settlement, who
were since deceased. And for these also he makes the Apostles to have taken
care. He tells us, that in foresight of this Case, they provided for an (...),
n. 44.
(...), an Inheritance that others might succeed into their Places. Possibly it
ought to be (...), as denoting an Additional Law to those other (...) etc. n.
42.
(...), received from our Lord, which had formerly been mentioned by this same
Author. So, in imitation of Plato's (...), Philo, as I remember, calls
Deuteronomy by the same Title of (...) as given a little before Moses his
Death, after the Collection of his former Laws. So our Author teaches us, that
this Law also for securing the Succession, was given by these Apostles, after
they had now settled the Church of Corinth, and ordained as many as they then
thought necessary for the Government of it. That is the notion of (...), it
signifies in him afterward. as appears by another (...), etc. n. 44.
Example very little distant from this same place. He tells us therefore what
this Additional Law was, that they who were to be substituted in their places
as they died, were to receive their Authority from Persons of the highest rank
in the Church. That I take to be the Notion of (...), that they were (...), as
that signifies to be had in reputation, and as on the contrary contemptible
Persons are said to be (...), like the proletarii or capite censi in the Roman
matricula of Citizens, Registered as so many Names, not for any considerable
benefit that their Cities received from them. These (...) therefore, were such
as by the Apostles themselves were designed for supplying the Apostolical
Office after their deprature, in filling up the Vacancies of those Presbyters,
who had been put in Office by the Apostle, themselves, as they ^ell This
therefore St. Clemens, in this Reasoning, takes for a great Presumption, that
the Laity who were of the lowest rank in the Church, should take upon them to
displace those who had been put into their Office by the highest Ecclesiastical
Authority. And yet the Laity whose Case he speaks of, where Prophets, and
Spiritually gifted Persons, which Gifts were always admitted for fairer
pretenses to Spiritual power, than all the worldly Grandeur, and the Secular
terror of the Civil Magistrate. Prophets had been allowed that power even in
Sacrificing, which never was allowed the Secular Prince. Yet even against
these, St. Clemens asserts Rights of the Church, by the very same Topic
insisted on by Us, that the power of the Church was derived from God himself.
We see he ascribes this power of the (...) to the Authority of the Apostles. So
he also derives the Authority of the Apostles themselves, from God himself.
(...). n. 42.
The Apostles taught us the Gospel from our Lord Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ
from God. Christ therefore was sent by God, and the Apostles by Christ; so both
missions were orderly according to the Will of God. His designed inference
therefore with reference to his Cause was, that they who had been put in Office
by an Authority so manifestly and nearly derived from God, ought not to be
turned out of their Office by a Power that could not pretend to any such power
derived from God at all. In all these gradations, he supposes none that gave it
to the Laity, on which account it is, that he overthrows all Right they had to
claim it. How then can the Magistrate pretend to it?

LII. He draws the like Inferences from those Reasonings, in Practice, as we do.
Thus then the Reasons from our Principles, and therefore supposes them
generally known, and as generally granted, even in that happy Age. That is not
all: He pursues those Principles to the same uses in Practice, that we are
making of them now. Do we cleave to our deprived Fathers, notwithstanding the
Lay deprivation? We do therein no more than what he advises also. (...) n. 21.
Let us reverence, says he, the Lord Jesus Christ, whose Blood was given for
us. Let us pay a Veneration to our Rulers; let us honor our Presbyters. (...).
n. 46.
Let us cleave to the Innocent and Righteous, for these are the Elect of God.
Do We complain of the desertion of our Bishops. and betraying of the
Ecclesiastical Rights, as Schismatical? And are we deeply concerned at the
Consequences which have followed upon it, distructive to our Common Religion?
And does not he the same? (...). ibid.
Your Sebism has deprived many, has driven many to despondency, to doubting of
Religion, and all of us to grief. I wish we could not also apply his following
Words to our present Case: (...). ibid.
And yet your Sedition holds on. Do we heartily wish that the Schismatical
Rivals would think of Repentance, and returning to their Duty? And how are we
therein singular? Does not he recommend the like thoughts to the Schismatics
of his own time? These are his words. (...). n. 57.
You therefore who have laid the Foundation of the Sedition, be subject to the
Presbyters, and be disciplined to Repentance; bending the knees of your heart,
learn to be subject, laying aside the haughty and insolent arrogance of your
Tongue. How worthy are his following Words of their Consideration? (...). ibid.
For it is better for you to be little, and of good Repute in the Flock of
Christ, than seeming to have pre-eminence to be cast off from his hope. Let
them never complain of the severity of our Censures, when they find this Holy
unconcerned Apostolical Fellow Labourer of St. Paul, judging as hardly in a
parallel Case. We here see, that he thought such Schismatics out of the Flock
of Christ, and cut off from his hope. He elsewhere adds, with reference to the
same Case, and the same Persons, (...). n. 16.
Christ is of those Who are humbly minded, not of those who exalt themselves
over his Flock. Plainly denying them any interest in Christ, whilst they
continued in that condition impenitent, that is, whilst the Rivals hold their
Schisinatical pre-eminence. He tells us, that (...). n. 44.
it is no small crime, if we cast them out of their Bishopric, who have
offered their Sacrifical Gifts unreprovably and holily. He accordingly adds;
(...) n. 46.
It behooves us therefore, Brethren, to cleave to such Examples. For it is
written, Cleave unto those who are holy, for they who cleave to them, shall be
made holy. And again, in another place, he says, with the innocent thou will be
innocent, and with the perverse thou will be perverse. He supposes no Holiness
reputed by GOD for such, but in the true Communion. Thence he adds, (...). n.
46.
Let us cleave therefore to the Innocent and Righteous, for those are the Elect
of God One of the Prerogatives of the Peculium, is to be the (...), the chosen
Generation. So that in confining the Elect of God, to the true Communion, he
must necessarily be supposed to confine the Peculium to it also. His following
Exhortation therefore firts our Circumstances, as well as it did his. (...)
ibid.
Why are there Strifes and Angers, and Divisions and Schisms, and War among
you? Have we not one God, and one Christ, and one Spirit of Grace that is shed
upon Us? And is there not one calling in Christ? Why do we draw and tear
asunder the Members of Christ, and foment Seditions against our own Body, and
come to such Madness, as to forget that we are Members of each other? May this
Pathetical Exhortation of so great a Person, prevail with our Brethren to study
some Expedient for securing our Ecclesiastical Liberties, and healing the
Breach they have been driven into by Carnal Politics! What a Glory would it be
to them who are princpally engaged in it, to do what he invites them to? (...).
n. 54
Who is there among you Generous? Who is Merciful? Who full of Charity? Let him
say, If the Sedition and Strife and Schisms be for my sake, I depart, I go
away, where you please, and do whatsoever is required by the Multitude. Only
let the Flock of Christ have peace with the Presbyters, who are set over it. He
who would do so, would gain to himself great Glory in the LORD. How much would
it advance their Honor here, and their Peace hereafter, if they would turn
their Emulations for Pre-eminence, into those more Noble ones of Humility, and
Peace, and Condescension? The worthy Doctor, since his ingenuous owing his Chapter
18. p. 197.
Mistake of the Design of Clemens, discovered since by the Vindicator, may be
presumed, by this time to be sensible, now much it is more proper to make such
Addresses to his. Fathers, than ours. He must, at least, acknowledge the making
them so, to be more agreeable to the Design of St. Clement.

LIII. The Laity cannot now pretend to any Indirect Right of depriving Bishops,
as the Jewish Princes could in the Case of the Jewish Priesthood.
Thus it appears, that by the Principles, even of the Apostolic Age* no Laity
whatsoever can pretend to any direct Power over our Ecclesiastical Governors,
with regard to their purely Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Rights. I now proceed
to show 4thly, that they cannot now pretend even to an indirect Power (such as
I showed that Princes might pretend to the^) of depriving our Bishops with
regard to Conscience. For neither of the reasons given there, will hold her.
They cannot make their Right impracticable now, as they could do then, by
excluding them from any particular place, from which it is in their Power to
exclude them. Their Consecrations and Eucharists are not now confined to
Cathedrals, as the Sacerdotal Acts of the Jewish Priesthood were to the Temple,
but are equally valid, where ever they are exercised within their ow
Jurisdictions. This hinders them from being perfectly useless when they are
excluded from Cathedrals. Nor has GOD fixed upon any particular Places, to
which he has confined his own acceptance of them under the Gospel. But as we
have seen from Ignatius, (for I now descend no lower) the one acceptable Altar
now follows the one Bishop, not the Bishop the Altar. This hinders the
Additional Right formerly accruing to a Possessor, purely on account of his
Possession, which was then sufficient to make a Possessor's Right better, which
without Possession, would have been worse than that of an excluded Predecessor.
Nor indeed is there that Reason now, as was then, to expect that GOD should
confine the Exercises of the Evangelical Priesthood to a particular place.
Their Religion then was confined to a particular Nation, and was part of the
National Constitution, as it was Theocratical. There was therefore all the
Security given that Laws could give, that their Princes should always Patronize
it. One of another Nation was incapable of the Office, any other way than by
Conquest. And that did necessarily suppose the Subversion of the Laws
themselves, and therefore of all the Security that could be given by Law. But
the Evangelical Priesthood was first instituted by Christ, and settled by the
Apostles, in a time when the Kings of the Earth stood up, and the Rulers were
gathered together aagainst the Lord, and against his Christ, Acts IV. 26, Not
only without the consent of, but in opposition to all the Civil Powers then
being. And therefore to have made it depend on the Pleasure of the Magistrate
then, had been perfectly inconsistent with a Design of securing and
perpetuating it. And that could not have been avoided, if it had depended on
any thing that was in the Power of the Persecuting Magistrate. It was
instituted and established under actual and violent Persecutions, and therefore
must have been fitted with Provisions that might enable it to subsist under a
state of Persecution, by a Power perfectly disentangled from the Secular Power.
To this it was requisite, that it should be under no obligation of Conscience,
to depend on any thing that was in the Power of the Persecuting Magistrate, as
it must have done, if it had been obliged by GOD to any one particular Place.
It was also requisite, that this Priesthood being constituted by GOD as the
cement of a Spiritual Society, all that was requisite for managing that
Society, should have been by God, (who was pleased to found that Society)
conferred on the Priesthood, as its Right in Conscience, and therefore by the
same Divine Power, exempted from the Right of the Civil Magistrate. For all
that this Priesthood could have to recommend Duty to the Consciences of its
Subjects in a state of Persecution, was only its Sacredness, and the Obligation
that lay on GOD to ratify his own Act, in inflicting the Censures denounced by
it against refractory Persons; and therefore they must be very well satisfied,
that the Censures were denounced by one to whom GOD had given a Lawful
Authority to denounce them. Otherwise, they could not think GOD obliged to
ratify them. And for this it was absolutely requisite, that they should believe
the Magistrate to have no Right in those Cases wherein those Censures were
concerned. Otherwise, they could not think God obliged to ratify them, if they
had been Invasions of the Right of the Magistrate. But the Districts were then
absolutely necessary for making the Churches Censures, as settled out by Lord
and his Apostles practicable. By them the Bishops knew what Persons were liable
to their particular respective Jurisdictions. By those the Subjects olso knew
the particular Bishops to whose Censures they were obliged to pay a Deference.
If the Bishop had censured Persons not belonging to his Jurisdiction, by the
settlement then made by the Apostles, they could not think GOD obliged to
second him in his Usurpations, and therefore could be under no Obligation to
regard such Censures. It was therefore absolutely necessary that the Right of
Preaching the Gospel, and settling districts, without the leave of the
Possessing Magistrates, must by GOD have been made the Right of the
Ecclesiastics, in reference to Conscience, and therefore could not at the same
time have been the Right of the Civil Magistrate. What then will become of the
Doctor's imaginary Contract? Bellarmine fancies, that when the Magistrate was
baptized, he also was supposed to make an implicit Contract with the Bellarm
de Romans Pontif. lib. V. ^ 7.
Bishop, that his Crown should be at the Bishops disposal, whenever the Bishop
should judge that his holding it would be inconsistent with the Churches
Interest. This is as reasonable as the Doctor's pretended Contract, that on
consideration of the leave allowed by the Magistrate Letter to a F^^end. p. 20.
for Preaching and settling districts in his Dominions, the Bishops make an
implicit contract with the Magistrate that they will submit to be deposed by
him. when he shall judge their holding their places hurtful to his Worldly
Interests. If either of these implicit Contracts would hold Bellermines is the
more likely of the two, that the lesser Worldly Interests should give way to
the Spiritual. But from what has been said, it appears that the Right of making
Districts, was a Right inseparable from the Authority given by GOD for making,
and governing Proselytes all the World over. If therefore it be not the
Magistrates, but their own; what reason have they to make any, however
implicit Contracts, for that which is their own already?

LIVE. Our Reasoning against the Magistrates Right of deprivation in Spiritual
proceed Universally, and therefore in Case of Temporal Crimes, also the owning
such a Power would have been Pernicious to the Primitive Christians also, who
were charged with Temporal Crimes*
The Magistrate therefore cannot, by the Constitutions of the Gospel, pretend
to any ^ight, whether direct, or indirect, for depriving our Bishops of their
Spiritual Power. This our Adversaries themselves do not deny, where the Causes
pretended for their deprivation, are purely Spiritual. But where the Case is
Temporal, as it is here in our Fathers Case, there they think that the
Magistrate may punish them, not only by Secular Punishments, but by
Deprivations, as to the exercising of their Spiritual Right in Districts
contained within his Dominions. But all that can fairly follow from their Crime
being Secular, is no more but this, that it properly belongs to the Cognizance
of the Secular Magistrate, and is therefore justly punishable by them who have
a JUST TITLE to the Supreme Secular Authority, That is, in such a way* of
Punishment as properly belongs to the Right of the Magistrate. And we allow
that to extend as far as the Secular Honors, and Revenues, by the Secular Laws
annexed to their Office, nay to their Persons also, as to what is Personal to
them. This is perfectly sufficient to secure the Magistrate (in Case not only a
single Bishop, but the whole Synod, should prove guilty of violating their Duty
to him) whatever the Doctor pretends to the contrary. But that this will give
him any new Right of punishing. which he cannot pretend to by the Nature of his
Office, our Adversaries have not yet pretended to prove. Till they do so, or
till they Answer what has now been produced to prove the contrary, that his
Right of Magistracy does no way reach the Spirituals of our Bishops, no nor
their Right to exercise them in Jurisdictions contained in his Dominions; we
may as easily deny, as they assert, that Power of Deprivation, by them ascribed
to the Magistrate. One would think, that when we have proved the Nature of the
Spiritual Power, such as that it is not in the Power of any but GOD, or those
Authorized by GOD for this purpose, to deprive them of that Power who have once
received it; and that neither the things themselves transacted by the Spiritual
Power are in the Power of the Magistrate, nor that GOD has given the Magistrate
any Authority to represent him in these matters, which may oblige him to ratify
in Heaven what the Magistrate, in his name, pretends to Act on Earth: It should
unavoidably follow that the Magistrate has not this Power at all, which if he
have not in general, he cannot have in this, nor in any other particular Case
assignable by our Adversaries. Why are they therefore so unreasonable as to
expect, after we have disproved this Power in general, that we must be put to
the further trouble of disproving it in a particular Case? They themselves can
easily perceive the partiality of their demands in other the like Cases. They
who, on the other side, are for the encroachments of the Clergy upon the Rights
of the Magistracy in order to Spirituals, in Case of Heresy, do so far proceed
successfully, when they show that Heresy is a Crime properly cognizable by the
Spiritual Judicatories, and that Magistrates, as well as others, are Subject to
such Judicatories in matters purely Spiritual. But then the consequence would
only be, that a Magistrate, so convicted of Heresy, might by such Spiritual
Judges be deprived of his Right to Communion, and consequently of all the
Spiritual Rights and benefits, to which he is entitled as a Member of the true
Communion. This is the utmost that Spiritual Judges can pretend to, or wherein
they can expect that GOD will second and ratify their Determinations. But when
they proceed further to forbid all Civil Conversation with the Magistrate, to
deprive him of his Civil Rights, to absolve his Subjects from their Duty of
Civil Obedience: These are consequences, which, I believe our Adversaries will
not defend. Yet how they can avoid being obliged to it, if they will be true to
the Consequences of their reasonings in this Case, for my part, I cannot
understand. For why may not the Church assume a Right of punishing Temporally,
a Crime that is really allowed to be of Spritual Cognizance, if the Magistrate;
for a Temporal Crime, may inflict a deprivation of Spirituals? I do not now
insist on what we have to say, as to the validity of the Sentence given against
our Fathers, in respect of the Temporal Authority that can be pretended for it.
However, that is, at least, sufficient to show, that it is only the Judgment of
those, who have given Judgment, against them, that they had even Temporal
Authority sufficient for it. And if the Secular Powers may deprive Bishops, for
any Crime, which they who deprive them, shall be pleased to call Temporal; and
if we also, are obliged to think such deprivatons sufficient to discharge Us
from the Duty we owe them, with regard to our Conscience: I cannot see how the
Primitive Christian Bishops could have escaped such deprivation. Julion the
Apostate pretended Temporal Reasons for most of his Persecutions, purposely to
hinder the Sufferers from the Glory of Matyrdome. And even in the earlyer
Persecutions, Secular Crimes were imputed to the Christians. That was the Case
when the Burning of Rome was charged upon them in Nero's time, and the burning
of the Palace at Nicomedia, in Diocletian's; when the Stories of the Dog and
Candle; and Oedipodean incests and the Mothers of Children, were pretended to
be proved against them, by the extorted confession of some Slaves in the time
of Marcus Antoninus. Their very Meetings came under the Laws de Sodalitijs, and
de Hetaerijs, and de Factionibus. And their refusing to Swear by the Genij of
the Emperors, or to Sacrifice for them, were by the Interpretation of those
times reducible to the Laws of loesa Majestas, which we call Treason. Will our
adversaries therefore grant that, on these accounts, those Pagan Emperors might
have deposed the Christian Bishops, and Absolved their Subjects from their
Duties in Conscience owing to them? If they will, we are very sure our glorious
Ancestors of those Ages were not of their mind. And let our Adversaries
themselves judge, whether we have most reason to follow, as Guides of our
Conscience. Besides the Advantage the Primitive Christians had for knowing
Tradition better, this was also a manifest one; That our late Brethren's
Practice goes along with their Worldly, Interests, and indeed never began, till
motives of such Interest inclined them to it; but the Practice of the Primitive
Christians was directly contradictory to such Interests.

LV. The Spiritual Rights of Our Fathers have been now invaded by Civil Force.
Bare Characters. without Districts not sufficient to preserve the Church as a
Body.
But the strangest Answer of all is, That our Adversaries cannot yet be
persuaded that our H. Fathers Spiritual Rights have yet been invaded by secular
Force. As this way of defense signifies their unwillingness to undertake the
Patronage of such Invasions, I confess, I am not a little pleased with it, in
regard to the Liberty it may allow them hereafter, if GOD shall be pleased to
turn our Captivity, to defend the Rights of their own Function, when they may
be defended without danger. And I do not know why, even now, the Clergy should
be forward and Active in promoting a Casuistry that may absolve the Magistrate
from the obligation incumbent on him in Conscience for their Protection. But it
is a strange degree of Confidence to deny the Fact. Had they not set up other
Bishops to exercise Spiritual Power in the same Jurisdictions, they might
indeed pretend to it, But having done so, it is from thence we date their
Schism. Nor do I see, how they can avoid the Charge of it. For if the
Spirituals of our Fathers be yet untouched, then they must still have the same
Right over those same Jurisdictions, as to Spirituals, as they had, and as was
owned by our Adversaries themselves formerly. If so, their Rivals, exercising
Spiritual Power in the same Jurisdiction without their leave, must be looked on
as Invaders of their yet untouched uninvaded Spirituals Rights. If so, they
must, in the Language of St. Cyprian be for as, be aliens, be non secundi, sed
nulli. Not barely on the Authority of that Holy Martyrs saying, but as the
Vindicator proved, from the Nature of the Spiritual Monarchy, which allows no
more than one at once, without conscent, to have a Right within the same
Jurisdiction. It is very plain from hence, that their Right to their particular
districts and Jurisdiction, even as to Spirituals, is actually invaded by their
Intruders. And we have now, and so had the Vindicator formerly, shown the
settling of districts in order to Spiritual Jurisdiction, to be a Right of the
Church, independent on the Favor of the Civil Magistrate. We have shown that
the Church, as well as the State, was by CHRIST and his Apostles made a visible
Body, and that their way of knowing the visible Governors, and Subjects of
this visible, Body, was, even from the Apostles Time, taken from the extent of
those visible Districts; that they who lived in these districts, were all
Subjects to the Governors of the districts, and that the Governors of those
districts as to Spirituals were the particular Governors to whom the Christian
inhabitants of those Districts, owed Obedience as to Spiritual: That whatever
Right the Magistrate had formerly, that might seem inconsistent with these
Rights, was by GOD himself taken away from the Magistrate, in order to the
making this way of propagating the Gospel, Practicable; yet so, that Power
enough was still left for securing the Authority of the Magistrate, as to
Temporals: That the first Christian Magistrates, found the Church possessed of
these Districts, and the Bodies of the Christians, in the several Districts,
possessed also of the Opinion of the Independency of those Districts, as to
Spirituals, on the Civil Magistrates; which they had always made appear, in all
Difference between the Magistrate and the Bishops, by their unanimous adherence
to the Bishops, as to Spirituals: That therefore those Districts, as to
Spirituals, were never derived from the Favor of the Magistrate, and therefore
not obnoxious to his disposal. Here therefore this whole Dispute is reducible
to a short Dilemma. If the presumed Magistrate has not invaded the Spiritual
Districts of our Fathers; then the Intruders are Schismatics for intermeddling
with those Rights which their Predecessors are not deprived of. And all others
also must be Schismatics who own and Communicate with the Intruders. If the
Rivals be not Intruders, they must needs say that the Predecessors have lost
their Right, even to those Districts, as to Spirituals. And how they should
come to lose it but by the Sole Act of their Magistrate, I know nothing that
our Adversaries can pretend. There is manifestly no Act of the Church, that
they can so much as pretend for it. Their Character, they say, is not yet
touched. No wonder it should not, since the Schoolmen, from whom they borrow
the term of Character, hold Characters to be indelible by any Humane Authority
whatsoever, not only secular, but Ecclesiastical also. However all the Use our
Adversaries make of their remaining Character, is only to make them restorable
to their old Jurisdictions, without a new Consecration; and in the mean time,
to legitimate some Acts of Epicopal Power, which must no be supposed to depend
on a relation to a particular Jurisdiction. But this Character, that has no
relation to a particular District, could not be sufficient for preserving
Bodies (such as the Church was designed to be by, them who founded it) in a
State of independency on the Civil Magistrate; Bodies, as then understood by
the Ecclesiastics, being determined and distinguished by such Districts. The
allowing therefore the Heathen Persecuting Magistrates a Power of dissolving
the relation of all the Bishops of their Dominions, to particular Districts,
had parfectly dissolved all particular Churches, as Bodies, when the Magistrate
was pleased to dissolve them; and therefore cannot be agreeable to the design
of CHRIST and his Apostles, who intended to perpetuate Churches, as Bodies,
independent on the state. And it is certain, that this Power of discharging
Ecclesiastcal Governors from the Districts in their own Dominions, was not
owned in the Civil Powers by the Apostles and earliest Christians. Had it been
so, the Apostles themselves must have quitted Jerusalem, when they were
forbidden by the Sanbedrim, and sought out other Converts and Districts,
wherein they might exercise their Function and Character. But where could they
seek or find them, but the same Objection, would still recur from this Right of
the Civil Magistrate? There must therefore have been no Churches in the World,
if this Doctrine had been allowed of. But it is certain, that the Apostles did
still challenge and exercise their Jurisdiction in Jerusalem, and were owned
and seconded in doing so, by the Christians Inhabitants of that City, against
all the Persecutions of the Magistrate, and were all of them owned by GOD, by
the Credentials that followed them, which could never have been, if these their
Practices had been Usurpations. And all the Right that Bishops then had for
obliging the whole Catholic Church, was grounded on the commerce of
Communicatory Letters, and the Common interest of all, to ratify the Acts of
particular Districts. Thence it appears, that all exercise of Epicopacy, as
Catholic, was grounded on the Right, each Bishop had to a particular District.
So vain are our Adversaries pretenses for making our Bishops, Bishops of the
Catholic Church, though deprived of Districts, in order to the exercising any
Episcopal Act for preserving the Face of a Body, under a Persecution.

LVI. Supposing the Church and Christian State had made one Body, yet more had
been requisite to make that Supposition applicable to our present Case, which
is not yet taken notice of.
But the Principle pretense of all that our Adversaries insist on, is, That in
those earlier times, the Church was indeed a Society distinct from the State,
and whilst it continued so, the deprivations of the State, could therefore not
extend to Spirituals, which were the constituts of the Church as a Society
distinct from it: But that there is no necessary consequence, because it was so
then, that therefore it most be so now: That the Reasoning from the Sense and
Practice of those Times, does indeed hold where the Case is the same as it was
then, That is, where the State consists of Infidels; but not in ours, wherein
the State professes the Christian, Religion. This is suggested by the worthy
Author of the Defense of the Church of England, as he calls it, from the
Charges of the Vindicator. And he has therein managed the Reasoning Part of
this Dispute better than the Doctor, in that he has pitched on the particular
Proposition, which he thinks needs further proof in the Scheme of the
Vindicator, seeming withal to allow that if this also be cleared, the rest of
the Vidicators Proof will hold, as being firmly superstructed on it. This
therefore brings the Question to a short issue, and affords a further Subject
of useful Discourse, for improving what has been said already, and I therefore
return my hearty thanks to that Author for it, only wishing that he had allowed
himself a larger Scope for making that out, which if proved, would have been so
very considerable for his purpose. Supposing he had proved his Assertion true,
yet other things, remained to have been proved further, for making it
applicable to our present Case. Something more had certainly been requisite for
his purpose, than barely to suppose the Magistrate barely Christian. He might
easily have foreseen that, even among Christians, there are different
communions, on account of HERISY and SCHISM. If the Magistrate therefore be
guilty of either of those, he is as incapable of Uniting with the Church in one
Cmmunion, as if he were an IDOLATOR. And I suppose all the ground that worthy
Person has for making a believing Prince's Case different from that of an
Infidel, in order to the Church's coalition into one Body with the Society that
is governed by the believing Prince, must be the Church's Union in Communion
with him, which it cannot have with an Infidel. For that Political Union, which
is requisite for Secular Government, as far as it is consistent with difference
in Communion, as to Spirituals, the Orthodox are as capable of maintaining with
INFIDEL Princes, as they are with either HERITICKS, or SCHISMATICS. And for
applying that Case, he might have considered further, how far Communicating
with Schismatics in other places, and setting up Schism where he found the
true Communion established by Law, and allowing no Patronage of Law, without
Schismatical conditions, may go to prove a Prince's Case SCHISMATICAL. Then
supposing the Church and State united into one Society, he should have enquired
further, why this Union must rather be under the Secular, than the spiritual,
common Monarch. This, I am sure, is against the General Rule of Subordinations,
to make the more Noble Power Subject to that which is less so; and therefore
ought to have been proved by reasens peculier to this particular coalition of
two Societies into one. Such peculiar Reasons I doubt are more then ever we can
expect from him. But supposing both these difficulties surmounted, that the
Church had a Prince of one Communion with her, and that the two Societies now
united, were to be Governed rather by the PRINCE, than the METROPOLITAN; Yet
still another Question remained worthy his Consideration, how long this Union
was to hold? If irrevocably, then the Church would be left destitute of a
Power, necessary for her subsitence, whenever the Prince should Apostatize to
Infidelity, or an Infidel should succeed him by the Rules established for the
Succession. If therefore the Church's Power be granted revocable, the Enquiry
then would be, whether the Grant can in reason be supposed to hold any longer
than the Prince's Protectoon of her. If so; then whether, when he revokes his
Protection granted on Conscionable terms, and Persecutes his Fellow Brethren,
for no other reason, but for being true to the Principles of the old communion,
this be not the very Season wherein they are, in Conscience, absolved from
their old Grants, and are perfectly free to resume their old Spiritual
Liberties? I know our Adversary will understand me, without any further
application.

LVII. The Prince (...) account of his being only a Christian, has no Title to
any Spiritual Authority.
These things, I say, had been requisite to make his Doctrine Practicable, if
it had been proved, and proved as well as himself desires to prove it. But, for
my part, I am perfectly of the Vindicators mind, nor do I see any reason to
doubt but that his whole Proof will hold, if this be the only suspicious
Proposition concerned in it. I see no reason, why the Church should loss her
Liberties, or Princes gain more Power by their Conversion, than they had
before. The Nature of the thing, does not the least require it. Princes, when
they are received into the Church's Communion, are received, as other Laics
are, by Baptism; which can therefore entitle them to no more Power, than other
Christians, who are admitted into the same Society, the same way, as they are.
As therefore Baptism alone confers no spiritual Authority to others, no more it
can to the Prince, who has no Pre-eminence above them, on this account. When
therefore he is baptized, he still remains, in reference to spiritual Power, no
more than a Private Person, as all others do, who have no more spiritual
Authority given them, than what is conferred upon them in their Baptism. How
then comes he by this Power in Spirituals, which our Adversaries challenge for
him? All our forementioned Reasons proceed as validly against his claim of
spiritual Power, whilst he continues only a Layman, though Baptized, as they did
before his Baptism. Still, the spiritual Power is grounded on the Power of
rewarding and punishing Spiritually, by admitting to, or excluding from, the
Spiritual Benefits of the Society. Still, the Power of that admission to, or
exclusion from, those Benefits, depends upon the Power of the Incorporating
Rites; which being granted, admit into the Body, or if denied, exclude from it.
Still the Incorporating Acts, are the two Sacraments, as we are Baptized into,
the spiritual Body, and as we are made one spiritual Body, by our partaking of
one Bread: So that none can have the Power of these Incorporating Acts, who has
not the Power of Administering the Sacraments. Still, the Power of Administering
the Sacraments, is proper to the Evangelical Priest hood; and it is still, as
unlawful for Princes to invade the Sacerdotal Offices, as it was under the old
Law, when the Prince was obliged to be always of one Body, with the
Priesthood, in reference to Religious Acts of Communication. Still, the
Reasoning of St. Clemens holds that Laymen are only to meddle with Acts
properly Laical, and proceeds with more Force than in the Case wherein that
Holy Apostolical Person used it. The Gifted Laics had been Baptized as well as
our Believing Princes, and in that regard were every way Equal with them. But
as they were endued with Spiritual Gifts, they were better qualified for
extraordinary Calls to Acts of sacerdotal Power, than Princes can be by any
Pretensions to, or Advantages of, Worldly grandeur. Baptism indeed makes the
Prince and the Church one Society, as the Prince is thereby incorporated into
the Privileged Society of the Church, But then, this Baptismal Union is rather
of the Prince to the Bishop, than of the Bishop to the Prince, and therefore on
the Bishop's terms, not the Prince's. How then can the Prince's being received
into the Church as a private Person, and as a Subject to the spiritual
Authority, entitle him to any of that same Authority, to which by his Baptism,
he professes his subjection? He is indeed so far from being a Public Person in
his Baptism, that the Obligation and Benefits of his Baptism, are wholly
Personal to himself, none of his Subjects, being in the least, concerned in it.
If he had acted as a Public Person in it, his single Act had obliged all his
Subjects, and would have consequently entitled them to all the benefits of his
stipulation. But this is more than our Adversaries will pretend in this Case.
How then can an Act purely Personal, entitle him to an accession of Spiritual
Authority?

LVIII. A whole Nation, by Baptism, may be made one Society in the Church,
without prejudice to their being still a Society distinct from it.
Thus far therefore it is certain, that a Prince's admission into the Church,
is not alone sufficient for a Coalition of the State into one Body with the
Church, because that other Body of the State, whereof he is head, is not the
least concerned in this Act of his as a Private Person, not as a Public, much
less as a Head of any Body at all. Suppose we therefore the generality of a
State converted and Baptized also. This will indeed make them one Body with the
Church. But on the same terms as it made the Prince one, that is, on the
Church's terms, not on theirs: That is, by so many repeated Personal Acts
qualifying them for, and receiving Baptism, as there are supposed to be
particular Persons in that whole Secular Society, and as so many private
Persons, not as invested with any public Authority in another Society. Still,
therefore, Proselites of that kind, how numerous soever, can never hurt the
Authority of that Society, into which they are Incorporated only, as so many
private Persons. A whole Nations therefore, how populous soever, coming in on
these terms, cannot change the Spiritual Society from what they find it. They
add to the numbers of the Subjects of the Spiritual Society, and in that
regard, should rather advance, than diminish, the Authority of that new Society
into which they are Incorporated And as their accession to the Church cannot
make any change in the Government of the Church, so neither in their one. Their
admission into the Church being only the Act of so many private Persons singly
considered, can therefore not concern them as a Society, can therefore no way
affect them as public Persons, and as concerned for the Government of the
Society, into which they were Incorporated before. There is therefore on
neither side any explicit renunciation of ancient Rights, nor yet by any fair
Interpretation. Their coalition into one Body with the Church, does not
dissolve the same relation they had formerly to different Societies, on
different considerations. The Bishop, though he act the part of a Public
Person in admitting them into his own Spiritual Society, does not thereby put
off his former Subjection as to Temporals, nor acquire any thing inconsistent
therewith. Nor does the Magistrate by his Subjection in Spirituals, profess any
thing not fairly reconcilable with his Temporal Sovereignity. Their coalition
therefore into one Body, is very well consistent with their still continuing as
distinct Societies as they were before. Nor does our worthy Adversay object any
thing to prove the contrary, but that upon Conversion and Baptism of the
Seculars, the Church and State consist of the same Persons. How should the
Church and State make Two distinst Societies, says he, where the Church and
State consist of the very same Persons? The very same way, say I, as our K.
EDWARD the III. was, at the same time, a SOVEREIGN of England, and SUBJECT of
France, when he swore homage to Philip of Valois for his Dominions in France.
Yet who doubts but England and France were then two distinst and perfectly
independent Societies? The same way as the BISHOP himself was the Head of the
CHURCH, and yet a Subject of the STATE, therefore a Member of BOTH Societies,
antecedently to any such Conversions, or any Pretense that could be therefore
made, for a coalition of both into one Society. Conversion therefore, thought
it bring all Persons into one Society of the Church, yet does not hinder but
that the Two Societies of the Church and State, continue as distinct from each
other as formerly, whilst the same things remain that made them two Societies
formerly. And Conversions do not hinder but that they may still remain so.
Still, the Spirituals and Temporals, are as distinct as ever. Still, the same
Right continue for the Bishops to be the competent Judges of Spirituals, as the
Magistrate are, of Temporals. Still, the same distinction of Laws continues, by
which the Two Societies are governed as formerly. That the Church is to be
governed by the Church, which are made by a Consent of the Ecclesiastics, and
that the State is governed by the Laws, which receive their Sanction from the
Lay-Authority. Still, the Independence continues, that the Bishops are as
supreme unappealable Judges for Spirituals, as the Magistrates are for
Temporals. Conversions I am sure, do not hinder, but that this also might have
remained as it did formerly. For such a coalition of the Two Societies as our
Adversary reasons for it, would be necessary that the Government of one of the
Societies should surrender, or acknowledge a dependence on the Government of
the other. But neither of them can be pretended at the first Conversions of
Magistrates. Neither of them now, in the Case of the Church of England. The
name of Head, on which our Adversary insists, is long ago laid aside by Q.
Elizabeth. And one of our Articles disowns all Pretensions of our Princes to
the power of preaching the Word, and administering the Sacraments. This Article
is ratified, and made Law by an Act of Parliament. Upon these Considerations,
we can fairly take the Oath of Supremacy, as thus intrepreted by the
Legislators themselves, without owning any subjection of the Bishops, as to
Causes purely Spiritual, to the Supreme Magistrate, even in England. So far the
Church and State are yet, even here, from being made one Society, as our
Adversary pretends. The Examples of Bishops taking out Patents for the Right of
giving Orders, were, I believe, never known before the Reign of HENRY the VIII.
And that I hope our Adversary himself will not plead as a Reign of Presidents.
If he do, the Liberties of the People will be no more secure, than those of the
Clergy. Nothing was security against him, who made such manifest invasions on
the Two Fundamental Securities, MAGNA CHARTA, and his own OATH, taken at his
CORONATION. Thus clear it is, that Conversions alone could not make any change
in the Rights of Power in Spirituals, of which the Church was possessed before,
notwithstanding that the Converts are thereby made one Body with the Church,
with which they were not one formerly.

LIX The Church's Obligations are more necessary for the subsisting of the
State, than those she receives from the State are for hers.
If therefore the Majestrate will lay claim to a Right in Spirituals, it must
be on some other account than bare Conversion. That, he must rather lose, than
gain by, as I have already shown, because in his Conversion he comes to the
Bishop's terms, not the Bishop to his. Our Adversaries therefore have another
Pretense for his Superiority in purely Spirituals. That is, the benefit that
the Church enjoys by the Magistrate's favor and protection, the honors and
profits annexed to the sacred Offices, and the security she has thereby against
Adversaries, and the assistance of the secular Arm for reducing Rebellious
Subjects by secular coercions. For these things they think her obliged in
Gratitude, to remit some of her former Rights, by way of compensation for them.
And this Obligation in gratitude they conceive sufficient to engage her to an
implicit and intrepretative Contract to continue this remitting of Rights on
her part if she will, in reason, expect that the Magistrate shall continue his
Favors. But, I confess, I cannot see, proceeding on Principles that must be
granted by all who believe Religion, but that the disadvantage will still lie
on the side of the Magistrate. For by this way of Reasoning, the implicit
Contract for remitting Rights, will lie on that side which is most obliged; and
that side will appear most obliged, which receives more benefit by the commerce
than it gives. For this consideration of remitting Right, on account of
Gratitude, comes only in by way of compensation for what is wanting on its own
side, to make the benefit it confers equal to that which it receives. But I
cannot imagine how the Magistrate can pretend his Favors equal to those which
he receives by Religion, especially the true Religion. So far he is from
exceeding them, so as to expect any compensation for arrears due to him on
ballancing his accounts. It is by Religion, and by those Obligations which
nothing but Religion can make sacred and inviolable, that he holds his very
Throne it self. If he hold his Throne by Compact, nothing but Religion can hold
the Subjects to the Contract made by them. If by any other Right, nothing but
that can oblige them to pay him that which by any sort of Right soever is his
due. Where he has no force to exact duty from them, nothing can restrain them
but ties of Conscience, and nothing alse can lay a restraint on their
Conscience but Religion. Where he has a power of Force, yet even that is not
near so formidable at the irresistible power of Heaven, and the fear of future
and eternal Punishments. No Considerations but those, can curb them from secret
Practices, which oftentimes subvert the greatest Humane Force by degrees
insensible, and therefore unaviodable. Nor is any Religion so conget on these
accounts, as that which is truest and most acceptable to GOD. GOD may be
obliged, by the general Laws of Providence, for the general Good of Mankind, to
inflict Imprecations made for securing Faith, even in false Religions. But he
is most present at the Offices of his owe establishment, and therefore they
have the greatest reason to fear them who imprecate in that form which is most
suitable to the ture Religion, No Religion so formidable at that which
threatens future and eternal Pains in case of Violation. No Religion can so
well assure Us of the future and eternal State, as Revealed Religion. No
Revelation so well evidenced by Credentials attesting it in Ages of Writings
and accurate Information, as our Christian Religion. No one Communion even of
Christians, so just and equal against Invasions on either side, either of the
Church, or the Magistrate, as that of the Primitive Christians; and of these
Churches which lately came the nearest to those Primitive, in these late
flourishing Dominions. Thus it is every way certain, that the Church does more
contribute to the security of the State, than that secular Protection, which is
all the State can contribute, does to the security of the Church. The Church
can subsist by her own Principles, if she will be true to them, without the
support of external Power. The State cannot subsist without Force, nor secure
her Possession of a coercive Power, without the support of Religion. Thus, even
in point of necessity, the Church is more necessary to the State, than the
State is to the Church.

LX. The Benefits received by the State from the Church, are also greater than
those which the Church receives from the State.
Nor only so. But the Obligations on the Church's side are greater, and more
beneficial to the seculars, than those of the seculars can be to the
Ecclesiastics. And this is withal a great consideration in judging concerning
the Measures of Gratitude, and the extent of what is to be done, in order to a
compensation. The greatness of the benefit on one side, is the principal thing
that requires additional Offices on the other side, to make an equality on both
sides, which is that which we call a Compensation. Indeed the necessity of it
is no otherwise a Consideration in this matter, than as the need we have of a
thing adds to the Price expected for it in ordinary Commerce. But the Benefits
of Religion are without compare beyond all that can be pretended from the power
of the State. Consider we the Supreme Magistrate in his own Person; and all
that he enjoys as a Prince, is not to be mentioned with what he may expect as a
Member of the true Cammunion, and a Professor of the true Religion. Our Savior
himself has told us, that his gaining the whole World, is no purchase nor
profit, if he lose his own Soul for it, and that nothing can make amends for
such a Loss. The Magistrate who believes his Christian Religion true, cannot
avoid believing this. And how can he that does so, think the Church in his
arrear for his favor and protection? This is, and in reason ought to be, of
more censequence to him than his Crown and Scepter, which are a very small part
of the purchase mentioned by our Lord, nay, than the flourishing of the whole
Community for which he is concerned. But we may consider him further as a
public Person, inspired with a public Spirit, and with all that Zeal for the
good of his Community, which becomes his noble public station. Consider him as
divested from all private, though greater interests, in his Acts relating to
the public; yet even so he must believe the whole Society, for which he is
concerned, more obliged by being admitted into the true Church, than that any
thing that he can do by the power and interest of his whole Society, can ever
recompense it. So far he is from any hopes of supererogating and obliging the
Ecclesiastics more than they deserve, though all the favor done, were no more
than their admitting his whole Society, into the true Communion. The saving of
one Soul is, in our Savior's now mentioned Doctrine, a greater benefit than
what can be performed by the greatest Worldly Power. But the receiving his
whole Community into their privileged Society, is a public benefit to the
whole Community, and a benefit of the highest kind, far exceeding that of which
a single-Soul is capable, which yet is too great for him to hope to recompense.
As therefore he is obliged upon account of his Socitey, to be grateful for
kindnesses received from the Church, so he never can hope by all the public
power of the Society of which he is possessed, to make even with the
Ecclesiastics. When he has done all he can, his good will must by the
Ecclesiastics be accepted for his deed. How can he then oblige them to any
further accounts on their part; that are to be made up by cession of their just
Rights? Even as to Temporals, the whole Body of the State, and the Prince as
concerned for the Body, are more obliged to the true Religion, and the Society
in which alone it is to be had, than they are ever able to requite. Not now to
mention the Temporal Blessings to which they are hereby entitled, Godliness
having the Promises of this Life, as well as of that which is to come; all that
Justice in Conversation, all that sweetness and obligingness which their Duty
to GOD obliges Religious Persons to show to all with whom they converse; all
that sincerity and open heartedness which makes Mankind love, and trust, and
please each other, are the most genuine fruits of the true Religion, where it
is heartily believed and practiced. It can therefore be nothing but
inconsideratness, and disbelief, and forgetfulness of the true value of things
upon sober consideration, that can tempt the Magistrate to think that the
Church is so over-obliged to him for his protection, as to need a compensation.

LXI. If the State had been capable of conferring the greater Obligations, yet
a good Pious Magistrate could not, in reason, desire such a recompense as
should oblige the Church to yield any of her Ancient Rights.
It rather on the contrary appears, that the greatest Obligations are on the
Church's side, and that therefore what compensation by cession of ancient
Rights, was necessary on account of Gratitude, was rather to be expected from
the Magistrate. The best and most pious Magistrates have always thought so, who
were certainly the most competent Judges of matters of Religion. Yet supposing
it possible, that the State could supererogate* a pious Magistrate would never
desire nor accept of such a recompense, as should oblige the Clergy to yield
their ancient and original Rights, conferred on them by GOD himself at their
first establishment. He would presume that Power was necessary for the good of
the Spiritual Society, which GOD was pleased to put them in possession of,
antecedently to the favors of secular Princes, and could not find in his heart
to deprive the Spiritual Society of any Power which GOD himself had judged
necessary for it. He might the rather presume it concernin a Society instituted
under a Persecution, and designed to continue the same under all the
Revolutions, not only of his own, but all other states in the World. He would
consider himself also as a Trustee of the Power committed to him by GOD, and
therefore under an Obligation to manage the Trust in that way that he could
judge most agreeable to the mind of him who had committed the Trust to him. He
would therefore think himself obliged to value all things according to the
value that GOD has put upon them; principally to regard that which was
principal in the design of GOD, and to make all other Considerations
subservient to it, which GOD intended should be so. This would oblige him to
make all Designs for the Temporal Prosperity of his Subjects, ultimately useful
for the public good of their Souls. This would oblige him further, to mind
that in the first place, and principally those Expedients which more
immediately tend to the promoting it, and all other Temporal Politics no
otherwise, nor further, than as they also may promote it, or at least be
consistent with it. And in this way of Reasoning, I know not how he could avoid
preferring the Spiritual, before his own Authority, and therefore managing his
own Authority in subserviency to it, for the promoting and supporting it, not
for diminishing it. This I am sure every truly Christian Magistrate, must look
on as more solid and Judicious Reasoning, from the Principles of the Christian
Religion, and securer therefore for his last Accounts to GOD, and his Soul's
Eternal Interest, than to suffer himself to be influenced in matters of so
momentous a nature, by Atheistical fooleries and flirts of being Priest-ridden.
This therefore being supposed, how conscious soever such a Magistrate might be
of his own good Will to the Church, yet he would not be willing to accept of
any branch of that Power which GOD had judged necessary for her, that himself
might have the managing it for her interest. He would not think it for the
Glory of his time, upon any pretense whatsoever, to leave that Holy Society
more destitute of Power than he found her. He must needs think, that GOD's own
settlement of it was the wisest, that they were fittest for administering the
Power, who, by the Nature of their Function were best qualified to understand
the Causes in which it was conversant, and who were most concerned for the good
of the Society, for whose use GOD had given it; and who by Obligations of
Conscience, and by being destitute of external force, were the least likely to
design, and least able to carry on encroachments to the injury of lriva powers.
He would not be willing that a Successor should be trusted with an
administration of such a Power, which, if ill administered, might prove of so
dangerous consequence to the Church's walfare, and for whose good meaning he
has not that security as he has for his own. He would not easily trust, even
his own partiality, of his own mutability, with it. These would be the natural
Reasonings of a generous and well minded Prince: And methinks they should be so
of pious and generous Parliaments also. Here has been very much Zeal pretended
for securing our Church against a Popish Successor: This should make those who
call themselves Protestant Parliaments, unwilling to challenge that as a Right
of Parliaments in general, which may put it in the power of a Popish
Parliament, and indeed of any other that may be of another Communion, to
dissolve our Church, as this Power of Lay deprivations will certainly do, if
they may be allowed as sufficient to discharge Us from our Spiritual duties to
our so deprived Bishops.

LXII, Princes have been allowed by the Church a Right to keep Persons out, not
yet Canonically possessed; but not to turn any out, who were already in
Possession of Bishoprics. And that without any proper Cession of Right on the
Church's part.
Thus it has appeared, that a well meaning Magistrate to the Interest of the
Church, and Religion, has neither Obligation nor Equity to expect such a
cession of Spiritual Rights on the Churches part, as a compensation for his
Protection, nor would himself be inclinable to think he had any. What ill
meaning ones may expect, is not worthy our regard. Such are too partially
concerned, to be taken for competent Judges in Affairs of this nature: They
neither deserve such a Cession, nor indeed are fit to be trusted with it.
However we deny not, but that the Magistrate has a Right in the disposal of
those favors which are requisite for the Churches interest in order to a legal
Settlement and Protection. And he has withal thereupon a Right to expect a
Security to be given him for his own Temporal Power, against invasions from the
Ecclesiastics, in consideration even of that Act of Justice, of securing them
also from the like Invasions from the Temporal Power, by his employing it in
their defense, though he be otherwise obliged in Conscience to protect that
which himself believes to be the true Religion and the true Communion. But then
this is no proper Cession of Spiritual Rights. For even antecedently to the
amicable correspondence between the Church and State, the Church was as much
obliged in Conscience to forbear encroachments on the Temporal Rights, as the
Magistrate was on the Spiritual. Only the difference was, that before the
correspondence, the Church her self took upon her to judge concerning the
trustiness of the Persons put in Office by her, having then no access to the
Civil Magistrate; but afterward she suffered him to judge himself of his own
security. That was by not having Bishops imposed upon him to enjoy his
Temporals annexed to their Office, without his own approbation which was no
more than what was generally reasonable on equal terms. This sometimes allowed
him a power at first of stopping any Person proposed if he did not like him,
sometimes of pitching on the Person by the Right of a Lay Patron. So also he
was allowed to judge concerning Canons, whether they might prove prejudical to
the Temporal Government, before he seconded them with his Temporal Government,
and by secular Coercions, which was also very just and equal, without any
cession on the Churches side. For this was only allowing him to judge where his
own Power and Right was concerned. But then this Right was only to keep out a
Person who was not yet possessed of the Power he pretended to, by even the
spiritual Right of Consecration, and therefore no Act of Authority upon a
Bishop properly so called, but only on a Candidate for the Office. But there
was never any Act of the Ancient Church so much as pretended, that I know of,
that ever Allowed Princes to turn Bishops out of their spiritual Rights,
without Synods, when they were once Canonically possessed of them. No Emperors
of the same Communion that acted sedately, and like Persons who regarded
Principles, who ever attempted it, without at least packing or pretending
Synods for the deprivation of Bishops. The Canons omitted by the Doctor are
sufficient, if there were no more, to show that this was, at least, the sense
of the Church, and Jurisdiction of the Constantinopolitan Patriarchate. And
even this Power that was allowed, was allowed on Obligation of Interest, not of
Conscience. None could pretend to the Temporals annexed to the Episcopal Office
without the Princes consent. And whilst the Correspondence between the Church
and the Prince held, there was no need of separating the spiritual Rights form
the Temporal. But the Church was at perfect Liberty in Conscience, if she was
willing to want the Temporals, to give the spiritual Power alone, and much more
to continue it, where it was already given, if she Judged the Prince's
Impositions more prejudicial to her spiritual Society, than his Favor was
advantageous; and when that Case fell, she was to Judge. Thus much therefore
may be allowed the Magistrate on account of his own Right, without any thoughts
of Cession of the Church's Rights, and without any acknowledgment of Obligation
from the Magistrate that should make a Cession necessary, or so much as
reasonable. And the acknowledging a Liberty in the Magistrate to keep out, does
not in any Equity of Interpretation infer a Right to turn out Bishops, and
absolve their Subjects from their duties to them in spirituals, and with regard
to Conscience, this being greater than the Right that is confessed. Thus
therefore there is not the least ground for an implicit compact on the
Church's side, for Cession of her Rights and Liberties. For this cannot be
proved, but from the Nature of a greater Obligation, than can be othewise made
amends for, without a Cession, or a grant of things greater than that of
deprivation: Neither of which can be here so much as pretended, and therefore
the Church cannot in reason be pretended to have done it by a tacit consent,
or an implicit compact. And for an explicit compact, that may seem to have
agreed to it, I do not think our Adversaries can pretend any, before that Reign
of Violence, against Sacred Rights, especially, of Henry VIII. a Prince
unbounded by any sense of Right whatsoever whether Sacred or Secular.

LXIII. The Power of turning out Bishops once Possessed, too great to be
granted on any Consideration whatsoever.
Indeed the Nature of this is such as cannot be granted by any Society that is
absolute, on any Consideration whatsoever. No Obligations that can be laid on
a Society can be valued by it more than its own subsistence. It must Be, to be
capable, of receiving Obligations, and it must have a Security of its
continuance, in order to its having a Security, that the Obligations shall be
continued also. Its subsistence therefore is antecedent to all possible
Obligations, and therefore the securing that, is of more importance to it than
any possible Obligations. No present Obligations, can be a sufficient
recompense for them, to put it in the Power of another, to dissolve and destroy
them as a Society. Especially such Obligations, which concern them principally,
as they are a Society. They are therefore only Obligations Perpetual, that can
pretend to be an equivalent for a Society, (that may promise to it self
Perpetuity, if governed by it self) to put it self in the power of another
Society, of interests seperable from its own. But that such Obligations to
their Society, shall be perpetual, they can have no Security, unless they be
first secured, that the Society it self shall be so. And for this, it is a very
justly suspicious circumstance, if the Magistrate, who pretends to confer the
Obligations, refuses to do it, but on condition that the Bishops will submit to
hold during his pleasure. He who designs to weaken the security they have
already, is justly to be suspected of a design on the security it self. And the
Church must needs look on it as a Diminution of the security, for her
subsistence, if from subsisting as long as her self pleases, (so she may do,
whilst she has her own Government in her own hands) she must be reduced to
depend on the pleasure of another, of affections variable from her Interests.
She has therefore reason to break off all Treaty with a Magistrate, who should
openly treat with her on such terms, as the Sheep were obliged to do (in the
Apologue of Demosthenes) when the Wolves are said to have made specious
proffers of Peace, and future kindnesses, on a like condition that the Dogs
(which were the only real security the Sheep had to oblige the Wolves to
performance) should be delivered up to be destroyed by them. So Semiramis when
no doubt with great professions of good will, she had prevailed with Ninus to
allow her the Liberty of commanding his Dominions for one only day, secured it
to her self for ever, by destroying him before the time appointed for her
resignation. For to allow this Power to the Prince of depriving the Supreme
Governors of the Church, I know not how it can be contrived without danger of
ruin to the whole Society, or at least, without lessening the security it has,
whilst it is confined to the Ecclesiastics. To allow him a power of derpiving
alone, without a power of filling their Sees by substituting Successors, will
not indeed involve us in Schisms by communicating with those who administer
their Jurisdiction for them by Authority derived from themselves, though the
Bishops themselves cannot interpose in the Administration of it. But it will at
least disable the incumbent Ordinary, to perform any Episcopal Office for his
life, if the the Magistrate be pleased so long to disable him for it. And by
the same reason as this is granted concerning any one, it may hold concerning
the whole Episcopal College in the Dominions, if he be pleased, with a design
of ruining the spiritual Society, to deprive them all for the same term, of
their several Lives. For this must evidently hazard the whole succession, and
dissolve the Constitution of the Church, and in the next Age, at least, in the
opinion of the greatest part of Christendom, if none of the Bishops in being,
be permitted to secure the succession by new consecrations. For this is a power
greater, than what is supposed to be in those who exercise their Jurisdiction
in their Absence. The Presbyteries, may perform what is requisite for their own
time. But the Power of Ordination, is not given them, without which a succesion
cannot be secured to posterity. To provide against this intolerable
consequence, The Church is obliged to take care that the supplying the Sees
with new Bishops, be not deferred so long till the whole Episcopal Order be
Extinguished. Either therefore the Magistrates deprivation must discharge the
Subjects from their Obligations in Conscience to the First Bishops, or it must
not. If it do not discharge them, the Second Bishop who is consecrated into a
full See, where duty is still obliging, must be a Schismatic, and break the
spiritual Society in pieces by intestine divisions among themselves. If he may
discharge them, then his depriving all the Bishops, must be taken for a
discharge of the Subjects of all the Diocesses in his Dominions, from their
duty to all their Bishops, which must consequently disable them to do any
Episcopal Act in any of them all, for preservation of the Church, or of their
own Order, if the Obligation of such deprivations, may be supposed to extend to
Conscience. Thus the Church must necessarily be dissolved and destroyed
whenever the Magistrate with the consent, and assistance of the greater
Society, shall be pleased to dissolve it. This is inevitable wherever two
absolute independent Societies by compacts do Unite in one, under the
Government of one of them as absolutely Supreme. Our Adversaries themselves
will grant it in the other Case of encroachment of the Ecclesiastics, on the
Rights of the secular Magistates. When the Pope was allowed a Power of
depriving Princes of their Crown, and absolving their Subjects from their
Duties, and Oaths taken to them, it was impossible for Secular Governments to
defend themselves against the Pope, though then the removal only of the Person
was the thing pretended. In this Case, our Adversaries themselves are sensible
that the whole Society is concerned in him, who has the power of the whole
Society, and the whole Right of Governing is concerned when a Possessor is put
out, who has as much Right by the Establishment as any other can have who shall
pretend to succeed him. And why can they not see the inevitableness of the same
Consequences, in the contrary encroachments of the State upon the Church,
maintained by themselves. This therefore is a Power too great to be recompensed
by any possible Obligations the State can put upon the Church, and therefore
such as ought not to be alienated upon any Possible pretense of Obligation.

LXIV. In this Case, particularly, no Temporal Favor whatsoever can make
amends for the loss of the benefits of the Spiritual So ciety. There can
therefore be no implicit Contracts for such an Exchange that can in Equity
oblige the Ecclesiastical Governors to performance, though it had been in their
Power to make such a Contract.
Particularly, this Reasoning holds in our present Case, more strongly than it
would in others. It may indeed be possible, by being Members of another
Society, that all the Particulars of which a Society does consist, may enjoy
greater advantages by being dissolved into another Society, than by being a
Society by themselves, and at their own disposal. And a Case may therefore fall
out, wherein a less beneficial Society, may not only put their Liberties in the
power of another more beneficial Society, to be by it disiolved at pleasure,
but may also actually surrender their very Liberties themselves, in
consideration of greater benefits, to all the particulars of the less
beneficial Society, not only than those which they possess on account of their
Incorporation, but also than that Liberty also which they enjoy on account of
their independency, which is it self also a very valuable benefit, and adds
considerably to the other advantages of their present Society, in the common
esteem of Mankind. But for this, two things are requisite to make the Case
Practicable, neither of which are applicable to the subject of our present
Discourse First, the benefits of the New Society, must indeed be more valuable
than those of the old one, together with their Liberty considered into the
bargain. 2dly. They who are possessed of the Rights of the old Society, must be
possessed of them on their own Accounts, not as Trustees of any other, that so
they may have no further Obligation to preserve them, than their own present
Interests in them, and may therefore be at Liberty to accept of considerations
of graeter present Interest. If either of these Considerations fail, they
cannot think themselves obliged in Equity to stand to such a Contract,
especially where no more is pretended than an implicit one, not expressed in
Words, but gathered only from considerations of Equity. And here neither of
them can be so much as pretended. First it cannot be pretended that any Secular
Favors or Immunities whatsoever can make amends for the benefits of their
present spiritual Society. This has been proved already. I shall therefore here
take it for granted. Indeed it is in our present Case so very manifest, that I
need no great Favor of our Adversaries themselves to give me leave to do so.
Supposing it therefore granted, all the Rules of equitable Reasoning in the
sense of those Ages wherein the State first became Christian, will relieve the
Church against any such pretentions, as are here insisted on, of an implicit
contract for surrendering her independency. Societies had in the Roman Civil Law
(which is the best standard for judging what was thought equitable in those
times) the same favor as Minors, from being obliged by overreaching
Contracts. And indeed there was reason for it, when their Interests were
transacted by others who as seldom consulted the sense of the Communities, as
Guardians did their Pupils, and who were liable to as just suspicions of
corrupt insidious dealings, and private interests, as Guardians were. This
therefore would allow the Church a Restitution in integrum, a perfect
rescission of such a Contract, made in her name by her Representatives, where
the disadvantage was in it so manifest, as the alienating spiritual Rights in
exchange for Temporal; and the contract had yet proceeded no further than to be
implicit only and interpretative. Indeed here the very Representatives
themselves might expect to be relieved in Equity. For, receiving a valuable
consideration, is that which is expressly mentioned, even in our Modern
Contracts, even where that valuable consideration it self is not mentioned,
purposely to prevent their revecableness, if it had not been mentioned. It is
therefore supposed that when the Consideration is not valuable in comparison
with the Right contracted for, it is but reasonable in Equity, that such a
Contract be rescinded. Especially, where the Contract is not expressed in
Words, there is no reason in Equity to presume that any such Alienation was
intended. All that can be pretended in this Case, is, that the Prince's Favor,
and Protection, is accepted of by the Representatives of the Church. But how
does it appear, without an explicit Contract, that it is accepted of with a
design of entering into a Contract? How does it appear, that it is accepted of
as a consideration? How does it appear, that any Right, on their own side, is
intended to be parted with in consideration of it? How does it appear, but that
it is thought already sufficiently required in the favor already conferred on
the Prince and his Subjects, in admitting them into a Society so much more
beneficial than their own? If any Cession of Rights, had been thought of, why
must it needs be of a Right, so essential to its subsistence and continuance,
as that is of the Independence of the Supreme Govornours of their own Society?
How can it appear, that in accepting of the Prince's favors, such a Contract
as this was ever thought of? Nay the very unequalness of it would be in Equity
a strong Presumption, that it was not though of, nor intended, nor ever would
have been consented to, if it had been expressly insisted on. It is certain many
kindnesses are accepted of, without any thoughts of a Contract, It is strongly
presumable such an Alienation as this, would never have been consented to, if
it had been thought of. Here is no proof of a Contract, but bare acceptance. On
these considerations, there can be no reason or Equity to oblige the
Ecclesiastics to stand to so partial an Interpretation of a Contract imposed
on them by their Adversaries. Indeed there can be no such Contract at all, as
an implicit one, which can be no otherwise proved, but by reasonable equitable
Interpretation.

LXV. But here it is not in the Power of the Ecclesiastical Governors to make
such a Contract.
Thus much might have been pleaded for discharging the Church Officers from
these Obligations, though they had indeed a Power to oblige themselves thus
far, and had no more to do in this matter, than to consider whether there were
prospects of present Interest sufficient to induce them to it. But that is not
the Case here. All they can do, on any consideration whatsoever, by any however
Explicit Compact is not sufficient to Alienate that Power, by which the Church
must again subsist, whenever the Magistrate deserts her. For this Power is not
her own, but a trust committed to her by GOD, and a trust committed to her, with
a design the Power should be perpetuated. Whatsoever therefore she does, she
cannot oblige God by an Act of Alienation of it. So a Servant that should
Alienate his Lord's Rights without his leave, cannot hinder his Lord from
challenging them again, nor any other Servant who is empowered by his Lord to
demand them. This is allowed among our hired Servants, and much more with the
Roman Slaves, to whom the Scriptures allude in this matter. (The Apostles
themselves call their Office a (...), and a (...), and an (...) Words in the
Language of that time importing Slavery.) such were usually then entrusted with
Stewardships. And the lower degree of Slavery, that of a (...) St. Paul looks
on as a higher dignity of his Apostolical Office. And he calls his Power a
trust, and a dispensation, and looks on himself as under an Obligation of
fidelity, to discharge it according to the mind of him who had committed the
trust to him. This was undoubtedly to signify the Nature of his Power by the
Roman Civil Laws received at that time, which allowed Servants to acquire
Actions to their Masters, but not Alienate them without their express command.
The Apostles themselves therefore were not at Liberty to Alienate this trust
committed to them upon any considerations whatsoever of their own private
convenience; nor much less can they do it, who now succeed them in a Power,
indeed derived from them; but in many particulars more limited than theirs was.
Besides this Power is entrusted with them not for themselves only, but for the
interest also of Souls in general. Thence it appears that they cannot be
allowed to dispose of it on considerations relating to their private Interests.
As it is a Trust for others, the same Notions will take place here which did
with the Roman Tutors and Curators, who where also Officers in Trust for
managing an Interest which was none of their own. Nothing they did to the
Prejudice of the Pupil could oblige him to performance. Especially if they
presumed to Alienate any part of the Inheritance entrusted with them on
considerations of private Interests of their own. Such Contracts were perfectly
rescinded, and left no Obligation on him to ratify them when he came to age, as
other Contracts might, which were beneficial to him. Here therefore they could
lay no Obligation on GOD, to ratify their Alienation of the Power entrusted
with them, to the Civil Magistrate. And yet without a Right obliging GOD to
ratify what was transacted by the Ecclesiastical Governors, all the
Conveyances they could pretend to make of their Spiritual Rights to the
Magistrate, must be perfectly insignificant For then GOD may still own him for
a Bishop who is deprived by the Magistrate, and disown that Person as an
Intruder, who is substituted into his Office by the Lay Power. For it is GOD'S
Act alone that can determine the Question as to Right, and with regard to
Conscience Seeing therefore the Ecclesiastical Governors cannot confer a Right
upon the Magistrate to have his Acts ratified by GOD; after all the Compacts
they can make, the Right continues as it was before. They who had the Right of
making and depriving Bishops, have the same Right still, and may resume the
exercise of it when they please, and are obliged to do so, as they will approve
themselves faithful to their Trust, when they shall judge the exigences of the
Church to require it. What then can their Contract signify, be it never so
express? It on the contrary appears, that no consideration whatsoever of
private Interest, can be a reasonable inducement for Ecclesiastical Governors
to enter into such Contracts, not only because they cannot validly oblige
themselves, or confer any valid Right upon the Magistrate in this matter, which
he had not before; but even in Consideration of their own Interest. Suppose the
Favors of the Magistrate were indeed sufficient to countervail the Personal
benefits they enjoyed, purely on account of their being the Heads of a distinct
independent Body; yet it cannot be denied but that the Punishment they have
reason to fear from GOD on account of their Falsehood to their Trust, is without
comparison greater than what can be recompensed by the Civil Magistrate.

LXVI. It is not agreeable to the mind of GOD, that the Church should so
concorporate with the State, as that the Bishops should be deprivable at the
pleasure of the Civil Magistrate.
Indeed the Nature of the spiritual Society as constituted by GOD is such, as
that it cannot be thought agreeable to the mind of GOD, that it should so
concorporate with the State, as wholly to depend on the Authority of the Civil
Magistrate, so as that its Supreme Governors, the Bishops, should be subject
to him in Spirituals also. It is not agreeable to his mind that the more Noble
Society should be subjected to that which is less Noble; that the Interests of
Souls which are more valuable in his esteem than all the Kingdoms of the World,
should depend on the pleasures of particular Princes, and the Interests of
their particular little Districts. It is not agreeable, that he should trust a
Government of principal importance, in the hands of those who are not likely to
regard it, as their principal employment, who make the World their principal
Study, and take their understanding that, and its concers thoroughly to be the
principal accomplishment they are capable of, for the discharging of that which
they take to be their principal Office, and who either take no pains at all to
understand the concerns of Religion, or do it no otherwise than as it is
consistent with their other employments, which are not indeed of that
importance as matters of Religion are. It is much more likely that he intended
that it should continue, as himself had settled it at its first establishment,
in the hands of those whose Principal care it should be to mind it as it
deserves, That is, Principally, and other things, no otherwise than as they may
prove subservient to it. It is no way likely that he would have Religion left
to their disposal, who by their Office think themselves obliged to be swayed
Principally by their Worldly interests, than which there is hardly any thing
more contradictory to the great ends of Religion; to make Reformation of
Manners necessary to be begun by Courts, which are usually the Originals of the
corruptions of that kind, and the great hindrances to well meant designs of
Reformation. An obvious consequence of such a trust would be, that Religion,
which Princes do not take for their Principal Work, must be made subservient to
their worldly Politics, which Princes generally take for their Principal
employment. And who can think that GOD would ever intend that a Religion at
first established in a State of Independency on the secular Power, should
afterward be brought to a State precarious, and depending on the pleasure of
the secular Magistrate? GODS establishing it otherwife at first showed plainly
that it was better for the Church to be independent on the State, whenever
there should be any difference between it and the secular Magistrate. This
withal we are certain of, that GOD is not changeable as man is; but that whilst
the same Reason holds, or when the same Case returns, his mind will be the same
as it was before. When ever therefore the Magistrate who has once favored the
Church, shall again desert it, and withdraw his Protection from it; we must
then conclude that the Church is in the same condition she was in before the
Magistrate received her into his Protection; and therefore that it is GODS
Pleasure also that she should subsist then, as she had done before, on her own
Government. On her own Government, I say, as well qualified now, as formerly,
for continuance, and perpetuity, by its independence on the pleasure of the
Magistrate. This is indeed the only way of knowing GODS pleasure concerning a
Case, where no now Revelation is so much as pretended, as none is here, even by
our Adversaries. This therefore being certain, that, in Case of a New breach,
GODS pleasure is that the Church should again be independent; it will be also
certain, that in the Interval; whilst the good correspondence holds between the
two Societies, GOD cannot allow such an Alienation of Power as shall disable
her, in Case of a now breach, to persist on her old terms. This will requite
that the old Society be preserved with the old Government of Bishops during the
Interval. For the Church is not such a Society as other Humane ones, that can
be set up at pleasure by the Agreement of the particular Members of which it
consists, whenever they are Free from other antecedent inconsistent
Obligations. This is a Society erected by GOD, and requires Governors
Authorized by him more than other Civil Societies do, for Obliging him to
confer spiritual Blessings exceeding the Power of the Members considered in
themselve. GOD has given them no reason to expect, when the breach shall fall,
that he will extraordinarily empower Men immediately as he did the Apostles. The
only way therefore for securing the continuance of the Church, is to keep up a
Body of Governors. Authorized by the Apostles in that Succession, which has
been derived from them to our present times, which cannot be, unless the
Succession it self be continued on, in all the Interval of good Correspondence.
This therefore requires that they do not suffer themselves so to be
Incorporated into the State, as to have no Governors of their own Acting by a
highery Authority than what can be derived from the Prince. This consideration
alone is sufficient to disprove our Adversaries fancy concerning the coalition
of the Two Bodies, under the King as the Common Head of both of them, when, in
the mean time, the Church is obliged to continue in her Bishops a power not
derivable by any Patents from the KING. This Power therefore not derived from
him, must be perfectly independent on him. And indeed no Power but what is so,
can justify, and make Practicable, a Resumption of ancient Rights. For what
ever depends on the Magistrate, may, and will in course, be taken from the
Bishop when the correspondence is interrupted. If therefore, when it is taken
away the Bishop has then no Right to Govern, he cannot expect GOD will ratify
any exercise of a Power to which he can pretend no Right. But without GOD's
ratifying what is done by the Authority, and good reason to presume that GOD is
obliged to ractify it, such a Government can signify nothing for keeping the
Society in a Body, that has nothing to recommend it, but consideratinos
relating to GOD and Conscience. The Alienation therefore of this Power so
necessary for securing the Society, being so plainly against the Mind of GOD in
giving the Power, no Act of Alienation of it, can expect a ratification from
GOD, and therefore it must be Originally null and invalid.

LXVII. The Magistrate is by no means, a Competent Judge of the Church's
Interests.
Besides, there are other things so peculiar to the design of GOD, in
instituting the Spiritual Society, that make it by no means probable, that it
was his pleasure, that it should coalesce into one Society with the State under
one common Supreme Government, both for Spiritisals and Temporals. It is
inconsistent with the Office of the Supreme Magistrate, to endure that his
Subjects should live under a state of perpetual Violence from another Power,
without using his utmost endeavors to resit it. The Church may, and often
must, submit to a Persucution, when it is not otherwise in her Power to avoid
it but by resistance. She may with great generosity choose a Persecution, when
she judges it to be for the Interests of Religion, and it is her Glory to
overcome Evil with Good, and to subdue her Enemies rather with Patience and
Constancy, than Arms and open violence. She can still subsist and gain by such
a state, whereas the Civil state is perfectly dissolved when once that violence
becomes irresistible. The Magistrate is, by the Law of Nations, allowed to
return violence for violence, and to do many things when provoked by his Enemy,
which the Church can never decently do on any Provocation whatsoever. It is for
the Interest of the Magistrate (if he look on Religion as his Interest) that
the Church should be free in her Actings for Reformation of manners, which she
cannot be, if the Bishops must, at his pleasure, be turned out of their Office,
for no other reason, but their being faithful to it. The Church withal was
designed by GOD for a Society that should correspond all the World over, as
they did anciently by their Communicatory Letters, as to Spirituals. For her
Censures can significe nothing for reclaiming Heretics or ill Livers, if they
extend no further than her own Jurisdiction; if they exclude not from
Catholic, as well as Diocesan Communion. She ought therefore to enquire into
new Opinions, as they may occasion difference of Communion, that she may
neither recommend Heriticks to the Communion with Foreign Churches, nor receive
them to her own Communion, if recommended by them. This cannot be done by
single Bishops, because in these things, at least, they are to proceed by a
common Rule, and Unanimously, not as in other things, only by a Majority of
Suffrages, because no differences of Faith can be born with in the same
Communion, as differences of Opinion may be, in other things of lesser
importance. This will require frequent Synods, such as they had farmerly before
the State was Christian, twice a Year in course, besides what greater Synods,
might be thought necessary on extraordinary emergent Cases But these cannot be
had, if they must depend on the Pleasure of the Local Magistrates. General
Synods cannot be had on these terms, without a General Peace, and freedom from
Jealousies, in all the Worldly state, or till all the Dioceses in the World
should come under the power of one Secular Magistracy. Nor were there any
Synods of that kind before the Conversion of the Empire of the Christian
Religion. However, the Church was even then possessed of a Right of meeting in
Provincial Synods for her own Affairs, without asking the Magistrates leave,
pursuant to the general Right given her by GOD for propagating her Religion.
And even those Provincial Synods had such a correspondence as was absolutely
requisite for settling Unanimity and a good Under standing between them. But
since they have depended on the Pleasure of Local Magistrates, not only this
correspondence, but also the Subordinate Provincial and National Synods have
been discontinued. Nor can this Catholic Correspondence which is
notwithstanding so necessary for all (even Diocesane) Discipline, be retrieved,
without the consent of so many Local Magistrates, as have Churches in their
Dominions, if the Churches must be concluded by these pretended Contracts. But
certainly Christ could never intend, that a thing so universally necessary for
that Discipline which is to be continued in all Ages of the Church, should
depend on a consent of so many different Minds and Interests as are veryrarely
to be expected in any Age. I see not therefore why it should be expected that
Christ should ratify such Compacts against his own Designs.

LXVIII. The Surrendry of the Clergy in Henry the VIIIth' s time, cannot oblige
their Posterits now.
Thus it appears, that no Contract has been made generally, and that none can
be made validly, for Alienating the Church's Right, of which she was possessed
before the Conversion of Princes. Thence may be judged how little obliging
those Act of the Clergy in the Sacrilegious Reign of Henry the VIIIth were, for
obliging themselves and their Posterity, never to meet for Affairs concerning
their Spiritual Function without the Prince's leave. Had that Right been a
Property of their own conferred on them by a Humane Conveyance for the private
benefit of their Function, they might indeed have pretended a Right to oblige
Posterity by those Acts of Resignation. But considering it as a Right not
conferred, but entrusted by GOD himself for greater ends than their own private
Interests; thy can pretend no Right to hinder Posterity from resuming the
Privileges then surrendered, whenever they shall judge them necessary for those
great ends for which their Function was entrusted with them. Especially what
the Magistrate either has, or can do, in consideration of that surrendry,
falling infinitely short of being an Equivalent. Besides it is manifest, that
the Surrendry then made, was perfectly forced on them, as well as the Fine was
laid upon the whole Body of the Clergy' on account of the Praemunire they had
incurred for owning Cardinal WOLSEY's Legatine Power. It has therefore, on that
account also, that consideration of the Force by which it was extorted, for
discharging Posterity, from its obligation, which, added to the Considerations
now mentioned, will free it every way from the Obligation of the Contract. All
that can be said for it, must be grounded on some antecedent Right that the
Prince might pretend before his Force; and therefore it must not wholly be
resolved into this extorted Surrendry. For if the Prince had no Right before
his Force, he could have none afterward, on account of Conscience, whatever he
might pretend by Human Secular Laws. For his Force without any antecedent
Right, had been no other but downright Injustice, which could not entitle him,
nor his Successors, to any Right in Conscience. Especially where the Right it
self is of that nature, as it is here, that it belongs to a higher than Human
Secular Judicatory. It therefore concerns our Advesaries to consider what they
can pretend for that Right antecedent to that Force. And I think what has
already been proved, sufficient to cut them off from all Pretensions of Right
by the Constitutions of the Gospel. For I have showed, that the Church was
possessed of a Right to govern her self independently in visible Districts and
Jurisdictions before any Conversions of Princes. I have shown withal, that no
Contract either was made, or could be made, that could dispossess her of that
Right, with regard to Conscience. If therefore they will pretend to any such
Right antecedent to the forcible surrendry, it must be on some other Topic
than that of the Constitution of the Gospel. The tell us therefore, that the
Jewish Kings in the old Testament, ordered many things relating to Religion.
Thence they infer, that our Princes have the same Power now. But, granting the
Fact true, that the Jewish Princes were invested with that Power, it will
however by no means follow, that our Christian Princes must be so now, If what
I have already proved, hold true. For having directly proved, that the
Constitution of the Gospel is otherwise; the Question then will be, whether
Precedents are to take place. And that in this Case, cannot be difficult,
according to the ordinary Rules of judging concerning the Practice of
inconsistent Laws. These Rules are, That Laws of greater importance take place
of Laws of lesser importance; That later Laws of even the same Legislative
Power take place of elder Laws, as being so far virtually repeals of them as
their Practice proves inconsistent: That Laws more suited to present
Circumstances take place of those which were made on a remoter prospect of our
present Circumstances. And by all these Rules there can be no doubt but that
now all such Legal Precedents are to be overruled by the peculiar Constitutions
of the Gospel. This, I am sure, is generally admitted in other Reasonings of
this kind. And there is nothing peculiar pleaded in this Case, why Jewish
precedents should rather overrule here than in other Instances. Much less is
there any reason, why they should take place at a distance, upon the first
Conversions of Princes, when it is so manifest that they did not do so at the
first Settlement of the Christian Churches. However, as to this particular of
Deprivation, I have already given my reasons against the Magistrates Right,
even in the times of the Jews, and have answered already what has been
pretended to the contrary, from the Case of Abiathar, and those other later
Deprivations by the Heathen Magistrates. And this is at present our Principal
Dispute.

LXIX. No Reasoning from the Rights of the Jewish Princes to the Rights of
Christian Princes now.
Indeed in this whole matter concerning Reasoning from the Jewish to the
Evangelical Priesthood, I have taken care to Argue barely from what was common
to them both, the Nature of Priesthood in general, and in those very instances
wherein even the Apostolical Christians admit the Argument. Our Adversaries on
the contrary when they Reason from the Princes Power then, to the Power of
Christian Princes now; they do not Argue, as I have done from the Priesthood
simply considered, but from the Power annexed to the Priesthood, yet seperable
from it, according to the design of GOD in the particular Constitution. The
Power of Governing the Society, whose holy Rights are administered by it, is, I
confess, very seperable from the Right of Priesthood in general, and whether it
was actually annexed to it, or not, is therefore to be judged by the particular
constitution. But particularly for the Jewish State, I rather believe that it
was not annexed to it. For the Right of Government as annexed to the
Priesthood, is founded on the Right the Priest has to oblige subjects by
excluding refractory Persons as such, from partaking in his Sacrifices. But so
much Erastus has, I think well observed, that the only things that then hindered
from the Sacrifices, were only Legal incapacities, such as not being of the
Holy Seed, or being under some Legal Pollution; not any whatsoever immoralities
of Life. And therefore the Punishment for not standing to the award of the
Priests was capital, as being a disobedience to so much of the secular
Government, as it was Theocratical; not exclusion from the Sacrifices of those
who had been contemned by the delinguent Nor indeed was there that necessity
that the Government; even as to Spirituals, should be annexed to the Priesthood
then, as there is under the Gospel now. The Prince was then always obliged to
be a Jew, and therefore of the Religion established for that Nation by GOD
himself. Now his being of an other than the true Religion, is no hindrance by
our modern Constitutions, from having a Lawful Right to the secular Government.
Then the Prince had a better pretense, as the Head of the Theocracy, to command
in affairs concerning GOD; than any Prince living can now, when no State
pretends to be Theocratical. Then all the concerns of the Peculium were
confined to that single Nation which was wholly commanded by one Prince. Now
the concerns of every National Church, are mixed with those of all the other
National Churches in the World, with whom their Prince has no concern at all.
This very consideration makes the National Church's Interests seperable from
the Interests of their Prince; of which he can therefore be by no means
presumed a Competent Judge. That Priesthood was not intended to be Practicable
in a time of Persecution and Independence on the Civil Government. On the
contrary, the want of all the Exercises of their Religion was the most
dejecting consideration of their Captivities, and one of the greatest
inducements for good Men to be earnest with GOD in Prayer for a Restoration.
They were then to be without a 2 Chr. XV. 3.
Priesthood, without an Hos. III 4.
Ephod, without a Teraphim. And the Jer. VII ^.
Temple of the Lord was the Principal thing bemoaned by them who pretended any
Zeal for their Nation or Religion. No doubt on account of their losing all the
comfort of Sacerdotal Ministrations which could be performed in no other place
besides that particular Temple. Then the loss of their daily Dan. VII. 1. 12,
13. IX. 27. XI. 3. XII. 11. Joseph. Bell Jud. L. VII.
Sacrifices was the highest Calamity that the Antichrist then expected could
bring upon them. And the perfect uselesness of the Priests afther the
destruction of the Temple made Titus put the Priests to the Sword when the
obstinacy of the Jews had obliged him to destroy the Temple. So clear it was,
that that was not a Religion capable of subsisting in a Persecution, as to the
Exercises of it as a Communion. But it is withal as clear that our Church was
instituted in a Persecution with a Power of depriving disobedient Subjects of
the benefits of Communion, and with a Power of exercising Sacredotal Offices in
that very State of Independecy on the Civil Magistrate. And indeed that State
was principally provided for here at the first Institution of the Church, which
was not so much as designed in the Jewish Church, Besides, the clear and
express Revelation of Spiritual and Eternal benefits conveyed by our
Evangelical Priesthood is a thing peculier to the Gospel. Yet this alone is
sufficient to put it beyond all pretensions, even of a Theocratical Magistracy,
designed only for Temporals. Thus therefore it every way appears that more
Power is by GOD himself annexed to the Evangelical, than to the Legal
Priesthood. This therefore is sufficient to overthrow our Adversaries
Reasoning here, that our Princes now may challenge all that Power that the
Jewish Princes could formerly. For they cannot challenge that which, though it
was not then, has yet been since annexed to our Evangelical Priesthood.

LXX. Our Present deprivations not justifiable by even our present Secular Laws.
Yet after all, we can even from the Laws of of our Countries, and the Supremacy
settled by those very Laws, except against the Sentence of Deprevation passed
against our Fathers, as to their Spirituals. The Supremacy in Causes
Ecclesiastical is, by all the Acts made concerning it, vested, not in the
PARLIAMENT, but in the KING. And even as it is in the KING, it was never
intended for him, so as that it might be in his Power to confound the several
Courts and Jurisdictions to which Causes are appropriated by the Laws
themselves. The Acts for the Supremacy, even in Temporals, do not allow him to
transfar any Cause from the Court appointed for it to his own hearing out of
it, nor even to any other Court, than that to which the cognizance of it does
properly belong. This holds, as in other Cases, so in this also, of the
Deprivations of spiritual Persons. And it is owned to hold by Mr. Hooker
himself in that very Book to which we are referred by our Adversaries. He owns
it with express application to the Case of the KING himself, the Seat of the
Supremacy in Spirituals. He tells us, that, All Men are not for all things
sufficient, and therefore public Hook. Eccl. Polie. Book VIII. p. 463. ed.
Land. 1682.
affairs being divided, such Persons must be Authorized Judges in each kind, as
common Reason may presume to be most fit. Which cannot of KINGS and PRINCES
ordinarily be presumed in Causes merely Ecclesiastical; so that even common
sense does rather adjudg this Burden to other Men. He owns that Bishops alone
were before accustomed to have the ibid. P. 465.
ordering of such [Ecclesiastical] affairs. He confesses, that Virtuous
Emperors. such as Constantine the Great was, made Conscience to Swerve
unnecessarily from the Custom which had been used in the Church, even when it
lived under Infidels. I know not why others should not emulate the Example of
so great a Prince, if they also would be esteemed, in the Judgment of so great
a Person, Virtuous. I know not why it should not be counted commendable also in
them, if they also had made Conscience to Swerve unnecessarily from these
acknowledged ancient Ecclesiastical Liberties. He owns, that this same
Excellent Prince ratified the Order, which had been before, exhorting the
Bishops to look to the Church, and promising, that he would do the Office of a
Bishops over the Commonwealth; and when he did take cognizance of Causes of
this kind, yet this great Person doubts whether he did so, as purposing to give
them Judicially any Sentence. Here we find plain confessions, that the Church
was in possession of these Liberties before the Conversion of this first
Christian Emperor, and that Emperor himself was so sensible of this Possession
that he made a Conscience of invading it. And who could better Judge of his
Right as a Christian Prince, than he who was the first example of it? Mr.
Hooker does indeed think that Constantine abstained from what he might lawfully
do. But he seems plainly to grant that the Emperor was of another mind, when he
says he made a Conscience of doing what Mr. Hooker thinks he might have ibid.
done. That same Judicious Person adds further, with reference to our
particular Laws in England: There is no Cause given unto any to make
Supplication, as Hilary did, that Civil Governors, to whom Common wealth
matters only belong, may not presume to take upon them the Judgment of
Ecclesiastical Causes. If the Cause be Spiritual, Secular P. 466.
Courts do not meddle with it. We need not excuse our selves with Ambrose, but
boldly and lawfully we may refuse to answer before any Civil Judge in a matter
which is not Civil, so that we do not mistake either the Nature of the Cause,
or of the Court, as we easily may do both, without some better direction than
can be by the Rules of this new sound Discipline. But of this most CERTAIN we
are, that our Laws do neither suffer a Spiritual Court to entertain in those
Causes which by the Law are Civil; nor yet, if the matter be indeed Spiritual,
a mere Civil Court to give Judgment of it. Thus Mr. Hookeer. And he proves what
he says in the Margin from passages of the Laws themselves, and the Book de
Not. Brevium, and Bracton, plainly asserting the difference of those two
Jurisdictions. I am sensible what a Scope I have here of enquiring into the
Laws themselves, and proving this Independently on the Testimony of this
admirable Man. But perhaps I have already said more than can be Printed in this
difficulty of our Circumstances. I therefore say no more at present, but refer
our Adversaries to him. The rather because he is indeed against me in making
the Church one Body with the believing State, and because one of our
Adversaries has expressly insisted on his Authority. Both these reasons, Defense
of the Church of England, P. 7.
as well as the distance of the Age he lived in, are sufficient to clear him of
any, the least, suspicion of partiality on our side. Even in this very Cause he
defends the Use of Lay Persons joined in Commission with Spiritual ones for
determining Spiritual Affairs. And possibly he may do so by Examples (if all
Examples must pass for Precedents,) since Henry VIIIths Usurpations. But when
King JAMES the II, added Laymen in the same Commission with the Bishops
concerned in the Case of the Bishop of London, with a Power of Deprivation or
Suspension ab Officio, as well as a Beneficio; it is very well known that his
Lordship excepted against the competency of his Lay Judges, that as a Bishop of
the Catholic Church he ought to be tried by Bishops only. His Lorpship would
do well now to remember his own Plea then, in order to the judging of his own
Case now, how he can justify his Communicating with those who are set up
against his Colleagues deprived no otherwise than by a Lay Power. It is well
known that his Council then Learned in our Laws insisted on this Plea as
maintainable by our present Laws made since the Constitution of the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy. And what good Church of England Man was there then
that did not think the Plea very just and reasonable? Let those Lawyers be
pleased to recollect what they had to say on that Case, and try whether it will
not also affect our present deprivations. It is very certain that the Liberties
of H. Church are the very first things provided for in Magna Charta. and the
Coronation Oath, so that if these things be not inviolable, nothing else can be
so, being Fundamental to all the Security that can be given by our present
Constitution. And it is no way reasonable, that bare Precedents, without
express Acts for Alienating such Rights as these are, should be thought
sufficient for extinguishing a Claim grounded on so inviolable a Security. If
they be so, Henry the VIIIth made such Precedents for violating Magna Charta,
and the Coronation Oath too, that no Liberties of the People can now be secure.
And it is withal as certain, that in the Disputes which occasioned the passing
Magna Charta, this particular of the exemption of the Clergy, was one point
principally insisted on. Nay, it was insisted on then to higher purposes than
were reasonable, or than I am concerned for now, so far as to exempt them from
Secular Courts, even when they were guilty of Secular Crimes, and even so it
was most frequently determined in favor of the Clergy. That was Becket's
Dispute, which generally prevailed in the following Ages, when he was
Canonized, and when Henry the IId had submitted to Penance for what he had
done in opposition to him. This Case of their Exemption as to their Spirituals,
which is all for which I am now concerned, was than so generally acknowledged,
even by the Laity themselves, that there was very little occasion of disputing
it. Rarely was it ever invaded, and more rarely yet (if ever) was that Invasion
defended by themselves who were guilty of it, till the Unhappy Times of Henry
the VIIIth. So uncontroverted was the Right for which I plead, that I do not
think our Adversaries can give one single Instance of substituting a Successor
into a See vacated by no better, than a Lay deprivation. This privilege
therefore against Lay deprivations, was so undoubtedly the sense of Magna
Charta, and the Coronation Oath, that on that account, as well as in point of
Right, all Patriots ought to be Zealous for it, as well as all good Christians;
all who have a true Concern for those Two Fundamental Securities of Property as
well as of Religion; all who are so wise, as to foresee how far Precedents of
violating them in one Instance, may proceed for violating them in others also.

LXXI, The Conclusion.
I hope the Worthy Defender of the present Dividers of the Church of England
will, by this time, see that this Proposition questioned by him. concerning the
Distinction of the Church, even from a Christian and Orthodox State, is as
firmly proved as any other particular of the Vindicators whole Hypothesis. I
hope he will also find it conformable to those very same Authorities he was
pleased to porduce against it, that of Mr. Hooker, and even of our Church of
England, as settled by our Ancient Laws. Though the Compass I am obliged to
confine my self to, will not allow me to follow either him or the Doctor into
other Arguments, or into particular Applications of this I have insisted on;
yet I have endeavored to urge my Argument so, as to obviate whatever they have
said that might otherwise have seemed to weaken it. I now leave and recommend
the Success to him whose Cause I have endeavored to plead, not as I would, but
as I was able. A Good Cause alone is indeed a very great advantage above
Artifices of Wit and Subtilty, in pleading for an ill one. That is all that I
pretended to. But it is God alone that must give the Word to the Preachers, and
dociliey to the hearers. And it is his usual way to glorify his own Power, in
the weakness and contemptibleness of well-meaning Instruments. This Title I
have, and this alone, to his Assistance and blessing on the management, that it
will appear to be his own Work, if the Good Cause it self do not suffer by my
concernment in it. The same good GOD dispose our Adversaries to follow the
Truth rather than their Worldly Interests; to consider impartially what is
said, how contradictory soever it may seem to their Fleshly Inclinations, to
examine with their more sagatious Judgments, rather what the Cause it self
would afford to be said for it, than what has been said by me. He alone can
revive in them their old love of the Truth of Peace, of Unity; their former
seriousness in these concerns of the greatest importance to them; their former,
or even the Primitive Zeal for the Interests of the Church and of Religion in
this Unbelieving Apostatizing Generation. When he shall be pleased to do so, we
may then hope to see Endeavors for healing the Breaches themselves have made;
we may then hope to see them ambitious of doing it on the most Honorable Terms
that may be for the Church's Security against future Invasions, and against the
Precedent of making Spiritual Interests give way to Worldly Politics; we may
then hope to see them again as much concerned as we are, nay, as we ought to
be, that our Church and our Communion may not depend on the precarious pleasure
of a Persecuting Magistrate. How much more pleasing a sight must this be to all
generous and Christian Tempers than our present Divisions and Scandals, and
Animosities? When, O When, shall it once be?

FINIS.

