The Danger of Pride and Ambition.



THE DANGER OF Pride and Ambition. With the Excellency of Humility and
Obedience.

SHOWING The Reasons why the former ought to be Avoided, and the later Chosen
and Embraced.

Being a Profitable Discourse, occasionally Published upon the Funeral
Solemnity of a late Unfortunate Person.

1 Kings, 1 chap. 5 ver. Then Adonijah the Son of Haggith, exalted him self,
saying, I will be King: and he prepared himself Chariots and Horsemen, and
fifty Men to run before him.

This may be Printed,

R. L S.



Printed by H. B. for P. Brooksby at the Golden Ball in Py-corner. 1685.

The DANGER of PRIDE and AMBITION. etc.
1 Kings, 1 Chap. 5 Verse. Then Adonijah the Son of Haggith, exalted himself,
saying, I will be King; and he prepared himself Chariots and Horsemen, and
fifty Men to run before him.


AMongst all the Blessings that contribute to Man's felicity, there is nothing
that ought to be more desirable, to make him truly happy in this World, and
furnish him with an opportunity to prepare him for the other, than true
content, humility, calmness of mind, and a resolution to be pleased, and sit
down quiet, in what station soever GOD has appointed or allotted him, not to
meddle nor concern himself in other men's affairs, nor be emulous of Greatness,
but in patience and meekness to under go what ever shall befall him, not
repineing nor revileing, but rejoicing, not shaken by the Storms of adversity,
nor swelled with the Tide of prosperity, but remaining always the same,
rendering Honor, Obedience, and Respect where it ought to be, and a civil
behavior toward all men, living blameless, and in a Christian charity with
your Fellow Creatures. Such a one (I say) lives in a perpetual calm, let the
storm roar round him never so loud, and the waves dash never so much, having
built his House upon a Rock: When the restless and unquiet man is ever tossed
in the Ocean of hazards and dangers, being every moment ready to split upon the
Rocks of misery, or strand himself on the Beach of Shame and Disgrace. For sure
it is, there is nothing proves more fatal to the Sons of Adam than Pride and
her black offspring Ambition; nay, and not only to Man, but Angels, as appears
by Those whose proud aspiring caused their Fall, from the Mansions of Joy and
Bliss, in a Dungeon of horrid Darkness, and Abyss of endless Pain and Misery,
bound in everlasting Chains of Punishment. Yet is it not sufficient to deter
rash Mortals from imitating those Infernal Legions, as far as corporeal Beings
are capable of imitating incorporeal; as is evident in diverse, who have
wilfully courted Pride and Ambition to their own destruction, blinded with
hopes of greatness, they did not, or would not see the eminent Danger that
attended the rashness of their Folly, but being of a restless nature, gave way
to that Feavourish Disorder that drove them from their happy station to shame
and disgrace, over and above, the Trouble and Anxiety that still possessed the
mind with fears and jealousies; for Ambition is a continual Tempest, that
tosses the laboring Soul upon the Sea of Hope; and for the most part Lawless
Desire (a thing that is ever craving, but never satisfied,) endeavoring to
pass all bounds and limits, impatient of ease and restraint, still aspiring to
Rise above the common Leavell, and always envying Superiors, and disdaining
Equals and Inferiors, frought continually with Airy imaginations, reaching
after lofty things, and desiring impossibilities.

Put case the Man whose Soul is too prone to draw in this fatal Poison, should
have his first desire to be great and prosperous, to live in plenty and ease,
be respected with all imaginable Regard, Would this content him? No, his Soul
(infected with the Fever of Ambition) would still be craving, the Temptation
would be buzzing in his Ears, that some neighboring Cedar dropped upon his
Boughs, some others Fame and Greatness eclipsed his, and could he but aspire
above him, he would promise himself ease and content, desiring no greater
promotion.

This (perhaps) is granted, which (in likelihood) may for a while give
satisfaction, but not long, e're he complains the Clouds over-shadow him, and
screen from the cheerful Sunbeams, some greater Favorite than himself
appears, whose sight he badly indures; nor can he have rest or ease, but daily
tortures and torments himself, imagining his own Luster to be dimn in
comparison of his that is above him; And now his Wishes are renewed, promising
himself content, could this Obstacle be removed; which peradventure falls out
to his wish, but then the Sunbeams beat too hot upon his aspiring Top, and
fain he^d be above it, grieved he is, and to gratify himself, leaves no means
unattempted, which he conceives may any way further his purpose; no horrid
mischief can seem a Danger greater than he will venture on, though to his
certain Ruin; as many sad examples have made apparent: How were Chora, Dathan,
and Abiram, for Ambitiously aspiring to equalize themselves with Moses, and so
consequently eclipse that Power GOD had ordained, swallowed alive, with all
that appertained unto them? The ponderous Globe hearing the Voice of its
Creator, cleaft asunder, and wide yauning, sunk them to its center, giving
their Ambition a fall, as low as its aspiring hoped to carry it aloft.

How did the great Goliath, towering in his hauty pride, defy the Armies of the
Living God, proudly insulting for a while, Ambitious yet to get a greater and
more dreaded name, till David (but a Youth) by unsuspected ways overthrew him,
bereaving him of Life and Honor in a moment.

Young Absalom, in whose hot Breast Ambition spread her deadly Bane, not
contented with the Favors of an Indulgent King, whose paternal care and tender
love had rescued him from Death, (his due for murdering his Brother Amnon) nor
the favor of restoring after Banishment, with many Princely Benefits heaped on
him by the Royal Hand; but flattering himself with hopes of Empire, prompted by
Ambition, he first found means to steal the Peoples hearts and then with
impious Arms invaded the Heritage of Jacob, and molested those whom he ought
to have defended to his Power, and rendered due Obedience to his Father and his
King: But long did not the Breath of the Multitude, nor their Tumultuous Arms
avail him, but routed in all parts, and flying, his greatest Ornament became
the cause of his Destruction; for hanging by the Hair in a thick Oak, he lost
his Life with his Ambition, falling by the hand of Joab, the Terror of his
Crime being so great, that although it appears he had a considerable time to do
it in, he could not unloose himself; which gave some of the Jewish Rabins
occasion to imagine that when he was so hanging, he fancied Hell to be gaping
beneath him, and that if he were unloosed, he should instantly drop into it,
the Terror of which wrought so far, that he had no power to relieve himself.
But whether so, or otherwise, certain it is, he received the reward of his
Treason and Rebellion, and might have been a sufficient Warning to others,
whereby they might have instructed themselves of what fatal consequence such
dangerous, unnatural, and lawless attempts are, and how high displeasing to
Almighty God, who fails not to punish those that enterprise them with a more
than ordinary severity, that so they may stand as Sea-marks, to prevent the
wrack of others upon the same fatal Rock, or bedding Quicksand.

Nor can any one be truly said to serve God, in whose heart Pride and Ambition
have the least abode; for God only regards the lowly and humble; to them it is
he gives Grace, and means of sincere Repentance, and not only* a turning away
from, but an abhorrance and detestation of Sin, who make it their business to
live just and upright in the sight of GOD and Man: But the proud and
haughty-minded he brings low, making them humble, not according to their Will
and Inclination, but by Force and Constraint, frustrating their enterprises,
and giving checks to their aspiring, though many times it proves greatly to
their advantage, by giving them an insight of their Folly and Rashness, laying
before them the danger that they were in, letting them understand how much they
were flattered and abused by those upon whose breath they soared, till (
Icarius like) their wings were singed, and the matter that kept them in order
melted: To let them see (I say) how much their folly has undone them, and by
what means they were Ruined, which is in some measure a Mercy, to incite and
compel them to pay due Acknowledgments; due Tributes of Praise and
Thanksgiving to his Great Name; who takes such Care of those that are
regardless of themselves, and has many ways to bring them back to that Safety
they were running from.

So Jonah in proud Contempt of the Heavenly Message, was overtaken in his
flight, and after a severe humbling, to let see in whose Hands and Power he
was, gladly obeyed, when crying against the Sins of Nineveh, he made his
Reconcilement with the Almighty.

As for Man in this Case, he is frequently drawn away by flattery, and
persuasion, a Praise of his Excellencies and great Deserts, his Wisdom and
Knowledge, his Fortitude and Conduct, which by insensible Ways instills into
the Soul a kind of a self-deceiving to many, being apt to believe that that
they would have to be so, and too frequently overvalue themselves upon that
that is not, which inflames them to a desire of many things beyond their Reach,
fancying themselves much wronged and injured if they have not their
Expectations answered, and therefore bend their Studies, and endeavors to
gratify themselves therein too frequently, by unlawful ways and means, which
for the most part involves themselves and others in Ruin and Disgrace, for
certain it is, that self-flattery swells some Men to such a Degree, that it
drives them forward into all Perils and Dangers, as a Ship without a Pilot,
riding before a furious Wind, rushing on a Craggy Rock, whose destructive top
the Waves can cover, but by Turns is torn in Pieces, and so broken, becomes for
the future, the floating-pastime of the Ocean.

There is nothing that the Almighty more abominates than Pride and Ambition; as
appears by the Fall of the Angels, mentioned in the beginning of this
Discourse, who being happy in the Realms of Light, and capable of enjoying what
might render them so Eternally Happy, they fondly chose to be greater than they
were designed, and thereupon growing discontented, proudly aspired to equalty
with their Maker, but soon found their folly by a through sense of Pain and
shame cast out, and deprived of the Beatifick Vision, rendered for ever
incapable of recovering their Native Seats, or the Favor of him, in whose
presence is fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore; and by that very wile
the Serpent, that is the Infernal Fiend in the shape of the Serpent, or really
possessing him, Tempts Eve in Paradise, even with Promises of a more
Transcendant Happiness, though she found it far otherwise, undoing her self and
all the race of Mankind, had not Infinite Mercy found out a way to restore them
to a second happiness, by Regeneration, and a firm relyance on Him who is the
Fountain of Salvation, who gave himself for us.

Nay, Ambition is that which prompts Men to all manner of Violence and
Disorder; for blinded or intoxicated with the seeming-lucious bane, what will
not some men do to make Way to their desires; to resist which the strongest
Ties of Friendship are not sufficient, through what Injurys have been left
undone on this occasion: what Bloodshed and Mischief has it caused, being in
many Cases like a Torrent, the more it is opposed, the more furiously it raves
and foames, though in the end it expires like a Comet which has wasted the
unctious matter that the Earth has sent up to feed its portentious flame. How
many have felt the Sting of this fatal Serpent? How many have found it like a
Thorn in their own side, not only proving Restless, but Troublesome, and Fatal,
even to their undoing, making them slight all Good Advice, neglect the Returns
of Favors and Love, prove ungrateful, and return evil for good, and be so far
insensible of the Benefits they have received, that they rather turn them to
the Prejudice of the Doner, than make a due Acknowledgment? As it is reported
of a certain person, who from a low condition being raised by his Prince to
many Honors, when considering with himself that he should never be capable of
making a suitable return, but that he must be perpetually engaged to the Bounty
and Beneficence of his Lord: What does Ambition and Ingratitude prompt him to,
but to Conspire his death, thinking of no better a Way to take off the
Obligation; but his Treason being Timely discovered, and he not able to deny
it, (the guilt of so foul an Intention not permitting a Concealment) his Lord
commanded he should be drawn in a Cart about the City, and that all such as
would, might use him despitefully, which in consideration of his heinous Crime,
was not wanting; yet he bore it patiently, till one struck him a small blow,
which made him make many loud Laments; and being demanded the cause, he
replied, that That person had been maintained and relieved by his Bounty, and
that he had saved his Life, and could not expect that he above all Men would
have added ^o his Affliction; of which his Lord ^^aring, said, Even so have I
raised ^im who sought my Life; and there^pon Commanded that he should receive
the Punishment due to his Treason.

Wherefore let those that Love their quiet beware how they tread these
Dangerous Paths, or soar upon the false Wings of Ambition, which will
certainly deceive them, and bring 'em t^ a too late Repentance, if too long
deferred.

But as I before hinted, let every on^ be contented in their station, wi^^ what
is their own, not repining n^^ murmuring, but Serving their Mak^^ in Truth and
Sincerity, yielding rea^^ Obedience to those that are in Auth^rity over them,
faithfully and cheerf^^ly discharging their Duty towar^^ GOD and Man, that so
all may l^^^ peaceably and be happy, baffling (...) Malice and Envy of Hell,
which da^^^ seeks to raise Divisions and Hatred among us, that the Kingdom of
Darkness may be the more enlarged.

But to conclude, let us rely upon GOD for all things, who is the Blessed
Author of our Being, and well-Being, who better knows than our selves what is
convenient for us, and study rather to be Good than Great, which ought to be
the Task of every Christian, that so they may live peaceable in this World, and
be made Partakers of the endless Joys in that which is to come; which in his
good time* GOD will bring to all those that Love and Fear him.

ANd now, O Lord God, most holy, most merciful, and everlasting Father of
Spirits, and Lover of all those that in purity and sincerity put their trust
and confidence in thee, grant us thy unworthy Servants such a portion of thy
Saving Grace, as may enable us to know thee aright, and trust in thee, as we
ought, that so we may be able to overcome the Depraveties of Nature, and resist
those Temptations that are daily laid by the Prince of Darkness and of the
Air, who Rules in the Children of Disobedience. Give us, O thou Righteous God
of all the Earth, such an heart, that we may know our selves aright, and ever
humble our selves before thy Divine Majesty, who abhorrest the proud and lofty,
and give grace to the humble and meek, that so we may be able to check those
aspiring thoughts that are too prone to puff up the mind in Pride and Ambition:
Teach us for thy dear Mercies sake to render ready Obedience to all those that
are put in Authority over us, that we may be always free from Hatred and
Malice, and be ever content with all cheerfulness in the condition or station
thou art pleased to place us in, that so we may be rendered a fit Object of thy
mercy and tender compassion, through Jesus Christ the Son of thy Love, in whom,
and through whom alone we can only expect thy favor and blessing. To whom,
with thee, and thy Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory, Power, Praise, and
Dominion, World without end, Amen.

FINIS.

