HUSBANDRY Anatomized, OR, An Enquiry into the Present Manner of Teiling and
Manuring the Ground in SCOTLAND For most Part; AND Several RULES and MEASURES
laid down for the better Improvement thereof, in so much that one third part
more INCREASE may be had, and yet more than a third part of the EXPENSE of the
present Way of LABORING thereof Saved.

By JA: DONALDSON.

EDINBURGH, Printed by JOHN REID. in the Year, M.DC.XC.VII.

To the Right Honorable, PATRICK Earl of MARCHMONT, Viscount of BLASONBERIE
Lord POLW ARTH, Lord High Chancellor of SCOTLAND And the whole Remnant Lords
of His Majesty's Most Honorable Priy COUNCIL.
Right HONORABLE,
IT may be looked upon as a Piece of heightened Arrogance, for such a Person as
I am, to Presume to Endit any thing that may deserve your Lordships Cognizance;
And truly on any other Subject, but this most Plain, and Genuine Art of
Husbandry: I had scarce adventured to publish my Sentiments, and much less
presumed to offer the same, to such August, Venerable, and Judicious Critics,
Who are acquainted with Learned and Eloquent Treatises on all Subjects: But
where there is greatest Judgment, there uses to be most Discretion; Which
gives me Confidence and Ground to hope, that what I here offer with Respect and
Good Will, allanarly with an Eye to the public Good, shall find Acceptance:
Tho from the Style of Writing or Congruity of Language, no such thing can be
pleaded for; Rhetoric being that which neither the Subject does require, nor
my simple Genius can Aspire to.

Perhaps two Questions may be asked, Concerning my Experience in Husbandry, and
Motives in publishing thereof. To give a positive and distinct Answer to both,
will require an abridged History of my own Life, which I shall with all Brevity
repeat, because it will be a kind Kye to the following Sheets.

I was bred in the Country, Till I was upwards of twenty years of Age: And my
Father keeping Servants and Cattle for laboring a part of these Lands, which
heritably belonged to him: I had occasion to acquire as much Knowledge in
Husband Affairs, as was practiced in that place of the Country. Some few years
before the Revolution, I applied my self to the study of Traffic and
Merchandising: But as soon as it pleased GOD to call his Majesty (then Prince
of Orange) to relieve these Kingdoms from the Imminent Danger They then stood
in; I judged it my Honor and Duty to concur with such a Laudible and Glorious
Undertaking: And according to my Ability, testified my Affection to the Cause,
several ways needless here to repeat; And especially in Leavying a Company of
Men for his Majesty's Service, and served in the Earl of Angus his Regiment,
till the second day of February, 1690. When that Regiment was reduced from
twenty to thirteen Companies.

I was disbanded, But through the scarcity of Money in the Exchequer, and great
need of keeping an Army on foot; Hitherto I have received no Reimbursement of
Money I Depursed on that Occasion, nor what I can claim of Arriers: But the
chief Cause of my being reduced to the present hard Condition I am in, was, The
leaving my Business in Confusion, when I engadged in His Majesty's Service, not
getting Goods in my Custody disposed off to Advantage, nor Debts due to me
sought in; And on the other hand, my Creditors sued for what was owing them, I
was obliged to satisfy, and pay several other Sums I was Caution for, to my
great loss: By all which, and several other misfortunat Accidents, my Credit
was much broken, and Estate near exhausted. Notwithstanding of all which, I
wrasled under all these Disadvantages, still thinking to have recovered, till
within this two or three years. At length I was obliged to succumb, my
Creditors attacking all my Effects; I was necessitat to leave the Kingdom for a
time, and now returning empty handed, I began to Reason thus with my self:
What? Have I learned nothing from all that I have seen or heard, whereby I can
be Useful to my self or the Commonwealth? And at length came to this Resolve,
I have had some Experience of the Way and Manner of Labuoring the Ground in
this Country; And I have seen their Way of mannaging thereof in some other
Places, which is generally done to greater Advantage: And when I began to try
what might be the Causes, why there is such difference of Increase in one
place, more than another, I found it is not altogether from the difference of
the Climate, nor Primitive Constitution of the Earth.

And as soon as I thought of publishing this, I thought it my Duty, (with all
Humility) to present it to your Lordships* in respect you are not only
Proprietors of a great part of Lands in this Kingdom, but also in Authority and
Dignity, to recommend this Project, both by Example and Precept; And if it may
seem practicable in your Lordships Eyes, and any Benefit to the Public come
thereby, I shall reckon it a special Mercy of GOD (who by his Overruling
Providence often times works by contrary like Means) that I am reduced to this
penurious Condition; For if it had pleased GOD to continue me in prosperity, I
believe this Project had never entered my thoughts. I am not so self conceited,
as to apprehend there is any great Mystery in what I have here published, for
it is a thing many have not only known, but practiced; But never any that I yet
saw, has published it in their Terms, for (as I noted in page 125) the grand
mistake lies in Miscalculation; And I foresaw, if I had used the common Method
of writing on this Subject, it had been objected, the Profit would not
overballance the Expense; For which Cause, I have chused to go through every
Particular, and show how and from whence the profit does arise.

I know Epistols Dedicatory, are usually stuffed with the Praises of those to
whom they are directed; But the like Practice were here supperfluous (tho I
were capable of such a Task) as the Poet who was desired to write in praise of
Alexander, answered; Who has dispraised Alexander? So I think my dull Pen
attempting to applaud Unquestioned Virtue, were not only Vain, but Injurious.
Wherefore, I judge it my best Eloquence, to be altogether silent, and let your
Enemies judge whither Real Virtue does not dwell in the Breasts of these whom
Divine Providence has exalted to such Dignity; And the most Serene, August,
and Judicious Monarch this Day in the World, makes choice of for His
Counselors. But to avoid Prolixity, and encroaching upon your Lordship's
Patience, I shall conclude. Now that all Honor, Prosperity, and Endless
Felicity, may always attend You, is the Earnest Wish, and Unfeigned Prayer, of

Your LORDSHIPS most Humble and Obedient Servant, Ja: Donaldson.

ERRATA,
Page 8 Line 8, for Vigitables read Vegetables, and several other Places: Page
25 Line 12, for only, and read only add. Page 107 Line 1, for 5 read 4, ibid:
Line 3 for 200 read 1600. Page 108 Line 10 for 4907 read 7907.

As for any other Literal Errors, incident to creep into all Books, throw
mistake, be pleased to correct them your selves; And if it were proper here to
make an Appologie for my self, I might plead the more to be excused, in respect
I have been so hastened to have this finished before the Session sat down (and
other Reasons needless here to repeat) that before I wrote the second Sheet,
the first was at the Press, and never after had I one Sheet of Copy ready at
once, the whole time it was a printing.

THE PREFACE to the READER
Neighbors and Country men, this small Treatise may seem to bear a Title which
in the following Sheets cannot be made good, I confess before I took a
particular look into every Circumstance of this Project, I could scarce believe
such a thing could be: But after peruse^, let the Judicious Reader Judge how
far I have accomplished my Undertaking. I know it is seldom that any new
Project is much encouraged by most of you, and he that proposes it reputed a
Wise Man: However, I have rather chosen to hazard upon the Censure of all, than
conceal that which may be profitable to any; And seeing the chief mystery of
this Project consists in your Prudent and Exact Calculation, (as I remarked in
my Answer to the 2 d. Objection) wherefore I yet once more Recomend it in this
and all other Cases.

I doubt not but some may cast it in my Teeth, since I am so good at Teaching
others how to improve their Stocks; How comes it to pass, that I have been so
far mistaken in forecasting of my own Affairs? To which I Answer, Perhaps I may
now be a better Gamester than formerly, while my Carts were a playing.
Moreover, it was not altogether my want of Skill in Calculating, that made my
Projects to misgive; But grant it to be as ye suppose, it does not follow, but
my Advice may be both Profitable and Reasonable: A Mariner that has suffered
Shipwreck, may be as good a Pilote in that same Channel where he lost his
Ship, as another that has come that same Way, with a Prosperous Gale, and
Full-Sea, sailing over the hide Rocks, and dangerous Banks. If you think my
Advice Reasonable, take it Gratis, and welcome; If not, buy Experience at th
Rate I have done.

HUSBANDRY Anatomized, OR, An Enquiry into the present manner of Manuring the
Ground in Scotland for most part, and several Rules and Measures laid down for
the better Improvement thereof, etc.
WHEN Almighty GOD Created the World, by the Word of his Power, He could have
made Men to live without Food, as well as Angels: Or yet have made the Earth to
bring forth all manner of Food for him without Labor or Industry, as it does
for Ca^^le and creeping things: But so it was, that He that is Infinite in
Wisdom saw it meet to assign Man a daily exercise in earning his Food and
Raiment, whereby he is not only diverted from following some bad Practice; But
also that thereby he may see his great frailty, in that he is not able to live
without daily Subsistence and Refreshment, from Creatures inferior to himself.
As also he thereby may learn to know his great need of Spiritual Nourishment to
his Soul, in as much as it is more precious than the Body, together with many
other profitable Lessons.

No doubt if Man had continued in the Estate of Innocence, his Labor had been
rather a Pleasure than a Toil, as may be gathered from the Sentence pronounced
against Adam, where it is said, From thenceforth by the Sweat of his Brows he
should Earn his Bread. until he should return unto the Dust; It Is plain enough
it had not fated so with him, were not for his Transgression: And upon Cain's
Transgression, the Earth is again Cursed, that thenceforth it should not yield
its strength. What wonder tho before this time it had become a barren
Wilderness, considering the daily multiplied Transgressions of the Children of
Men? But this being extraneous to my purpose, and that which I am not capable
to decipher, I shall remit it to the Contemplation of Divines.

But that I may come to the purpose, I shall first take some general
Observations concerning the present Constitution of the Earth.

2. Lay down certain Rules for bringing every kind of Ground to a right
Temperature, so far as may be.

3, An Inquiry into the present manner of manuring the Ground, through most
part of this Kingdom.

4, Lay down several Rules for manuring it to greater advantadge, tho not
enclosed.

5, How much more by Parking and Enclosures.

6. Concerning Stock-keeping.

7. Something concerning Planting.

8. Some directions how to sow several Garden Seeds, and Roots,

And lastly I shall enervat what Objections I conceive may be framed against
any of my propositions.

CHAP. I. Of the Earth's Constitution in general.
ANd first, I say, notwithstanding that Proverb is of verity, There is never a
Tale without a Reason. That is, there is no Effect, but from some certain
Cause; yet, it is as true there may be many things really true in Effect, that
we do not well know from what Cause: And seeing I am neither Philosopher nor
Alchymist, I hope the moderat Reader will not altogether disprove or misregard
my propositions, where the matter of fact is evident, although I cannot give a
Philosophical definition of the Cause; Nevertheless, that I may not desire the
Reader to credit my bare Assertion without any ground, I shall in some measure
endeavor (according to my weak capacity) to give him satisfaction in this
point.

And first, I say, it cannot be denied but some places of the Earth are Moist
and Cold, and other places Hot and dry. The cause of which differences some
aleadge to be by the influence of the Planets and other Celestial Bodies; (by
which also they make all Minerals to be Engendered). I shall not say but there
maybe much truth in this, for in these Climates lying nearest the Equinoctial,
geting a larger share of the Sun's heat, are generally more fertile (providing
it be not scorching) than other places more remote, as I shall afterward show.

Neither shall I altogether deny but other Planets may also have some
influence; Notwithstanding of all which I cannot be persuaded through influence
of the Planets, there can be with in the bounds of a mile of ground (or perhaps
less) one field hot and sandy. Another cold clay ground. A third Marish and
Boggie. A fourth dry Heath ground, A fifth a tolerable mixture of all these,
etc. Now seeing these differences cannot be from the forementioned Cause, it
must be from its primitive Constitution, or I shall not dive any farther into
it.

To enquire any more after the Cause of this, is like a person coming where
there is a house on fire, and in stead of endeavoring to quench the Flame,
calls out, How did the Fire break out? How was the House kendled? The thing
required in this case (seeing the Effect is unqustionable) is rather to remove
the Malady, than enquire any farther after the Cause.

I shall therefore proceed to lay down several Rules, whereby to bring each of
these different kinds of Ground to such a temperature, as it may be in a
condition to nourish, any Plant or Seed therein sown or planted; which is done
by removing the superfluity of that quality that prevails, and strengthening
of that which is weak. For as in humane bodies* there are a Composition of the
four Elements, and through the superfluity, or deficiency of any one or more of
them, Diseases are contracted and fomented, so in the Earth there is the like
Composition of qualities, and so far as heat, Moister, cold or dryness,
exceeds the bounds of a moderat temperatur, so far is she Diseased and
rendered unfruitful.

I know some assert the Salt or hot quality that is in the Earth, is the only
cause of growth of Vigitables; And consequently, barreness to be only for want
of this quality: I confess where this quality is wanting altogether, Barrenness
cannot but ensue: And also; that this quality is that which is most frequently
deficient in our cold Climate. And moreover tho it be strengthened or assisted
yet by teiling and Manuring of the Earth its extracted forth into the substance
of grain, and other vigitables, and so needs frequently to be renewed.
Notwithstanding of all which with submission to men of greater Judgment, I am
of opinion there may be abundance of this Hot or Salt quality where there is as
much barrenness, as any where else.

But that I may confirm this assertion, I say, I have seen a field fatned
sufficiently with Dung, yet by reason of great drowght, it has yielded small
increase, yea, scarce one third of what it has done at other times: The cause
surely was not for want of this Hot or Salt Quality, but allanerly for want of
Moister. Again, I have seen a field that wanted not enough of this Hot quality,
and by excessive Rains (after it has been tiled and sown with Good Grain) has
produced little else but weeds, and Thristles, for that season, also I have
seen strong Clay ground, where the clods remained firm and unbroken did not
produce so much by far, for that Season, as at other times, when by reason of
the Frost in the Winter, the clods have easily Mouldred to pieces,
Notwithstanding it was otherwise, in no better Condition, which makes me
believe the want of Air, (tho there be a moderat temperature of the other
qualities) hinders the growth of Vigitables, for tho it want not Air in the
stalk, which is above ground, yet in this confirmed Earth, the Air cannot have
free access to the Root. Another thing which confirms me in this opinion, is,
where Trees grow closs, or near the Bottom of hedges, little or nothing does
grow. Morover, I have seen in the Bottom of a dung hill (Plewed and sown) tho
round about the borders thereof the corn has been extraordiner strong and good,
yet where most of the strength of dung did remain, little or nothing did grow,
which says the excess of this hot quality, (tho there be a moderat temperature
of all the rest) does hinder fruitfulness.

I observed formerly that within the bounds of a mile of ground in some places,
there may be seen fields in equal circumstances, as to the manner of Situation,
and yet differing in other circumstances very much, for which I can understand
no cause save the primative constitution, but for Valys being generally more
fertile then hills, I humbly conceive one or all of these reasons may be given;
First, The internal heat of the earth, warming the Air next unto it, and in
respect the hills are farther extended from the center than the Valys, and b^ing
so much higher, where the Air is more pure and less warmed by this internal
heat, they are so much colder, and consequently more unfruitful. Or secondly,
If it be said it is not the internal heat of the Earth that warmeth the Air,
but rather the reflex heat of the Sun Beams, it is the same thing upon the
Matter, for whither the heat be from the Earth it self, or the Sun's heat
re^^yling, still, the Valys have the advantage of the Mountains, in respect the
Air that is lowest receives the greatest share thereof. 3. So much as the
hills are higher than the Valys, they ly the more open to the Air, which has a
quicker motion, the higher it is, and Air moved is much colder than when it is
not moved, whither it be in that it is warmed by things nixt to it when it
stands still; and when it is moved, fresh Air still approaching, which has
not been warmed, be the cause why the one is warmer then the other, I shall not
determine. But the matter of Fact is beyond contraversy, that the Air moved is
much colder than when it is not moved, and Valys being much sheltered from the
violence of Storms are keep'd so much the warmer, and consequently are the more
Fertile.

Moreover hills being steep the Rain runs presently off so soon as it
falls, and does not only carry that salt or hot Quality that is in it self
away; But if the Ground be not well Soarded, carries part of the Earth also
away with it self. And on the contra^e, Valys lying near level, Rain cannot run
suddenly off, but getting time to soak or sink in the Ground, the salt Quality
remains still, whereby the Earth is much Enriched.

By the above mentioned Observations, you may see it is Heat principally that
makes the Valys more fertile than the Hills: It follows, that if other Ground
can be warmed to the like degree, it may thereby be made as fertile. I shall
therefore in the following Chapters, give some Directions, how this may be
performed, which may be done two ways: First, By assisting the Internal H^at;
Next, By restraining the External Cold, of each in their places.

CHAP. II. How to bring every kind of Ground to a right Temperature, so far as
may be.
NOw, to follow the Example of a skillful Physician, after finding out the
Disease, he prescriveth Medicines suitable to be applied to each various
Distemper, so shall we after this search and inquiry into the Nature and
constitution of these different kinds of ground above mentioned. See next what
measures are to be taken, to bring the same to a moderat temperature. And as
the Apostle says in another case, Paul may Plant, and Apollo may Water; But
it is GOD that gives the Increase: So let men be never so industrious or
careful about their worldly Affairs, yet if GOD give not a blessing to the
means, their labor is in vain; For how often is it seen, that after a hopeful
Spring, an unseasonable Summer makes a scarce Harvest, and after a seasonable
Summer, and good appearence of a plentiful harvest by intemperat weather (a few
weeks) much of the fruits of the Earth have been consum^d.

I am not so much an Astrologer, as to impute the cause of this to be from the
influence of Celestial Bodies, and by the Regency or Planets of this and the
other disposition, together with their Conjunctions, Squares, Angles, and
Opositions, and so forth. Such various effects are produced (and that not only
in the Elements): But also the like influence have they on humane bodies, both
in their Dispositions and Actions, is the Doctrine of most Astrologers. What
ever be the Opinion of such Men, yet it is beyond contraversie they go about to
seek the nearest, that go to the Stars to seek knowledge in futer Events.

I know so much of Astrology, that I know Mathematicians may calculat the
course of the Planets, and know in what Schem or Form the Celestial Bodies
shall be for a great many years to come; And also, they may be informed by
those of their own profession that have lived many hundred years ago, what
was the Schem of the Heavens when such and such Events fell out, and from this
they conjecture when the Celestial Bodies come again to be in the like Posture
or Frame, the like Events they shall befall.

I say, notwithstanding of what Knowledge the best Mathematicians may have in
future things, by these Conjectures, there can be nothing certain from these
Causes: For, I hope none of them will deny, but he that gave these Creatures a
Being, and appointed them their Uses and Offices, can work whatsoever he
pleases, without their concurrance or assistance: But so it is, he has
forewarned us to be assured, if we persist in sin, we may expect to be punished
as other people, who have committed the like sins in times past: And we have
frequent instances in the History of the Jewish Church, what was the causes of
the Judgments inflicted on them. I know not how the Planets were disposed, in
all the Revolutions of that people: But the Penman of that Sacred Story,
attributes all the Mutations of these times, to other Causes. I am of Opinion,
that such as are well versed in Sacred Writ, and acquainted with the Life and
Conversation of a People, may read their Destiny, better than all the
Astrologers in Europe can do by their Mathematical Calculations.

None I confess can be positive as to the Time or Manner, GOD sometimes giving
a longer or shorter space of Repentance as he pleases; And because He does not
always punish sinners in the very act, therefore many mistake the cause of
their punishment, as the Israelites in Ieremiah's time, being by him reproved
for their idolatry, assuring them that the afflictions they were then under,
proceeded from that cause: They absolutely defend themselves, alleging he
went about to deceive them, Ier: 44.17. But we will certainly do whatsoever
thing goes forth of our own mouth, to burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven, and
to power out Drink Offerings unto her, as we have done, we and our Fathers, Our
King and our Princes, in the Citys of Judah, and Streets of Jerusalem, for then
had we plenty of Victuals, and were wel^, and saw no evil. But since we left
off to burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out Drink Offerings
unto her, we h^^e wanted all things, and have been consumed by the Sword, and
by the Famine. We want not abundance in our times, that mistake the Language of
Providence, not one white less than their Israelites did; But meddling with them
not being to our purpose, I shall let them stand and fall to their own Master.
What I design at present, is to have my Reader persuaded to a dut^^ul
Obedience unto the Law of GOD, and to depend on Providence, for good Success in
his Lawful Affairs, and for a Blessing on the Fruits of the Ground, rather than
believe Good or bad weather, or any other Events comes by guess, or by the
common course of the Stars.

Now, To return to our purpose, let us see what kind of Nourishment or Medicine
is required to refresh the Ground withal, or to bring it to a temperat
Constitution; And that is, First, Dung of all sorts, and Vigitables of all
kinds, providing they be first putrified or rotten; Yea, all kind of Animals,
and Lime, Ashes, etc. Tho some curious persons recommend Horn and Hove, Blood
and Gutts of Cattle, and Shells of Fishes, and Saltpeter, etc. as very strong
and dureable Nourishments for the Ground Yet seeing these things cannot be had
by every one, I shall only speak of these which may be had every where, Viz:
Dung of Cattle, Ashes, Lyme, Marle, and Sea-ware, any of which will strengthen
any kind of Ground* Yet some of them are stronger than other, and each of them
proper to be applied to different kinds of Ground, as I shall immediately remark.

And first, I shall begin with Marish Ground, if it be ploughable, then let it
be made in high Riggs, Sheep or Horse Dung is fittest for this kind of Earth,
if it be so moist that it cannot be plewed, draining the Water from it by
Trinches or Ditches, and strawing it with Lime, or Ashes of Wood or Coals, will
much help the growth of Grass, and prevent the growth of Rushes, or any other
hurtful weed.

2 ly, Where the Earth is sandy and hot, let it be fatned with Cow Dung, or
Marish-earth, because the Constitution thereof is too hot already, Dung of a
contrary Quality must be applied: But if it be excessive hot, it can hardly be
made Fertile, unless a great quantity of Clay or Marish Ground be laid upon it,
which will be more expensive than all the Profit coming thereby can repay. In
that case, I know nothing better than take what Grass it produces of its self,
and not spend Seed and Labor in vain; For tho in a wet Season it may bear a
pretty good Crop, yet seeing a drowght may as readily happen, it is saffer to
bestow Expense on other Ground, where more certain Profit may be expected.

3 ly, Strong Clay Ground is that we shall speak of next, the Nourishment most
proper for it, is Horse or Sheep dung; This kind of Earth is capable of as much
Improvement, as any kind of Ground whatsomever: Yet seeing there is two
Maladies in it to be removed, which is Cold and Astringedness, or Hardness,
especially when a very dry Summer follows a wet Spring; Beside the dung above
mentioned, take Sea sand, or other sandy Earth, and spread upon it as you do
dung; This both helps to keep the Ground open, and also mitigats the Cold.
Another thing that makes this kind of Ground open and tender, is fallowing: And
also sowing it with Pease or Beans, which at least ought to be sown on this
kind of Ground, every third or fourth Year.

4 ly, The next kind of Earth we shall speak of, is Mountainous, wild, and
over-growen with Heath or Heather. This Shurb only grows on cold dry Ground,
where scarce any thing else can grow: Nevertheless, by removing that cold dead
kind of light Ground that is upon the surface of the Earth where this Heather
grows; The soil may be made pretty Fertile. The manner of mannaging this kind
of Ground, is as follows, viz: To digg it up in Turffs, which being dried,
gather in small Heaps and burn, and spread the Ashes in September or October,
then sow it with Wheat, and plough it down with a light Furr; The first years
Crop will do more than reward your Labor, (ten or twelve Bolls per Aiker,
being the least Increase you may expect) and always afterward, it will be fit
for Grain or Pasture, as your other Ground: But because most People in this
Country, are Strangers to this kind of Labor, I shall tell what Method they
take in other places, to make this wild Ground Arrable.

Where the Heather is very rank or strong, they take a Ho^ much in form of an
Each, and therewith stricking as when a Carpenter heweth with an Each, going
round all the quarters of each Turff they digg it up; Or else they first slit
the Ground with a kind of Plough they have for that Use, making each slit about
a foot distant from one another, then crossing it again, all the edges of the
Turff are ^ut, so that they need but only cut them in the bottom; Eight Men may
digg an Aiker in a day, where the bottom of the Turff is only to be cut, but if
the Ground be not slit as abovesaid, scarce will they digg one half thereof.
You may slit your Ground either with your common Plough, by lengthening your
Culter three or four inches lower than your Sock: But that which I judge may be
more easy, and hasten your Labor much more, is to make a Slyp aft^r the
common manner only, and a Crossbeam, and therein you may place two Culters at
least, providing they be thin and of good Mettle, then lay a weight upon the
said Slyp, and wherever it is drawn, it will slit the Ground alse deep as
the point of your Culters goes.

CHAP. III. How to manage the Ground to better Advantage, tho not Enclosed.
SEeing all that can be said in General, can never point out the Case so
clearly, as condescending on Particulars does; I shall therefore lay down the
whole Matter in every Circumstance, which I shall do by comparing the present
way of managing the Ground, by that which I shall propose. But because every
kind of Ground is not alike, some being Valys, which of themselves are more
Fertile than Hills or Mountainous Ground, and some lying near Borroustowns,
geting a greater quantity of dung than its own product can make, by which it is
in a pretty good Condition already. But seeing I am to give only one Instance,
it shall be that which is commonly called Dale-ground, that is, such Lands as
are partly Hills, and partly Valys, of which sorts may be comprehended the
greatest part of Arrable* ground in this Kingdom; And as is said, tho this one
Instance cannot be an infallible Rule for managing every kind of Earth by, yet
in some measure, any person may know how to manage every kind of Ground; For,
if the Ground be naturally Fertile, or lying near any place where dung can be
had: More Land may be taken into dunging, and where the Ground is naturally
barren, less must be taken in dunging, than what is here proposed; In a word, I
would give this a general Rule, to dung no more than can be dunged sufficiently.

Of this kind of Dale-ground above mentioned, I shall suppose a Farmer to have
a Lease or Tack of threescore Aikers, at three hundred Merks of Rent per
annum, (perhaps some who are not acquaint with Rural Affairs, may think this
Cheap, but these who are the Possessors thereof, think otherwise, and find
difficulty enough to get the same paid, according to their present way of
manuring thereof, as anon you shall see.) But that I may proceed to the
Comparison, I shall show how commonly this Farm Room is managed; It is
commonly divided into two parts, viz: one third Croft, and two thirds Outfield,
(as it is termed) The Croft is usually divided into three parts, To wit, One
third Barley (which is always dung'd that year Barley is sown thereon) another
third Oats, and the last third Pease. The Outside field is divided into two
parts, To wit, The one half Oats, and the other half Grass, two years
successively.

This Ground being improven as above represented, let us see next what the
Laboring of it may cost, and what may be the Product thereof: First, The
Product that may be supposed to be on each Aiker of Croft four Bolls, and that
of the Out field three, the Quota is seven score Bolls: This we may reckon it
to produce good and bad Seasons, the Better to mend the worse, which we shall
also reckon at five pounds per Boll, Cheap Year and dear year, one with
another; This in all, is worth seven hundred pounds.

Then let us see what profit he can make of his Cattle: According to the
division of his Lands, there is twen^y Aikers of Grass, which cannot be
expected to be very good, because ^t gets not leave to ly above two years, and
therefore cannot be well ^oarded: However, usually, beside ^our Horses, (which
are kept for ^loughing the said Land,) ten or ^welve Nolt are also kept
upon a ^erm Room of the above mentioned ^ounds: But in respect of the badness
of the Grass, as said is, little Profit is had of them, perhaps two or three
stone of Butter is the most can be made of the Milk of his Kyne the whole
Summer, and not above two Hiffers brought up each year. As to what profit may
be made by bringing up young Horses. I shall say nothing, supposing he keeps
his Stock good by those of his own upbringing, both in this Case, and in that
which I shall instance by and by: The whole Product then of his Cattle cannot
be reckoned above fifty Merks; For in respect his Beasts are in a manner half
starved, they are generally small, so that scarce may a Hiffer be sold at above
twelve pounds; The profit of his Bestial therefore, cannot exceed what is said.

By what is said, you see the whole Product of this Farm Room, exceeds not the
Value of seven hundred and thirty three pound, or thereabout; The Grain and
Bestial being all he has to make Money of, except what Virtue the Good wife and
her Maid can make, which is needless here to enquire into; For let it be what
it will, the way of managing the Ground, according to this project, will rather
further than hinder them in their Frugality.

Therefore I shall now try what Expense or Out-Cost the managing of this Room
may be: And not to mention the first Cost or Stocking of it, which may be about
the matter of 8 or nine hundred pounds, the Interest of which in Reason, ought
to be allowed out of the first end of his profit. But I shall proceed, you
heard this Ferm Room produces one hundred and forty Bolls of Grain per
annum, forty of which may be allowed for the Mantainance of his Family, and
sixteen for the use of his Horses, forty to pay his Rent withal, and as much
for Seed; This in all makes one hundred and thirty six Bolls, only four Bolls
remains for paying of Servants Wages, which cannot be less than seventy or
seventy five pounds, for he can labor it with no fewer than two Men, and one
Maid, beside a Herd in Summer, and other Servants that are required in Harvest:
Yet nothing more has he to furnish his Family in Clothes, and other
Necessarys, except the Industry made by his Wife and Maid, or if he can spare
some of the forty Bolls allowed to be consumed in the Family, it may help to
pay part of his Servants Fees.

Now I shall proceed to show what Method I would have Fermers take in managing
their Land. You heard, two Men, a Boy, a Maid, and four Horses, was required to
labor the Room above mentioned, I shall seek no more to labor one half more
Ground: And if the product of both be equal, according to their proportions,
then is the expense of Seed, and laboring of this additional thirty Aikers,
wholly saved, which is a considerable profit; But I shall make it evident, not
only shall this expense be saved, but also the product of the Ground shall be
more than that of the first Instance, even proportionablie to their Bounds.

The Mailen or Ferm Room I am to speak of, I suppose to contain ninety Aikers
of the like Ground, with that formerly mentioned, I divide it thus, sixty six
Aikers I make Out-field, which I divide into three parts, two thirds I leave
Grass, and one third I plough three years, then I plough another third part
three years, and then the last third part I plough other three years, and
begins again to plough that first third part, and so continues to plough one
third, and ^ave two thirds Grass; Thus every third is ploughed three years, and
lies six successively.

Of the other twenty four Aikers, I first take two, and I make it in a Yeard,
or Orchyeard, half an Aiker thereof I Sow and Plant, with Cabbage or other
Kaile, and what Roots I think fit for Use of the Family; the other Aiker and
half I leave Grass, and the whole I plant with Fruittrees, but because I
assign this Orchyeard for another Use, than allanerly for Fruit, I plant the
Trees at the matter of thirty foot distance: The Trees being planted at this
distance, hinders nothing the growth of Grass or Herbs beside them, and
within ten or twelve years, much Benefit maybe also made of themselves.

The twenty two Aikers that remain, I divide into five parts, which is near
four Aikers and a half each part: To make the shares equal, I take half an
Aiker off the Out-field. Thus I have eighteen Aikers of Croftland sown, and
four and an half Grass each year, so I dung four Aikers and a half the first
year, and thereon I sow Barley, the next year I sow it with Wheat, the third
year with Pease or Oats, the fourth year with Oats or Pease, the fifth year I
leave it Grass, or if I thing fit I Fallow it the fifth year, by this Method,
only four Aikers and a half is to be dunged every year, for which there is dung
abundance, because a far greater number of Cattle can be kept on this Mailen,
than that above mentioned, (because I have more than three times as much Grass,
for tho there be not three times as many Aikers, yet in respect it is much
better Soarded by lying six years, whereas the other lay but two, it will be no
worse than what is said.) And as I observed formerly, six or seven Aikers of
the other Mailen used to be dunged every year, it is certain this four aikers
and a half, has far greater allowance.

Let us next see what product may be reasonably expected off this Mailen. I
suppose it will not be denied (by any who know Husbandry) but each Aiker of
Croft may produce eight or ten Bolls at a Cropped considering how strongly it is
dunged: How ever, I shall reckon but only seven, and the Out-field I suppose
may be reckoned to bear four Bolls per Aiker* For seeing in the above written
instance, three Bolls was the product of one Aiker after two years lying; And
this lying six years, cannot but be much more Refreshed, for tho the common way
of supplying the Defect of the Salt Quality that is in the Earth, be by
applying Dung or Lyme: Yet there is also much of this Quality in Dew and Rain,
and when the Ground is not tiled or opened up, Grass or other things the Earth
produceuh of it self, does not extract forth so much of this hot Quality by
far, as Seeds do when it is Manured; Therefore I think one Boll per Aiker, may
be very reasonably expected more off Ground that has had six years rest, than
that which has had two. The product then of twenty two Aikers, I shall reckon
four score and eight Bolls, and seven times eighteen, the product of the
Croft-land is six score and six Bolls, which in all make^ two hundred and
fourteen Bolls; A fourth part of the Croft being sown with Wheat, we may
reckon on 24 Bolls of that Grain (beside its own Seed) which is at least a
Crown per Boll better, than other Grain; Add this to five times two hundred
and fourteen pounds, the Value of the whole Grain upon the said Mailen, the
Quota is eleven hundred and forty two pounds.

Next let us consider what Stock of Cattle may be maintained upon this Mailen
or Ferm Room: You heard, four Horses, and ten or twelve Nolt, were kept upon
that above mentioned, and three times as much Grass is upon this: Yet, I shall
not so much endeavor to augment the number, as strive to have the Cattle in a
good Condition; For, as I formerly remarked, generally throughout this Kingdom,
the Cattle are almost half starved, which keeps them both small and lean. Let
us therefore keep on this Mailen, but two Horses, four Oxen, and eight or ten
Milk Kyne, and a Bull: Six Calves we may reckon to be brought up by them ever
year, one half Male, the other Female: Our Stock of young Cattle, according to
this Calculation, does consist of six Calves, six of a year old, and six of two
years old, which according to the Vulgar way of reckoning Soumes, may be
counted eight Soumes: And when they come to be three years old, they come in
the account of Kyne or Oxen; The two Horses, according to the Vulgar account,
are reckoned four Soumes, and every Cow or Oxen one, so the whole Soumes above
mentioned, are twenty seven. The Aikers of Grass in this Mailen are forty
eight, beside that of the Orchyeard (which I reserve for Hay to give the Cattle
when sick, or Sheep in a Storm) besides the above said twenty seven Soumes, I
may keep on this Grass, forty or fifty Sheep.

Let us now reckon what Benefit may be made of their Cattle; And first, of the
ten Milk Kyne, may be made sixteen or twenty Stone of But^er, sixteen Stone at
a Dollar per stone, is odds of forty six pounds in Money, three Oxen and three
Kyne, I have to sell or dispose of every year, and in respect they will be
better fed than Cattle commonly now are^ (in regaird their Pasture is not
overlaid) I may reckon them at eighteen pound the piece, four of them I sell at
Hallowday for seventy two Pounds, and two of the Oxen I keep and feed (having
good Fooder enough) all Winter, and in February or March, I sell them at thirty
pounds the piece at least, which is sixty pounds: Upon the Horses I reckon
neither Profit nor loss. Of the product of our Sheep, we may reckon twenty to
be brought up every year, their Wool may be reckoned worth thirty or thirty six
pounds; I sell or ^^spose of seven or eight of the weakest of them at
Hallowday, at forty shilling a piece, which amounts to fourteen or sixteen
pounds, twelve of the best of them I put into the Orchyeard, and lets them feed
there till after Candlemas, and then I can sell them at four or five pounds a
piece at least, which is fifty or sixty pounds.

Beside all this, I can have in my Orchyeard, four or five Be Hives, which may
be kept at little or no Expense, whereof I may make twenty four pounds per
Annum, and the half Aiker of Orchyeard I have in Herbs and Roots, shall save a
Dozen or sixteen Bolls of Grain; However, I do only reckon it to save fifty
pounds.

Now, Let us see what the whole product of this Mailen or Farm Roo^ amounts to,
in all.

Imp: 214 Boll^ grain at 5 lib: per Boll. 1070 00 00 The addition alworth of 24
Boll^ Wheat 72 00 00 3 Kyne and one Ox, at 18 lib: a piece. 72 00 00 2 Oxen at
30 lib: a piece 60 00 00 8 Sheep at 2 lib: a piece. 16 00 00 12 Sheep at 4 lib:
4 shil: a piece. 50 08 00 The profit of the Orchyeard. 50 00 00 The W^^l worth.
36 00 00 16 stones Butter at 2 lib: 18 shil: per stone 46 08 00 Honey worth. 24
00 00 1496 16 00 The product of that Mailen above mentioned, was only 733 06 08
Which being deducted from 1473 lib: 16 ss: there remains still. 763 09 0^

You may remember I observed the Expense of Laboring and Seed of both Mailens
are alike, for seeing I labor but forty Aikers of the later, the just number
of that labored of the former, the like number of Servants, and quantity of
Seed, will sow and labor both.

You see I have seven hundred and sixty three pounds more in this than the
product of the first Mailen, and I have only a hundred pounds more Rent to
pay, conform to the proportion of Ground I have more in this last; But because
the Landlord gives me Encouragement at my first Stocking of this Ground, in
trusting me for several years a part of his Rent, because at first, the Ground
cannot be brought to a good Condition, and because I get a Tack or Lease some
considerable time, that I may be thereby encouraged to improve this Ground;
therefore I shall allow him twenty or thirty Bolls more Rent per Annum. Now,
grant that I do pay 30 Bolls more than what is above reckoned on, and
proportionable to the Rent of the first Mailen, that is one hundred and 50
pounds in Money, take this and the hundred pounds last mentioned, from seven
hundred and sixty three pounds, five hundred and thirteen pounds have I still
more profit, than he who possesses the first Mailen, managed as at present it
is, through the greatest part of this Kingdom.

But beside all this, I offer yet to make it evident, I shall save ten or
twelve Bolls of Grain the other does not, which I do thus; You may remember
sixteen Bolls was allowed to maintain four Horses in laboring the first
Mailen; But in the other, I allow only two Horses to be kept, and four Oxen,
they need not to be fed with Corn as Horses are, three or four Bolls per Annum,
is all that four Oxen will need, so here is four Bolls saved at least, which is
but a part of the profit had by laboring with Oxen, for as I have showed
above, sixty pounds may be made every year of two Oxen, after they have
labored two or three years, which cannot be made of Horses, for tho some may
make Benefit by bringing up Horses, yet all cannot: Further, than to get
Service of them while they live, for all of them must once die in some Bodies
custody; And therefore, whatever any may gain, others must certainly loss of
them. But because Oxen are not so good for every Service as Horses are, I
recommend a part of each, as most Convenient and Beneficial.

Again, I save six or seven Bolls of Seed, which the Possessors of the first
Mailen does not; And because I had Occasion several times to mention Bolls and
Aikers, which are not alike in all places throughout this Kingdom* I shall here
tell what Bolls and Aikers I mean off; the Boll is after Lithgow Standard,
which contains near seven or eight Potles English, or a galon Scots measure,
this is the Stander for Oats or Barley; But that of Wheat, Pease, and Meal one
third less: And the Aiker contains an hundred and sixty Pearches or Falls, to
a Fall six Else, an Ell thirty seven Inches, and a Quarter of an Inch; Three
of our Aikers make near a Rood more than four English Aikers; I have reckoned
all along a Boll of Grain for Seed to an Aiker of Ground which does very near
jump in all kinds of Grain, except Barley, which does not require so much, But
seeing I have reckoned both Mailens alike, what it varies in the one, it varies
in the other also.

But to make my Assertion good, I say, let any person observe, and they will
scarce find one stalk of any kind of Grain, but it will have a dozen of Grains
upon it, and some will have no fewer than thirty or forty, and scarce any
under twenty, beside several stalks sometimes out of one Root. By all which it
would appear, the product is no less than twenty four Fold: And yet (in the
mean time) five or six or seven Fold, is thought no despicable Increase.

This says not above one third of the Seed that is sown does come to
perfection, which I am very apt to believe: Now let us see what are the Causes
why it is so, which (beside the fault of the Seed) I can guess at none save
two, the Maladies of both I shall in some measure remeed; The first is by
reason of the roughness and knotyness of the Ground whereon the Seed is sown,
some of it falling down to the bottom of the Furrows, and afterward being
covered with clods and dust, perhaps more than 5 or 6 inches thick, it is
either therein chocked for want of Air, or cannot get sprung up thorrow so much
Earth. Moreover, even tho it be not so deep in the Earth, yet when the Seed is
sown dry, and falling into such places of the Ground as are also dry, it
cannot suddenly chip or spring, and continuing partly moist and partly dry, a
great dale of it consumes before it does sprout.

That which confirms me in this Opinion, Is, when I have taken notice to Malt
upon the Floor, scarce one Grain of ten, yea in good Grain, scarce one of
twenty, but what did fairly chip, or begin to shot forth, from which I
conjecture, if that which is sown on the Earth, were as much moisten^`d, it
would as universally chip: And I believe, very little Grain that once springs
above Ground, does afterward ^ail, except the Season be very intemperat.

The way then to Remeed these Maladies, are to steep the Seed before it be
sown twenty four hours at least (some prescrive steeping in Aquavitae and Lyme
Water) but I am for no such Curiosity, fearing the Benefit will not repay the
Charges; But let it only be steeped in Water twenty four hours, as is said, and
let it ly upon the floor till the watter dry from it, and if ye cannot
conveniently have it instantly sown, it will be nothing the worse to ly three
or four days (providing ye let it not heat,) it comes as fast forward on the
Barn Floor as if it were sown* For the Sape or Moisture that remains in it
after steeping, is sufficient to make it once sprout, and I suppose after it
does once chip or shut forth, it does not radily afterward fail. And then to
prevent its falling into hols, give the Ground a course of Harrowing before the
Seed be thereon sown, and tha^ harrow it till it be enough, Taking their
Measures, I dar adventur to sow an Aiker of Land with two or three Pecks less
Seed, than in following the common Manner, which is more than seven Bols saved
of forty Aikers, if three Pecks per aiker be rebet: But I shall only reckon
six saved this way,

Before I close this Chapter, I shall answer one Objection, which some perhaps
may frame against my steeping of Seed-Corn, in that I Am of Opinion, dry Seed
sown upon dry Ground is not sudenly moistened, and lying some considerable
time half wet half dry, is consumed before it receive Life: Whereas on the
contrare it is the universal Opinion of all that have any Knowledge, or
Experience of Husbandry, that a dry Seed time is the most seasonable of any,
in so much that it is a Vulgar Proverb A Boll of March Dust is worth a Boll of
Gold, but steeping of Seed seems to infer the contrair.

To which I answer, this makes nothing against my assertion for as I showed
above, there is a moderat temperature of diverse Qualitys required in the Earth
to fit it for bringing forth Grain, and it is not so much the excess of Moister
in Seed-time, that hinders a plentyful Cropped, as it is the excess of Cold,
and tho the Earth of it self be Cold and Dry, yet Water is Colder, and when the
ground is wet with Rain in Seed-time, it cools it so much, that much of the
Seed consumes before it Chip. Another bad consequence that follows a wet
Seed-time, is the ground being Ploughed and Harrowed wet, is in a manner
knedded together like Levan, and drying afterward hardneth together as if it
were a Cake, so that Air has not free access to the Seed or Root of the stalk,
and therefore cannot be so fruitful, as otherwise it would be: Besides all
this a great dale of hurtful Weeds spring up which are encouraged by a Cold
wet Season, and geting once above the Corn before it rise keep what advantage
they get.

CHAP. IV. The great Profit of Hedging and Enclosures.
THE preceding Chapter having already run beyond the bounds I thought to have
contained all I had to say on this Subject in; I shall endeavor all possible
Brevity in speaking to these Heads I have nor yet spoken to. You may remember
at our entry it was observed, That where the Earth is Fertile, there is a
moderat Temperature of Heat, Cold, Moisture, and Dryness, and when any one or
more of these Qualitys prevail, or are desicient, it is so far diseased and
rendered unfruitful. And also, That the Hot or Salt Quality, is that which is
most frequently defective in our cold Climate, and tho it be strengthened, yet
by Tielling and Dressing of the Ground, it is extracted forth into the
Substance of Grain, etc.

That which is principally required then to bring the Ground to a Fruitful
Condition, is to assist this Hot or Salt Quality, and seeing by GOD's
Providence, we Inhabit this place of the Earth, which is naturally more cold
than many other places thereof, in respect it lies more remore from the Sun's
Heat, let us therefore endeavor to help by Art, that wherein Nature is
defective.

And before we go any fatther, it may be no unseasonable Meditation, to
Contemplate upon the Wisdom, and Goodness of that Infini^ Being, who has fixed
the Sun (that most glorious Creature) in such a Sphere, that by this one body
of Light the whole Universe is Illuminated* warmed, and Quickened: For what
Creature, Animate, or Inanimate can subsist without constant Refreshment from
his Grateful and Comforting Rays: Yea, does not all the other Luminaries
borrow their Light and Glory off him? What Finit Capacity could ever have
contrived, where to place one single body that might give light and moderat
heat to the whole Universe? Had the Sun been fixed in a lower Sphere than now
he is, the Earth had been scorched or burned up, Had he been placed in a higher
Sphere, than the Earth had not been warmed to such a degtee, that it had been
possible for Men thereon to live, or any thing therein to grow? Should the Sun
remain but a year or two at that distance he is from us in Winter, no living
Creature could subsist.

But the placeing of this Glorious Body, at such a convenient distance, is but
one part of the wonderfulness of the incomprehensible Wisdom of GOD, in
relation to that Creature; For had not the Sun moved, let him be fixed in what
place soever, one third part of the Earth had not received the Benefit of his
warm Beams. Had his Annual motion (that is his Revolution through the Signs)
been also quick as that of the Moon, then Corn, Herbs, Flowers, etc: that had
begun to sprut and grow, during the time of his welcome Visit, should have
weathered and decayed upon his sudden abandoning of them before they came to
perfection. (And here, if it were not beside our purpose, I might ask such as
make the Moon to be another inhabited Terestial Glob. what time Corn takes to
grow up and ripen there; For more space than a month can they not have, for
Summer, Winter, Autumn, and Spring* Or else they must call every month but one
day. And so I leave them to calculat their year themselves.) Or, had the Sun's
motion been also slow as Saturn's, or other of the Superior Planets, then these
places receiving his visit had been scorched by his long continuance in one
place, and other places continuing long in extreme cold during his absence,
could not but frize before his return: For it is beyond Contraversie, if the
Sun did continue any considerable time in one place, things about him would be
much more warmed than they are by his transient Visit. As for Instance, Let a
person take a Shovel full of fire, and carry round about all the borders of a
Room, every particular place will not be so much warmed thereby, as one place
is, when it does remain any considerable space there; Much on this Subject
might be said, which surpasses the Eloquence of the ablest Orator, or Pen of
best accomplished Clark; Wherefore I shall return to what I was speaking of
before.

You see Heat is one principal cause of growth of Grain, and other things the
Earth brings forth; And seeing Providence has aloted us to live in this cold
Climate, we must (by Art) endeavor to help that wherein Nature is defective,
as is said. Which is done two ways, viz: First, by restraining external Cold,
and next, by strenthening or assisting the internal Heat that is in the Earth.

The way to restrain external Cold, is in a special manner, by Planting and
Hedging, of which I shall speak more particularly, when I come to treat of
Planting; But in the mean time, that I may confirm my Assertion, that
restraining of external cold, is no small Encouragement to growth of Corn and
Grass, etc: Besides the Reasons given for it in the first Chapter, I shall tell
what (from Experience) I have seen, and what any person to their conviction may
readily observe; in any place where the Earth is sheltered from the violence of
Storm: As for Instance, what Orchyeard, Gairden, etc: being enclosed, under the
shelter of Trees, or any thing else that defends them from Wind and Storm; But
it is more Fertile than other Ground equal with it in every Circumstance, this
only excepted? Again, I have seen where the Wind had passage but only through
the gape of a Hedge or Stonewall, the Ground there in the same very bit, and no
where else near it, has been visibly a great dale more barren than the rest of
the same Land. And on the other hand, where there has been a Bush, or any other
insignificant shelter (tho the rest of the Ground about it has been barren)
Grass or any other thing growing under the lie of it, has been tolerable good
and rank. Instances to confirm this were infinite, wherefore I must conclude, to
restrain external Cold, must be no small Encouragement for growth of Corn and
Grass, etc.

Having spoken of manuring, or dunging the Ground in Chapter second, and given
a hint of what kind of Dung or Manure was fit for every several kind of Ground;
I shall not now resume what was there said, only I would recommend this as an
Universal Rule, to apply that kind of Manure to every kind of Earth, that has
most of the Quality in it, that the Ground whereon it is said has least of,
viz: hot Manure on cold Ground, and cold Manure on Hot Ground; But least some
may be ignorant what kind of Dung or Manure is Hot, or what is Cold, know, Cow
or Ox Dung is the coldest of any I know, and Horses Dung is more hot, but Sheep
Dung is hoter than either; Lyme, Ashes, and Pigions Dung, are also very hot,
either of them may be applied alone, or mixed, as I shall afterward show. But
because I spoke of Marle, and perhaps every one knows not what it is, nor how
to find it, take Mr. Markem's Definition of it, in his own Words.

Marle, you shall understand, is (according to the Definition of Mr. Bernard
Pullisly) a natural and yet an excellent Sorb, being an enemy to all the Weeds
that spring up of themselves, and giving a generative Virtue to all Seeds that
are sown upon the Ground: Or (for the plain Husband Man's Understanding, it is
a certain rich Stuff, and rough Clay, of a glewie Substance, and not Fat or
Oily, as some suppose, this Marle is cold in Quality, and not Hot, as some
would have it) and it was Earth before it came to be Marle, and being made
Marle, yet it is but a Clay Ground, all Chalk whatsoever, was Marle before it
was Chalk; And all manner of Stones which are subject unto Calcination or
burning, as Lymestone, Flint, and the like, were first Marle before they were
stones, and only hardened by accident, and so not possible to be disolved, but
by fire: As for Marle it self, when it is a little hardened, is only disolved
by Frost, and nothing else: And thence the Cause is, that Marle ever works
better Effect the second year than the first.

This Marle has been made so precious by some Writers, that it has been
accounted a fifth Element, but of this Curiosity I will not now dispute.

Touching the Complexions and Colors of Marle, there is some difference, for
tho all conclude there are four several Colors in Marle; Yet one says there
is a White, a Gray or Russet, a Black and Yellow; Another says there is a Red
and White mixed like unto Porphery. And all these may well be reconceilled, and
Colors may alter according to the Climate and Strength of the Sun, so that by
these Characters, the Color, the Roughness, and the Looseness, when it is
dried, any Man of Judgment may know Marle from any other Earth whatsoever:
This Marle is so Rich of it self, and so Excellent for Continuance, that it
will Maintain and Enrich barren Ground, the worst, ten or twelve, and some for
thirty years.

This Marle is commonly found in the lowest parts of High Countries, near Laiks
and small Brooks, and in the high part of low Countries, upon Knowls or small
Hills, or within the Clifts of high Mountainous Banks, which bound great Rivers
in. To conclude, You will seldom find barren Sandy Grounds, but what are verged
about with Marle, sometimes it is found within two or three foot to the Surface
of the Ear^h, and sometimes ten or twelve: It is worth the searching after, and
boring of suspected places for it, may be worth your pains.

Having given you this short hint of Markem's Opinion of Marle, and how to know
it; I shall proceed to what I proposed, To wit, To give some Directions how to
make some further Improvement of the Ground, than what I have showen in the
preceding Chapter, And as I said, seeing Nature has casten our Lot in this
cold Climate, we must by Art endeavor to supply that want the best way we can,
which beside the warding off Storm and Winds, applying all or any of the
forementioned kinds of Manure, does also warm or heat the Earth so, that it
does bring forth Grain, etc. without any Fence at all. But know, where there is
no Fence or Shelter from Storm, the Earth does require a greater Quantity of
Dung to keep it warm; And to make this the more plain, I shall illustrate it by
this familiar Similitude. You know when a Man is going abroad on a cold day,
the common way to defend himself from Cold, is to put a Cloak or other Vestment
upon him; Yet, by taking a Draham of Brandy or Strong Waters, and walking
sharply, he may also keep himself warm. So I say, where the Earth is not
defended from Wind and Storms, it must have the more Manure laid upon it; And
consequently, where the Earth is defended from Storms, the less Dung will
serve. And seeing Manure cannot be had to every piece of Earth, these Fields
that are fenced, will not require so much, and so what can be had will serve
the more; Wherefore, if in the Instance forementioned, four Aikers and a half
was dunged every year, by the dung of the Cattle that were mantained, upon the
Mailen of ninety Aikers, then I suppose one Aiker more, the self same quantity
of Dung, may manure every year, where the Ground is hedged or fenced.

Now if one Aiker more can be Manured, or (as it is commonly termed) Mucked
every year, and the Manure lesting four years, as is showed above, than four
Aikers more Corn may be had every year in a Mailen of the above mentioned
bounds; Which being reckoned at seven Bolls per Aiker, as the rest of the
Aikers of the said Mailen were reckoned at, makes twenty eight Bolls more than
was on the said Mailen not enclosed: But seeing four Aikers of that which
formerly lay Grass is now made Corn, perhaps it may be said the Profit is
inconsiderable, in respect four Aikers of Grass are deduced, for the said
twenty eight Bolls of Corn. To which I say, notwithstanding four Aikers of
Grass are taken off the Pasture, yet seeing the whole or greatest part of the
Ground is enclosed, and there was in all forty eight Aikers of Grass, there
remains still 44 Aikers of Grass, which according to the Parity of Reason,
seeing the Ground is warmed by hedging, so that one fourth or fifth part of the
Dung can be saved off Corn-Land, and the Crop be alse good as when it had the
whole alowance; than I may reckon the Grass also one fourth or fifth part
better then it was before the Ground was Hedged.

Therefore I have not only as much Grass as I had forme^ly, when these four
Aikers were not taken off the Pasture (and the Ground not enclosed) but even
tho ten Aikers were taken off, the remaining thirty eight Aikers enclosed, are
better than the whole forty eight lying open without fence. And beside the
twenty eight Bolls had more on the Croft-land, I suppose the Out-field being
enclosed also, may yield a Boll per Aiker more than it did before: Howeverr,
reckoning it only half a Boll, it is eleven Bolls in all, which added to twenty
eight, makes thirty nine, which in all makes an hundred and ninety five pounds
in Money, at ^ive pounds per Boll, so much more is the Product of this Mailen,
than what it was before reckoned at.

The yearly Expense is no more than what we formerly reckoned, except the Seed
and Laboring of this additional four Aikers taken off the Out-field; For which
I shall deduce 12 pounds per Aiker, being in all forty eight. Take forty
eight pounds from an hundred and ninety five, there remains an hundred and
forty seven pounds. And in respect the Pasture is as much improven by Hedging,
as the Corn-land is; A greater number of Cattle may be thereon maintained; And
consequently, more Dung will there be made, which will serve to Manure more
Ground, than all that is yet made into Croft.

Besides all this, seeing more Cattle can be kept upon this Mailen when
enclosed, more Profit on them may be also expected. but I shall pass that, and
advance yet to another step of improving this said Mailen, which I do two
ways, First by Fallowing, and next by seeking out all the Manure I can
possibly get, beside the dung of Cattle, and all rubbish made of the Product of
the Ground itself.

As to the Fallowing, I say it was marked at the entry of our division of this
Mailen into Croft and Out-field, that the Outfield was divided into three
parts, one third always to be in Corn, and two in Grass; If the Ground ly
conveniently, I can sub-divide each third part into three parts, and plough six
or seven Aikers of the Out-field Grass every year; But if that cannot be
conveniently done, I let it all ly till the third year, and then I fallow six
or eight Aikers of it, sometime in the Winter preceding the year I resolve to
sow it, and then about the beginning of May, or latter end of April, I plough
it over again, and lets it take the drought for a month or more, then I harrow
it, and lets it ly a Week or two, and then I plough it again, and lets it ly as
before, and when the Mould is again dried, I harrow it again. The advantage of
this kind of Labor, is more than can be well credited, by those who know not
something of it in Experience.

But that I may not desire any to credit my bare Assertion, these Reasons I
shall offer to confirm it. First, By this frequent Tieling and Harrowing of the
Ground, it is made mellow and tender. Next, All Weeds, Grass, and other things
that may extract the strength out of the Earth, is quite consumed (and be the
by, I know no better way to cleange any Ground that is overgrown with Goole)
But the chief benefit it hereby receives, is through the warmness of the Sun
beams: And Dew and Rain falling upon the Earth, no kind of Herb or Grain being
to interupt it, the Salt Quality that is therein remains still: As also, the
warmness it has received by influence of the Sun, for being thoroughly dried in
the Summer, it does continue much warmer than otherwise it would be.

But if none of these Reasons may be convinceing for my last Proof (like the
Catholics who flee to the Testimony of the Church, when other Proofs fail) I
leave it to be determined by these who have tried the Experiment, and to any
who ever saw a Fold-dyke made of the very next adjacent Earth, that after being
dried one Summer, and again thrown down to its own place, whither that Ground
has not afterward been more fertile than the rest about it, that was not so
diged up, and dried.

In the next place, as I said, I use all diligence for making what Manure I
can, for beside the dung of Cattle, which I preserve with great Care, in
bordering my Dunghill so about with a wall of Earth, that no Sapp can run from
it, and not only so, but takes care that none of the Piss of Cattle run away,
and if there be not as much off-fallings of Straw or Litter about them, as may
retain it, I take care that it be kept in a Trough or deep hole, at the
Lower-end of the Cow-house or Stable, and causes it to be carried then^e to the
Dunghill, and pour it out there, for doubtless there is as much strength or
pith in Piss, as in Dung.

Again, if there be any Marle, or Sea-ware in the Ground, or any place near by,
I make it my business to get as much of it, as I can conveniently lay upon the
Ground every year, till it be all gone over: But if neither of these can be
had, I look for Lyme; Of which, with old thack of Houses, and Clay-turff diged
in some most convenient place of the said Mailen, being dried, I mix with the
Lyme and old Thack, together with Dung and Straw, or any Rubbish I can get; I
make a Dunghill upon some convenient place of that Land I intend to Fallow, as
I showed above. This I do every Summer, or any other time when Occasion
serves; And at the end of three years, the time when this six or eight Aikers
of Out-field is fallowed, I lay this Dunghill upon it; But if the Ground ly so
that I can Fallow two or three Aikers every year, so that it ly not in the
middle of my Pasture, I lay this Manure also every year, on so much as I can.

Now, after Fallowing and Manuring, I plough it about Michaelmas, and thereon
sows either Wheat or Winter Barley; And if the Season be good, ten or twelve
Bolls per Aiker may be expected, without a Miracle. For Fallowing of it self
without any Manure, is able to Enrich any ordinary Ground, so that for three or
four years, it will bear as much as if it had been dunged tolerable well; But
because this Ground has never before been manured, I give it both Fallowing and
Manure, to bring it once to a good Condition, and then with resting six, and
being but tielled three years, it will continue in a good Condition for ^ifty
or sixty years. Yea, if it be Hedged and kept Warm, and not ploughed oftener
than what is said, it will in all time coming continue much better than it was
before.

Now, as is said, taking this course in providing Manure extraordinar, for two
or three Aikers of Out-field Land every year, within twenty or twenty four
years, it is all thus brought to a good Condition, so that if I please, I need
not from thence forth let it ly more but three or four years at a time, and
plough it as long, whereby I may always have eight or ten Aikers more in Corn,
than what is showed above: Moreover, every one of these Aikers may reasonably
be supposed to bring forth six Bolls per Annum, which is two Bolls more, on
each Aiker of the twenty two Aikers of Out-field* allowed to be ploughed each
year, than it was supposed to bear in Chapter third, which is forty four
Bolls: And eight Aikers that formerly lay Grass, being now ploughed, and
yielding six Bolls per Aiker, makes forty eight Bolls; Which added to forty
four, makes nintie two, which at the price foresaid, is worth 470 pounds, for
the Expense of Seed and Labor of the additional eight Aikers now ploughed,
more than what was before, I deduce one hundred pounds, and three hundred and
seventy still remains.

But because Hedging the Ground, and purchasing of this extraordinar Manure, or
Gooding (as it is vulgarly termed) cannot be done without some Expense; In
reason therefore, it ought to be deducted out of the Product or Increase that
is h^d of the Ground; Let us therefore enquire what that may be. And seeing we
reckoned already four Aikers Croft, and eight Out-field more labored each
year, than was when we summed up the Account in page forty two, and allowed
twenty Shillings Starling for Seed and Labor of each Aiker, we must therefore
now deduce all that was allowed for laboring the said twelve Aikers, and allow
it in part of payment of what charge I am at in keeping more Men and Horse,
than were proposed for laboring the Mailen before it was Enclosed; For since I
reckon all charge of Men and Horses that labor the whole Ground, the expense
of laboring this twelve Aikers also, comes in on that account.

I shall therefore allow one Man, and other two Horses, or two more Oxen, to be
kept when this twelve Aikers are labored, than before; two Horses (according
to our first Calculation) does require eight Bolls of Corn to maintain them,
and for a Man's Meat and Wages, I shall reckon eighty or ninety pounds. There
was a Boy allowed for Herding, when the Mailen was not enclosed, which will not
be required after it is enclosed; Yet I shall allow him to be kept in this
case, not only in Summer, but even in the Winter also, who may serve to drive
the Plough; And two Men are sufficient to thresh the Corn, and dress the
Garden, and do any other Labor that is to be done, beside the ploughing. Now,
for this Boys Meat and Wages all Winter, (you know he is to be kept in Summer
however) I reckon forty pounds. Their four Men, or at least three Men and a
Boy, are abundance to labor this Mailen to the full; And for cu^ing down this
additional twelve Aikers of Corn, let twenty four pounds be allowed. That I may
let you see the whole Particulars at one Glanc^, I have set them down here in a
^ormal Account.

Impri^is, The remain^ of the Account in page 42 763 09 04 4 Aiker Cro^t 28
Bolls at 5 lib^ per Boll. 140 00 00 On 22 Aiker Out-field 44 Bolls more than
was reckoned at first, is 220 00 00 ^ Aiker Out-field 48 Bolls at 5 lib: also
240 00 00 Summa 1363 09 04

The Expense that is more required in Laboring of this twelve Aikers that was
Un-laboured before the Ground was Enclosed, amounts to the Sum of 254 Pounds,
as the following Particulars does make appear.

Imprimis, 12 Bolls Seed. 60 00 00 Eight Bolls for Horse Meat. 40 00 00 A Man's
Me^t and Wages. 90 00 00 A Boy's Meat and Wages. 40 00 00 For additional
Shearers. 24 00 00 Summa, 254 00 00

This 254 pounds being deduced from 1363, there remains 1109.

To go through every particular, and show what might be made of Cattle, now
when the Ground is Enriched and Enclosed; And also, what Benefit may be had by
Sowing Seeds of Cloaver and other Grass, Ryb Seed, and several other ways how
the Land may be Improven; But what is said already, (having run beyond the
intended bounds) it may be sufficient to provoke people to try the Experiment.
And if this be kindly accepted off, perhaps I may enlarge a little further on
this Subject (unless some better accomplished for this Work, do take it in
hand, to whom I shall willingly yield) in the mean time, I shall hasten to
speak to the next Head proposed. I foregot to reckon upon the Profit of the
Orchyeard, which may contain upwards of seventy Trees, reckon each to bear but
a Peck of Fruit, which they may easily do, before they come to twelv^ years,
which may be r^ckoned as many pounds; But because we allowed nothing for Lyme,
in case it be to Buy, let it go for that Use.

CHAP. V. Concerning Stock-keeping.
THat which will hold two, will hunger three; Is a common Proverb in every
Bodies Mouth, and yet scarce is there any thing less believed, if we may take
Peoples practice to be an interpretation of their Minds, for as I formerly
observed through most of this Kingdom all Pastors are overlaid, and Cattle in
a manner starved; That which therefore I would recommend to all Stock-keepers,
or others, that keep Cattle, to keep no more, than plentifully they can
maintain: I offer to make it appear, two Kine well keep'd, (and consequently
other Beastial) shall yield more profit than six, as commonly they now are
kept.

But I begin with Horses, Those that are for bringing up of Horses, I would
advise, (if their Stock can rea^h it) to provide themselves in what Mares they
resolve to keep for brood. Choice them of good shapes, and other good
properties, then let the Horse or Stalion be the best that possibly may be had,
the Brood can hardly choose but to resemble the Sire and Dame, and a Foal of a
good kind requires no greater Expense in upbringing, than that of the worst:
Therefore what ever the best can be sold at, more than the worst, so much is
your profit thereby.

Then let your Mare be served only once in two years, for a Mare that is giving
Suck, cannot be in good condition to breed one in her Belly at the same time;
And seldom will ye see a Foal brought up, upon the Dame that is with Foal* But
it is much weaker than that which is brought up on her, when no^ with Foal,
beside the Mar^ her self and the Foal in her belly, are both much more weakened,
where fore if you would have the Mare, or either of the Foals to thrive,
observe as above.

Concerning Kine, I shall not now insist, Because I spoke something of them*
Chap. 3. I again recommend th^s as a principle that can never be enough
inculcat, keep what number soever your Ground can mantain sufficiently, and no
more: Yea let there be rather three wanting of your number of Cattle, then half
a soume keep more upon your Grass, than enough.

What is that which makes Cattle in other places, to be more tall and strong,
then commonly they are through this Kingdom? But because they are fed more
plentifully, and ^specially when they are young to feed well, is a great mean
of strengthening Cattle.

Therefore if you would have your Stock to thriv^, spare not to give your
Calves Milk abundance when they are young; Whether you feed them with Milk, or
let them suck the Dame, no great matter, they may be well enough either of the
ways, providing you spa^e not Milk: Or if you please to save some of their
Milk, then you must supply their Diet with Broth mixed with the Milk you give
them, for Kine that will not give their Milk but to their own Calves, or at
least when they are present; I doubt not but they may easily be brought, to
give it as kindly, when their Calves are absent, as when present: Providing you
use them not to that base Custom. When any Cow seems to be fond upon her Calf,
let it not suck her at all, and tho she kick or make stir at first when you
begin to milk her, yet by tying of her feet, or useing other means to r^strain
her from hindering you to milk her, after a short time, she will give her milk
peaceably.

The next thing I shall speak off, is concerning making of Butter and Cheese:
And to say no worse of it, Our Women generally throughout this Kingdom, kyth as
little dexterity in this, as in any point of Huswife Operations I know;
something of the Causes thereof, I shall afterward note.

Tho I can say nothing to this point absolutely, as having tried the
Experiment, and found the Effect answerable to my Expectations; Yet I have
discoursed with such as have proven their Knowledge therein in effect, and the
Reasons they gave for taking such measures in ordering o^ their Milk, (as in
the following Lines) to me seem so plausible, that I doubt not, but we may have
as good Butter and Cheese in this Kingdom, by following the like measures, as
readily is to be had any where.

But take the account as follows, in making of Butter: Take what Milk you
have of your kine at one Mai^, and put it in a Churn or other Ves^e^ by itself
after it is well strained, let it stand in some cold place twenty four hours,
or thereabout; If you have as much of it as fills yo^^ Churn, then may you
churn it, but if you have not so much as fill your Churn, you may keep it till
you get another Mail, or two more to put with it, but by no means mix any of
the other Milk with it, until you be just going to churn it, for when hot Milk
is poured into that which has stood some time, makes it to curdle (or as it is
commonly termed) sheer, the Cream with some of the grossost substance of the
Milk, gathering to the top, it begins to sour, and never afterward can
Butter be made thereof, so good as when it is taken in due Season: To wit, When
at first it begins to thicken or lapper, For then the Milk has a very
delicious Taste: And on the contrar, when Milk is long gathered, beside the
sheering, or curdling above mentioned, the Taste alters much and becomes
unpleasant, (to speak nothing of wholesomeness in respect I am no competent
Judge therein) and in reason, Good Butter cannot be expected of Milk that is
spoiled.

If it be here answered by any, there is a necessity for gathering of their
Milk some considerable time, because all the Quantity they have at a Mail or
two, will not fill their Churn. To which I reply, let them proportion their
Churn to their Milk for any quantity whatsoever above a Chopin, may be churned,
and if it be less, I think it not worth your pains: But I pass this, and I
shall next give you account of the best Information, I have concerning making
of Cheese.

That which is generally imputed to be the Cause, why Cheese is not universally
good in this Kingdom, is because the Cream is gathered off the Milk, before the
Cheese be thereof made, and indeed in no place where this custom is followed,
can the Cheese be good: For as the Proverb is, You cannot sell the Cow, and
supp the Milk. Butter and Cheese of the same Milk cannot be reasonably
expected, without as much loss on the one, as there is Benefit by the other.
That which I suppose may be one chief Cause, why Women take this Method, is
because they think little less Butter have they off the Cream, than if they did
churn all the Milk together. I cannot positively say which way is most
beneficial, but well I wot, Cheese made when the Milk is new and not skum'd, is
far better than that which is made of Milk that is skum'd, and I suppose it is
also more Beneficial. And I am also sure (let them take what Method they please
in ordering of their Milk) that a greater quantity of it can be had of two Kyne
well fed, than of three; Yea, I may say six that are not well fed, which is the
chief thing I insist on.

What the particular quantity of Butter or Cheese that commonly is made of each
Milk-cow, I cannot positively declare (but as I remember) when I was in
Ireland, I have heard some say, that these who kept Derries, commonly make a
Firkin of Butter of each Cow (which is about forty pounds of our weight)
beside a Calf brought up on every two Kyne each year: And these that make
Cheese, double the quantity.

I need not here trouble my Reader, in telling the necessity of kepping clean
Vessel, and careful straining of the Milk, it being a thing known to any body
of Common Sense. The special thing required in making of Cheese, is to take the
Milk when it is fresh and new, and thicken it without taking off any of the
Cream; And be sure the Thickening or Yearning (as it is termed) be also fresh
and good, there is little other difficulty in making of good Cheese.

Now we come to speak of Sheep, the universal Usefulness of this Animal, is so
well known, that it is altogether needless to speak to its Commendation, for as
it is (I think, I may say without exception) the most useful Animal in the
whole Universe; So are She^p the most beneficial kind of Stock, bringing most
Profit to the Owner, for not only do they multiply faster than other Cattle, in
coming near to their full Stature in a years time, but also the flesh of them
are as wholesome and delicious Food, as perhaps any other whatsoever. But
especially, beside all that is yet said, every year they yield their Fleeces,
which is in some respect the most considerable of all, for without them we
might be supplied in Food, but in Clothing, I know no^ how Men can be other
ways provided.

But that you may the more particularly see what Profit can be made of them, I
shall suppose a Farmer to possess a Room or Mailen of a certain Bounds, and as
we did that Mailen of Dale Ground, first enquire into the present Profit
commonly made that way; And next, what Profit may be made by taking another
course, so shall I now do in this Case. We need not be inquisitive into the
Exact Bounds, nor Rent o^ the said Mailen, that being supposed to be alike in
both Cases. All that we make more by following this new Method, than what was
made formerly, is free profit, providing the charge of Servants and other
Expense, be alike.

Now, I suppose a Mailen to contain a mile of Ground Square, which is about 800
Aikers, where the Ground lies level; But because the most of Sheep Pasture is
Hilly and Mountainous, (the same Circumference can contain more) I may suppose
it therefore to contain a thousand Aikers at least, on which we shall reckon
4000 or 4500 Sheep may be kept.

Now I shall suppose on this Mailen above men^ioned, there is kept 4000
Sheep, and 40 or 50 Kyne; the Profit of the Kyne I shall not now speak of,
having spoken concerning that kind of Cattle already. Of this 4000 Sheep, I
suppose 2000 Ewes, Reckoning these of a year old into the number; Of these 2000
Ewes, I suppose sixteen or seventeen hunderd Lambs to be produced every year,
one half Male, and the other Female; Two hundred of which I suppose he may
sell in Lambs, at 12 Shilling a piece, which is 120 pounds; An 100 or a 150 I
suppose may die in Gelding, and otherwise while they are young; One thousand
four hundred I suppose to remain till Hallowday, but because in many places,
not only are the Lambs (as well as old Sheep) fed on bare Pasture, but also in
many places, the Lambs are wained perhaps before they be a month or six Weeks
old, whereby they are kept in a lean Condition; And Winter approaching, the
natural growth of Grass failing, and no other Pasture ordinarily is provided ^or
them in Winter, but that whereon they fed in Summer. Any person may judge how
they can subsist, especially in great Storms of Frost and Snow, when for a
month together perhaps, the whole Fields and Hills whereon they were wont to
feed, are totaly covered; It is rare to see a Stock of Sheep kept after this
manner, but one sixth part of them dies every Winter; But I shall suppose only
of this Stock, four hundred to be lost that way, which is scarce one tenth
part. But before Winter, I shall allow a 1000 of the said Sheep to be sold at
half a Crown, or three Shillings Starling a piece. Now, suppose a 1000 Sheep to
be sold at one pound 16 shilling a piece, is 1800 pounds, the Woole of all the
4000 Sheep, and 1400 Lambs, I suppose may be reckoned at one pound a piece,
which cannot be valued above six pounds the Stone, good and bad over head, this
in all makes 345 Stones, which in Money extends to the Sum of 2070 pounds;
This with the 1800 he got for his thousand Sheep, and the 120 received for his
Lambs, makes in all 3990 pounds. For any other Increase had on this Room, viz:
What profit is made of his other Cattle, and the Milk of his Sheep, for
Brevi^ys sake, I shall pass without enquiring into, and for these shall allow a
greater Sum than reasonably they can be re^koned to. The Expense of Servants
keeping, and Butter and Tar^ for his Sheep, I shall not reckon upon* But
foregainst that Account, I shall lay the Expense of keeping Servants for
attending on the Cattle only, to be kept upon this Mailen, as I would have it
Stocked (which certainly must be less, because the Cattle, according to my way
of Stocking are fewer) what Servants are kept for lab^uring the Ground, shall
have Wages allowed them, off the product of their own handy labor.

I shall now proceed to show how I would have this Room stocked, and improven,
For the four thousand Sheep kept thereon, I demand no more but only two
thousand five hundred to be kept, their increase I shall reckon
proportionabl^ to these formerly mentioned: Seventeen hundred was reckoned to
be the Product of four thousand, and seeing their last has a third more pasture
it cannot be doubted but they may be in a better condition, and consequently
may be more fruitful: However, as is said, I shall reckon their Increase only
proportionable to these above mentioned, viz: 1062, for according to the Rule
of Proportian, if 4000 yield 1700, 2500 yields 1062, the 62 I discount for
Lambs that die while young; For all of the said 2500 Sheep, and 1000 Lambs, I
would have Hutts builded, and make them so large, that they may have sufficient
Room to ly at ease, and have room to breath, for too much heat may do them
hurt; Wherefore little holes or windows in the Walls, will be very convenient,
if it were not to preserve them from Rain: And for the benefit of their dung,
they needed not to be put in any house at all, but their dung (as I shall
instantly take notice of) is almost as material a piece of benefit as any one
profit had by them.

Next I would have about two hundred Aikers of the said Pasture enclosed, and
not suffer a beast thereon to set its foot, till after Hallowday; Then I make
about some thirty Aikers in Meadow: And because some may object that this will
be the most difficult Task of all, because of the natural barrenness of the
Ground; I shall answer to this by and by: But first I would have an hundred and
twenty Aikers more laid by for Cro^t, and this may seem another Mystery: But I
say again if it be not so mountainous, that it cannot be plewed, it may be made
very fertile.

Six or seven score Aikers I appoint for Croft, but if it cannot be plewed at
all, I gather the dung nevertheless, and therewith manure the Grass: But I
suppose an hundred Aikers or two of the bounds foresaid to be arable, which may
be ordered after this sort.

The Sheep you heard, are to be put in Coats every Night in Winter, and even in
Summer also, if they be no^ put in folds, their Sheep being well bedded or
litter'd (for that must by no means be neglected) every one of them including
Lambs, will make a Cart load of dung each year, which I value at fourteen
shilling each Cart load, as you shall afterward hear. This three thousand ^ive
hundred Carts of dung; will sufficiently dung thirty five Aikers, at five score
Cart load per Aiker. But because this Ground is naturally cold, I shall allow
six score to each Aiker, which is no worse than nine score common dung, the
whole dung according to this Reckoning, serves thirty Aikers, the strength of
which will remain good four years: So by this Sheep dung, six score Aikers is
kept in Manure, each Aiker of which I doubt nothing off, but it may bear ten
Bolls per annum: But that I may remove all ground of Objections aagainst the
fertility of this six score Aikers of Croft or Corn Land, let the dung of the
rest of the Cattle, To wit. A dozen Horses, or Oxen that perform the Labor,
and forty or fifty Nolt, be added to the said Sheep dung abovementioned, I am
sure no better dunged ground can be required, neither for all this shall I
reckon the Product of each Aiker above 7 Bolls, seven times six score is eight
hundred and forty Bolls, less than an hundred Bolls will serve for seed,
observing the Rules given Chap: 3. And forty eight Bolls for Horse Meat,
according to that Calculation. Six men are kept to labor this Ground, beside
what are needed for other Uses) whose Mantainance I shall not reckon) laying
that aside, foregainst the Servants that were required to wait upon the Cattle,
when this Mailen was managed as above, an hundred Bolls will therefore be
sufficient for both Meat and Wages to these six Men, An hundred Bolls for seed,
forty eight for Horses; and this hundred makes in all two hundred and forty
eight, which being deduced from 840 Bolls, five hundred and ninty two still
remain, which being reckoned at five pound per Boll, is two thousand nine
hundred 60 pounds, But because nothing is yet allowed for sheering and reaping
this Corn, let two hundred pound go to defray that Charge.

Thirty Aikers, as I formerly said* I would have made in Meadow or Hay, for
preserving the Sheep in a Storm, and not to go through every particular, and
show how much Hay may be made on each Aiker, and how many Sheep may eat a Stone
or Load of Hay at a Meal; I say, not to trouble my Reader in surveying every
particular, I suppose it will not be questioned, but this quantity of Hay may
serve this Stock of Sheep, in cases o^ extreme necessity, when their Pasture
are covered with Snow, or if they be in a great strait, they may be supplied
with Corn-sheaves. The way I make this Meadow, or Park (if there be none
natural upon the Ground) is by sowing several Aikers of the Corn-ground with
Cloaver, or Grass-seed, when it has born several Crops after its dunging, and
ready to be dunged again, sow it with Cloaver, as is said, after the Corn is
thereon sown, and the Land made as smoth as possible. I say, about eight days
after the Corn is sown, sow this Seed upon the Ground, and fill your Harrow
with Thorns, so that the Teeth thereof go not into the Ground, least thereby
the Mould be raised too high above the Grassseed; The Thorns being well tied
into the Harrow, it smootheth a thin Mould over the Seed: So that year you have
your Crop of Corn, as if nothing else were upon the Ground. And next year, the
Cloaver and Grass grow up plentifully, so that two or three times it may be cut
down or moven; Thus are your Hay Parks made.

But if your Ground be so Mountainous, that it cannot be ploughed, nevertheless
it may be made Hay, either by laying Dung upon the Grass, or by folding your
Sheep or other Cattle, on the place you intend to make in Hay: And after it is
pudled and dunged by the feet and dung of your Beastial, sow it with the said
Seeds, and Harrow it as above.

Let this Hay be given to your Sheep in time of Storm, as is said; But first
provide Racks to lay it in, for if you throw it down among their feet, they
will loss a great part of it, by trampling it amongst their Dung; Some place
their Racks in the middle of their Sheep Coats. But this I do not commend, for
if the Rack be placed so low, that the Sheep can conveniently eat out thereof,
then the Woole is torn off their backs, by going through beneath it; To have
them placed upon the Wall, I judge more convenient.

The 200 Aikers that was appointed to be hained all Summer, let your Sheep be
put on it in November, or as soon as your other pasture grows bare. By this
prudent providing for Food to your Sheep in Winter, I doubt not but it may
granted, that Sheep kept after this manner, will be much stronger and more
healthie, than those kept as was formerly supposed; And consequently, their
Lambs cannot but be fatter and larger, for how can it be supposed, that a Ewe
lying among Frost and Snow all Winter at the point of starving can in the
Spring bring forth a Lamb in a good Condition? Therefore we may reckon Lambs of
Sheep, kept after this latter manner, one third better than those kept as
above.

I question nothing but their Wool may be as much improven as themselves; My
reason for it is this, when other Beasts are fat and in a good Condition, their
Hair is v^sibly much softer and smoother; Look but to any Horse that is well
fed and kept, and to a laboring Horse that is sore wrought and ill fed, and
you will see what difference is betwixt them, and so of all other Beasts. And
seeing Wool is the Hair that grows on this Animal, Why should it not Improve
as much as that of others? I doubt nothing, if Sheep were fed as plentifully in
this Country (as easily they may be, as is showed above) but their Wool may be
made as good, as readily is had any where else.

Now let us see what may be yearly made of those 2500 Sheep, you know 1000
Lambs was supposed to be had of them every year, beside those dying young; A
100 let be sold in April or May, at 18 Shilling a piece, which is 90 pound;
Four hunder of the oldest and weakest, let be sold at Hallowday, for two
pounds, is 80 pounds; Four hunder let be keep upon your best hained Grass,
which may be sold I suppose at 5 pound a piece, betwixt Candlemas and May, is
200 pound, proportionable to their Number.

Their Wool may also be reckoned more in quantity, than these that are badly
fed, for not only is the Wool best on fat Sheep, but it is much thicker and
longer also. I suppose therefore this three hundred and fifty Sheep and Lamb;
may not only have as many pounds of Woole, but even one Quarter of a pound a
piece more, which makes in all, four thousand three hundred and seventy five
pounds of Wool, which is two hundred and seventy five Stone, seven pounds,
reckon this at nine pounds per Stone, is two thousand four hundred and fifty
seven pounds in Money.

The Product of this Mailen, Stocked and Ordered as above represented, after
the Expense of Seed and Laboring the manured Land, is deduced, as follows,

Imprimis, Corn worth 2960 00 00 Lambs worth 0090 00 00 Sheep sold in Autumn
0800 00 00 Sheep sold in the Spring 1600 00 00 Wool to the Value of 2457 00 00
Summa, 4907 00 00

The Product of the Mailen, as in the first Description is,

Imprimis, Lambs 0120 00 00 Wool 2070 00 00 Sheep 1800 00 00 Summa, 4890 00 00

This 4890 pounds deduced from 7907, there remains 3037, so much more Increase
is there by managing this Mailen, as I have above demonstrated (except 200
pound, to be deduced for Shearers Wages, and what profit is alleged to be
made of Ewes Milk) than was made of it according to the first way of Managing
thereof: And call that what y^ please, the Profit is considerable still.

CHAP. VI. Something Concerning Planting.
I Shall be as brief as possible in in speaking to this Head; Both because I
have insisted beyond my Expectation in the foregoing Chapter; And also, because
abundance have been already written on this Subject, better than I can pretend
to do.

What I intend here, is only to give Husbandmen (who have not occs^ion to see
such books as treat on this subject) a short hint of what may concern them, in
this kind of Labor.

You may remember I recommended planting as a great mean to help to enrich your
Ground, and Fruittrees, as very beneficial, in respect of their Fruit. The
expense of purchassing or upbringing of them, is in a manner nothing at all, a
days labor or two of one Man once in the year, may bring up a greater Nursary
than you will need; Take Seed of any kind of Trees you desire to have brought
up, and dress a little bit of your Garden, and sow or plant them there. Be sure
not to suffer any Weeds to grow amongst them, when you sow Seed of Trees, and
they rise closser than they can well grow together, transplant them to another
place of your Garden, a foot or eight inches distance is enough, while they
remain in the Plant Bed; Plant but one hundred, yea, half that number every
year, will soon plant all your hedges. When they are about six or eight years
old, replant them about the borders of your Fields.

Fruit-t^ees may as easily be brought up as those which are barren, only they
need to be ingraffed, which is done thus; When they are full inch thick, or tho
they be bigger, they may be ingraffed also, either by cutting of the Branches,
and ^puting a Graff in the stump of each Branch, or yet in the principal Stock,
which (if it be thick) must have four or five Graffs, the manner of performing
is thus, either with a Saw, or sharp Knife, cut your Stock about a foot and a
half from the Ground, and after you have made it very smooth, take and slit it
down a pretty bit, that it may receive the Graff; Your Graff must be Twigs of
the handsomest Fruit Trees you can get, of one years growth, only let an inch
and a half, or thereby, of that which is under the upermost Knot remain with
the Twig, and that piece which is under the Knot, make in form a wedge, but let
the bark or reind remain upon the edges of it, then put it into the Stock,
joining the reind of the Graff, exactly with the reind of the Stock, then put a
piece of Clay upon the top of your Stock, to defend it from Rain, till the
wound close, and foreget not to cut the top off your Graff, i^ it be long, the
length thereof ought not to exceed six inches.

As to the manner of planting your Fruit Trees, observe to plant them at thirty
foot distance at least, and if the Ground be cold on which they are planted,
you must digg a hole two or three foot deep, and six or eight b^oad, where you
intend to plant every Tree, and if you put not dung in the bottom thereof, you
must at least fill it with good Earth; Some put Coals under their Trees) and
then plant your Tree when it is filled up so far, that your Tree has little
enough deepth to root in, then set your Trees upon the fine Earth that you have
laid in the bott^m of this pit or holl; so must y^ do with all your Barren
Trees and Hedges, where the ground is very cold, for when the roots of a Tree,
is placed upon cold tile or Clay, it cannot thrive: Wherefore in the planting
of your Hedges, let the ground be dunged where it is first planted; And if the
Ground be not naturally good, you must gather as much of the Crust of other
Ground thereabout, as serve to plant your Hedge in. So much concerning Planting.

CHAP. VII. Concerning Sowing and Planting of several Garden Seeds, and Roots.
IN this Art I profess not much Knowledge, Yet (perhaps) I have something more
than every Husbandman, and all I intend here, is only to give some few
Directions, to such as are altogether ignorant in this matter, how to provide
themselves in some common Roots and Herbs, for the use of their Kitchens:
Because I have been recommending the Use of Roots and Herbs, as more profitable
for House keepers, than to make always Use of Grain for Maintenance of their
Families. Wherefore least they object against my Advice, in pretending
difficulties from their want of skill in this Art, and the natural Barrenness
of the Ground.

To solve these difficultys, I say according to the Measures already laid down,
for bringing every kind of Ground to a temperat Constitution, I have shown
already that any kind of arable Ground may be made fertile by industry: And I
say again by Hedging and Planting, fence your Garden from Storm and dung it
well, you may have Roots and Herbs abundance therein.

To bring your Gardens therefore to a good Condition. First, Digg up or delve
your ground, at first about a foot deep: The soard of your ground throw the
bottom of the Furrow or Trench, and if there be any Weeds or stones in it,
gather them out, this being done about Hallowday, or some time in the Winter;
Then in the Spring, so soon as you find it seasonable for sowing of Seeds, dung
your Garden and delve it over again, casting it in Plots or Beds. And then you
may sow Carrot, Parsneep, Turneep, or Onion Seeds, or any other common Seeds
you please, and as soon as any Weeds begin to spring, be sure to pluck them up;
In the Furrows you may plant Cabbage, I need not tell you how to set or plant
common Kale, few or none but what has abundance of them already.

But when your Ground begins to fail, which perhaps it may do within twelve or
sixteen years, even tho y^ dung it every year, by the frequent laboring and
breaking up, it begins to fail, and turn somewhat dead or lifeless, which
cannot be helped, but by letting it rest two or three years, or else by
Trenching, which is done thus, First cross your Br^^k or Plot of Ground, make a
Ditch about two or three foot broad, four inches deeper than the Crust of the
Earth, or deepth you have digg^d before, throw the Earth quite out, and seatter
it upon the laighest part of your Plot, then dig as much of your Ground next to
this Trench, and throw the upermost of the Earth into the bottom thereof; and
the new Earth you find below lay uppermost; and when you have occasion to
Trench this Ground again, you must dig three or four inches deeper then before,
and as often as ye Trench, raise three or four inches new ground, and dung it
and sow as before.

I also recommended Potatoes; as a very profitable Root for Husbandmen or
others that have numerous Families; And because there is a peculiar way of
Planting this Root, nor commonly known in this Country: I shall here show what
way it is ordinarily planted or set. But first, know there be two sorts of them,
the one knotty and some thing redish colored, the other long, some thing after
an Oval Form and white, this last is set whole, and when the Stalk is grown up,
a dozen or perhaps more Potatoes grows round about the Root thereof, but the
cornered sort must be cut in small pieces, before they be set.

Now the manner of Setting or Planting them, is thus, The ground whereon they
are set must be dry, and so much the better it is, if it have a good Soard of
Grass. The Beds or Rigs are made about eight foot broad, good store of dung
being laid upon your Ground, (Horse or Sheep Dung is the most proper Manure for
them.) Throw each Potatoe into a knot of dung, and afterward digg Earth out of
the Furrows, and cover them all over, about some three or ^our inches deep; the
Furrows left between your Riggs, must be about two foot broad, and little less
will they be in deepth before your Potatoe be covered.

You need not plant this Root in your Garden, they are commonly set in the
Fields and wildest of Ground, for enriching of it. The common way Potatoes are
made us^ of, are boiled and broken and stirred with Butter or new Milk, also
roasted and eat^n with Butter, Yea some make Bread of them by mixing them with
Oat or Barley Meal, after they are broken and stirred with Milk, other parboyl
them, and bake them with Aples, after the manner of Tarts: Several other ways
are they made use of, as eating among Broth, and broken with Kale. To be
brief, Potatoes are as useful and profitable about a Husbandmans Houses, as
any kind of food, I know.

I might insist in showing farther, How any Farmer possessing a Mailen as in
Chap: 3. May by Roots and Herbs, not only save ten Bolls of his Grain, but
even never twice so much. From the middle of August till January he may have
Potatoes, in March and April Parsneeps, from May to October, abundance of Milk,
Kail and Carrots, and Turnneeps, etc. after Lambmass. But having insisted
beyond my Expectation, let what is said suffice at the time, and if this pass
the Press again (there being but a few Coppies of this Impression) perhaps the
World may have it with some Addition and Amendments; In the preceding Chapter
as a special means to enrich your Ground, I thought to have informed you, that
where you can have the Conveniencie to set Water upon your Land, it will much
increase the growth of Grass.

The way to perform this, where you can draw a Ditch along the head of your
Field, and foregainst the head of every Rigg, make a little Gape, that you may
close or leave open at your pleasure, and then draw Furrows with your Plough
and Spade squint ways* in the declining of the Hill, from the Furrow between
your Riggs, to the top or middle thereof, where it is left without any Conduit;
Then it spreads, and wa^ereth the Ground. But that it may not run away as
soon as it falls down to the Furrow again, you may raise it to the middle of
the Riggs as before: Thus renew your Conduits till i^ come to the lowest part
of the field.

CHAP. VIII. Several Objections Solved.
NOt to consume time, I shall as briefly as possible, answer to some of the
most material Objections I judge may occure; And in the first place, me thinks
I hear some thick scul'd Peasant, that sees as ^ar^ in States Affairs, as a
Mear does in a Millstone; Saying, What? And, From whence came you Sir? That
offers to teach us how to labor our Ground, We and our Fathers, have been bred
in Husbandry th^se many Generations, and if there had been any Mystery in it
to find, would not they have found it out before this time? Are you Wiser than
all that ever have been bred and exercised in Husbandry hitherto? Away with
your fool Notions, there are too many ^ees in your Bonet-case, we will satisfy
our selves with such Measures as our Fathers have followed hitherto.

Solve, Soft Friend, one Question at once, you run on with a full Carrier;
However, to your first two Questions, I say, I am neither Italian, Ierman, nor
of any other Foreign Nation and therefore likely to be the less noticed, what
farther concerns these Questions, satisfy your self with the acount given in
the Epistle Dedicatory. What you or your Fathers have been bred to, or what
Misterys they might have found, I question not, neither pr^tend I to any great
Measure of Wit. But grant that what I advise to were new, as it is not, for
many in this same Kingdom, and the greatest part of all others I either have
seen or heard of, have found the Truth of what I say to their Experience, and
if you will make Wit and Reason yield to Will and Custom, I have no more to
say, brook your Opinion.

Object: 2. Some more grave person I fancy, asks me what may be the Reasons;
For ( ye know there is never a Tale without a Reason) why this Method I advise
to, is so universally contemned in this Kingdom, if such Benefit as I pretend
may be had by following of it.

Solve, So far as I can understand, the Causes are all or either of these
three, the Maladies of two of them your Landlords may remove, and if you take
my advise, the third you may remove your selves.

First, When a Tenent makes any Improvement of his Ground, the Landlord
obliges him either to augment his Rent, or remove, in so much that its become
a Proverb (and I think none more true) Bouch and Sit, Improve and Flit. I doubt
not but if Fermers had good Security for continuing in possession of their
Lands, bu^ they might thereby be much Encouraged to improve them. Another Cause
why Fermers make so little Improvement of Lands in their Possession, is
Poverty, that great enemy to virtue, for people that are empty handed, are glad
to accept any thing that first offers, rather than wai^ for future great
things. Landlords might also give their Tenants Encouragement in this Case, by
spairing the Rent for a time. But the principal or chief Cause, is peoples want
of Skill to calculat or forecast the Ordering of their Matters, most people
thinking it better to take a scant Crop of Corn, than leave their Land Grass,
not considering, that by leaving a part of their Land in Grass, the rest that
is manured, geteth the greater allowance of Dung, whereby it is Enriched: And
that part le^t in Grass, is also thereby brought to a more fertile Condition.
It is needless here to insist on this point, having spent whole three Chapters
already, in showing how I would have Fermers divide their Lands, and take only
so much into manure, as they are able sufficiently to keep in a good Condition.

The two Parables our Savior adduceth, concerning a King's making War; And
other Men's going about to build: That they ought to forecast the Charge, and
how they may be able to accomplish their Undertakings; I say, tho that Text is
chiefly to be taken in a Spiritual Sense, yet may it be taken in a Literal
Sense also; For when a Man undertaketh any Business whatsoever, that is above
his power to accomplish, ten to one but his project does miscarrie.

And I think Aristotle spoke Truth, when he said, He that is ignorant of
Arithmetic, is fit for no Science, which was also the Opinion of Plato, when
he affixed this Inscription over his School-door, Let none enter in hither,
that is ignorant of Geomitry; When there is so much of it needed in the right
Management of Husband Labor, as you may see in Chapter 3, 4, and 5. which is
of all Employments; the most plain and natural; How much more is it requisite
in other Sciences and Employments.

Object: 3. But tho the Method you propose, should be followed, yet no such
profit will come thereby, as you would make us believe; For in your Calculation
Chapter third, you reckon all things at a disadvantage, in your first Example,
and all things to the Advantage in the second.

Solve, The contrare is true, for according to the division of Croft and
Out-f^^ld, in the third Chapter, I make the Land taken into Croft, g^t more
than double allowance of Dung, which the other had, and the differrence of
product is only three Bolls, which I doubt nothing of, but it may be more:
Nevertheless, admit there be but two Bolls of difference, that is to say, allow
the Croft according to the first way of manuring, to produce five Bolls per
Aiker, the odds will be greater than I reckoned it at when you defaulk the 150
pounds, I pay more Rent for the last Mailen, and beside, there was six Bolls of
Seed, and four of Horse Corn saved, which was not reckoned in that Account and
why the Out-field in the latter Case, may bear one Boll more per Aike^ than the
first, I suppose satisfying Reasons were given already. As for the profit on
the Cattle, I think none can doubt of it.

Ob: 4. Your Hedging and way o^ Manuring recommended Chap: 4 th. is so
difficult, that the Charge will exceed the profit, Moreover the Hedges will not
grow on any Barren Ground.

Solve, The Expense and Profit are both there reckoned, and the cont^ai^ does
appear; As for Hedges growing, I have showed already, that any kind of Ground,
by Industry may be made fertile: However, ^or your more particular Information,
concerning planting of Hedges, I say, digg a ditch on every side of your Hedge,
or at least one on the outside thereof. Take the crust of the Earth you digg
out of your ditches, and lay next to the root of your Hedge, and if the Ground
be very Barren or cold, mix dung therewith, for as I observed when I spoke
concerning planting, when the roots of Trees are fixed in cold Tile or Clay
(tho the Tree it self may be nourished by Dew and Rain, without extracting any
Strength forth of the Earth, as I have seen a Tree growing out of a Wall, which
had no other kind of Nourishment, but what it received from Dew and Rain) does
in a manner frize, or as it is vulgarly termed, Dozz'ns the Root, so that it
cannot thrive: But when a Tree is planted in Ground that is any thing warm, as
the Surface or Crust of the Earth in all places is, for it is warmed by the
Sun's Beams, and Salt it receives in Dew and Rain; And your Hedge being
therein planted as is showed above. And then to preserve your Hedge while it is
young, let your Fields about them be Corn, so Beasts will have no access to
them in Summer; And in Winter, Cattle seeing nothing to tempt them to break
into your enclosed Fields, the Hedge and the ditch it self, will be sufficient
to restrain them.

Object: 5. But you speak of Hedges keeping the Ground warm; Pray, What shelter
has the Ground by your Hedge, except a Rigg or woe lying next to it?

Solve, You may remember, I also recommended planting of Trees in your Hedges,
which will also ward off the Storm; But even the Hedges themselves (if any
thing tall) will shelter more than the breadth of a dozen of Riggs of Ground:
And if your Enclosures be not too large, scarce any bit thereof will be
altogether void of shelter from Storm, as is said.

Another great Benefit had by Enclosing, Is, the Fields are thereby preserved
from being trampled on by Cattle, which does not only break the Soard of Grass,
but also with their feet, make holes wherein Water does stand, and thereby the
Ground is kept cold

Object: 6. You lately recommended seting Water upon our Gras^, ^s ^ piece of
great Improvement, and now ye tell us, that Water standing in the footsteps of
Cattle, does the Ground much injury.

Solve, Both these may very well be; For Water set upon the Ground, as was
showed above, leaves the Salt that is in it behind, and runs away it self,
but that which stands in footsteps of Cattle, cools the Ground, as is said,
and also moisteneth it too much.

Object: 7. In your fifth Chapter, you recommend housing of Sheep, and taking
part of that Ground into Manure, neit^er of which is practicable, for the Land
is so Mountainous that it cannot be ploughed; And it were hardly possible for
us to get Hutts built for so great a Number of Sheep.

Solve, Where the Land is Moun^^inous and cannot be ploughed, lay the dung of
your Cattle upon the Grass, and not to plough it at all; But this needs not
hinder People to plough their Ground, where it is ploughable. And for the
trouble of building Hutts for your Sheep, the profit of their dung will much
more than ten times recompense that trouble: Yea, that which will buy Tar^ and
Butter for Smiring your Sheep one year, will build them Hutts that will lest
ten years: And beside, the Sheep are both hereby kept in a better Condition
of body, and their Wool is also improven, as was showed in Chapter fifth.

Object: 8. The Benefit of Sheep'^ dung, by keeping them in Hutts is naught;
For whatever the Ground whereon it is laid may be thereby bertered, the pasture
whereon they used to be fed, must certainly be so much the worse, for when the
Sheeply in the fields, their dung is left upon the Pasture, by which it is
Enriched.

Solve, There is some seeming Reason in this Objection, yet upon trial it will
be found to evaporate, for when the dung g^tteth leave to ly above ground, not
only much of the Strength thereof is defused into the Air, and exhaled by the
Sun's heat, but especially the Heat or Salt thereof is not able to overcome the
natural Coldness of the Earth, in respect it is scattered here and there in
small Quantitys. To illustrat this a little, take a piece of hot Iron, that is
able to heat one pynt of Water, and put it into twenty or thirty pynts, it will
soon be coolled, and the Water be little or nothing the warmer: So this
Quantity of Dung that is sufficient to Warm or Enrich thi^ty Aikers of Land
every year, being scattered up and down a thousand Aikers, the Effect thereof
is not known, as is found by Experience.

Object: 9. You advise us to dung our Pasture where the Ground is not arrable,
which if we do, that Grass, would root our Sheep.

Solve, I did so, and also there told you make Hay of it the first year, but
least ye object against this, I say, there is no Ground whatsoever, that
bears Grass, but it may be made so Fertile, that it shall grow to the length
of Hay, or tho it did not, then might you feed on it the first year, other
Cattle or Sheep you intend to fatten and sell.

Object: 10. As for your Orchyeards, and keeping of Bee's Hyves, these are for
Gentlemen to look after, we must be taken up about some other Bussiness, we
have not time to spend in looking after such Conceits.

Solve, I showed you already, there is Profit no less than pleasure to be had
that way; Your Orchyeard, in effect, is nothing, but a Hay-park, and beside the
profit of Trees, which may be considerable you have as much of it as any so
much Ground you possess. And the Bees require little pains or Expense, neither
is there any fear of wanting Food to them. In the beginning of the year, the
Blosomes of Trees, and Flowers growing amongst the Grass of your Orchyeard, and
other places, will serve them; And in the latter end of Summer, the Blosomes of
Potatoes, and Pease and Beans.

FINIS.

