SALUTATION AND Seasonable Exhortation TO CHILDREN.
Dear and Tender Children;
WHO are of the Seed and Offspring of the Righteous, a Salutation of my
endeared Love is to you, and my Prayers to the God of Love and Father of Mercy
are for you, that he may raise you up as Living Monuments of his Mercies: and
that you that have been brought up in the Way of Truth by your Parents or
Friends (that have had a godly Care over you, to discharge their Duty, in Love
to God, and to your Immortal Souls) may come into the Truth and Fear of God,
that they may have cause to sound out Living Praises to the God of our Lives on
your behalf; for the Cry of the Righteous is to the Lord for their Children, as
for their own Souls; and as they are near and dear unto them, so their Desire
to the Lord is, That they may be near and dear unto him, and that he would give
them an Inheritance amongst them that are sanctified; which is far better than
any Outward Portion or Inheritance that they can leave to you, and will stand
by you when all Outward Riches will fail you: for though you are Young and
Tender in Years, you know not how soon the Messenger of Death may come to call
you; then there can be no Resisting of that Power that summoneth you in, and to
Judgment calls you. Oh! therefore whilst you have a Day, prize it; for Time is
very precious to Old and Young; for the Redemption of the Soul is precious. Oh!
therefore, dear Children, Remember your Creator in the days of your Youth, and
answer the End of the Lord for which he made you, which was to Serve and
Worship him: For your Believing Parents, that have born you, and suckled you,
can have no greater Joy in you, than as Samuel's Mother had, That she had born
and suckled a Child for the Lord; and as the Lord had freely given him unto
her, she freely gave him up to serve the Lord in his Temple all the days of
his Life.

So Dear Children, wait upon the Lord, that your Strength may be renewed in
him, and that you may feel the same Power at work in you, as sanctified Samuel
from the Womb, that you may be sanctified Vessels to the Lord, and that your
Bodies may be Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell in.

So the Desire of my Soul to the Lord for you is, That as you have begun a
Testimony for the Lord in keeping up the Meeting, that you may hold out to the
End, and not fear what Man can do unto you; for the Lord's Care is over you:
and as you meet in his fear, his Over-shadowing Power will be amongst you,
though you are but Little Children; he will suffer you to come unto him, that
out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings he ordains Strength that he may
perfect his Praise; and he will carry his Lambs in his Arms, and gently lead
those that are with young. So Dear Children, keep to the God of Strength, and
he will be your Strength; though you are Weak, he is Strong, and able to make
you more than Conquerors, through him that has loved you: And as you keep to
the Lord, and your Faith stands in his Power, the Enemy within nor without
shall never conquer you, but ye shall be like the little Children in the
Temple, who cried Hosanna to the Son of David; and they feared not, though the
Chief Priests and Scribes were sore Offended with them; and as it was in that
day, so it is now; not many Mighty, nor of the Noble Men of the Earth, that
believed in his Low Appearance, because he came too Low for them; they despised
him as the Carpenter's Son, and said, that he was one that they knew from
whence he came; but they did not; for to them his Vissage was more marred than
any man's, and they could see no Comeliness in him, and who said to them, They
dyed in their Sins; whither he went, they could not come.

So blessed be the Name of the Lord for evermore, that has hid these things
from the Wise and Prudent, and has revealed them unto Babes. So Dear Hearts,
let us forever wait upon the Lord, and hearken to Wisdom's Voice, that we may
be kept low in his Fear; for, The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom;
and to depart from Evil, that is a Good Understanding.

So Dear and Well-beloved Friends, the Desire of my Soul is, That we may pass
the Time of our sojourning here with Fear, and that we may keep to the Unerring
Way, that a Wayfaring Man, though a Fool cannot err therein: And as we keep to
the Light, and bring our Deeds to it, they shall be made manifest, whether they
are wrought in God or no; and so we shall come to know that Living Faith that
gives Victory over the World; for, Without Faith it is impossible to please
God; for the Just lives by Faith.

So Dear Friends, Keep to the just Principle of Life, that God has placed in
you, to Redeem your Souls from Death, that so whilst you are in the World, you
may know the Preserving Power, that keeps his Children from the Evil of the
World.

And there is one thing more that lies upon me to you Disobedient Children,
that live not in an Heavenly Subjection to the Lord and to your Parents; Cease
to grieve the Spirit of the Lord, which is given to you to profit withal; and
cease to grieve your Honest Parents; and do not do as Absalom did, who caused
his Father to Lament over him with a sad Lamentation, because he Dyed in
Disobedience against the Lord and his Father; and he could not be Comforted in
his Death, as he was in his other Son; when he heard of his Death, he arose,
and washed and anointed himself, and eat Bread, and satisfied himself, in that
he should go to the Innocent Child, though it should never return to him.

So Dear Children, Watch against that Disobedient Nature, which keeps you in
Disobedience to the Lord, and to your Parents; and as you wate upon the Lord,
in his Fear, you shall know the Mighty Power of the Lord to work out that
Nature in you that is subject to Vanity, and to set up his Heavenly Government
in you, that you may order your Conversations aright in the Sight of God, and
all men: And then, when you are gathered together to wait upon the Lord; and
cannot be content with the Form of Godliness Without the Power, nor with a bare
Formality of coming to Meeting, the God of Power and Life will appear amongst
you, and his Presence will be in the midst of you; and though there may be No
Words spoken amongst you, yet keep to the Word of God, which is Quick and
Powerful, that that may dwell plentifully amongst you, and forever preserve you.

So Dear Children, Press forward, that you may be Confirmed and Established in
the Faith that once was delivered to the Saints, and that you may be made able
to Contend earnestly for it, and then nothing shall move you; yea, though the
Earth may be moved, and the Powers of Darkness shaken, yet you shall have a
Sure Habitation in the Lord, and be gathered into the Ark of the Covenant,
where you shall be hid with the Lord while he is raining down in his
Di^pleasure Plagues upon the Wicked; and though they may call to the Mountain
and Rocks to fall on them, to hide them from the Fierceness of the Wrath (...)
God; yet they shall not save them, nor shelter them from what he has decr^ed
to bring upon them: But those that have an Interest in Christ, have no (...)to
fear whether they Dye or Live, as to this Outward Tabernacle; (...) Gain, and
to Live is Christ; so whether we Live or Dye, we are the Lord's.

So Dear Children, I commit you to God, with my own Soul; de(...) that he would
bring you, and establish and preserve you and me in hi^ (...)able Truth, which
never alters.

From Bridewel in Bristol, the Place of my Confinement for the Testimony of
Truth, as it is in Jesus, the 30th of the 4th Month, 1682. Your Loving Friend*
Dorcas D(...)

LONDON, Printed by John Bringhurst, at the Sign of the Book in
Grace Church Street, 1684*


