Liber cui Titulus, Two Discourses against the Romanists, etc. Authore H.
Dodwell,

IMPRIMATUR, Geo. Hooper, Rmo. Dn^. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. a Sacris Domest.

Junui 8. 1676.

TWO SHORT DISCOURSES Against the ROMANISTS.

1. An Account of the Fundamental Principle of Popery, and of the insufficiency
of the Proofs which they have for it.

2. An Answer to Six Queries proposed to a Gentlewoman of the Church of
England, by an Emissary of the Church of Rome.

By HENRY DODWELL M. A. and sometimes Fellow of Trinity College near DVBLIN.

LONDON, Printed for Benj Took, and are to be sold at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1676.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Fundamental Principle OF POPERY, As it is a Distinct
Communion; AND Of the insufficiency of the Proofs which they have for it. WITH
A PREFACE concerning the Usefulness of this Undertaking.

By HENRY DODWELL.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Took. 1676.

A PREFACE Concerning the USEFULNESS Of the following HYPOTHESIS.
. 1. THough I cannot undertake for what is mine in the management of the
following Discourse; yet as to the design (for which I am wholly beholden to
the Goodness of my Cause, and the intrinsic reasonableness of the Evidences
which prove it good) I think I may, without Immodesty, affirm that, if it hold,
it must be of universal use with them of the Roman Communion.

Laity and the Vulgar, who either have not the Abilities, or cannot spare the
time, which would be requisite for Enquiring into the particular Disputes, to
have the Controversies reduced into a narrow compass. And especially if these
few things, to which they are reduced, may suffice for securing the Duty
incumbent on such Persons as well as if the Enquiry had been more minute; and
when withal the Evidence, on which their Resolution depends, is suited to the
capacity of that sort of persons. Now all these things are provided for by the
following Hypothesis.

. 3. All the Disputes between us are reduced to this one of the Popes Supremacy
over the Catholic Church diffusive. As for our Differences in Other
Particulars, it is here proved, that, if we be not mistaken in This, themselves
either cannot charge us with Error, or not with any Error of that consequence
as may excuse them, either for Separating from our Communion, or for that
rigorous Imposing their own Opinions which are contrary to it.

. 4. And this does indeed effectually secure the Duty of Ordinary Laics in
this whole affair. For the Obligation incumbent at least on such Persons who
are not, by their particular Calling, obliged to Enquire, can only be to know
so much as may secure their Christian Practice; and that is sufficiently
secured by due adhering to that Communion where they may reasonably expect the
performance of those Divine Promises which are conveyed in the use of the
Sacraments, and the other Ordinary Means of Grace, so that the main concernment
of such Persons is this, to know where such a Communion is to be had. Now the
solving of this Question appears from the Principles here laid down, sufficient
to decide the whole Dispute concerning the true Communion. If it should prove
true that the Pope has this Authority over the Catholic Church diffusive, it
would follow that his particular Church must be the Catholic Church virtual,
and so must have a Title to all those Promises made to the Catholic Church in
the Scriptures (thus much at least will follow, even according to their
Hypothesis who do not pretend that these Promises reach so high as
Infallibility) and therefore that they were obliged to submit to Active
Obedience, to all Lawful Impositions, and Passive even in Unlawful ones, so
that in all Cases it would be Unlawful to join with any other Communion in
opposition to it. And on the other side, if it prove false, it will plainly
follow that it is unlawful, either for those who are already in that Communion
to continue in it, seeing they cannot continue in it without being accessory to
the Divisions of Christendom by abetting a Tyrannical Power over it; or for
others to desert their own Communion to come to the Roman, which cannot on
those Principles, be done with any such pretense of Necessity as may excuse
their Separation from being Schismatical.

. 5. The Evidence also into which this Dispute is ultimately resolved, must
needs be such as must be suitable to the meanest capacity that is capable of
acting prudently in this great affair (and certainly every one is in Interest,
as well as Duty, obliged to make use of his utmost. Prudence in a matter
wherein his greatest Interests are so nearly concerned) For the meanest
Prudence that is, will require that where they cannot choose their way, there
at least they should choose their Guide. And it is only the Authority of the
Pope as a Principle of Unity, and of the Church adhering to him as a Guide in
Controversies, of which this Hypothesis allows them a Liberty to judge, in
order to their own private satisfaction. And as the matter is such, concerning
which the meanest Prudence, that can deserve the name of Prudence, is obliged
to judge, so the Evidence is such as every one must be capable of judging who
is capable of being Prudently and Rationally a Christian. For the very Truth of
Christianity it self, in reference to us in this Age, must be proved by
Historical Testimonies of the Miracles by which it was attested from the
beginning; and the Canon of the Scripture must be proved by the Testimonies of
those by whom the Scriptures were delivered. And it is the same Historical
Testimony, whether of express Scripture, or of express Tradition, to which they
are here referred for the proof of this Supremacy of the Pope: and the Subject
concerning which this Testimony was to be given, could not but have had so
general an influence on their Practice (if they had acknowledged any dependence
on this Supremacy) as that it must have been as notorious to them who gave it,
as those Miracles, or that Canon; and therefore their Testimony must have been
as Credible in one Case as in the other.

. 6. Besides that the Negative Argument (which I here make use of) is much less
Questionable than the Affirmative. That is, there is much more reason to doubt
of a pretended Tradition, if it be not expressly mentioned in the Primitive
Authors, (and doubting is sufficient for my purpose, to overthrow the Credit of
that which pretends to be an Article of Faith) than to believe a thing to have
descended from the Apostles, because those Authors pretend it did so. For in
their Affirmations they many times deliver what they think on their own
Conjectural Reasonings, wherein they are as Fallible as others. But what they
have not mentioned, if it be not allowed to conclude that they knew it not, and
that therefore there was then no Historical Evidence for it, seeing that could
not have escaped their knowledge; yet thus much at least will follow that we
cannot be satisfied that they had any such Evidence, which is enough to render
it doubtful to us whether it were an Apostolical Tradition. Now that they did
not mention this Supremacy, I do not desire the Ignorant to take the bare word
of our Authors; but I am content that they trust their own Judgments concerning
the passages produced, as far as they are capable of judging them; or where
they find themselves unable, that there they acquiesce in the Confessions of
candid, learned Men, though of our Adversaries Communion. Which is no more than
what they themselves count Prudent in the like Cases, when they occurr in the
management of their secular affairs.

Convenient, but it is almost Necessary, in dealing with our Adversaries, to
begin, at least, with this Fundamental Principle. For till they be convinced of
the Fallibility of their Guide, all the Reasons produced against them are only
taken for Temptations and trials of the stedfastness of their Implicit Faith.
And, in affairs of this nature, they are taught to distrust their own Judgment
(nay, in matters of Faith the most Learned Clergy are taught to do so, as they
are considered in their private capacity, as well as the more ignorant Laity)
and they are further taught that, in such matters, their Faith is by so much
the more excellent and meritorious, by how much more it captivates their
Understandings; and that this captivating of their Understandings implies a
denial of their own Judgments when different from that of their Superiors. Now
upon these terms it is impossible to deal with them by particular Reasonings.
For the utmost that can be expected from the clearest Reasonings, is, that
their private Judgments may be convinced by them. But if, when this is done,
they distrust their own Judgments, nay, think themselves obliged to deny their
own Judgments in compliance with that of their Superiors, nay, take it to be
the greater glory of their Faith to deny the greater and more powerful
Convictions; it will then follow that, by how much more Conscientiously they
Act according to their own Principles, by so much the less capable they must be
of this kind of Reasoning. It must needs be in vain to urge them with such
Reasons, by which they will not be tried, though they should indeed prove
convictive, and that to their own Understandings.

. 8. Nor indeed is it rational to expect that they should be otherwise
disposed, pursuant to their Principles. For all Prudent Considerers of things
will confess, that one direct proof that a thing is actually True, is more
considerable than many Probabilities to the contrary. Especially if the direct
proof be of it self stronger than any contrary Objection; as indeed no
Objection can be so sufficient to prove any Proposition false, as the
Infallibility of the Proponent is to prove it true. Which must the rather hold,
considering that they take the judgment of their Judge of Controversies for an
adaequately-infallible Proof; never remembering that, though indeed the Spirit
of God be Infallible, yet, the Arguments whereby they prove their Judge of
Controversies so assisted by that Spirit as to partake of its Infallibility,
that is, so assisted, as that their Judge of Controversies shall Infallibly
follow the Infallible Guidance of the Spirit (otherwise themselves cannot
pretend that all assistance of the Spirit must infer Infallibility, unless they
will grant that every good Christian is Infallible, because they cannot deny
that he is so assisted) I say, these Arguments are only Moral, and such as may,
in many Cases, be exceeded by Arguments taken from the nature of the thing; and
that the Consequence must follow the weaker part; so that still their Faith can
be no more than morally certain, though their Judge of Controversies were
granted to be Infallible in regard of his assistance.

. 9. Yet even so, it should be remembered on our part, that no Arguments were
fit to be admitted against the sense of an infallible Judge, but such as might
exceed those whereby their Judge of Controversies seems to them to be proved
Infallible; which would cut off many of those Arguments which are used in the
particular Disputes. But beginning at their First Principle, it is easy to
show that they are obliged to take our Arguments into serious consideration,
and to determine according as they judge Reasonable in their private Judgments.
For the Judge of Controversies cannot, in reason, oblige them to captivate
their Understandings to it self, till it be proved. And the Arguments here used
are Antecedent to that Proof. And when upon examination of the Credentials of
the Judge of Controversies, their proof of such a Judge shall be found
insufficient, they will then, and not till then, have reason to trust their
private Judgments in the particular Disputes. And then, and only then, the
particular Disputes may be likely to obtain an equal hearing from such of them
as are truly Conscientious.

Hypothesis hold true, it will be very useful both to retain several in the
Reformed Communion, and to bring several others over from the Roman, who are
already by their Principles disposed for the Reformation.

1. There may be several, who, in the particular Disputes, may probably incline
to the Roman side, and yet have an abhorrence for the Roman rigor in those
principal ones concerning Infallibility, and the Popes Supremacy. These, if
they may be persuaded that they may be admitted to that Communion without
professing the Belief of those Principles to which we are as yet to suppose
them so very averse, may be tempted to think it lawful to join themselves in
Communion with them. This seems plainly to have been Mr. Cressy's Case, whose
entrance into that Communion was very much facilitated by the account of
Infallibility given him by Dr. Veron, Exom. (Second Edition) Sect. 1. Chapter 19..
4. p. 74. Sect. 2. Chapter 21.. 3. p. 188. Append. Chapter 5.. 2. p. 516. See Verons
Lat. Answ. to Q. Gener. 8. p. 561. at the end of the Exom.
whereby he was persuaded that it was only a School-term, not used in the
Decrees of any received Councils, no nor any way expressly defined, and that the
use of it would not be exacted from him by their Church as a Condition of her
Communion. For he acknowledges he had formerly believed that this main ground
of the Roman Religion (so he calls it) namely the Infallibility of that Church
was as demonstratively confutable as any absurdity in Mathematics. Exom. Sect.
1. Chap. 16.. 3. p. 58.
And particularly he confesses that Mr. Chillingworth's Arguments against it
had to him appeared unanswerable; Sect. 2. Chapter 21.. 4. p. 190. Sect. 2. Chapter 3.
p. 90.
and that his Book alone had the principal influence on him to shut up his
entrance into Catholic Unity. But it is here proved that whatsoever may be
thought of the Word (concerning which more may be said than was observed by Mr.
Cressy's Friends, but that it is unnecessary to say it on this occasion) yet
the Thing must necessarily be maintained by them on the same Principles by
which they have presumed to censure the Reformation, and in that very sense
wherein our Arguments are so conclusive against it. It is very strange to me,
and seems disagreeable, I will not say to that Candor, but that accurateness,
which was observed by him in that Enquiry, that he could pretend that it was
the Word Infallibility against which Mr. Chillingworth's Arguments had been so
successful, or that he could satisfy himself with that pretense in a matter of
that importance. Indeed, if his Arguments had been Grammatical, there might
have been some color for pretending that advantage was taken from the
ambiguity of the Word to pick out the most Invidious sense among those many
other more favorable ones of which it was capable; but being Notional and
taken from the nature of the Thing, they must necessarily be levelled against
it in some certain signification. And it had been easy to have shown that they
do as clearly overthrow the Infallibility of Judgment in a Creature in the use
of Fallible Means (which is the sense which I have here proved the Romanists
obliged to maintain) though their Infallibility were derived from the Divine
assistance; as if it were derived from their own Nature, as that of God is,
which is the sense which Mr. Cressy would make to be only concerned in these
Arguments. It might easily have been also shown that Mr. Cressy himself grants
the very sense of the word here defined, and cannot deny but that it is very
properly and naturally signified by it; nay that, by his own Principles, the
Churches not using it in her Canons can be no Argument that she ever intended
to leave private Persons at their liberty to use it, or forbear it, as they
pleased. Whence it were easy further to infer, not only that it must needs be
intolerable for private persons to deny it, but also that it must be justly
Suspicious as much as to wave it (since it has been used,) though on pretense
of another sense applicable to it, but never intended by them who brought it
into the Roman Church, though at first they might have forborne the introducing
of it. And if it be not free to Subjects, either to deny or forbear it, what
room can be left for their Indulgence so much celebrated in this particular?
Nay, what Indulgence could it be, if they might indeed be excused from the
Word, as long as they are obliged to maintain the Thing; I say obliged, by
doing that which cannot possibly be defended without supposing it? Certainly
they cannot think but that Actions are as significative as Words in reference
to God and their own Consciences.

. 11. So also for the other point concerning the Popes Supremacy, it is an
usual Artifice whereby many others are seduced, that they are persuaded that
they may take the same Liberty that the French take, in Questioning the Popes
Monarchical Power. But, from the Principles here laid down, it plainly appears
that the Liberty taken by them is rather connived at by the Roman Court on
politic Considerations, than approved or allowed by the Roman Communion, as
consistent with their Principles. The like might have been shown concerning
several other Consequential Doctrines which facilitate the seducing of
Proselytes; as that of the Distinction between the Church and Court of Rome,
and the possibility of Reforming the Abuses of the Court by the Power of the
Church, etc.

. 12. Now in Persons who have not been inured to those Prejudices of Education,
and that great Credulity which are insensibly infused into Persons bred in that
Communion (which must be supposed to be the Case of them who are not as yet
Proselyted to it) these general Principles of Infallibility and the Popes
Supremacy are like to meet with the most difficult reception. For to such who
have had experience of the difficulty of things by their own trial of them, and
who are not averse to any pains that may appear requisite for the satisfaction
of their Consciences; it is so far from being likely to appear that it is an
Act of Christian Virtue to avoid Evidence, or to suppress their Convictions,
when different from the Sense of those few interessed Persons who are plainly
possessed of the Government of that whole Communion, as that (till their
Infallibility be first proved) it is not likely to pass for an Act of common
honesty. Nay, their expecting such unreasonable Concessions from them at first,
would, to such Persons, be a very just reason of suspecting them, when they
should find themselves treated by them at the same rate as they might expect to
be by the most professed Deceivers. For what more likely Art could any Deceiver
use, than to persuade those, whom he had a mind to seduce, to trust in him
without and against their own Convictions? Nor is it likely that they who have
no other inducement than the intrinsic reasonableness of its proof should be
persuaded to believe it as easily as they who have been inured to it by
Prejudices of their Education. Nor is there that violence offered to their
Faculties in following a weak and doubtful Proof in one particular instance, as
in renouncing their clearest Convictions Universally, in all matters to be
defined by their Judge of Controversies. And therefore it is very possible for
Persons favorable to the sense of the Romanists in many of the particular
Disputes, still to be very averse to their pretenses to Infallibility; and this
not (as it is usually said by our Adversaries) only out of a haughtiness and
unwillingness to yield, but on rational and truly-Conscientious accounts.

. 13. Nor is the other Doctrine concerning the Monarchical Power of the Pope
less unacceptable to Persons of another Communion before they are brought over
to the Roman. I will not mention how much the consequence of believing such a
Doctrine may impose upon their Liberty, because that will not by our
Adversaries be thought a Conscientious Disswasive from it. Though certainly it
be very allowable to stand upon their own Rights, till they be convinced out of
them by a greater Evidence than would suffice for Concessions of less
importance; which is sufficient for my present design. That which I had rather
insist on at present, is, the indesensibleness* of the abuses of the Court of
Rome, which are so gross and provoking, as that generally they are the last
things to which Revolters are reconciled; and usually, when they are so, it is
only on pretense that that Church is not concerned for them. But, by this
Monarchical Power of the Pope, the power of Reforming them is ascribed Only to
him whose Interest it is they never be Reformed; and so to destroy all hopes of
Reformation. Which is a consideration that, if seriously thought of, would
certainly startle many of those who are brought over to them on accounts truly
Conscientious, being seduced to it by such false pretenses.

. 14. For when it shall appear to this sort of Persons (as I have endeavored
to make it appear by the following Hypothesis) that their joining in that
Communion must necessarily imply their approbation of these Unacceptable
Doctrines; they must find themselves unavoidably reduced to this choice,
whether they will embrace these Doctrines rather than forbear their Communion,
or whether they will keep off from their Communion rather than own these
Schismatical Doctrines. Nor will it be hard to judge how they would be likely
to determine in such a Case. For if their aversation to these Doctrines be
greater than their kindness to particular Opinions or Practices of the Roman
Communion (as I have already shown that it is reasonable to believe that it is
frequently the Case of Persons not yet Proselyted by them) they must
necessarily think themselves obliged on these terms to continue where they are.

. 15. 2. And the same things proportionably applied may serve to show the
usefulness of this Hypothesis for gaining several moderate Persons of the
Romanists themselves. They who call the Doctrine of the Popes Infallibility
Archi-Heretical, White's Tab. Suffrag.
and confess themselves unable, in this Principle, to defend their Church
against us; when they shall find that the Fundamental Principle of their own,
as a distinct, Communion, is this confessedly indefensible Archi-Heretical
Doctrine and that without this they cannot justify either their Separation or
their Impositions, they cannot think it safe in Conscience to continue any
longer divided from us.

. 16. The same thing is also applicable to that other Doctrine which prevails
with several very considerable Parties of the Roman Communion, That the Supreme
Judge of Controversies on Earth is either the diffusive Catholic Church, or a
Council that is truly Free and General, and accordingly received as such by the
Catholic Church diffusive, and that that alone is the seat of Infallibility.
They who are of this Judgment, if the following Hypothesis hold true, must
necessarily be obliged to change their Communion on two accounts. 1. That they
cannot make out their own Title to their being the Catholic Church in this
sense, nor can they consequently prove that many of our Doctrines, which they
condemn as Heretical, have ever been Canonically condemned by this Judge of
Controversies. This will hinder them from abstaining from our Communion for
them. And 2. that, on these Principles, the Doctrines of the Popes Monarchy and
Infallibility must be Heretical. This will oblige them to abstain from the
Communion of those who maintain them.


. 17. 1. They cannot make out their Title to their own being the Catholic
Church in this sense. For evidently they are not the Catholic Church
diffusive, many considerable parts whereof are not in Communion with them. And
therefore all the Plea they can make to the Authority or Infallibility of the
Catholic Church must be grounded on the Notion of a Catholic Church Virtual,
which Notion they must needs disclaim in asserting the Power of the diffusive
Catholic or its Lawful Representative over all particular Churches. These
things I conceive so clear from the Doctrine here delivered, as that I cannot
think my self obliged to say any more concerning them at present. Hence it will
follow, that all those particular Doctrines, which have been defined against us
only by the Western Councils, As the Florentine Council, etc.
without the Suffrages of the Eastern Bishops, or the reception even of all the
Western Churches themselves, must fail of that pretense to Infallibility which
is here even from their own Principles proved necessary to justify their
Separation from us on that account. And when these are deducted, there will
remain but few instances of Doctrines disputed between us, if any, which
themselves can pretend to have been defined by the united Suffrages of all
Eastern and Western Bishops, and unanimously received in the particular
Dioceses. Nor can they, on these terms, give any account why they condemn and
exclude from their interest in the common Judicatory of Christendom as many,
and as great, and every way as considerable, Churches as themselves.

. 18. 2. But if such Western Councils, As of Constance, etc.
as are in this point defended by our Adversaries of this Faction, must indeed
be admitted for the Supreme visible Judicatories, and consequently as entitled
to that Infallibility which is by them ascribed to this Supreme Judicatory; I
cannot conceive how they can avoid thinking themselves obliged in Conscience to
separate from the Communion of them who ascribe this Infallibility to the Pope
and his Conclave. For there is nothing that can be said to justify their
Separation from us, but will as strongly prove them obliged to separate from
their own Brethren of that Persuasion. For these Councils have taken upon them
to decide the Controversy concerning the Supremacy, by declaring this Power to
be in the Church diffusive, and themselves to be Lawful Representatives of that
Church; and consequently that all Ecclesiastical Power, the Papacy it self
being also expressly mentioned, was subject to them. For can they think that
Propositions, neither Necessary, as to their matter, nor Evident, as to their
Proof, can oblige Subjects to their Belief under pain of incurring the Censure
of Heresy, only on account of their being defined by their Supreme Judge of
Controversies? And is there any thing that themselves can pretend to have been
more expressly defined by that Judge, than this is? If they will think to evade
this Argument, by pretending that this Doctrine of the Power of their Judge of
Controversies is not so properly de fide it self, as a Principle antecedent to
the belief of all Particulars that are so; yet this can derogate nothing from
their obligation to separate from the Communion of Dissenters concerning it.
For can they think themselves obliged to Separate for the denial of one
particular defined by that Authority? And is there not incomparably more reason
they should do so for the denial of the Authority it self? Is not the Authority
it self more Fundamental than the particulars can be which, on these
Principles, derive their whole Credibility from it? And must it not be much
more heinous to destroy the Credit of all possible Particulars, which, on these
Principles, is included in the Judge of Controversies, than to refuse an actual
Assent to any one Particular? And as it hence appears, that the matter of these
Differences among themselves is more momentous, and more obliging to a
Separation, than themselves can pretend those to be wherein they differ from
us; so I may add farther, that the Separation, which ought in Conscience to
follow hereupon, must be equally irreconcilable. For will it not come to the
same Event, whether we utterly disown a visible Judge of Controversies, or
whether we indeed own one, but own such a one as that our Adversaries cannot
think themselves obliged to stand to his decision? In both Cases there is
equally acknowledged a Liberty of Appeal from all Power that is acknowledged by
the Adversary. And that Power which must decide Controversies against an
Adversary who does not think himself obliged (as much as in Conscience) to
submit to such a Decision, must do it either by force or Arbitration, which are
Remedies as allowable by our Principles, as by those of our Adversaries. Nay,
in this Case they cannot plead even that pretense of Canonical Punctuality, at
least so long to forbear separating from the Communion even of acknowledged
Heretics, till their Cause were declared to be Heresy by their competent
Judge. For they who believe these Councils to have been the Supreme
Judicatories, must consequently conceive themselves obliged to believe that
their Superiority over the Pope has been defined by a Canonical Authority; and
they who do so, can have nothing left to excuse them for forbearing an actual
Separation. And as it thus appears that they must hold themselves obliged to
abstain from the Communion of those Persons who professedly and expressly own
this Doctrine of the Popes Monarchy: So when they shall find that this Monarchy
is indeed the Fundamental Principle of the whole Roman Communion, as distinct
from others; they must, by the same Principles, think themselves obliged to
abstain from the Communion of that whole Church, not only of those who do
expressly defend that Monarchy, but also of others, though in terms denying it,
as long as they keep to that Communion which cannot be kept without
consequentially defending it. It is in vain to think to weaken the Authority of
the Decision of those Councils, because it was in a matter concerning their own
Interest. For besides that this will give Us a plain advantage against any
Authority whereby they can pretend that we are Canonically censured; They
themselves are sensible, on other occasions, that this is inseparably the Right
of the Supreme Judicatory, to Judge even in matters of its own Interest; seeing
there lies no Appeal from it, even in such Cases, to any other Judicatory that
might Judge more impartially concerning them. And they who think the Supreme
Judicatory Infallible, must think themselves also obliged, not only to a
Canonical Acquiescence for Peace's sake, but also to an Internal Assent and
Approbation of the Justice of such a Decree, even out of Conscience. This I
conceive at least sufficient to prove, in this Case of persons not proselyted,
as well as in the former of persons already of that Communion, that they who do
more firmly adhere to this Doctrine of the Superiority of the Catholic Church
diffusive, must think themselves obliged to separate from their communion when
they are convinced of the inconsistency of this Doctrine with it. The only
difference is that this firmer adherence to this Doctrine may more ordinarily
and easily be expected from Persons not yet Proselyted, than from those who are
prejudiced in favor of the contrary by their Education in that Communion.
These are those Dividing Principles intimated in the following Answer to the
Queries proposed to the Gentlewoman, Answ. to Q. 4. page 86.
though I was unwilling on that occasion to enlarge further concerning them.

Hypothesis is for the direction of Peacemakers, to let them see what it is
that renders our reconciliation impossible; and which, if it be not first
accommodated, must render all their endeavors in particular Questions
unsuccessful; and therefore against which they ought more earnestly to strive
by how much they are more zealous for Catholic Peace. The way hitherto
attempted has been to endeavor to reconcile our particular differences. This
has been, either by clearing their respective Churches from all those things
for which they have not expressly declared, and of which express Professions are
not exacted from Persons to be reconciled unto them, by how great Authority
soever of their particular Communicants they have been countenanced or
maintained. This way has been taken on their side by Mr. Veron, etc. and on
ours by Bishop Montague. Or where the Churches have declared themselves, there
by allowing the greatest Latitude of Exposition, and putting the most
favorable Sense on their Decrees of which they are capable. Thus Grotius has
dealt with the Council of Trent, and S. Clara with our English Articles. The
design of all the endeavors of this kind has been to reconcile the Churches
without any yielding on either side. I confess I think the number of
Controversies may be exceedingly diminished by this way of proceeding, which
must needs be very acceptable to any, who is more a Lover of the Catholic
Church's Peace than of Disputation. Many of the Tenets on both sides, that are
very invidiously represented by Adversaries, will, on a closer examination,
appear to be either mistakes of the Writers meanings, or Opinions of particular
Writers, or senses of the Church's Decrees which were never designed by the
Church that made them; and consequently unnecessary to be assented to in order
to a reconciliation. But when all is done, they will fall very short of
reconciling the different Communions. For though all their particular Decrees,
even concerning Faith, were made tolerable by these means, (1) yet that were
not sufficient to prove their Communion Lawful; and (2) yet there can be no
hopes of reconciling all particular Decrees by these means, but some will still
remain which will make their Communion intolerable to them of the other side.

. 20. 1. Though all their particular Decrees of Faith might, by these means, be
made tolerable; yet that were not sufficient to prove their Communion lawful.
For neither is there any security that that sense of their Decrees, which might
be taken for tolerable, would in Practice prove such as would be admitted by
Governors; so as that they on the other side might, on their owning of that
sense, be received to their Communion. No, though it were countenanced by
Doctors of never so eminent note, nay, by the Ecclesiastics who should receive
them. For still their Church ought to be admitted to be the most Authentic
Expositer of her own meaning. And I do not doubt but several of their
Proselytes, who should go over to them on account of many of these moderate
Explications, would find themselves mistaken in many things as soon as their
Church had any obligation to explain her self concerning them. And though the
Church might not think it worth her interposition to do it upon the
reconciliation of every particular Proselyte, yet She must certainly think her
self obliged to it in order to the reconciliation of the whole Communions. Then
many of these palliations would certainly be found so repugnant to her design*
and so destitute of any plausible appearance, as though She had been willing to
yield in earnest in instances wherein She might not seem to do so (and that is
the utmost condescension that can in reason be expected from a Church which
pretends to be Infallible, at least while She pretends to be so) yet they would
not afford them even so, as much as a Salvo for their reputation. Nay, though
all her present Decrees of Faith had appeared tolerable, and appeared so in
that very sense wherein She really understood them; yet even this would not
suffice for a solid reconciliation of Communion, as long as the same Authority,
by which these other Decrees had been defined, is still owned to be Infallible.
For still the next General Council (in the sense wherein they give that Title
to such as are not truly Occidental) may define new Articles never yet defined,
or at least declare such Propositions to be so, which, as yet while they are
not defined, may very innocently be disbelieved. And then, as they, who even
now believe what has been defined hitherto, not for the intrinsic Probability
of the things defined; but for the Authori^y whereby they are defined, must
find themselves obliged, by the same Principles, to receive such new
Definitions of the same Authority; So we, who even now disbelieve them, on
account of the unsatisfactoriness of their intrinsic Proofs, and for the
contrary Proofs produced against them, and who do not believe the Authority of
their Proponent a sufficient Argument to countervail these intrinsic
confutations, must still continue to disbelieve them, even when they shall be
so defined; which will then oblige us again to divide as great a distance as
ever. Nor is this to be looked on as a Case unlikely to happen, considering
that there are already many very suspicious Doctrines so universally received,
as that their Learned men confidently tell us that some of them are fere de
fide, and doubt of others whether they be not already altogether so. Where it
is observable that the grounds of their judging so, are, either the expressness
of those Decrees of their Church which are already made concerning them, or the
Universality of their reception, or the stress which is laid upon them, which,
in all likelihood, would prevail with such a General Council, if it had been
assembled, to give their Suffrages for them.

. 21. 2. But though a reconciliation of the Particulars hitherto defined might
have been more available for a solid Peace, than it hence appears likely that
it would be, yet even this is not Practicable by all the means of
Reconciliation that have as yet been thought of. Some things have been defined
in both Communions with such a design upon Dissenters, as that no mollifying
Arts of Interpretation can prevail with any unprejudiced Person to believe that
the Senses really intended by them are reconcilable. Nor indeed have the
Romanists any reason to expect that we should agree with them in all the
Particulars defined by them, whilst we do not agree with them in ackowledging
the Credibility of their Judge of Controversies. For, Antecedently to their
being defined, they confess many of them so obscure as that they may pardonably
be disbelieved and opposed. And how can any wise man expect that all Men should
be of one mind in so many instances of such a nature? And yet even one unlawful
Condition of Communion is alone sufficient to make their Communion unlawful,
and the Churches irreconcilable.

22. Now that there are somethings for which their Church her self is
unavoidably concerned wherein we have all the reason, that can be desired, to
expect that She should yield to us in order to the accommodation of our
differences, I* think I might confidently Appeal to as many Learned Men, though
of our Adversaries Communion, as have had as well the Courage to speak their
thoughts, as the Candor to follow their own Convictions. The Testimonies of
many of them, to this purpose, are already so well known, as that I believe it
will not be expected that I should exceed my present designed brevity by
producing them. This therefore being supposed, it will plainly follow that no
solid Peace can be expected with those of that Communion without some
Concessions on their side; and therefore that which inevitably hardens them
against all Concessions must consequently ruin all hopes of a lasting
Reconciliation. Now this is done by their Doctrine of Infallibility, and their
own Title to it. This is it that makes them presume to define such things as
themselves confess to be inevident Antecedently to their own defining them.
This makes it impossible for them (as long as they pretend to it) to submit
those things as much as to a review, in this Age of Knowledge, which were at
first defined in Ages of very great Ignorance. This hinders them from yielding
to the clearest Convictions to the contrary, or from acknowledging them even
where they cannot choose but yield to them. This keeps them from reforming any
of those Errors, of which we have reason to believe themselves so sensible
(since the great modern improvements of Ecclesiastical Learning) as that they
would not have introduced them, if they had not found them already admitted,
and thought themselves obliged not to desert them, nor to believe any Evidence
sufficient to prove them blameworthy, when they had once found them so
admitted. And therefore it will concern all hearty well-wishers to Catholic
Peace, to lay out their Zeal and Industry principally to discredit this one
Doctrine which is so extremely pernicious to it.

. 23. And in order hereunto I have endeavored to make it appear, that the
challenge of Infallibility to their whole Communion is truly grounded on a
Principle disclaimed by considerable numbers of their Communicants; that is,
the Popes absolute and unaccountable Monarchy over the Catholic Church. Whence
it will follow, that, though Infallibility did indeed belong to the Supreme
Representative of the Catholic Church diffusive, yet they can lay no claim to
it who deny his Papal Monarchy. And therefore they who believe these Promises
of Infallibility to have been originally made only to the Catholic Church
diffusive, and withal deny this absolute Monarchy of the Pope, cannot lay any
better claim to this Infallibility than any other part of the Catholic Church
diffusive that is as great and as considerable as themselves. But themselves
confess Churches no less ample for extent (and indeed more considerable for the
multitude of Apostolical Sees) than their own, to be so far from being
Infallible, as that they believe them actually mistaken, even in matters of
Faith, and that for several Centuries together before the Reformation. And
therefore all the Authority which they can challenge on these Principles is
only a Canonical one, such as is due to particular Provincial or National or
Patriarchal districts, which are, on all sides, acknowledged to be Fallible.
Which will not only concern the Council of Trent, but also all other Councils
that are only Occidental.

. 24. Now this Concession alone, that they are Fallible, would, at least, be
sufficient to show that they could not think it unlawful to review their own
Decrees, and either to correct or repeal them, as they should Judge it
reasonable upon that review. And though indeed it is not for the Interest of
the Public that Governors should be too easy in rescinding their own Acts,
and especially at the motion of such an challenge it as a Duty from them to
rescind them, and when it cannot be done without an acknowledgment of their
having been formerly mistaken; yet it is withal as little for that Interest,
that they should wholly divest themselves of the Power of actually Practicing
it, when it shall appear necessary by the exigences of the Communities for
which they are entrusted. And, if, in any Case, this may be allowed to be
Expedient, there can be no reason to doubt but that it is so here. The thing is
of that importance, as that upon it depends the Reconciliation of the Divided
Parties of Christendom, which are neither likely to be subdued by the Power of
any one, nor possible to be reconciled without Concessions on some, if not on
all, sides, by Churches, as well as by private Persons, and it cannot appear on
which side the Concession is fit to be made, unless all submit to a trial, and
resolve, upon trial, to yield to what they shall judge reasonable. Besides,
there is a particular Reason why the Church should reserve an open Ear for all
things that can be urged for her information in matters of Faith. Not only in
regard that the things are such as do not derive their Lawfulness or
Unlawfulness from her Authority, but are what they are, either True or False,
Antecedently to it; so that her Authority, as it cannot change the Nature of
the things in themselves, so neither can it alter their obligation in reference
to the Consciences of those who are otherwise persuaded: Nor that She must be
Responsible to God, how little soever She be so to her Subjects, if She betray
her trust in the Faith once delivered to her; and thereupon drive out of her
Communion Persons, who ought to have been encouraged to continue it, and break
off from the Communion of other Churches with whom She ought to have maintained
a correspondence: But also because her whole Authority depends on it. For if
She be Erroneous in Fundamentals, especially if her Error be by way of Defect
in them, She is incapable of being a Christian Church, and consequently
incapable of Ecclesiastical Authority. So that, as She tenders her whole
Authority in other things, She is obliged to use all diligence to secure her
self from Error in these, and it must be her best Policy to do so. Nay, the
greatest Human Authorities that are, and who are most Critical in insisting on
these Punctualities of Policy in maintaining what they have once determined,
yet think it no disparagement to them to condescend to a review, and to change
their Judgments, upon better Information. And since the retriving of that sort
of Learning, which is requisite for clearing Apostolical Tradition, which came
in with the Reformation of Religion, the Church of Rome her self is much better
informed, and better qualified for Judging, than She was in those obscurer Ages
wherein She first defined them.

. 25. Supposing therefore that She were thus disposed to come to a review, it
plainly follows further, that the whole force of her new Decrees upon this
review, must be resolved into the merit of the Cause. For when her Judgment has
once been acknowledged Fallible, there can then remain no further pretense of
any greater Certainty in her Conclusions, than in the Premises from whence they
were deduced by her. And from hence it would be very reasonable to expect 1.
that She would not upon this new review define what She should believe
insufficiently proved Antecedently to her Definition. This being applied to
particulars, would cut off very many of her newly introduced Articles which her
most eminent Champions confess inevident Antecedently to her defining them. And
we might expect the number of Articles, which would be reduced upon this way of
Trial, the more considerable, if 2. all those counterfeit Miracles and
Revelations, and all those counterfeit Authors and Authorities were waved,
which at the defining of these Articles were generally believed genuine, but
are since as generally acknowledged to have been Forgeries. All those Doctrines
which, upon such Testimonies as these, were taken for Apostolical, must lose
their Credit of being so as soon as these Testimonies shall be convicted of
incompetency for assuring us what was Apostolical. Especally 3. if none but the
earliest Writers be trusted, as indeed none else are competent, for conveying
Apostolical Tradition to us. And 4. if they were wary in this kind to impose no
Doctrines as Conditions of their Communion, but such as might appear even to
themselves very Necessary and very Evident: If the defalcations were made which
we have reason to believe would be made, even by themselves, upon the
Suppositions now mentioned, I do not see any reason to despair of so much
Liberty to be allowed by them as would suffice to reconcile our Communions. And
this I believe will be an information very useful, and very acceptable to all
hearty desires of the Peace of Christendom, that is indeed, to all
truly-Christian Spirits.

Hypothesis is, that it will serve for a Scheme of Principles to justify the
Reformation, for which some of our modern Adversaries have been so very
importunate. Nor do I pretend hereby to supersede the Endeavors of that
admirable Person who has already undertaken them. Dr. Stillingfleet.
His Principles do excellently well show that, as to the Resolution of our
Faith in those Particulars which are truly of an Apostolical Original, and
wherein we do agree with the Romanists themselves, we can sufficiently prove
them derived from the Apostles by competent Testimonies of the several Ages
through which they must have passed, without being any ways beholden to an
Infallible Judge of Controversies. Nay that such an Infallible Judge is indeed
a Means improper for such an End; as requiring many such things for its proof,
to us, who must be supposed to live* at a distance from the time of its
Original Institution, as are every way, at least, as liable to Dispute as the
Controversies to be determined by it. So that hence it appears that we may be
Christians, nay and Catholics too, that is, that we may believe as many
Articles as at first were imposed as necessary to be believed, without the
least obligation of being Romanists, that is, of believing all their
superinduced Novel Doctrines. And this is of excellent use against them in the
whole Dispute concerning the Resolution of Faith, where they pretend that the
Books of the Scriptures themselves, and the Sense of those Books, and
consequently all the Articles which are proved from those Senses, cannot be
proved Credible to Us without the Authority of their Judge of Controversies;
and therefore that as we follow this Authority in these things, so we ought to
follow it in all other things equally recommended by it, which must therefore
be equally Credible with them. This Consequence will indeed hold with them
concerning whom the Supposition is true; and therefore it cannot be strange
that the Romanists, who profess to believe our common Articles on the Credit of
this Authority, should look on those whom they call Heretics as choosers in
Religion, and as self condemned, in refusing to believe other things as
credible, and credible on the same Principles with those they do believe, they
still supposing that they, whom they call Heretics, believe the common
Articles on the same Principles on which themselves believe them. But from the
Principles of that excellent Person it plainly appears, that the Supposi^ion is
not true concerning Us; and that as we profess we do not, so there is nothing
that can in Reason oblige us to believe even our common Articles on the
Authority of their, or any other pretended Infallible Judge of Controversies.

. 27. But the Principles here advanced do not so much concern the Articles
wherein we are agreed, as those wherein we differ, and therefore will more
immediately reach the Popish Communion as Popish, and the Protestant as
properly so called, that is, as protesting against their Errors, and against
the Uncanonical courses taken by them for Imposing their Errors; and for the
suppressing of all opposition to the contrary. Here it is first proved that, it
being our part only to Assert our own Liberty from their Additional Articles,
they are obliged to prove, not we to disprove, their Impositions. Then, because
the first Principles of their Impositions are not agreed on by themselves, but
expressly denied by several Persons in their Communion, therefore I have
proceeded to enquire after them, by knowing what it is that they are obliged by
necessary consequence to maintain on account of their being of that Communion;
so that by finding these we have all their particular Doctrines reduced to
their first Principles. And the discovery of the weakness of the proofs
producible for these (upon the former Supposition that they are obliged to
prove them) is as clear a Discovery of the Justice of the Reformation, from the
first Principles as the nature of the thing will bear.

Hypothesis above others is, that it is capable of a more easy proof, and a
proof more likely to prevail ad homines. For the several Parties among our
Adversaries will not only grant us each of the Premises, but undertake to prove
them for us; and an indifferent Person will not be beholden to either of them
for the Conclusion. That he cannot be true to the Principles of their Communion
(or, (to use their language) that he can be no sound thorough Catholic) who
does not hold Infallibility, and that confined to that part of the Church which
is in their Communion on account of their being virtually Catholic, the
Jesuits, and other high Papalins will affirm, and it is that for which they
contend. To them therefore I shall refer all those of that Communion, who shall
doubt of the cogency of the proofs here produced, for further satisfaction. I
could heartily wish that the odium of this reference might make them decline
the Service; and should take it for a highly commendable condescension, if such
as they, who have devoted themselves to the Service of the Catholic Church,
could be persuaded to declare their dislike of Principles so pernicious to
Catholic Peace. But I fear it is a favor too great to be expected from them.
If any therefore doubt of the other Premiss, viz. the indefensibleness of this
challenge to Infallibility, and of this Notion of a Catholic Church virtual,
on which that challenge must be grounded, he may be pleased to consult those of
their Writers who defend the Supremacy of General Councils, or rather of the
Catholic Church diffusive. So that this way of proceeding will be most suitable
for all sorts of Adversaries. If they read it with a desire of satisfaction,
they will find that more easy when they shall consider that it proceeds only
on that which themselves do partly grant true already, so that there will only
one Premiss remain concerning which they can desire further satisfaction. If
they read it with a design of confutation, they will also find that more
difficult when they shall remember that they cannot undertake it without
engaging a very considerable Party among themselves in the defense of these
Fundamental Principles of their whole Communion.

. 28. Many great and considerable improvements might have been also made of
this difference of their Authors in matters of so great importance to their
common Interests, which may hereafter be more fully enlarged on as themselves
shall administer a further occasion for it. This will show how little reason
they have to boast of their Unity when it thus appears that they are so little
agreed in these Principles of their Unity. So that, as it has already appeared
that their difference herein must in reason oblige them to separate in their
Communion, if they act conformably to their Principles, so nothing but a
provocation like that which was given to Luther and Henry the Eighth, can be
wanting to them who deny this Monarchy of the Pope, to make them do as they
did, viz. actually to divide their Communion as their Principles already oblige
them. This will also let them see how little advantage their Laity is like to
have above ours in judging of the Controversies which divide our Communions.
They would have them take the Judge of Controversies's word for the
Particulars. That may be when they have found him. But when there are different
Pretenders (as there are here, the Pope, the Council, and the Church diffusive)
how shall they judge who has the justest Claim? Must they judge of the reasons,
at least of Credibility? That is it that we would have them do, and for which
we are blamed as putting them upon a task too difficult for them, or
encouraging them to entertain too good an Opinion of their own abilities. Must
they take the Pope's word in the Case? But he is yet only a Party; and, till
the Motives of Credibility be tried, can have no advantage above others his
Competitors. And then, why may not They be trusted also? If they be all
trusted, their Pretensions being so inconsistent, the Laick, who trusts them,
must still be lest as irresolute as ever. Must they therefore follow the
judgment of their most Credible Divines concerning it? But that will again be
as hard a task as the former, to be able, in so great apparent Equality, to
distinguish who are the most Credible; especially abstracting from the merit of
the Cause. And what advantage the favorers of the Papacy have in numbers, that
the others have in disinteressedness, which will go very far in recommending
the Credibility of an Authority in such a Case as this is. Besides the greatest
Authority of Divines will not by themselves be allowed for any more than a
probable, and therefore a very fallible, inducement. But how much more so, when
there are other Divines as eminent as themselves of another Judgment? And even
Infallibility it self, if it be received on a Fallible recommendation, will
still amount to no higher than a Fallible Proof; which even themselves cannot
judge sufficient for their purpose in such a Case as this is. If both
Pretenders and Divines be trusted on both sides as far as their Pretensions are
not inconsistent with each other, this will effectually serve my purpose, and
convince the Laick, who trusts them, of the insecurity of their whole
Communion. For he must thus be obliged to grant both the Premises of the
Argument by which I have here proved it unsecure. The Major is this,

Infallibility, as appropriated to the Roman Communion by their Title to their
being virtually Catholic, that is, by their adhering to the Papacy as a
Principle of Catholic Unity in the sense above explained, is the Fundamental
Principle of that whole Communion as distinct from others:

This he must believe on the Authority of the Popes themselves who have
declared for it, and of the Jesuits, and the rest of the high Papalins. The
Minor this:

But this Authority of the Papacy (on which the Title of that whole Communion
to Infallibility is grounded) is false and improbable.

This he must also for the same reason believe on the Authority of all those
who defend the Supremacy of General Councils, or of the diffusive Catholic
Church. So that in this way of judging by Authorities (which is agreeable to
the Genius and Principles and Arguments of that Church against us in other like
Cases) the Laity, at least, must be obliged to distrust their whole Communion,
as Fundamentally grounded on an unwarrantable Principle. But of these and other
like matters, perhaps a larger account may be given on future occasions.

A positive ACCOUNT OF THE Fundamental Controversy On which Depend all other
Disputes, betwixt the Romanists and the other Communions of Christendom, with a
short discovery of the little evidence they have on the Roman side in this
Controversy.
BY the Fundamental Controversy, I mean that on which the particular
Controversies do depend, and wherein what is maintained by the Chapter of Rome,
does so nearly concern her that the whole subsistence as a distinct Communion,
must adaequately depend on the Truth or Falsehood of it. And her Assertion
herein is that Fundamental Principle, the confutation of which is alone
sufficient for convicting her of the guilt of that Separation of Communion,
which has been caused by her unwarrantable Impositions in the particular
Disputes, and for excusing all others who have permitted themselves to be
excluded from her Communion rather than they would profess the belief of
Errors, which was required as a Condition of their Communion. So that the
Confutation of this Fundamental Principle does virtually and consequentially
contain a resolution of all other particular Controversies debated between us.

For finding out this Fundamental Principle, I suppose, Suppositions.
1. That the first Formal Separation (I will not yet say Schism, for that
implies a fault in it, which is to appear from what follows) was made by the
Romanists, at least as to us in England, with whom they communicated in the
same Public Offices, till they separated themselves upon the prohibition of
Feb. 25. 1569.
Pius V. 2. That this Formal Separation without sufficient positive grounds for
it (though there were no sufficient convictive grounds to the contrary) is the
Sin of Formal Schism; which is as properly incurred, if the Separation be
unnecessary, as if it be unreasonable if it be without, as if it be against
reason. 3. This being supposed, for our Justification, who were on]y passive in
the Separation, it is not requisite that we confute their pretenses, but it is
abundantly sufficient that the proofs produced by them are not directly
conclusive to their purpose. 4. This purely-negative way of proceeding, that
they want sufficient ground to justify their Practice, being alone sufficient
for our purgation, the proof that the grounds of their separating from us were
sufficient (which is their positive Assertion) will be incumbent on our
Adversaries, and we cannot be obliged to disprove them. 5. This obligation to
Prove is incumbent on them, not only as they are the first Separaters (which
may only concern us of the English Communion) but also as the Imposers of their
own Sentiments on others as Conditions of Catholic Communion. Which will also
relate to foreign Protestants, who were driven from their Communion, being not
suffered to continue in it but on such Conditions. 6. Our Adversaries being
thus obliged to give a Positive account of their own proceedings; they have no
way to justify themselves but by vindicating that on which themselves lay the
stress of their Separation (so that, if they fail here, no other proof will be
sufficient for proving the necessity of it) which was noted to be meant by the
Fundamental Principle.


Here therefore two things will be necessary to be shown; 1. what this is on
which they lay this stress; 2. that it is no way justifiable.

For the First, it is clear Propositions.
1. That the particular Propositions debated betwixt us are not by themselves
thought necessary, to our Salvation, necessitate medii, so as that our
Ignorance or disbelief of them should deprive us of some necessary Truth,
without which we cannot be saved. For they themselves excuse such as did
disbelieve them, as we do, before the definition of their Church. 2. That, even
supposing we were erroneous in things not thus necessary, yet this were not
sufficient to justify their Separation or Imposition on intrinsic accounts;
that is, an Error of so small importance, as to the value of the thing, could
not in that regard, of its intrinsic value, excuse either their Separation
from us because we hold it, or their so rigorous Imposition of their own
sentiments on us concerning it. 3. That as there is no Intrinsic Necessity of
the Truth of the Propositions for our Salvation, so neither 1. is there that
Extrinsick Evidence of their being revealed by the Apostles that must
necessarily argue, in him that should deny them, an Irreverence and Obstinacy
against the Divine Veracity, on which their Credibility depends. This also
appears from their excusing the Errors of the Ancients, who if they had had
such Evidence in their times, could not have been inculpably Erroneous. Which
they take up from what S. Augustine had said to that purpose, in his Disputes
with the Donatists concerning the Case of St. Cyprian, whom he therefore makes
more excusable in the same Error of Rebaptizing Heretics than the Donatists,
because he lived before, but they after, the Nicene decision of that whole
Dispute. Nor 2. do themselves pretend that any Error, which may not be presumed
obstinately persisted in, is sufficient to justify a Separation from the
Communion of Persons so Erroneous. 4. Hence it follows that, seeing neither the
Intrinsic Necessity of the Propositions themselves, nor their Extrinsick
Evidence Antecedently to the definition of the Church, are, on their own
Principles, sufficient to justify the Severity of their proceedings against
us: The only thing they have more to allege for it must be our Disobedience in
disbelieving those Propositions notwithstanding the Authority which their
Church has given them by her Definition. 5. That the Obedience required to
these Propositions is not only not to make Parties and Divisions in the Church
against them(such as our Church is generally thought to require to the xxxix.
Articles) but also Positively to believe them, not only as Truths, but also as
matters of Faith. 6. That this Positive Belief of their Church's Definitions
exteriorly professed in joining in their Offices, and in abstaining from the
Communion even of Peaceable Dissenters, and censuring them as Heretics, cannot
veraciously, nor consequently without Sin, be performed without an Internal
Assent. 7. That this Internal Assent cannot safely be given without a
satisfactory conviction of the Truth of the Propositions so assented to. 8. And
therefore, that such an Assent may be given to Propositions defined by their
Church, only on account of her Authority, it is requisite that her Authority be
such a Medium as may assure us of the Truth of those Propositions. 9. This
Assurance (if it be nor, according to the Doctrine of their greatest Pretenders
to Reason, Mathematical, yet) must, at least for matters of Faith (and such
these Definitions are by themselves esteemed) be Moral, that is, such as may
exclude all Probability, if not all Possibility, of Doubting, whether they be
True. 10. That Authority, which, upon its own account, may be an Argument to
convince us of the Truth of her Definitions, must not be such as must depend on
the use of Means: both 1. because that will leave a Liberty for such as are
competent Judges of them to have recourse from such Authority to the Means
themselves on which such her Credibility will depend, which the Romanists will
by no means permit: And 2. because the Means are by themselves acknowledged
frequently Fallible, and the Infallibility only affixed to the Conclusions. 11.
That Authority which may assure us of the Truth of its Definitions,
independently on the Means, must needs be Infallible in its Judgment. Which
though some few late Authors have endeavored to avoid, yet the Generality of
them have found themselves in pursuance of the former Principles, obliged to
assert it. 12. This Infallibility of Judgment, surpassing the use of Ordinary
Means, must needs be Supernatural and Extraordinary; and therefore as to the
light by which it judges, it must be assisted by new Revelations, though it be
conversant about no newly-Revealed Objects. 13. This Infallibility is by them
challenged to themselves by virtue of those Promises of the Spirit in the
Scriptures, which themselves confess to belong only to the Catholic Chapter not to
any one particular Denomination of Christians. 14. That therefore their Title
to this Infallibility must, according to their own Principles, be resolved into
those Proofs whereby they make out their Title of being the Catholic Church.
15. They themselves do not, nor cannot, pretend to be the Catholic Chapter
diffusive; that is, that all the Regular, legal, original Successors to the
Apostles in all Apostolical Sees (most of which they cannot deny to have been
in the Oriental parts (have ever submitted to their Authority, or are united to
them in external visible Communion. Nay, they have condemned a much greater
number of Apostolical Sees than they have among themselves. 16. That therefore
the Notion of Catholic, to which they may with any color pretend, must be so
limited as that it may agree to a Party of Christians in opposition to others.
17. That though it may indeed be true, admitting an Appeal to the Primitive
records, that a particular Church may hold all that which was originally taught
by the Catholic Church diffusive, without any novel abusive Impositions that
may oblige any Conscientious Persons to keep off from her Communion, and so by
accident may deserve the name of Catholic, as that name distinguishes from
other Christian Societies of Heretics and Schismatics. Yet speaking of such
an Authority as they own in the Roman Church, which may prescribe against such
Appeals, so that its own only sense is to be presumed to be the Sense of the
Catholic Church, without particular convincing Evidences of the concurrence of
all in the Primitive Ages with them, this plainly requires that this Notion of
Catholic be certainly fixed, and fixed to a particular Judicatory, and this
Antecedently to a trial by the Primitive Records. For this prescribing against
an Appeal so rational as to the nature of the thing, must plainly imply an
obliging Jurisdiction, Antecedently to, and therefore Independently on, that
trial. And Jurisdiction can signify nothing unless the Judicatory to whom it
belongs, be also notorious, and notorious also Antecedently to the same trial.
So that in this way of proceeding it must necessarily be supposed that one
certain part of the Catholic Church can never cease to be Catholic, nor to
have a Jurisdiction over the Catholic Church diffusive. 18. These things
cannot be ascertained to a particular Church, so as to prescribe against the
now-mentioned way of trying it, without maintaining the Notion of a Catholic
Church Virtual. That is, we cannot be assured that a particular Church must
necessarily be Catholic, Antecedently to the trial of its Catholicism by a
recourse to the Primitive Records, but by being first assured that that
particular Church shall never fail of being Catholic it self, and that all
other particular Churches must approve of their Catholicism by their conformity
to that which can never be otherwise. So that on these terms the knowledge of
that one Church, and what is maintained by her, will be virtually a knowledge
of the Catholic Church diffusive, and what ought to be maintained by them.
Which things put altogether, do plainly make up that which our Adversaries mean
when they speak of a Catholic Church virtual. 19. This Notion of a Catholic
Church virtual, which may agree to one part of the Catholic Church diffusive
in contradistinction to all others, must imply such a Principle of Unity to
which all the rest are obliged, though that one part only do actually adhere to
it. 20. This Principle of Unity must not only be a Principle of Order, but of
Influence. For it is only by virtue of this Influence of this one Church over
all others that we can conclude that all others are obliged to be like it; and
it is only on this obligation of all other Churches to be like her that her
Title to the name of the Catholic Church Virtual is adaequately grounded. 21.
This Principle of Unity must be in the Governors of such a particular Church.
For our Adversaries will not have the Promises of the Spirit made to the
People, but to their Governors. So that the People can have no further Right
in them, but on condition of adhering to their Governors, who therefore must
be the first Principle of Unity. 22. This Principle of Unity must not depend on
the Authority of the Church diffusive. Otherwise that same Authority of the
Church diffusive might recall it, in which Case the adhering to it would not
prove a certain Note of Catholicism. 23. To apply therefore all this to the
Romanists, their whole pretense of being the Catholic Church is adaequately
grounded in that Notion of a Catholic Church virtual, whereby they confine it
to that Multitude of Christians who are united under a visible Monarchical Head
as a Principle of their Unity, to which, Jure Divino, all are bound to be
obedient. 24. This Monarchical Head to which they pretend a nearer interest
than others, is the Papacy.


The Summary.
Seeing therefore that nothing else can excuse their new Impositions but the
Prop. 1. 2, 3, 4.
Authority by which they are Imposed: And Seeing that no Authority can be
sufficient for their purpose to oblige their Subjects Prop. 6.
internally to believe what is neither Prop. 1, 2.
Necessary as to its matter, nor Prop. 3.
Evident as to its proof, Antecedently to the Definition of such an Authority,
but one that must be Prop. 7.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Infallible: Seeing* that they who do not in terms pretend the Popes
Infallibility necessary (and they who do so, already own what I would prove
that all must own according to their Principles) can make no Plea to
Infallibility, but from those Prop. 13.
Promises of the Spirit which themselves confess to have been primarily made to
the Catholic Church; and therefore though an Infallibility, even in Judgment,
were granted to belong to the Catholic Church, yet that can signify nothing
to our Adversaries purpose till they can prove Prop. 14.
themselves to be that Catholic Church to which alone those Promises
confessedly belong: Seeing evidently they are not the Prop. 15.
Catholic Church diffusive, and can therefore only pretend to the Title of
their being the Catholic Church Prop. 16.17, 18.
virtual: Seeing this Notion of the Catholic Church Virtual must necessarily
imply such a Prop. 19.
Principle of Unity to which all the Catholic Church diffusive is obliged to
adhere, as to a certain Standard of their Catholicism; and this Principle of
Unity, to which they can lay claim above other Christian Societies, is only the
Prop. 21, 23, 24
Papacy; and the Papacy, as a Principle of Unity, must be a Principle, not of
Order Prop. 20.
only, but of Influence; and that independently Prop. 22.
on the Judgment of the Catholic Church diffusive: All these things being
considered together, It will plainly follow, that, if this influential
independent power of the Papacy cannot be proved, all their pretenses to
Infallibility, or even to any Authority for deciding these Controversies
between us, must fall to the ground; and consequently all their particular
Decisions depending on them will neither be valid in Law, nor obliging in
Conscience, which will leave their Separation and Impositions destitute of any
pretense that may excuse them from being Schismatical.

This is therefore the Fundamental Principle on which all their Authority in
defining all other particular Doctrines must originally depend: And to show
that this Principle is insufficiently proved, will alone be enough to
invalidate all their other Definitions.

Secondly, Therefore to show the insufficiency of their proof of it. This Proof
must either be (a) from Tradition. And for this it is observable that, I. This
Notion of the Catholic Church Virtual, if it had been True, must have been
originally delivered by the unanimous consent of the Catholic Church
diffusive. We cannot judge otherwise unless we suppose a great defect, either
of the Apostles, in not teaching, or of the Church, in not preserving the
memorial of such a Fundamental Principle of their Unity. II. This Topic, of
Tradition delivered down by the Catholic Church diffusive, is the only proper
one for the Church who pretends to this Authority to prove it by. And till it
be proved, and proved to the judgment of particular Subjects, there is no
reason that She should expect that they should think themselves obliged in
Conscience to submit to her Authority. For Authority can be no rational Motive
to them to distrust their own Judgments, till it self be first proved and
acknowledged. And therefore if it do not appear, and appear to us from this
Topic, we can have no reason to believe it. III. This Notion of the Catholic
Church Virtual does not appear to have been ever delivered as the sense of the
Catholic Church diffusive: 1. Not of that Catholic Church diffusive which was
extant in the beginning of the Reformation. For then 1. The Greeks, and most of
the Eastern Christians professedly oppose it. 2. Many of the Western Christians
themselves, especially of the French and Germans, did not believe it. 3. The
Western Church it self Representative, in four, by them reputed General,
Councils of Pisa, Constance, Siena, and Basile, did not own the Popes Supremacy
as a Principle of Catholic Unity, but expressly by their Canons declared
themselves to be his Superiors, and treated him as being wholly subject to
their Authority. This was not long before the Reformation, and what they did
had not then been repealed by any Authority comparable to theirs.
2. Not of the Catholic diffusive Church in antienter times. 1. Not of the
Greeks ever since their Schism, as the Latins call it, under Photius. 2.
Before that time, even whilst they were united with the Latins, the Popes
Supremacy was disowned by them in that famous 28. Canon of Chalcedon, which
equalled the Bishop of Constantinople with him of Rome, and owned only an
Ecclesiastical Right in both of them for the dignity of their Cities (which, as
I have already Prop. 22.
warned, will not suffice for our Adversaries purpose) that I may not now
mention the Canon of Constantinople so expounded by the Fathers of Chalcedon in
place, and maintained by the Greek Emperors. It was also disowned by the
Council of Antioch against Julius; Disowned by the African Fathers, by whom the
only Plea the Popes had from the Council of Nice was found to be a forgery.
3. Not of the Catholic diffusive Church in those Primitive times, while the
Christians lived under Heathen Emperors: For, 1. The Romanists themselves are
unwilling to be tried by them, unless we will allow them to quote from the
Decretal Epistles, etc. which Learned Men among themselves do confess to be
suspicious, or manifest Forgeries. 2. Aeneas Sylvius, who was afterward Pope
Pius II. acknowledged that before the Council of Nice little respect was had to
the Bishop of Rome above others. Ep. 188. ad Mart. Mayer.
3. It appears by the freedom wherewith Pope Stephen was resisted by St.
Cyprian, and Pope Victor by the Asiatick Bishops, and by St. Irenaeus. And 4.
By the Canon of Carthage under St. Cyprian, which declared that no Bishop was
subject to another, but that every one was Supreme in his own charge under God;
not now to mention other passages in him to the same Ep. 72. ad Stephfratr.
5. By the weakness of the Testimonies alleged to this purpose, the Presidency
in the Region of the Romans in Ignatius, the powerful Principality in St.
Irenaeus, the Pontificatus Maximus Ironically derided by Tertullian, and the
one Bishop and one See in St. Cyprian, etc.




(b) For the Scriptures, themselves do not seem very confident of them without
the Expositions of the Fathers.

AN ANSWER TO Six Queries Proposed to a Gentlewoman of the Church of ENGLAND,
by an Emissary of the Church of ROME; fitted to a Gentlewomans capacity.

By HENRY DODWELL M. A. and sometimes Fellow of Trinity College near DVBLIN.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took, and are to be sold at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1676.

THE CONTENTS.
Q. 1. Whether any one going from the Church of England, and dying a Roman
Catholic can be saved? page 1. Q. 2. Whether they be Idolaters, or No? 39 Q.
3. Where was the Church of England before Luther's time? 48 Q. 4. Why all the
Reformed Churches are not United in One? 81 Q. 5. Why the Church of England
does not hold up to Confession, Fasting-days, Holy Oil, which we our Selves
commend? 94 Q. 6. Why was Reformation done by Act of Parliament? 110
ERRATA.
P. 34 l. 13 before vet add may. p. 42. l 13. after office add of. p. 58. l.
10. even for when. p. 92, l. 2. shows. p. 115. l. 8. for its r. his.

A PREFACE.
IT is of no further concernment to acquaint the Public with the occasion of
penning these Papers, than as the occasion might have an influence on the
design; and as it may be very useful to inform the Reader of the design, that
he may the better know what to expect in the performance.

He may therefore be pleased to understand that the following Queries were
tendered to a Gentlewoman of the Communion of the Church of England by a
Romanist, who had a design of seducing her; and that they were answered by
another hand, but on such Principles, or in such a way of management, as that
it did not give her the desired satisfaction. This gave occasion to some that
were concerned for her to show the Paper to some others in order to the
inviting them to undertake it in a way that might be likely to prove more
successful. By this means of communication it came at length to my hands from a
Person who first desired my Opinion concerning it, and then with some
earnestness importuned me to commit my thoughts to writing. Pursuant therefore
to this occasion, my design was in the first place to show from sound
Principles, that the Church of England is able to defend her Reformation from
the Errors of the Romanists, and to clear her self, as far as She is charged
with that Breach of Communion which followed thereupon, without giving any
advantage to the Non-Conformists to justify either their first Separation from
Us, or their Eternal Subdivisions from one aanother. Nor was I willing to
engage a Person in the Gentlewomans condition, in any Controversies that might
be spared without Injury to the merit of the Cause; or to debate even such as
could not so be spared, by such Arguments as might exceed her opportunities of
Enquiring, or her capacity of Judging, so as to oblige her to depend on the
conduct of others more Inquisitive and Judicious. But I have either waved
Authorities where I could debate the Case by Arguments less liable to Dispute,
and better suited to the understanding of a Gentlewoman; or where I have been
necessitated to insist on them, I have endeavored to make out their
Credibility by such Presumptions as are easy to be understood, and familiar in
parallel Cases, and generally granted as most Prudent, whenever unskilful
Persons find themselves obliged to acquiesce in the conduct of Persons more
skilful and Judicious than themselves. And I have purposely avoided all
citations of Authors, even where necessary, but such as were to be had, even in
English, and therefore might be consulted by the Gentlewoman her self.

I confess those other Reasonings fit for Scholars, as they are more subtle, so
they are withal more solid and conclusive. But withal I consider, 1. that those
things wherein Scholars have the advantage of unlearned Persons, are
principally such wherein Reading is absolutely necessary for their Historical
conveyance to us. It is certainly impossible for any to know what Doctrines
were maintained in the Apostles times (and consequently what Doctrines are
true, where they are supposed capable of no other Evidence of their being true,
but because they were so maintained) without insight into the several Histories
and Authors of the intermediate Ages through which they are to be deduced. But
for other things whose evidence of their being true, does not depend on such a
conveyance, the Reason of the thing is a sufficient Evidence; and of this every
equally rational Person, how little soever he be conversant in Authors, is an
equally competent Judge. And of this kind are many of the things here
mentioned, on which the stress of the Cause depends. The prudent Reader will
easily discern which they are, without my instancing. And 2. even in those
things which depend on Positive Revelation, and wherein the only means of our
Assurance of them is Historical Tradition; though it be indeed true that
Persons of little Reading cannot so competently assure themselves of the
writings and opinions of former Ages, without the assistance of others more
conversant in those Studies: yet since it is not the way of Prudent rational
Persons, therefore to conclude a thing to have been revealed by the Apostles,
because such Authors tell us that it was so; much less because such Authors
maintained it, as their own Opinion; but first to assure themselves of such
things on which the Credibility of such Authors in such matters may be made
clear to us, and then of those Expressions from whence they conclude such
Authors to have given Testimony to such a thing as an Apostolical Tradition: it
is plain that the judgment of these things depends wholly on the reason of the
things themselves. And therefore where Learned Men are agreed, as to their
accounts of the Authors and their Expressions; and where the only remaining
Dispute is, whether such undoubted Works of such Authors be competent for the
conveyance of a Tradition, and whether such Expressions, considered in all
their circumstances, come home to the Controversies at present debated; these
are things whereof common Prudence and a cultivated natural Judgment may as
well qualify Men to pass a Censure as the greatest Reading imaginable. And
this seems to me the best way in affairs of this nature, to wave such things as
were disputed among Learned men concerning their Historical Informations, and
only to found my reasonings on their unanimous Concessions. And most of the
Controversies betwixt Us and the Romanists are of that nature as to be capable
of this way of management. Now this way of not intermedling in the Disputes of
Learned men, but only proceeding on their unquestioned concessions is (as most
solid and satisfactory to the most accurate Learned men themselves, so) most
prudent and easy for those who are unlearned. And 3. even as to those other
things wherein I have indeed proceeded on popular Presumptions, yet considering
that these are the only reasons which God has fitted to the capacities of the
greatest part of Mankind, and that God is in his Goodness concerned to give
them reasons sufficient for their direction, and that the nature of the things
themselves is of importance to his Government, and that it is therefore
requisite that their direction be such as may not only excuse their mistakes,
but secure them of the Truth itself; I say, these things being considered,
there will be reason to believe that however fallible such general Presumptions
may be in their own nature, yet that God in his Goodness has so ordered the
matter in affairs of this nature, as that those who are guided by these
Presumptions may by the use of them be secured of the Truth it self in these
particulars.

As for the Method observed in this Discourse, it is such as I conceived most
clear and comprehensive in few words, and yet withal most accurate and
satisfactory to a doubting Person. For any one may be much more secure of a
Consequence when he is first secured of all its Principles, and he can much
better judge of them when he has an entire prospect of them in the natural
order wherein they lie, and wherein they are necessary for the deduction of
such a Consequence. Yet I have neither deduced my Principles too remotely, but
as near as I could find them clear and indisputable; nor have insisted on the
proof of those that were clear, any further than I conceived it necessary to do
so from the actual Disputes concerning the Consequence. And I have been careful
rather to prove than to confute; which I conceived to be a course, as less
Invidious to Adversaries (who should find themselves no further concerned than
as the consequences of positive Truths might make them concerned) so also more
satisfactory to a Person in the Gentlewomans condition. And in the whole I am
so little conscious of any design of displeasing any to whom Truth it self
might not prove displeasing, as that if any Adversary shall think it worth his
time to Answer what I have said, I am not my self afraid of provocation from
any thing which he can say in following my Precedent.

AN ANSWER TO Six Queries, etc.
Q.1. Whether any one going from the Church of England, and dying a Roman
Catholic can be saved.
I. IF by the words [ can be saved] be meant a possibility in regard of the
means, we then deny it. For we hold that such Errors are maintained in that
Communion as are in their own nature destructive of Salvation.

Such are 1. The Doctrines even of their Vid Consid. of Pres. Concern.
Church which oblige them to do mischief (as those concerning the Popes
Supremacy over Princes in Temporals, and concerning their Duty of prosecuting
Heretics) The For the Jesuits, see the Provine. Let^. and the Moral Theolog.
of the Jesuits; and for the rest of that Communion, the Jesuits defense of
themselves by way of recremination against others.
looseness of their Casuistical Divinity, countenanced by such Authorities of
Casuists as must needs influence such Persons as act conformably to the
Principles of that Communion; and their generally allowing a greater Liberty to
such persons as are desirous to reconcile their Vices with their hopes of
Eternity, by their licentious applications of those two Distinctions of
Precepts and Counsels, and of Mortal and Venial Sins, whereby they make most
Duties Counsels, and most Sins only Venial. Which danger is the more
considerable to an Ignorant Person, who for want of skill of her own, must in
Prudence, and by the Principles of that Communion, be obliged to trust such
un-secure Guides. 2. Not to mention the ill influence of several of their
Doctrines on the Lives of such as own them; the very imposing them as matters
of Faith, the Excommunicating and Anathematizing all that deny them, the
condemning Dissenters as guilty of Heresy and Schism (at least what they call
Material) the inserting several of their controverted Doctrines into their
Liturgies, so that they who cannot believe them, cannot veraciously join with
them in their Devotions, are Innovations from the liberty allowed in the
Primitive Church, wherein many (whom all own for excellent Persons and good
Catholics) never owned, nay some of them doubted of, or contradied such
Conditions of Communion; in sum, their unreasonable grounds of dividing
Catholic Communion, and their Uncharitableness to Dissenters, are Errors
dangerous to the Salvation of the Person owning and abetting them. For all will
own, even the Romanists themselves, that the Crime of breaking Catholic
Communion, where it is justly imputed, is destructive of Salvation. 3. Several
Abuses of that Church (I say of the Church, not only of particular Persons in
it) are so gross as that several of the most eminent and candid men of their
own Communion have owned them for such: such as Prayer in an unknown Tongue,
denying the Chalice to the Laity, Fabulous Saints and Stories still continued
in the best approved Ecclesiastical Offices, Martyrs canonized for bad Causes
conducing to the greatness of the Roman See, as Beckes for Example. Yet by the
Principles of that Communion, pretending to Infallibility, it is impossible
that any Abuse (in defense of which their Church is engaged, as She is here)
should ever be reformed, because it is impossible that a Church, so pretending
to be Infallible, should ever grant any such thing to be an Abuse. And many
more Abuses are by the moderate Persons of their Communion owned in the Court
of Rome, which yet by the power allowed to the Court over their Church, by the
general consent of the Church it self, cannot possibly be reformed. Seeing
therefore that the Church of Rome does thus oppose all possible Reformation of
Abuses of this nature; and seeing that, whilst these Abuses are not reformed,
many of them may justify a Separation, and most of them may do it when all
hopes of Reformation are professedly opposed; Catholic Peace on such terms as
may, not only lawfully, but commendably, be yielded, will be impossible. And
the abetting of such a Party as makes Catholic Peace on just terms impossible,
must needs be an Error destructive of Salvation. This is a mischief unavoidably
consequent to mistakes in a Society pretending to be Infallible.


As these Errors are thus of their own nature destructive of Salvation, so
going over to that Communion from another, does naturally involve the Person
doing so in the actual guilt of the Errors themselves:

1. Because Communicating (according to all) does involve the Persons
Communicating in the guilt of such Errors, at least, as are imposed as
conditions of the Communion, as these are in the Church of Rome. This needs not
to be proved against the Romanists who insist on it against Us as much as We do
against them. 2. This must especially hold in such as revolt from our Church to
theirs: both because such an embracing of their Communion is more an Argument
of choice and designed preference in such as leave others to come to it, than
in such as are born in it, and consequently must signify a more express
approbation of the terms of it; and because more explicit recantations of our
Doctrines are required even from Laick Revolters, than from such as are born in
it. 3. Because the Resignation of Judgment is expected more entire from Women
and Laics than from skilful Persons (who may in some Cases be allowed the
liberty of their own Judgments even by the Principles of that Communion) so
that Persons in the Gentlewomans condition, may by this means come to be
Responsible not only for the dangerous Doctrines of their whole Church, but
also for the Personal Errors of their Priests and particular Confessors: both
as they are (by the Principles of that Communion) allowed to be the Authentical
Proponents of the Doctrines of their Church to unlearned Persons (who are not
themselves qualified for Judging concerning them) as their Church is of the
Doctrines of Christ to the Learned; and as the same Rules of Prudence oblige
them as strongly to trust their particular Priests for Opinions, as they do
their Church for Doctrines of Faith, where they are still presumed as incapable
of Judging themselves.
II. If by this possibility of Salvation mentioned in the Question, be meant
only [ a possibility of the Event] notwithstanding the dangerousness of the
condition of Persons of that Communion, upon account of their being of it; then
the Resolution will depend on this: How far Errors of their own nature
damnative may not prove actually destructive to the Salvation of the particular
Erroneous Person, on account of the Ignorance and Unvoluntariness with which
the Person comes to be engaged in such Errors? For on these accounts it may be
conceived that the Errors may either not be imputed to her at all, or be
imputed in so low a degree as to become pardonable by the general Stipulations
and promises of the Gospel for the pardoning of Sins of Inadvertency and humane
frailty, which are supposed expiable by a general Care of fulfilling the
conditions of the Evangelical Covenant, together with a general implicit
Repentance of Sins unknown as well as known.

Now of these two ways whereby an Error damnative of its own Nature may be
hindered from proving actually damnative in the Event to the Erroneous Person,
it is only an Invincible Ignorance (that is, such as can be remedied by no
means that are in the power of the Person who is supposed Erroneous) that can
hinder all Imputation of her Error to her; and only such a degree of Vincible
Ignorance can suffice for extenuating the Imputation so far as to render it
pardonable in the way now mentioned, that is very hardly avoidable by the
Person, considering the frailty to which her condition in this Life is
obnoxious. So that for judging concerning the Condition of Revolters (which is
the Gentlewomans case) the Enquiry will be, what degree of Ignorance they are
capable of that may make their Errors Involuntary? that is, How far such as
they are may be capable of being Ignorant of their Duty to adhere to ours as
the true Communion? And for discerning this these following Particulars would
be fit to be considered. 1. That we are all agreed ( Romanists as well as
Protestants) that all sorts of Persons ( Ignorant as well as Learned) are
obliged to adhere to the true Communion (whatever that is) in
contra-distinction to others, at least, under pain of losing the Ordinary means
of Salvation, and consequently that comfortable satisfaction of the security of
their own condition, which they who enjoy the Ordinary means of Salvation must
needs be more capable of than they who are necessitated to repose their whole
confidence in Gods Extraordinary Mercies. 2. That all Persons being thus
obliged by God to embrace the true Communion, the Inducements to it must be
supposed sufficient for the conviction of all, and consequently suited to the
capacities of all who are thus concerned to receive Conviction. 3. Therefore
the Reasons being thus supposed sufficient for the conviction of all, there can
be no pretense of Invincible Ignorance for any but such as are Ignorant of
those Reasons, which cannot be supposed to be the case of Revolters.


Hence it follows, at least, that if Revolters act rationally, that is, Enquire
what it is they leave, and why, and accordingly follow their Convictions as
they ought, before their Change; they cannot be supposed capable of Invincible
Ignorance. So that the only imaginable pretense for rendering their Error
Invincible, must be the supposed Invincibleness of those Prejudices which may
hinder a well-meaning Person, acting conscientiously, from acting rationally.
Which muft be either 1. Opinions conceived obligatory in Conscience, hindering
the Persons embracing them from Enquiry, or following their own Convictions; of
which kind many instances may be produced which are favored by the Casuists of
the Roman Church: Or, 2. Precipitation in passing Sentence on a partial
Evidence, resolving on some particular advantage of one Cause without
considering its disadvantages, or the advantages of the contrary Cause, which
might possibly over-weigh it if impartially considered: Or, 3. An undiscernible
favor to one Cause more than another, whereby we wish it rather true in regard
of its greater compliance with some particular Interest or Affection which may
be thought Innocent, at least, if not commendable; which may the more likely
prejudice a well-meaning Conscientious Person, because it may indeed be Prudent
in some Cases, and it is not easy for a Person acted by it to discern when it
is not. But it is hard to conceive how any of these mistakes can be Invincible
in Revolters.


Not the 1. for 1. There can be no reason to take up such Opinions so
gratuitously, which are so Prejudicial to all Reasoning in general. 2. There
can be no reason to take them for granted as first Principles, without Enquiry,
(by which means very absurd Propositions may be taken up by very rational
Persons) where it is known that many skilful, and (as far as can be judged)
Conscientious Persons do, not only question, but, deny them. 3. Revolters from
us cannot as much as pretend any Prejudices of Education to excuse such
mistakes, seeing that among Us they find them utterly discountenanced. And as
they have thus neither Reason, nor (among Us) Authority that may induce them to
the belief of those Doctrines: So neither 4. Can the Authority of our
Adversaries be any probable inducement to persuade Revolters to the belief of
these irrational Doctrines: 1. Because the Romanists themselves are sensible of
the absurdity of these Doctrines, and their unserviceableness to their own
Interests when they have to deal with Persons whom they desire to seduce; so
that they are not likely to recommend such Doctrines to such Persons, as
Credible, on account of their own Authority. For if they should offer to
persuade such as they esteem Heretics of the unlawfulness of intermedling in
Religious Disputes, or following their own Convictions in them, it would be the
means to make it impossible to Proselyte such to their own Party. 2. If they
should be so imprudent as to persuade them of the Truth of these Doctrines so
prejudicial to their own interests in these Circumstances; yet the Person
tempted would need no other Argument to confute them than their attempts to
Proselyte her at the same time when they should teach her that it were unlawful
to hearken to any Reasons, or to venture her own Judgment concerning them, if
contrary to what at present she believed to be true. 3. Because if she must not
trust her own Judgment, but rely on Authority, it would be most Just, as well
as most Prudent, to trust the Authority of her own Party whom She has
experienced, than her Adversaries whom She has not; and therefore it could not
be reasonable to trust Adversaries contradicting the eminent Guides of her own
Party. 4. Because, at least, the Authority of Adversaries cannot be presumed in
Reason so great, with a Person not yet of their Communion, as to oblige her to
believe, on their account, what She her self thinks Irrational: Nay, rather
whilst it is questioned how far their Authority is to be trusted (as it ought,
in reason, to be considered before a change) and whilst the private Judgment of
the Person is trusted (as none else can be) in this debate; what in her own
judgment seems unreasonable would rather render the Authority suspected if it
should recommend it, than be it self believed for the Authority. Especially
considering 5. that to such a one as is not yet persuaded of the Credibility of
their Authority, this would afford a very prudent Argument for suspicion of
their Integrity, when they should urge her to the belief of such things whose
Truth they would not allow her liberty to examine by her own private Judgment.



Not the 2. for 1. It is hard to conceive a Person educated in the true Church
so ignorant of the advantages of her own way, as to be Invincibly persuaded by
those of the contrary, which upon a complete comparison are (by the Supposals
laid down in the beginning of this Discourse) so very disproportionable to
them, Vid. II. 1, 2.
and which may appear so by the Judgment of all who are concerned to judge
concerning them. 2. The fallacy of trusting such partial Representations is so
easily discovered by the most ordinary Experience and Prudence in human
affairs, and so universally acknowledged in all other ordinary occurrences, as
that it can hardly impose on any who proceeds with that Caution which all
acknowledge requisite in changes of great and dangerous consequence, as all
confess those of Religion to be. 3. Though a less advantage on one side above
the other might suffice, where the Person were not pre-engaged in either; yet
all confess the disturbance of a change, and the danger of venturing on an
unexperienced way, so considerable, as that they are not to be attempted on
barely Equal terms; which is a further warning for the Gentlewoman to be wary,
who is tempted to change from the Principles of her Education. 4. Supposing the
Person were so Ignorant as not to discern the advantages of her own Communion
above any other by her own observation, yet in that Case, it is on all sides
held Prudent to hear on both sides what can be said by them who are skilful:
which if She understand, and be able to judge of by her self, She must then (by
the Supposals now mentioned) see the advantage of her own side; but if She does
not, and so be necessitated, even in the choice of her Communion, to rely on
the conduct of a Guide, it must in that Case be much more Prudent to trust a
Guide whom She has experienced, than one whom She has not.


Not the 3. for 1. That Favor which is wholly derived from the inclination of
the Affections must needs be due to that side wherein the Person is already
engaged: both in Justice, as all generous Persons conceive themselves obliged
in all Cases capable of favor, to be favorable to their old Friends rather
than others; and in Prudence, because by this means the disturbance of a change
is best prevented. 2. If any Favor may be upon reasonable and well-meaning
accounts extended to one Cause above others: Either because the trial of its
Truth is easier, or because its Truth (if it may be proved) may be conceived
subservient to better purposes; as Mr. Cressy confesses himself favorable to
the Arguments produced for a Judge of Controversies, Exomolog. Sect. 2. Chapter
16.. 2. P. 162. Ed. 2.
because the decision of that Controversy alone would prevent the trouble of
Enquiring into the rest: yet even so (if this Favor be taken up and managed as
it ought to be by a virtuous well-meaning Person) it will not render the
mistake of a change Invincible. For, 1. This Favor (as far as it is
justifiable by reason) is to be had for the Religion wherein the Person had
been educated, and of which She is actually possessed, upon the same rational
accounts whereby that other Favor is conceived justifiable, and in as high a
degree of obligation; both as we are better able to judge of what we know
already than we can be presumed to be of a strange Religion; and as we can be
more confident in the practice of a Religion we have always maintained, than
we can in that which must suppose us convicted of having been formerly greatly
mistaken. 2. This Favor, as far as it may ybe conceived Prudent and Rational,
can only take place there where all other things are supposed Equal, which
cannot be supposed in the true way. 3. This Favor ought not to hinder the
Person from an Enquiry into the contrary Cause, unless the Evidence produced be
very certainly convictive, which also cannot be supposed in the way we are
speaking of. 4. This way of Favorable Presumption being the only way by which
the generality of the Vulgar are capable to Judge, and there being in the true
way inducements for all sorts of People; therefore it must be said that if this
way be managed impartially, that is, if all the Presumptions on both sides be
considered, this must bring them to the Truth.



Hence it follows, by the Principles of all Parties, that the Error of a
Revolter can hardly be presumed Invincible, and consequently not wholly
Excusable. So that for Judging concerning the Salvability of particular
Persons, it only remains to be enquired further, Whether they be capable of
such a degree of Vincible Ignorance as may be expiable by a General Repentance,
and the performance of all other Conditions of the Gospel in an Erroneous
Communion? And the Resolution of this depends on these Enquiries: 1. Whether
the Erroneous Communion (the Roman for Example) embrace the Doctrine of
Repentance so entirely, according to the Conditions required of it in the
Gospel, as that the Repentance performed in it may be presumed such as God will
accept? 2. What degree of Vincible Ignorance is expiable by a General
Repentance? For it is certain that all is not. 3. Whether a Revolter from our
Communion be capable of that degree of Vincible Ignorance which is so expiable?


The exact Discussion of these things is too large to be insisted on at
present, and therefore I shall only make application to the design of the
Question. I shall therefore show that what Possibility of Salvation soever we
may allow to Persons of the Roman Communion, yet it is no prudent ground to
encourage one who is not already of it, to revolt to it. To this purpose I
desire it may be considered, 1. That all the grounds we pretend to have for our
Charity, are rather Negative than Positive: rather our unsatisfiedness with
those Arguments which pretend to prove them actually damned, than any Positive
Convictions that any of them are actually saved. 2. That our Charitable
Presumptions are principally grounded on things impossible to be known by Us,
such as are the uncovenanted Mercies of God, and the possibility of Sincerity,
and even particular Explicit Repentance of the Error in the Person; so that it
is very easy for Us to be mistaken in our Charity, and we professedly choose it
as a mistake (if it should prove one) more pardonable than Censoriousness. 3.
That the Case, concerning which we Judge Charitably, is so very rare and
extraordinary, as that no particular Erroneous Person can be very confident
that it is her own: Nay, when we say, that their Errors are of their own Nature
destructive of Salvation, and that God has not interposed any General Ordinary
means for preventing their proving actually damnative in the Event, it will
thence follow that there are very just fears concerning the generality of their
Communion, and consequently many odds to one of the miscarriage of each
particular Person, which the Gentlewoman may do well to think of seriously. 4.
That the degree of Penitence which shall be accepted by God in a particular
Case, upon account of his uncovenanted Mercy, is very hard, if not impossible,
to be known by the Person concerned; so that even they who shall enjoy the
benefit of it in the other World, yet want the comfort of it in this; and
therefore can ground no confidence in any Practice undertaken on that
Supposition. 5. That this Security is very much more hazardous, and more
difficult to be Judged of, in Case of Vincible, than of Invincible Ignorance,
which has been proved to be generally the condition of Persons concerned in
this Enquiry. 6. That it is certainly more difficult in the Case of Revolters,
than of such who have had their Education in the Roman Communion.


These things I conceive sufficient to show that our acknowledgment in this
affair can afford no security for a Revolt, to a Person who seriously believes
Us, and is desirous to be Guided by Us. But if we be considered as Adversaries,
and consequently our Authority be considered only as cogent against our Selves,
especially when taken in conjunction with other things, as they usually argue
the Security of a change from our Singularity in Asserting the Salvability of
our own Communion, and our Agreement even with the Romanists in owning the
Salvability of theirs; whence they conclude it safer for an Ignorant Person to
venture her Practice in that way, in the safety whereof we are all agreed, than
in that wherein we are singular: In Answer hereunto I shall, at present, only
propose these things to the Gentlewomans Consideration: 1. That the
unreasonableness of this Argument has been sufficiently shown by others;
particularly She may consult Bishop Taylor's Letter, On 1 Cor. III. 15.
and the Dean of Canterbury's Sermon, which are in English, and are short and
easy to be understood by her. 2. That the Supposition it self is false here.
For they of the Roman Communion do as fully own the Possibility of the
Salvation of particular Persons in our Communion, as we do in theirs, both as
to the Principles whence it is deduced, (touching Invincible Ignorance) which
are granted as well by them as by Us, and even in express Confessions, when
they are pleased to speak their minds freely; of which I must needs say, they
are in Policy more cautious, for fear of giving Us any encouragement to
continue in our own Communion. If She doubt of this, She may, if She please,
consult of our English Authors (for in dealing with her I would not willingly
quote any others) Mr. Richworth Dialog. 1.. 7. page 38. Ed. Paris. 1648. Mr.
Cressy Exomolog. Sect. 2. Chapter 50.. 11. page 396. Knot in Charity Maintained,
Part I. Chap. 1.. 3, 4. compared with Mr. Chillingworths Answ. ib.. 3, 4. 3.
That this Candor of ours, when compared with their reservedness in speaking
their minds in this Case, is an Argument of our Ingenuity and fair dealing more
than theirs, which is a considerable Argument of trust to an Ignorant Person,
who finds her self obliged to trust the Authority of one of Us.


Q. 2. Whether they be Idolaters, or No?
I Must confess that I think the true Notion of Idolatry more difficult than is
commonly conceived, and to my Understanding not yet sufficiently explained. Nor
am I willing on this occasion to engage on that Dispute, both because it would
be too tedious, and because I think most of the mistakes already entertained
concerning it to have been occasioned by its having been stated in Disputes
with a design on some particular Adversaries. Not intending therefore to
determine positively, Whether the practices required by their Church as
Conditions of her Communion be necessarily Idolatrous? I shall only, at
present, recommend these things to a Person in the Gentlewomans Condition, whom
I suppose not so capable of examining the particular merit of the Cause, and
therefore it will be the most Prudent course for such a one to Judge by general
Presumptions.

1. That their Notions concerning the Saints are exactly the same with those of
the later Heathens of the Primitive times concerning their Demons then
worshipped; who yet were as certainly guilty of Idolatry (if the concurrent
sense of Primitive Christianity may be believed) as those accused of it in the
Old Testament, concerning whose sense we want those Records which might so
fully inform us. For it might have easily been shown, that those Demons were
confessed to be of an inferior Order, and not to require that supreme degree of
Worship proper to the Supreme Being; nay, that they thought them deputed by the
Supreme Being it self to convey his influences to Us, and our Prayers to Him.

2. That if the Heathens (notwithstanding that their Devotions were designed
for good Demons) were yet deluded by Evil ones, who were by God permitted to
interpose in their stead, because they paid that Relative respect to Persons
whom he had not declared it his pleasure to have so worshipped, and before
Images where they had no security from any promise of God, that none but good
Demons should presentiate themselves; How can the Romanists be secure that
they are not the same way deluded, seeing they have as little Security from
God's Word (which is the only competent means from whence they can in this Case
have Security) that it is his pleasure that they should be publicly Invocated,
and that he has given them the Office conveying his Blessings to Us, and our
Prayers to Him, and that he will permit none but good Spirits to presentiate
themselves at their Images?

3. That if Miracles pretended to be done at such Invocations be urged as
Arguments that God is pleased with them, this was pretended by the Heathens
too. And it may be, if it were impartially Enquired into, there would not be
greater and better attested Miracles for Invocation of Saints among the
Romanists, than for the Invocation of Demons among the Pagans.

4. That the same Arguments used by the Scriptures and Primitive Christians
against the Heathen Idolatries, are applied by the Protestants to the
Image Worship among the Papists now; and the same Answers given by the Papists
now, were then also insisted on by the Pagans.

5. That as these are very shrewd Suspicions of the dangerousness of this
Worship, so this danger is ventured on without the least necessity; there being
undeniable Security from the Primitive Records and Revelations of Christianity,
that God is pleased to accept such Prayers as are addressed to him through the
Intercession of Christ alone, so that there can be no necessity of having also
recourse unto the Saints.

6. That Image Worship is not countenanced by as much as any Venerable
Authority of truly Primitive Christianity, and that the Second Nicaene Council
that introduced it, was put to very disingenuous Shifts of counterfeit
Authorities for it.

7. That whatever may be thought of the Worship designed by the Roman Church,
yet even Mr. Thorndike himself (with whose Authority our Adversaries
principally urge us in this Dispute) does not deny that Idolatry is practiced
by the Ignoranter Persons of that Communion, which the Gentlewoman may justly
fear, lest it should prove her own Case.

8. That the Roman Church her self cannot be altogether excused from the
Idolatry of her Ignorant Communicants, seeing she puts unnecessary Scandals in
Ignorant Persons way, and is guilty of encouraging their Ignorance and
Carelessness of Judging in matters of Religion.

9. That the Practice of that Communion is genera^ly worse and grosser than
their Principles (as the Gentlewoman may inform her self of, in that impartial
account which is given of them by Sir Edwyn Sandys in his Speculum Europae)
which yet is observed and countenanced by their most Eminent Guides; so that
such as She cannot secure themselves from the danger of it.

10. That the Romish Church is by so much the more culpable in this Particular,
because She has not been content only to countenance and encourage a Practice
in so great danger of proving Idolatrous, so needless in it self, so destitute
of all Authority, either of Scripture or the Primitive Catholic Church (which
yet does so extremely stand in need of Authority;) but She has also imposed it
as a Condition of her own Communion (which She calls Catholic) so that they
who are willing to Believe and Practice all that was Believed and Practiced in
the Primitive Church, must now be Anathematized and condemned for Heretics for
refusing, to Believe or Practice any more, or to condemn those as Heretics who
do refuse it.

Q. 3. Where was the Church of England before Luthers time.
THE design of asking this Question is certainly to make our Confession of
Novelty (in such Cases wherein our Adversaries presume our Novelty so notorious
as that we our Selves cannot deny it) an Argument against Us; yet they
themselves are concerned in some Cases to deny its cogency. For even they
cannot deny that the deprivation of the Laity of the use of the Cup (for
Example) has been lately introduced into their Church by a public Law. If
therefore it may appear that our Church is Ancient as to all intents and
purposes wherein Antiquity may be available, but that the Church of Rome is not
so; and that in the sense wherein the Church of England has begun since Luther,
there is no reason to expect that She should have been Antienter, and that the
Justice of her Cause does not require it; and that the Antiquity upon these
Suppositions confessedly allowed to the Church of Rome is no Argument for the
Justice of her Cause: these things, I think, will contain a fully satisfactory
Answer to the Gentlewomans Question. I shall not at present engage on an
accurate Discussion of these Heads: but shall only suggest such short
Observations as may let her see how unreasonable our Adversaries confidence is
in this Argument, wherein they do so usually triumph. Therefore

1. Antiquity is indeed necessary to be pleaded for Doctrines, such especially
as are pretended to belong to the Catholic Faith, and which are urged as
Conditions of Communion. This is the Case wherein it is urged by Tertullian and
Vincentius Lirinensis in their very rational Discourses on this Argument. And
for this, I think, we may challenge the Church of Rome her self to instance in
one positive Doctrine imposed by us which She her self thinks not Ancient. I am
sure the Controversy is so stated commonly, that we are blamed, not for
Believing any thing ancient or necessary which is not, but, for not believing
some things which She believes to be so. And if She her self believe all our
Positives, and withal believes that nothing is so to be believed but what is
Ancient; it will clearly follow that She cannot, in consistency with her own
interests, deny the Antiquity of our Positive Doctrines. But for the other
Doctrines superadded by them, and denied by us, which are indeed the true
occasion of the present Divisions of Communion, we charge them with Innovation,
and are very confident that they will never be able to prove them, to the
satisfaction of any Impartial Person, either from clear Scripture, or from
genuine Antiquity of the first and purest Ages, which are the way wherein we
are willing to undertake the proof of our positive Doctrines, Nay, their
greatest Champions decline the trial, and complain of the defectiveness and
obscurity of the Primitive Christian Writers, which they would not have reason
to do if they thought them clear on their side.

These things therefore being thus supposed, That no Doctrines ought to be
imposed but what are Ancient; That ours are so by our Adversaries own
Confession, and that our Adversaries Doctrines are not so; and that in Judging
this, the private Judgments of particular Persons are to be trusted, as the
measures of their own private Practice (as it is plain that those Discourses of
Tertullian and Vincentius Lirinensis are principally designed for the
satisfaction of particular Persons, which had been impertinent if the Churches
Judgment had been thought Credible in her own Case, as a Judge of
Controversies; besides that even now this Argument from Antiquity is made use
of for convincing such as are supposed unsatisfied with her Authority, and
therefore to whom that Authority can be no Argument) which Liberty of private
Judgment is then especially most fit to be indulged when the distance is so
remote as it is now, when no Church has now those Advantages for conveying down
Apostolical Tradition in a Historical way as She had then: These things, I say,
being thus supposed, it will follow that we are wrongfully Excommunicated, and
therefore that we have no reason to fear that their Censures should be
confirmed by God. And though I confess every Error in the Cause of the Churches
Censures will not excuse the Censured Person for continuing out of her
Communion, when the Communion may be recovered by any Submission, how
inconvenient and harsh soever, if it be not sinful; yet that is the very Case
here, that we are not only wrongfully Excommunicated, but the terms proposed
for our restitution to Communion would be directly sinful, as has been shown
before. Vid. Q. I.. I.
Whence it will follow that we are excusable, not only in suffering our Selves
to be cast out of their Communion, but also in continuing out of it. But
because this is not our whole Case, who do not only abstein from their
Communion, but set up a Communion of our own, and maintain an Ecclesiastical
Body Politic distinct from theirs; our defense herein will depend on the
Justice of the Ecclesiastical power of those Persons who govern our
Ecclesiastical Assemblies. And therefore

2. All our concernment for Antiquity here will be, that our Bishops derived
their power from such as derived theirs with a power of communicating it in a
continual Succession from the Apostles. And this we do acknowledge true
concerning the Popish Bishops themselves, and do derive the validity of our
Orders from the Antiquity of theirs without any more prejudice to our Cause
than the Primitive Catholics did suffer by acknowledging the validity of
Baptism administered by Heretics. For the Succession of their Pastors is very
reconcilable with a supposed Innovation in their Doctrines (and certainly
themselves cannot deny that it is so, whilst they charge the Orientals with
Heresy, whom yet they cannot deny to have always maintained as uninterrupted
a Succession of Bishops as themselves) especially considering that the
Innovations we charge them with, of adding false and new Articles of Faith; not
of denying the old ones, do not in the least interrupt or invalidate their
Succession. This therefore being supposed, that the first Bishops of our
English Reformation received their power from such as had derived theirs by an
uninterrupted succession from the Apostles; it will follow that they were valid
Bishops, and if so, had the power of keeping Church Assemblies, and exercising
Jurisdiction in them, both for the Government of their present Charges, and
communicating their power to succeeding Generations. For nothing of this is
pretended to exceed the power of a valid Bishop. The charge of Heresy it self
cannot hinder the validity of their Orders either received or communicated;
though it may indeed, in the Judgment of them who believe them so, render them
obnoxious to Canonical Incapacities of executing them, and to Legal
Degradations, not from the Character, but from the actual Jurisdiction properly
belonging to their Office. But to such Canonical Incapacities and Degradations,
they will not deny even validly-Ordeined Persons themselves to be obnoxious,
and therefore cannot make that an Argument against the validity of our Orders.
And yet when this Charge of Heresy against our Bishops is not here to be Judged
by the pretenses of our Adversaries, but by the merit of the Cause; and
therefore is not to be taken f^r granted till it be proved.

That therefore which is indeed new in the Church of England, is, That though
her Positive Doctrines and Orders be Ancient, yet the Profession of her
Negatives; and the open Assertion of her Liberty from the Encroachments of the
Roman Court, and all her other Practices grounded on these Principles, were not
avowed by her Ecclesiastical Governors for several Centuries before the
Reformation. And in Answer hereunto I shall insist on the heads already
intimated. Therefore 1. There was no reason to expect that her opposition to
these Errors should have been Ancienter, though we should suppose the Errors
themselves to have been so. For there was no reason to expect that Errors
should have been discovered for some Ages before the Reformation, when there
was so great a want of that kind of Grammatical and Historical Learning which
is only fit to qualify a Person to Judge of Ecclesiastical Tradition; at
least, they were not likely to have been discovered by such a number as had
been requisite to maintain an open opposition. And if the Errors had been
discovered, yet it was not easy to expect success in holding out against the
Court of Rome, which was then so very powerful, and there was no reason to
expect such attempts from Prudent Persons where there was no probability of
success. And there was yet least reason of all to expect this opposition from
Bishops then, when no Bishops were made without the Popes consent, which he was
not likely to give to such as were likely to oppose him; when, after they were
made, they were obliged to be true to Him by express Oaths, as well as by their
Interests of peaceable continuance, or hopes of future preferment; when, at
least, it was impossible to resist their Fellow-Bishops, the generality of whom
were, in all likelihood, swayed by these Prejudices; when they had seen mighty
Princes themselves worsted in those Contests, and the extreme Severity of that
Court against Dissenters; when, lastly, differing from the Church of Rome in
any thing was counted Heresy, and Heresy was prosecuted with the extremest
Infamy (which must needs weaken the Authority of those Opposers with others) as
well as other Penalties of the Canon Law. Nor 2. Does the Justice of our Cause
require a greater Antiquity for our Negatives: For, 1. Our Negatives are not
pretended to be of perpetual obligation, but only for preventing the malignity
of the contrary Affirmative Articles to which they are opposed. And therefore
there is no reason to expect Formal Negatives opposed to Additional Articles
from the beginning, before the Additional Articles themselves were thought of;
nor to expect a Reformation of Abuses before there were Abuses to be Reformed,
seeing that in course of Nature these Negatives presuppose the contrary
Affirmatives, as a pretense of Reformation must also presuppose Abuses. And
therefore the pretense of the greater Antiquity of our Adversaries Errors and
Abuses is so far from prejudicing the reputation of our Negatives and
Reformation, as that it is indeed the best Argument of their Justice and
Seasonableness. For such Negatives as these, and such a Reformation, must needs
have been unwarrantable, if there had not been before Errors fit to be denied,
and Abuses fit to be reformed. Nor 2. Is it any Prejudice to the Justice of our
Cause, that these Errors were not opposed with formal Negatives as soon as they
appeared. For such Errors as these were usually first received as the Opinions
of private Persons before they were countenanced by Authority, and whilst they
proceeded no further, there was not that mischief in them, nor consequently
that obligation to oppose them, as when at length they came to be so
countenanced. For the Errors of Private Persons, whilst they are no more, are
not conceived so to oblige us to be of their mind, as that our silence should
in any Prudence be expounded as an Argument of our consent; and consequently
cannot be such a provocation to us to oppose them openly in our own Defense.
Nor 3. Is it necessary to expect that there should have been an open opposition
of them, even as soon as countenanced by Authority. For if even in the reproof
of the miscarriages of private Persons, Christianity obliges us to proceed with
all possible candor and modesty; we are certainly much rather obliged to
proceed so in dealing with Persons of Authority. We should give them time to
reflect, and we should bear with any Personal inconveniences that are not
directly sinful; rather than occasion those disturbances which are usually to
be expected from a public opposition of them. Nor is this forbearance more
agreeable to reason, than to the sentiments of those Ages who were generally
possessed with an excessive veneration for Authority, especially
Ecclesiastical; so that there is reason to believe that they would bear with
such Errors as long as the Abuses were tolerable, however otherwise
inconvenient. 4. Therefore that which makes these Errors intolerable to private
Persons in dealing with Authority (for of such I speak) is the imposing and
urging them as Conditions of Communion. And this might have been shown to have
been late, not before their Errors were defined and imposed in their Councils.
And therefore it was but lately that any public opposition was to be expected,
even from them who were in their Consciences persuaded that our Adversaries
Doctrines were Erroneous. And 5. When they were thus imposed, yet even then
private Persons were concerned, in Conscience as well as Prudence, to forbear
an open opposition, when there were no hopes of doing good, nay too probable
fears of prejudicing their Cause by it for the future: when upon their
opposition, they must have expected to have been condemned; when being
condemned, they were to be cast out of Communion; when being Excommunicated for
such a Cause, others would have been deterred by their Example, and their
credit must have been impaired by the Infamy incurred by the Canon Law then in
force, and their very condemnation would for the future mightily prejudice Men's
minds against the like attempts, when none could revive the like true Doctrine
without the dis-repute of being supposed to revive an anciently-condemned
Heresy; and when there were no hopes of being able to preserve themselves in
opposite Assemblies without Bishops to Head them, without whom they could not
maintain a Succession of Priests, nor consequently of Sacraments, and the like
employments and advantages of Ecclesiastical Assemblies; and when no Bishops
were likely to countenance such a design, whilst they were held in such
captivity to the Court of Rome by Oaths as well as their other Worldly
Interests, and when no Persons of a free ingenuous temper were likely to attain
the honor of Episcopacy.
These Reasons, with a very easy Application, may suffice to show that in an
ordinary way there was no reason to expect the Reformation sooner than it was.
And that there was no necessity sufficient to oblige God to interpose to raise
Men up to it Extraordinarily, will appear if it be considered 6. That it is not
every necessity of the Church that can oblige God to use such Extraordinary
means, but only such a necessity as must have destroyed a Church from the
Earth, that is, such a Society of Men wherein Salvation might be attained by
the ordinary Prescriptions of the Gospel. Now the prevalency of these Errors
does not oblige us to acknowledge that such a Church as this must have failed
even in those Ages wherein these Errors are supposed to have prevailed for some
Centuries before the Reformation: For 1. Though the Occidental Church had
failed, yet Christ might have had such a Church among the several Communions of
the Orientals. And I know no greater inconvenience, in this regard, in
admitting the faileur of the Occidental church, than what our Adversaries
themselves are obnoxious to, in admitting the like defection in the Oriental.
2. The prevailing of these Errors does not oblige us to deny an ordinary
possibility of Salvation according to the Prescriptions of the Gospel, even in
the Church of Rome it self in those Centuries before the Reformation: For 1. We
do not deny all Necessaries to Salvation, even according to the ordinary
Prescriptions of the Gospel, to have been taught even then in the Church of
Rome. The Errors we charge them with, are not of Defect, but Adding to the
Original Articles of Faith. And therefore 2. If it may appear that the sin of
Adding to the Faith was not (to such as were no farther accessory to it than by
continuing in the Communion of such as were really guilty of it) so imputable
ordinarily as to hinder the Salvation of such as were not otherwise wanting to
themselves in their own Endeavors; or at least not in such a degree as to
oblige God to interpose in an Extraordinary way for its Ordinary prevention:
this will be sufficient to show that (supposing those Errors so dangerous as we
do indeed suppose them, yet) God was not obliged to raise up, and maintain a
Communion in opposition to them for preventing the failing of such a Church as
I have spoken of, even in these Western Parts. And that this was so, may appear
from these Considerations: 1. That that skill in Ecclesiastical Learning, by
which our first Reformers were enabled to discover these Errors, was generally
wanting in the Ages before the Reformation, which might make their mistakes
then much more pardonable than now. 2. That the great mischief of these Errors
is, not so much the believing more for matters of Faith than really was so, as
the mischievous Consequence of doing so, the Divisions of the Church
necessarily following hereupon, the condemning of good Catholics for Heretics
and Schismatics, and excluding them from Communion, and hereby making the
peace of Christendom impossible on any just and tolerable terms, and Abuses
impossible to be Reformed. Which was not so imputable in those Ages when there
was no visible Communion to be condemned by joining with that of Rome; for as
for the even unjust Excommunication of particular Persons, Providence is not so
concerned as to interpose Extraordinarily for their prevention. This I say on
Supposition that the Waldenses and Albigenses, etc. were such as our
Adversaries represent them. If they were ootherwise, then among them there was
a Succession, for so long, of Churches holding our Doctrines before Luther. 3.
The Prudential Reasons now given might then generally excuse private Persons,
and all such as were not accessory to the guilt of introducing those Errors
(who were much the greater Part, and it is only for the greater Part that
Providence is necessarily concerned) from the guilt of not publicly Reforming
them. Yet even they are not so Excusable now, when the power of the Pope is so
much decryed, and there are so many Churches and Church Governors, under whose
Protection they may put themselves, and with whose Communion they may join, in
opposition to them.



3. The Antiquity allowed to their Errors on this Supposition is not sufficient
to Justify their Cause. For, 1. This Antiquity is not Primitive, but only of
some later Ignorant Ages. And the Unreasonableness of presuming Doctrines to
have been Primitive only, because they were actually found embraced by the
Church in later Ages, and of Prescribing on that account against a new
Examination of them by immediate recourse to the Originals, might have been
shown from the Fathers as well as from the Protestants. 2. The Antiquity of
those Notions of theirs, whereby they confine the Catholic Church to that part
of it in the Roman Communion (which might have been proved Fundamental to all
their other Doctrines, as they are made Articles of Faith and Conditions of
Communion) is contradicted by the Oriental Churches generally, who are as
ancient, and of as Unquestionable a Succession, as the Church of Rome her self,
and as ancient in teaching the contrary. 3. The utmost Antiquity which we allow
for their unwarrantable Doctrines is not so great as must be acknowledged (by
all that will Judge heartily) for several, which on all sides are acknowledged
to be Heretical, I do not only mean those of the Arians, but also of those
great Bodies of the Oriental Historians and Eu^ychians, continuing to this day
divided from the Roman Church; especially if they be really guilty of those
Heresies which are charged on them, and they must by Romanists be held guilty
of some, for Justifying their own Practice of condemning them. 4. Some of their
present Decrees (particularly those concerning the admission of the Apocryphal
Books into the Canon, and receiving Unwritten Traditions with Equal Reverence
with the Written Word of God) I doubt are not more anciently imposed, as
Conditions of Catholic Communion, than the Council of Trent it self, which was
since Luther. And both of these are very considerable, and especially the later
is very Fundamental to many of their other Decrees.



Q. 4. Why all the Reformed Churches are not United in One?
I Presume the design of this Question is not so much a Curiosity to be
Informed, either of the Politic Reasons which in the Course of Second Causes
might have an Influence on those Divisions which were occasioned by the
Reformation; or of those that might move God to permit Second Causes to act
according to their Natural Inclination, without the Interposition of any
Extraordinary restraint: but only to lay hold on that Advantage from our
acknowledged Divisions, which they may seem to afford to the Prejudice of our
common Cause. I shall therefore at present on^y propose such things to the
Gentlewomans Consideration, as may let her understand the weakness of this
Argument (how Popular soever) when they conclude us either mistaken our Selves,
or, at least, unfit to Guide others in the General Reformation; because we are
not all agreed in all the Particulars.

To this purpose it will be at present sufficient to insist on two things: 1.
That there is no reason why the Romanists should upbraid Us with this Argument,
and that it is their Interest, as well as ours, to Answer it: 2. That the
Argument it self is of no force as it is used by them against us.

1. There is no Reason why the Romanists should upbraid Us with this Argument,
and they, as well as we, are obliged to Answer it. For, 1. This very Argument
was by the Primitive Heathens made use of against Christianity in General, as
it is now against Us; and our Adversaries would do well to consider, whether
the same Answers pleadable by themselves now in behalf of those Christians, and
actually pleaded by the Apologists then, be not as pleadable for Us now. Nay,
this multitude of Sects in Christianity is even now the great Argument of
Irreligious Persons against the Truth of Religion; and I cannot believe that
any Piously disposed Person among them, can be pleased to allow the Argument to
be of any force in either Case, rather than want an Argument against Us. Yet I
believe they will never be able to show any Disparity. 2. If they speak, not of
Dividing Principles, but of actual Divisions, they, as well as we, have such
among themselves. They have Divisions betwixt the Irish Remonstrants and
Anti-Remonstrants, Molinists and Jansenists, as well as Thomists and Scotists,
and Jesuits, some of which Parties are Divided as well in Communion as in
Opinions. If they say that these Divisions are not the faults of their
Opinions, but the particular perversity of Persons, who will not stick to those
Principles which might keep them United, when their Interest inclines them
otherwise; the same will be pretended by every Dividing Party. If they think it
Injurious that their whole Communion should be charged with the misdemeanors of
Persons condemned by it; We all of Us plead the same, for there is no Party
that does not condemn all others in those things wherein they Divide from
themselves. 3. If they think our Differences concerning the Particulars we
would have Reformed, an Argument that the whole design of a Reformation is in
it self Suspicious and Uncertain; let them consider what themselves do or can
say, when they are, in the like way of Arguing, urged by Us with the several
Opinions concerning the Seat of Infallibility; whence our Authors conclude the
Uncertainty of the thing it self. It might easily have been shown, upon this
and the like Occasions, how they do, and are obliged to, acknowledge the
Unreasonableness of this way of Arguing. But the designed Brevity of my present
Employment only permits me to point at the Heads of what might be said, not to
enlarge on the Particulars. 4. It might have been shown that these Differences
among them concerning the Judge of Controversies, tend Naturally, and by due
Rational Consequence, to the dissolution of their Communion, a Charge which we
think cannot be proved against that which we believe the Right Communion.
2. Therefore, to show directly the weakness of this Argument, Let it be
considered 1. That whatever Differences they upbraid us with, yet they can
never prove that they follow by any Natural and Rational Consequence from the
General Principles of the Reformation, though possibly they may indeed have
been occasioned by that Liberty of Spirit which was absolutely requisite for
undertaking a design of such a Nature; as it must on all sides be acknowledged
possible that things really good may notwithstanding prove occasions of Evil.
And how very Unjust and Unreasonable it is to charge Personal Faults upon
Designs (that is in this Case the faults of Reformers upon the Reformation)
all, even the Romanists themselves, will acknowledge, in Cases wherein they are
dis-interessed. 2. That, this being Supposed, all that they can conclude from
these Divisions of the Reformers, is only, that no one Communion of the
Reformers has that advantage over the rest as that, Antecedently to all Enquiry
into the merit of the Cause,its Word is fit to be trusted as a Guide in
Controversies, to assure any of its own Truth, and of the Error of all
differing from it. This, if the Gentlewoman will observe, She will find that
their Arguments from this and the like Topics, only aim at. For because they
challenge such a Privilege themselves, they fancy Us to do so to; and that our
design is not to overthrow a Judge of Controversies, but only to translate that
Title from the Pope to Luther, or some others of our eminent Reformers, which
is far from our design. But this difference in Opinion does not in the least
prove, but that, upon a particular Enquiry into the merit of the Cause, one
Party may be found to have the advantage of the other, which is all that we
pretend to. 3. That this difference of the several Parties of the Reformation
in other things, is rather a very strong Presumption (for an Ignorant Person
who must conduct her self by Presumptions) that there is great reason for those
things wherein they are all agreed, and indeed is a greater Argument for the
Credibility of the Reformation in general, than for that of the Roman
Communion. For to a dis-interessed Person the Agreement of those is a more
valuable Argument for the Truth of what they say, who seem most of all acted by
the merit of the things, and least of all influenced by the Opinions and
Authorities of a few; and there can hardly be conceived a more considerable
Argument of their freedom in Judgment, than their actual difference in other
things. What therefore the Protestants are agreed in, seems more likely to be
the real sense of all that are so agreed upon an Impartial Enquiry; whereas the
Romanists are generally Influenced by a few of the Court of Rome, to whom the
rest do generally conceive themselves obliged in Conscience to conform. And
this advantage of the differences of Protestants for recommending their
Credibility in other things, above that of their Adversaries, to the Trust of
an Ignorant Person, will appear the more remarkable, if it be considered 4.
That they are not only agreed in general in the fitness of a Reformation, but
also in most of the Particulars to be Reformed. Indeed if they were only agreed
in general, that it were fit a Reformation should be, but agreed in no
Particulars; it might seem too probable a Suspicion, that it was not Truth, but
Faction, and the disturbance of the Public, that was their common design. But
that is far from being the Case here. 5. The Divisions of the Protestants in
Doctrine are not so irreconcilable as they may seem. The Harmony of
Confessions show them agreed in the Principal. As for the others, it is plain
that our Church of England does not think them worth contending for, whilst She
admits the several Parties into her Communion; and if other Protestants think
otherwise, yet She is not Responsible for them, because She is not of their
mind. The most pernicious Principles of all, which most Naturally tend to
Division, and which make the differences resulting from them most impossible to
be reconciled, are the differences concerning Church Government; and in that
our Church has Innovated nothing that should cause any breach, even from the
Roman, much less from any other part of the Catholic Church. And most of their
other Differences are no longer Irreconcilable than the Persons are likely to
continue averse to Reconciliation; but these Differences about
Church Government are so derived from the nature of the Things, as that they
may Cause Division among Persons otherwise well-meaning, and of a Peaceable
Disposition. 6. This Argument from the Divisions of Protestants, is principally
proper for such as are not actually engaged in any particular Communion of
them, and even to them ought to have no more force than that of a Prudent
Presumption, till the Person so Presuming might have leisure to examine
Particulars. But that seems not to be the Gentlewomans Case whom I suppose to
have been hitherto educated in the Church of England, and to have had
sufficient opportunities of Informing her self concerning us. For such a one it
would sure be sufficient that our Church is no way guilty of these Divisions,
whatsoever may be the Case of other Protestants.

Q. 5. Why the Church of England does not hold up to Confession, Fasting-days,
Holy Oil, which we our Selves commend?
IT is a mistake that the Questionist does suppose Us to commend Holy Oil.

However we think all the Instances here mentioned lawful and indifferent, and
so to be as obnoxious to the Prudence of particular Church-Governors, as other
things of that nature are by all acknowledged to be; and we shall conceive our
Selves secure of the Gentlewomans Communion, if She will not alter till our
Adversaries prove them necessary Antecedently to Church Authority, which is
more than they will as much as pretend to, at least, concerning some of them.

These things therefore being thus supposed, I shall propose two things to the
Gentlewomans Consideration: 1. That supposing We were to blame in omitting
them, yet this were no ground for Her to leave our Communion: 2. That as far as
they are not imposed by our Church, there was reason for their not imposing
them.

1. Supposing that we were indeed to blame in omitting these Ecclesiastical
Observances, yet this would be no sufficient ground to excuse the Gentlewoman
for leaving our Communion. For 1. No Indifferent thing, how imprudent or
inexpedient soever (and that is the highest Charge that the Churches mistake in
a matter of this nature, is chargeable withal, as long as the Object is
supposed of its own nature Indifferent) as long as it is not sinful (and
certainly it can be no Sin to submit for Peace's sake to an imprudent
Constitution) can excuse a departure from a Communion that is in other regards
allowable. 2. Whatever a Separation on this account might be in others, yet it
is less excusable in Subjects, who are no way Responsible for as much as the
Imprudences of such Constitutions, and who are certainly bound to bear with all
tolerable frailties of their lawful Governors, and who are not indeed so well
qualified for Judging concerning them, as neither being so well skilled in
Politics generally, nor being made acquainted with the secret Reasons of such
Constitutions, which might make that, which without them might seem strange,
appear highly commendable when considered with them 3. The Gentlewomans Sex,
and possibly her particular Condition, may not have those Advantages which many
others (though Subjects also) have for Judging concerning them.
These Arguments are so agreeable to the Principles of our Adversaries
themselves, as that they frequently make use of them for retaining Persons in
their own Communion. Which the Gentlewoman may be pleased to take notice of, if
any of her Tempters should Question them here, where they are disserviceable to
their Interests. But farther 4. Abuses in Governors acknowledging themselves
Fallible (though they be supposed indeed to be Abuses) are much more tolerable
than in those who do not; seeing there may be hopes that Governors,
acknowledging themselves Fallible, my in time be better informed, and may then
themselves reform what is amiss, without the compulsion of their Subjects;
which can never be expected from such as pretend to be Infallible. 5. If Abuses
of this Nature be conceived a sufficient Reason for leaving a Communion wherein
we are already, much more are they sufficient for hindering our access to
another, wherein as yet we are not. So that this same Reason, if it should make
her desert the Communion of the Church of England, would also hinder her
joining in that of Rome, in which the most Judicious and Candid Persons of that
Communion will acknowledge Abuses of the like nature.


2. As far as these Omissions are countenanced by our Church, there is reason
for it.

I say [ as far as they are countenanced by our Church] and therefore the
reason I shall give for such Omissions shall be as they are considered under
that Notion.

1. Therefore, for Fasting Days, I think they are imposed with the same design
of Religion in our Church as in that of Rome (for that account of Jejunium
Cecilianum, which is given by some, is not taken for the true sense of our
Church by her most genuine Sons) and that our Church is conceived to have as
much Authority to oblige her Subjects in Impositions of that Nature, so that I
cannot look on this disuse prevailing in Practice as countenanced by our
Church. If the Gentlewoman be so zealously concerned for them, I am sure She
may Practice them in our Communion, as well as in that of Rome, as several
others do. 2. Confession, even to a Priest, in order to his Advice and
Absolution, our Church, I think, owns as much as that of Rome; though we do not
make it a Sacrament, nor make it absolutely necessary, in an ordinary way, for
the remission of every particular Sin, that it be particularly confessed: That
the Practice of it is at present discontinued, our Church, I think, is not the
Cause. That She has not interposed her Authority to continue it, might have
been excused: 1. Because the thing is only of Ecclesiastical Right. For the
ancientest obligation to confess Sins, though scandalous in their own nature,
yet not become notorious (though that differed much from the Confession which
is now used in the Roman Church) was first introduced after the Persecution by
Decius, and that in opposition to the Novatians, as Socrates affirms; and this
was also afterward taken awav by Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, who
ordered every one to be left to his own Conscience in that matter, for which
other Bishops were so far from censuring him, that they followed him in it
almost in all places, as the same Historian tells us, and that omission was
vehemently pleaded for by St. Chrysostom, and obtained for no small time in
the Greek Church, whatsoever it did in other places. Whence it follows that She
has power, in discretion, to determine concerning its actual practice what She
thinks fit. 2. Farther, this being supposed, that it was in our Churches power
not to Impose it, that She did act prudently in not Imposing it, but rather
recommending it to the Liberty of private Devotions, will appear, if it be
considered that, if She had imposed it, She must necessarily have excluded all
such fr^^ her Communion as had not been satisfied with it; and it had not been
Prudent to have excluded Persons from her Communion for Indifferent things
avoidable by her, when She was complaining of the like Tyranny In the Church of
Rome, especially considering that it was also likely that the number was great
of those who were so dissatisfied with it.
However, if the Gentlewoman be desirous to Practice it for her own
Edification, I believe She may be furnished with Persons fitted for it in the
Church of England. 3. As for the use of Holy Oil in any of the pretended
Sacraments, we do not so far condemn it, as to refuse Communion with other
Churches that use it; nay, we our Selves retain it as a decent Ceremony of
Consecration in the Coronations of our Princes. Only we again conceive it 1. A
matter indifferent in it self, and not Essential to those Offices, because of
the differences in the Church concerning it. 2. This being supposed, our Church
does no way conceive it Prudent to continue it: both because it was the design
of the Reformation to reduce the Sacraments to their Primitive Simplicity, that
so Persons might ComCommunicate in them on the same free terms as then; and
because the Errors of those who made them Essential to the Mysteries, were of
great Consequence, and very fit to be so discountenanced by a discontinuance of
the Practice it self.
If by the Holy Oil here mentioned, be meant particularly their Sacrament of
Extreme Unction, ^. Our Adversaries cannot prove a Sacramental Unction for the
first Centuries. A Miraculous one they may, but seeing themselves confess the
ordinary Use of the Miracle to have ceased, there is no necessary reason
obliging our Church to continue the external Ceremony. This is at least
sufficient to show that it is in the Churches power to continue it, or not.
Which being supposed, I add, 2. That even in regard of the benefit expected by
it, whether of Bodily recovery, or remission of sins, or Spiritual strength
against the Agony of Death, the Gentlewoman, nor any other Subject of our
Church, can suffer no loss by our Church's discontinuance of it. For all these
things are as certainly attainable by the means continued in our Church from
Unquestionable Apostolical Tradition (as the Prayers and Absolution of the
Priest and the blessed Sacrament) as they could by the Unction it self; so that
I cannot perceive how a devout Person need to be concerned for the want of it,
on the terms now mentioned. Especially considering 3. That in the way it is
Administered among them, to Persons past hopes of recovery, and usually past
sense of their own condition, it cannot be conceived in any rational way,
capable of Edifying the Devotion of the Person concerned, and no other way is
suitable to the Dispensation of the Gospel. And supposing it no Sacrament,
there is no reason imaginable why the Prayers of the Assistants for such a
Person may not be as acceptable to God, without the observation of this
external Ceremony, as with it. And as upon these concessions its Continuance
must needs appear unnecessary, so 4. It would be inexpedient to countenance the
Errors consequent to the Opinion of its being a Sacrament, which are of so
weighty a concernment, by continuance of a Custom which may so easily be
spared. These things may suffice at present for satisfying the Gentlewoman of
her little concernment for it, without engageing on the Dispute concerning its
lawfulness.



Now this Fundamental Principle of our Churches Proceedings in these and the
like Particulars, concerning the power of the Church for Innovating from
Ancient Customs, not only by Adding new ones, but Abrogating old ones, might
have been proved not only from the Principles, but from several Practices of
the Roman Church her self.

Q. 6. Why was Reformation done by Act of Parliament?
REformation may be considered two ways: Either 1. As preached and imposed
under pain of Spiritual Censures, and of Exclusion from the Communion of the
Church, and a deprivation of all the Privileges consequent to that Communion.
And this is certainly the Right of the Church, and was accordingly practiced by
the Church in our English Reformation: 2. As Enacted as a Law of the Land, and
consequently as urged the same way as other Laws are, under temporal Penalties
and external Coercion, and encouraged by temporal Advantages. And this is
undoubtedly the Right of the Secular power. And this was all in which the
Secular power did concern it self in the Reformation.


What I can further foresee in favor of our Adversaries is, that 1. The
Secular Power ought in Conscience to be herein advised by the Ecclesiastics:
and 2. That though external obedience may be paid to the mistaken Decrees of
the Secular power following the mistaken part of the Ecclesiastics, yet the
Obligation (in Conscience and Right) of such Decrees must be derived from the
Justice of the Churches proceedings in advising the Magistrate* so that no Act
of the Magistrate can make amends for any Essential defect in the proceedings
of the Church. But the only Effect of the Magistrates concurrence in that Case
is, that what is already performed without Heresy or Schism in the Church, may
be by that means settled in such a particular Commonwealth without Schism or
Sedition in the State. And therefore seeing they suppose that at the
Reformation the greater number of the Bishops then being, were overawed and
deprived of the Liberty of their Votes by the Secular Magistrate, and it is the
nature of all Societies to be swayed by the greater Part; therefore they may
think it unreasonable to ascribe the Reformation to the Church of England, but
only to a Schismatical part of it; so that the Magistrate having attempted this
Reformation without warrant from the Church, they think they do well to call
our Reformation it self Parliamentary.

To this therefore I Reply, 1. That the use we make of this Topic of the
Magistrates concurrence, is indeed no other than to clear our Reformation from
being Seditious, which is ordinarily charged on Us by our Adversaries, and much
more ordinarily on the foreign Protestants. 2. That for clearing the very
proceedings of the Magistracy from being Heretical or Schismatical, to the
Conscience of the Magistracy it self, it is sufficient that the Magistracy gave
its Assistance and Protection to no other Church, but such as, at least,
according to the genuine Dictate of their Conscience, was neither Heretical nor
Schismatical. But this Justification of the private Conscience of the
Magistracy is, I confess, a thing we are at present not so necessarily
concerned for; and therefore 3. We grant farther, that for satisfying our own
Consciences of the Justice of these proceedings of the Magistracy, it is
requisitethat we be satisfied that they were Advised by that part of the
Clergy, whose Advice we conceive they ought to have followed. So that if this
may appear in the Case we are speaking of, this, and this alone, will be a
sufficient Vindication of the Magistrates proceedings to the Consciences of its
Subjects. 4. Therefore the Determination of the Justice of the Advice followed
by the Magistrate, may be resolved two ways: Either from the merit of the
Cause; or from the Legal Authority and Right the Persons may be presumed to
have to be consulted on such occasions. As for the former, it is in the present
Case the principal Dispute, Whether the Reformation undertaken by the
Magistrate, was right or not? and therefore very unfit to be relied on as a
Presumption to prove the Magistrates proceedings Irregular. The later therefore
only is proper to be insisted on here. And it consists of two charges: That by
the Laws of the Land the Magistrate ought to have been advised by the Bishops
then possessed of the several Sees; and That in advising with the Clergy,
whoever they were, he ought to have allowed them the Liberty of speaking their
minds, and to have been swayed by the greater part. These things are conce^ved
so necessary, as that the Magistrate not observing them, may be presumed to act
as no way influenced by the Clergy. Which is the Reason why they call our
Reformation, wherein they suppose them not observed, Parliamentary.


1. Therefore as to the Legal Right of the Popish Clergy to advise the Secular
Magistrate, two things may be Replied: 1. That this Legal Right may be
forfeited by the Persons by their Personal misdemeanors, and of this forfeiture
the Secular Magistrate himself is the proper Judge; and that this was exactly
the Popish Bishops Case at that time. 2. That the consideration of this Legal
Right is of no use for satisfying the Consciences of their Subjects, which yet
is the only use that is seasonable for this occasion.


2. As for the Canonical freedom to be allowed them in advising, and the
obligation of the Magistrate to follow the advice of the greater part: These
Canonical Rights can only satisfy the Consciences of their own Communion, but
cannot be pretended necessary to be observed, where there are different
Communions. For 1. The Romanists themselves never allow that freedom to Persons
out of their Communion, as was plain in the Council of Trent, and still appears
on all occasions. 2. Especially in particular National Churches, as ours was,
they themselves will not deny that the greater part may prove Heretical, and
therefore likely to prevail by Plurality of Votes; in which Case themselves
would notwithstanding think it unequal for the Magistrate to be swayed by them.
3. This has always been the Practice of the Church, and the Catholic
Emperors, never to allow any Canonical Right to the Assemblies and Censures of
Heretics, as Athanasius was restored first by Maximinus Bishop of Triers, then
by Pope Julius, after that by Maximus Bishop of Jerusalem, and at last by the
Emperor Jovinian, without any Canonical revocation of the Synods that had
condemned him. Many Instances of the like Nature might be given. 4. The Popish
Clergy had given the first Precedent of this Liberty themselves, in refusing to
admit of the Canonical Appeal of the Protestants from the Pope to a free
General Council.


FINIS.

