Tho. Dangerfield's ANSWER To a Certain Scandalous Lying Pamphlet, Entitled,
Malice Defeated, OR, The Deliverance of ELIZABETH CELLIER.

Together With some Particular Remarks made from her own Words, an
Acknowledgment of Matter of Fact, and a short Compendium of the Principal
Transactions of her Life and Conversation.

All which are Wrote by the Hand of Tho. Dangerfield, A Lover of Truth
Vndisguis'd.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at Randal Taylor's. 1680.

Tho. Dangerfield's ANSWER TO Elizabeth Cellier's Scandalous Pamphlet.
THis Age, by the unwearied Diligence of the Romantic Handicraft-Women, has
Produced diverse Monsters of both Sexes, or rather I may more properly call them
Devils in that Mischievous Dress of Humane Shape, who to blear the Eyes of an
Unthinking Crowd, still matter not to offer the greatest Provocations to the
All-seeing God, (who either has, or in his good time will discover to the World
the bottom of their Mischiefs, not to be fathomed by Humane Nature) by dressing
their Diabolical Contrivances in the charming Shape of Religion, hopeing if
their Designs fail, that the pretenses of Piety may render them fit Objects of
Pity; and if successful, confirm their Devices. Thus is the true Worship of
God abused by those Miscreants, and Christianity used as a Mask only.

In short, Mrs. Elizabeth Cellier is a Woman that has forfeited her Fidelity to
her Nuptial Bed, and when a Woman has once lost her Modesty, she is fit for all
sorts of Mischief, and there ought to be no farther Credit given to her; and
therefore I hope the Eyes of the People are not to be opened now by such an
Operatrix as she, or their Apprehensions to be Infatuated by a sort of People
who wholly devote themselves to the Service of Hell, and think to gain Heaven
by the deserts of mischief and Villainy. A Virtuous Life, full of Humility and
Repentance, might make some Impression in the Hearts of good People, but this
Woman and her Associates are a sort of Catterpillers, whose whole Study it is
to Canker and Destroy the very Root of the Nations happiness. And while they
seem to give a dutiful adoration to Sovereignty, make it their business to
Depose and Rob their Native King of his Life, and deprive his best Subjects of
their Hereditary shares of Right and Property, clandestinely designing no less
then a Total Destruction of three Flourishing Kingdoms. Yet after all this,
when once discovered, to the height of Impudence still with a daring and
reflecting Contempt both of the King and his Ministers, they publish
Vindications, and impute their Punishments to Malicious Prosecutions, and
pretend to acquit themselves from Treasons of the highest nature, by a
continued series of Confident Justification, still acting the same or worse
Crimes if possible.

So far do these true Offsprings of the Devil, the Father of Lies, outvie and
overreach those their dull Contrivances acted in the days of Yore, that they
are past Parallel, so that I may safely say that some of their Collatteral
Practices, (so lately experienced in these Kingdoms) may Challenge Hell for
Wickedness, and the Devils themselves for Subtilty.

Yet these are the Poor Distressed Catholics, and as they boldly call
themselves Royalists, who to accomplish their Designs, can Insinuate, Court,
Cringe, Lie, Wade through whole Oceans of Perjuries, -- Subornations, etc. Nay
they can assume any shape, and are bound to do so for the good of the Cause,
nay and such little things, as audaciously branding the Peers and Princes of a
Nation with false and scurrilous Reproaches: A fine way to repair the losses of
a distressed Midwife: yet these are the People who pretend to stand up for the
King and Country, and Hypocritically assume the Reputation of being concerned
for the safety thereof, when they of all Enemies are the most dangerous, and
could they but lull us into a new security, by such Stories and Fables of their
Innocence, as these are, which they daily publish, I fear me, we should soon
feel the fatal effects of their Sorcery.

To make which more apparent, I must now fall to unravel a certain Bottom of
Lies, spun to the best advantage by the hand of Impudence, which is Entitled,
Malice Defeated; OR, The Deliverance of Elizabeth Cellier.

WHich Book I have Perused, and find my self therein displayed so much beyond
the life, Her so much short of her true Colors, and such material Subject
matter fit for my Reply, that I have taken the Pains to draw from it, so far as
concerns my self, these following Observations, and shall confine my self to
most of her own words, which (as she says) were wrote by her own hand, (which
may pass well enough among the rest of her Lies) but, as I am well satisfied,
was Pend or rather Scribled, by the hand of a certain Lousy Dominican Friar,
now under the Sentence of Death, being in Newgate, and Convicted as such, and
for being in the Plots by the Names of Anderson, alias Munson, whom I do not
question but to see hanged by the same Names one day, with many others of the
same Tribe.

The first I begin with, is matter of Fact, such as she has been forced to own,
and to use in her Vindication, which is (viz.)

page 4. About the 10th. of April (79) I went to the Grate at Newgate to speak
with him, (viz. my self) he was in Irons, and said his Name was Willoughby, etc.

page 7. That I received from him some Articles drawn against Captain
Richardson, and thereupon gave him Half a Crown.

That I sent him at several times after by my Servant Sixteen Shillings, and
Money to pay his Fees that day on which he was Discharged.

page 8. That I paid sixteen Shillings more to fetch a Coat from Pawn.

That I paid Dangerfield's Fees in Newgate, (which amounted to near 6. l.) and
removed him afterward to the King's Bench, in order to a discovery of one
Stroud (which cost three pounds.)

page 10. That the papers relating to Stroud's business, were found between the
Pewter in my Kitchen, etc.

page 12. That I Collected some Money, and did pay five pounds for him, and the
same day he came out of Prison I gave him ten Shillings more.

page 13. That I offered to get him an Ensigns place under the Duke of
Monmouth, or an Employment to go to Sea.

That I gave him a stuff Suit and other necessaries, which cost about three
Pounds ten Shillings, etc.

Thus we have her Bill of Charges according to her own reckoning, which
amounted to Nineteen Pounds fourteen Shillings Six Pence; a very extravagant
piece of Charity to a Person that she never knew or saw before in her life, it
was Pity and Compassion in a singular degree, to cull me out for the Object of
her profuseness, merely for the sake of my Tears and Beging, as she pretends;
no, no, Mrs. Elizabeth, the World is not yet so stupid to believe you were so
mightily enamored with my Disconsolate Ejaculations, out of mere and pure
Charity; Men of reason will easily believe you had other ends, other aims than
that of Charity, and that out of your smart insight into Men, for which you so
much commend your self, you had another kind of prospect of my Phisiognomy and
Lineaments, beyond the Spell of Dominican Mumping, and far beyond the reach of
cold, dull, and insipid Charity.

And therefore after I was once in a condition, by means of your ill-boasted of
Charity, to appear upon your intended Tragic Stage, I shall give the Reader
from your own words a taste of some of your public Employments which you were
pleased to confer upon your Servant so munificently Rigged and Launched into
the World by your innocent Charity: You say, to use your own words,

page 13. That he would often bring me News of the great Designs of the
Factious, and that they had drawn Forces into the City while his Majesty was
Sick at Windsor, with intent to Subvert the Government.

page 14. That many of the Old Rump Officers were new rigged, and had Pensions
paid them by the Gentlemen of the King's Head Club.

That Commissions were giving out by the Names of the Keepers of the Liberties
ofEngland, and that he was promised one among the rest, I encouraged him to go
on, and gave him Money to defray his Charges, etc.

That he Writ down at several times, that which was found by Sir William Waller
in my Meal Tub.

That I went to the Lord of Peterborough and acquainted him with it, and he
presently handed us to the Duke, (of York) to whom Willoughby delivered the
paper.

That about the latter end of September, Dangerfield brought me Stories of the
great preparations of the Faction, That they did publicly own their.
Treasonable Designs.

That Goodwin and Alsop had made great Collections among the Brethren to carry
on their Rebellious Designs.

That Sir William Waller had three Hundred Horsemen ready for Action in an
Hours Warning.

That the City was ready to rise, and expected only the Word from the
Confederate Lords, etc.

Then says she, these Discourses being general, made me the easier credit him
in particulars, so I encouraged him to go on, gave him more Money, and bid him
observe their Actions and Designs, etc.

Lord, Gentlemen, what had this Lady of the Wicket to do to be so watchful for
the good of the Commonwealth, what did Politics and State Affairs concern
her? As if the Kingdom had been in labor of a By-blow, or like the Vanquished
and near-conquer'd French, that now the English in the same distress, had
wanted another Joan of Arque, to deliver them by the dint of her care and Zeal,
as the other hair-brained Amazon had endeavored to do by the Dint of her
Sword; certainly had such designs been really on Foot, the King had better
means of discovery than by such a Female Intelligencer as Mrs. Elizabeth
Cellier, and therefore notwithstanding all her charitable Clothing of me, the
Naked Truth is still the Naked Truth; that all the strange News, and formal
Stories which she pretends I brought her from time to time, were no more than
the Forgeries, which the Lady Powis, her Midwife and my self Contrived, so that
I cannot say but that the Woman did bring forth with my help, but it was
nothing but the Embryo of an ill coddl'd Plot, and was the very Bastard that
was afterward found almost stified in the Meal-Tub. Those Surmises and
Accusations which she endeavors to fix upon honest Gentlemen, about Horses,
Arms, and Money, (out of her Zeal to his Majesty's Service, if any body will be
so mad to believe her) were those very individual Lies, hatched as I said
before, and of which the Meal-Tubb was so miraculously brought to bed, and what
I was Charmed to insist upon as often as I waited on the King, as appears by my
charge against them Both in my first Narrative; Truth far more probable, than
any of the foregoing Female Tittle Tattle of Mrs. Elizabeth Cellier.

Page 14, 15. That Willoughby got drunk, and picked a quarrel at the Rainbow
Coffee-House, with one Kenestone, about Sir Thomas Player, and thereby made
himself obnoxious; so that having lost the hopes of obtaining a Commission
himself, he sought to get one by means of others, and then swore God dam him,
now the Papists would give him no money, he would go to the Presbyterians, and
they would give him enough.

How far she thinks this may amount to her excuse, I know not; but as well
living as dying, I must declare in the presence of God, (my quarrel being first
by accident with that Gentleman, Mr. Kinastone, who I would now be glad to
know) that the Countess of Powis, as well as her self, were the persons that
put me upon the Tumultuous part of it, and did it on purpose not only to baffle
the Electing that worthy Member of this present Parliament, Sir Thomas Player,
but also to create a mutiny, or uproar in the City: for look ye, Gentlemen, to
what purpose else should I leave a Challenge for Mr. Kinastone at the
Coffee-House, have 30 men, or upwards, ready Armed with Trunchions, Pistols,
Poinyards, etc. had it been my quarrel only, and I so extremely poor as she
expresses: where should I have raised 25 l. or upwards to buy the said Arms, or
to gratify so many people? But the question is easily answered: I had the
money from the Lady Powis, and her self, who were purely my Abettors and
Encouragers of the Action.

page 15. In the beginning of October, he pretended he understood that several
Treasonable Papers, importing the whole design of the Factious, were in a House
at Westminster; and that if he could get a Warrant to search the House, he
doubted not but that he should lay open the whole Conspiracy.

That he went to his Majesty to pray a Warrant.

That the King referred him to Mr. Secretary Coventry, who suspected him and his
shallow Contrivances, but I being induced to credit him, did upon his
complaining that he was denied a Warrant, advise him to go by the Custom-house
way; which de did, and then seized the Papers which were put there by himself.
etc.

Never did Midwife tell a Story more sillily than this pretended Wit of a Midw.
has done, certainly she either wanted a Cup of Hippocras to refresh her memory,
disturbed with continual watching for the good of the Nation, or else she had
drowned her brains in more provocative Tent; for, Gentlemen observe, she says
but just before he Swore God dam him, now the Papists would give him no money,
he would go to the Pr^sbyterians, yet says almost in the same breath, I being
induced to credit him, did adv^se him to go by the Custom House way, etc.

Here is a Tale so inadvertently told, that one would think Mrs. Eliz^beth had
never told a tale in her life before, but that all the World knows that
Gossiping is so much the soul of Midwifery, that it is impossible for the
Profession to subsist without it. But certainly the Devil owed her a shame when
she told this story; for any man would think it a strange neglect in
self-preservation, (a thing to be preferred before all others) should one
Person tell another that he had attempted to rob him of his life, and that he
still intended the same, and yet that after so fair a warning he should still
be embraced and entertained as a bosom-friend, and as strong a credit as before
given to his words and actions; for, by way of application, Gentlemen, the
intent of this blind story, as I conceive, was only to show you, that the
falling out of Lovers is the renewing of Love. She says we fell out, but yet
says we fell in again, and so She hugging the Presbyterians friend, to do the
King service, we became hand and glove once more, which indeed could not well
be avoided; for she knowing of the Treasonable Papers, where they were to be
laid, and what was to be done with them, and not liking the Secretaries
mistrust, advised me to the Custom-house way. And thus you see what a strange
way of clearing her Innocence this Mother Midnight has found out, by confessing
almost the half of what she was accused with; so that now, Gentlemen, let me
have but fair play, since Mrs. Elizabeth Cellier has owned one part of what was
charged against her, let her have her due, that is, let her be believed so far,
and then be so kind as to let the Oaths of 17 or 18 Witnesses besides my self
pass only for the rest. I wonder what some men think, to find so great a
Criminal owning in a Vindication those very Crimes for which she was so calmly
acquitted! she wanted advice before she published her Labors, for neither she,
nor her Rampant Dominican, have that same knack of disguising Truth which they
think they have.

Well, it appears then by her story, that the Papers were conveyed into
Colonel Mansell's Chamber; but who put them there? why, she says in all
likelihood it was my self. Truly she guest very right, and the reason was,
because she knew it to be so. But who was I? Why, a certain Villain that at
the same time she entertained in her house, upon an inducement to credit me.
Where was now the jealousy of womankind, to trust a quarter reconciled Enemy
with fresh advice, upon such a piece of trepanning fraud?

Thus the Confederacy continued: for though I had sworn a desperate oath, yet
she was induced to credit me still.

Now to the Meal-tub, she confesses the Plot was put in her Meal-tub: better
two dead Plots then one living Rat in such a place: But how came it there? why
I my self gave her a Paper, she gave it her Maid, and the Maid put it into the
Meal-tub; who discovered this Plot? not Mrs. Elizabeth you may be sure, that
was none of her business to do; and yet no wary Woman, but having received a
paper from such a Villain as I, that was to be so strangely concealed, but
would have taken the Paper out of it is Mealy Coffin, and viewed it, and finding
it of such dangerous Consequence, would have carried -- Meal-Tub and all to
Court, had the Service of His Majesty been the aim of her double diligence;
but it was for the Service of her Minions, the Roman Catholics, an ugly Cub of
her own handing into the World, licked into Form and Shape by others already
named; and therefore doing no injury to any but her self and her own party,
what became of it? Why, it returned into the Meal-Tub again, grew Mealy
mouthed, was Dough-bak'd, and so said no more; I cannot say 'twas born mute;
for it made a wicked noise at first, very ungrateful to her Ears: But Midwives
have always good Nurses to Friends; and they found a way to still it.

But now to return once more to the Letters, I must needs say what I had almost
forgot; that had not she been well assisted by several others, privy to that
Hellish Conspiracy indeed, as she calls it (viz. the conveying the Letters into
that innocent Gentleman's Chamber) neither she, nor near a single Devil of them
all, could have been capable of such a Contrivance; but now see what this
innocent Midwife has omitted to mention in the Paragraphs of the Letters, which
is, (viz.) That I showed her the Letters before they were put into the Chamber,
that her self, and her Co-contriveress, the Countess of Powis chastised me,

First, For refusing to make Affidavit to Mr. Secretary Coventry, that the
Papers were in Col. Mansell's Chamber before I had put 'em there, telling me at
the same time I was obliged by my Religion to part with my Life for the good of
the Cause, much more to make an Affidavit, no matter whether true or false.

Secondly, For refusing to Murder my Gracious King and Sovereign; for which I
was also about the same time severely rebuked by them both.

Thirdly, That it was by the order of the Popish Lords (my then Masters) in the
Tower, not hers altogether, that I should make use of the Custom-House Officers
for the seizing of the aforementioned Papers. --

Fourthly, That about the same time when we frequently spoke Treason, she
ordered me in all public discourse to call the King Lady Mary, the Duke Lady
Ann.

page 15. But now to return to her own words, (viz.)

That upon Wednesday the 22th of October, Willoughby was examined and went upon
bail till the 24th, in which time he gave me a paper desiring me to lay it up
safely, for by the help of it he hoped to defend himself.

That it was the same paper which lay before Mr. Secretary Coventry.

That I gave it to my Maid (Ann Blake) and she put it in the Meal-Tub.

But not a word of burning Papers, or her helping me to overlook both hers and
my Study, where for half a day or better, (as the servants have testified)
there was such tearing and burning of Letters and Pamphlets as they admired to
see; and that the Lady Powis her self, and I, were forming a defense for me
against I was to attend the King and Council, till which time her cornuted
Husband and Son were bayl for me, at her request; neither does she mention one
word of the strict charge she gave the Maid for the securing the Papers, alias
Meal-Tub Plot, so that they might be safe, in case the House should be
searched, because they did import such matter as was of too great Consequence
to be committed to the Flames; neither does she tell us that that was the very
original Paper from whence was taken the little Book I presented to the Duke,
wherein was contained the whole Scheme, and the pretended discovery I had made
in the Sham-Plot, etc.

Thus far I have related matter of Fact and Truth, the first part of that which
she her self has only disguised, no way fairly contradicted, in that Mealy Pack
of Lies, which she has called Malice Defeated: And now I shall come to a
second part, which she either evades in an elaborate manner, or with down right
impudence denies, viz.

Page 17. That Willoughby sent for Susan Edwards my Servant, to the Prison,
(after he was committed by the King and Council) by whom he sent me a long
Epistle, how he had been tortured that Night, then I sent him again this
following Note.

I have said you were taken into my House to get in desperate Debts -- They
bring me to L. S. they will ask me who encouraged me to go to him, I will say
it was you, it cannot worst you.

To this I deny that I ever sent to her till the Maid came first to me; with a
Letter from her Mistress, wherein she told me the Countess of Powis had
commanded her to bid me be of good Courage, and I should be removed to the
King's Bench, and be well provided for: That her Lady-ship would make immediate
Application to four or five Great men, who should soon do my business, to this
she desired my Answer, the Contents of which I am not obliged to remember, but
probably I might mention, in the same, something of the torture I had undergone
the night past, and the dread of worse for the night to come, but she willingly
mistakes what I meant by Torture, for 'twas not such a sort which she seems to
represent to the World, such as Irons or Cords, but 'twas the horror of an evil
Conscience lasht in every part with crimes of the deepest hew, which she and
her accomplices had engaged me in; for to use her own words, where she says,
when she first fetched me out of Prison, he expressed much sorrow for his past
Crimes, Page 8.
and made great Protestations of future amendment, it was that which indeed I
had done, and was fixed for a reformed Life, and did intend to have undertaken
a Pilgrimage to St. Jago, but what by her often attacks on the one side, and
the Devil's her grand Associate, on the other, that Resolution proved but a
Prologue to the worst Tragedy I ever was engaged in, which was the real
occasion of the Tortures which she expresses, though not explains, a good part
of which mischiefs are to be inclusively understood in the Letter which she
says, her Maid brought me soon after, wherein she uses these words, I have
said you were taken into my House, to get in desperate Debts.

How like an excuse this looks let the World Judge, or let her but rove, by any
one of her Husbands Debtors, who is an unbias'd man, that I ever treated with
him to any such purpose, I will give her the conquest; if not, both my self,
and the whole Universe I hope may freely challenge her, for what she has been
from her Cradle, a most notorious lying Doxey, who having once made use of a
Lie for an excuse, tells it so often, that with her self, it becomes a current
truth.

She knew very well I was cut out, neither for a Broaker, nor a Solicitor, and
that those plodding employments were no way suitable to my more Airy Genius;
and therefore the excuse of her desperate Debts, was as desperate as her Debts,
some of which were so desperate, that I am fully persuaded she never had any
such. Is it for any man of reason to imagine a Woman, that was Building Castles
in the Air, Dreamt of nothing but Maxims of State, and was designing to be a
Countess on Earth, and a Saint in Heaven, ever thought of such Trifles, as
desperate Debts? 'Twas an excuse that never will be believed, and therefore it
was very Femininely done, to put such an over-ridden stale pretense upon the
Nation. Come, come, Mrs. Elizabeth, your Ramping Dominican, had no mind to hide
your nakedness, but only to throw a Tiffaney Vindication over it, rather by
contraction to display, than cover the prospect: Where, by my advice he should
be Pictured peeping, like the Satyr in Aretines Postures, with a Line and
Plummet, in his Hairy Fist.

They bring me to L. S. they will ask me who encouraged me to go to him, I will
say, it was you, it cannot worstyou.

If I had been the Person had sent her thither, what occasion could I have had
for this instruction, for Truth needs no such support: but by the way observe
how the Scene alters, for I, who as she says, was at the Trial of the Five
Jesuits, Page 13.
employed to fetch Victuals and Drink, for the Witnesses, run on Errands, call
Coaches, etc. am now produced by her, for the Person who sent her of an Errand
to the Earl of Shaftsbury; nay and for my credit sake I must own it too, or
else I do nothing; such are the Devilish Practices of those People, who first
insinuate themselves into the good opinion of one they intend an Instrument in
their Black (or as they call it, the wounded) Cause, then gradually engage him
to act in their Designs, and when over Head and Ears, or caught by a
Discovery, prevail with him to take all upon himself, persuading him by the
Insinuations of some Priest, it is Meritorious so to do: And that if he be
Sentenced to Death he shall have a Pardon, but alas when it comes to that, good
night Nicholas, then there is nothing to be done, but to send his betrayed Soul
to the Devil, and to keep a constant Application to hold him steady, till he
comes to be Executed, binding themselves by bitter Vows and Execrations, that
he shall be Saved, and that such things must be deferred till the last Minute,
to keep others of less Faith right, whereas if a man should make any Discovery,
why then, it is all Lies, was not the Rope about his Neck? he did it to save his
life, he is a Villain and a Stigmatized Creature, and a thousand such
pretenses, and therefore can be no Lawful Witness; but if a man, by such
delays, will silently devote himself to the Halter with a Lie in his Mouth,
why then, his death is brought in Competition with the Testimonies of the
living, and Hirelings must be employed to disperse their lying Speeches with
new Additions, and to spread rumors throughout the Kingdoms, to prepossess the
more Charitable people, that they knew nothing of the matters laid to their
charge, but dyed innocently, and wrongfully, and indeed, that the people must
not believe, there either was or is any such thing as a Popish Plot. In these
Meritorious Practices, I was an Instrument, and therefore am the better able to
make it out to their Faces.

But to return to the former matter, our Lying Jezabel would once in her days
perhaps do well, if she would declare ingenuously to the World in time, who it
was sent her to the Earl of Shaftsbury, though I am clearly of the opinion (to
use as she says, my Lord Chancellors words to her at the Council Board) no
body will believe a word she says.

Page 17. That he desired my Maid to speak to me, that Victuals might be sent
him from my House daily, and that I would send him a promise of it of my own
hand Writing, by which (request) I perceived he was already a Rogue, and
endeavoring to get something of my Writing to make evil use of.

It Is very clear, that while I was acting in their Labyrinth, I was from the
first, very honest, and she her self declared as much to several Persons of
Honor and Quality, but particularly to the Earl of Peterborough, when she told
his Lordship I was a man had done great Services for diverse Foreign Princes,
and was a very honest, modest man; but now I have discovered what in truth I
knew of their Practices, and have put my self upon a Second Reformed
Resolution, I must be Branded and Stigmatized with I know not what Villainies,
and such as I still offer to be Hanged for, if either she or any of them, can
produce any Record for it, more then what were allowed by my self at the
Kings-Bench-Bar, when my Trial was, not hers, which Records were in Number
Seven: Four of which were from Salisbury for uttering Counterfeit Guinneys, one
from the Old-Bayly for uttering Counterfeit Guinneys, one for an Outlary for
Felony from Chelmsford, and one for Felony from the Old-Bayly, as she says.

Page 18. November the 1st. before His Majesty and the Lords of the Council,
Willoughby accused me of all the forged Stories he tells in his lying
Narrative; and I unfeignedly told the Truth.

What she meant by the word Truth is much to be disputed, as being a thing
altogether eloign'd both from her practice and profession; I am apt to believe
she lighted upon the word by accident, as the Gentleman did, when he prayed to
Cupid in the words of the Common Prayer Book, O thou whose service is perfect
freedom: For my part I cannot otherwise conjecture what she intended, unless it
were her owning a great part of what I charged her with, at the same time; for,
as for those which she calls Truths, it is such a sort of Truth, that neither
any of the Lords of the Council, nor any other Person whatsoever, that I ever
yet heard of, allowed it as such, (her own Party excepted;) so that it can be
no other than the Venom of an unhang'd Dominican, and her own lying Tongue.

Page 19. Willoughby was brought to a Window over against me (in the Prison) to
talk with me; where note she says I discoursed her to this effect, (viz.)

Madam, pray speak low, and tell me how you do, and do not discompose your
self.

I am sorry for your confinement: I could not help what I have done, you shall
not die; nor receive any other hurt.

Look here how I have been used, and then showed me his Arms, saying, he had
been miserably tormented, and was forced to accuse me and others to save his
own life.

That he had told the King more than he could make out, and was forced to join
with Confederates to get his pardon.

Madam, there are two persons found that will lay worse things to your Charge,
than I have done, therefore come in while it is time, and join with the most
powerful, you may make your own conditions; then he said that the King was
bought and sold, and here would be a Republic.

That the Duke would be destroyed in Scotland.

That if I would say the Duke gave me the Original of those Papers that were
found in my Meal-Tub, and bid me cause them to be put into Mansels Chamber, and
kill the Earl of Shaftsbury, that then I should have a Pardon, and more Money
than all the Witnesses had had together; for the Earl of Shaftsbury, and the
rest of the Confederate Lords, would raise Ten Thousand Pounds, which I should
pass over by Bills of Exchange.

That I should have twenty Pounds per week settled on me by Act of Parliament as
long as I lived: And if I would do all this, some Person of Honor should come
and treat with me.

Page 21. That he showed me his Arms, where the Irons or Cords had worn off the
skin, telling me he had been wracked, and cruelly used to force him to accuse
me.

That he asked me, if I thought other Persons, whom he had accused, would
forgive him; as well as my self.

That he told me he would write down all the intreague, with the Names of those
Lords and others that set him on work, and give it me.

Next morning he was at his Window by daybreak, and proposed if I would not
belie the Duke, to say the Earl of Peterborough gave me those Papers, and that
I had received a Thousand Pounds in Gold of Sir Allen Apsley, to pay him for
the Murdering of the Earl of Shaftsbury, and to raise Soldiers against the
King, etc.

In answer to all this Christening Gossipry, we are first to consider the
probability of these matters, and handle them with the more care and scrutiny,
in regard here are diverse Noble-Peers under her Female reproaches; a thing
strangely to be wondered at, that the Press should be so open, for scandals
against the Nobility, and so closely barricadoed against what would have been
more truly said against Persons far less considerable.

The forgoing discourse, as she says, passed from me to her, at the time when
we were both under confinement: A Lie not only of the more monstrous sort, but
also impossible; for, as to my part, I was a close Prisoner at the top of all
the Prison, by a special Order, and that from the time of my recantation, till
I had finished my Depositions; and I have been since credibly informed, she was
not committed to Newgate till within a very short time before I was discharged;
and I have been also informed, that she was committed close Prisoner, and kept
so a considerable time (after I was discharged) in Captain Richardson's House,
who for diverse reasons ought to use her with respect: And therefore how I could
communicate any thing to her, in Captain Richardsons House; from the top of
Newgate, either of that or any other nature, I refer to such as best know the
Prison, and the apartments, which have a Yard, called the Press-yard, and
diverse Rooms between them, and shall also have my Faith upon it, that there was
nothing of a Speaking-Trumpet in the case; but on the other side I must
confess, at that time the intimacy which had for some considerable time before
been between us, was fresh in memory, and that would have gone a great way with
me, could I possibly have come near her, but not to have insisted upon, as she
pretends, but to have directed her Prayers to the God of Heaven, (who had
opened my Eyes) to have done the same by her, that she might have taken a true
Prospect of the evil consequences, wherein she had embroiled both her self and
me, and ingeniously to have discovered them to the World; not that I could have
wanted her Testimony to confirm mine, but for her own Soul's sake: And besides,
admit she had been so wicked to have accused any Innocent Person, as she
pretends I requested her to do, how far it would have been concurrent with my
Testimony, let the World judge; for whereas she says, I requested her to accuse
the Duke of being privy to the conveying the Meal-Tub Papers into Colonel
Mansels Chamber, and bid her kill the Earl of Shaftsbury, nothing could be more
improbable, in regard the World sees I never yet mentioned one tittle to that
purpose in all my Depositions; and besides, the Papers that we put into
Colonel Mansels Chamber, imported matters of a clearly different nature from
those of the Meal-Tub. Therefore it is strange, that I should be so idle, as to
propose a thing of that detestable consequence to her, that would no ways
amount to the least tittle of service to my self, unless she as a Confederate,
had encouraged me to it, and supplied me from her wonted Fountain: And then
what should have hindered, but that I might have repealed that as well as other
things? And farther, that which is still more improbable, is, that I desired
her to say, she received a Thousand Pounds in Gold from Sir Allen Apsly, to pay
me for the Murdering the Earl of Shaftsbury, and to raise Forces against the
King, etc.

A thing I mention no where, nor did I ever charge her with being the Person
which was to pay me for that; for one Ricaut a Virginia Merchant, and her great
Familiar, was to pay me Five Hundred Pounds for the Murdering the Earl of
Shaftsbury, according to the appointment of the Lords in the Tower.

And as for her lame invention of my being tortured with Cords or Irons, it is
directly false, and such a like Lie as that of Mr. Prance, or one Coral a
Coachman, which she tells of in her third Page; but if both her self, and my
self, and indeed every such wicked miscreant, had been worse tortured than what
she has expressed, yet it would have been far short of our deserts.

Page 20. She says, (viz.) God is merciful, and if I live, I may repent, I was
deserted by every body, and if I had not been hanged, I should have been
starved; it is a sad thing to depend upon an ungrateful and disunited people, I
have reason to take some care of my self; those I belong to now, are very kind
to me, and send me great encouragements, I shall have a pardon, and be set at
liberty; but before I go, I would be glad you would consider your own
condition, etc.

To this no man has more to say than my self, for I have been all my life time
delivered by the Mercies and great Goodness of the All-seeing God, whom I bless
particularly for my last great deliverance from among that Infernal Crew; and
restoring me to his Grace and Favor, in which, by his Infinite mercy, I will
abide to the last minute of my life, rather than be again corrupted for the
greatest advantages, that ungrateful disunited Pack, as she calls them, can
propose to me; for however vicious my past life has been, the amendment only
time will produce, and I make no doubt, but that it will prove to the general
satisfaction of all such as delight in the conversion of a Sinner.

Then he showed me Gold, and told me great advantages were to be made by
becoming the Kings Evidence.

By the word Encouragement I am intended for some Ridicule, as I suppose; for
all persons may easily know what encouragement I have met with; yet
nevertheless there is no man can say I have expressed the least impatience for my
sufferings. The Gold she speaks of, would, no doubt, have been as welcome to my
Pockets, as to another man's, (could I have justified the occasion of earning
it) where perhaps it might have met with an old hoarded piece, which Mrs.
Elizabeth had used twice, as a Contracting Piece, upon Marriage of two
Husbands; but to prevent any such farther use, was by her presented to a
certain young Spaniard, some time since, as an Earnest-Peny for his good
Service, who intends it a Present, wherewith to tip the Cornudoes Horns, if
he will take the pains to come or send his kind Wife into the City to fetch it.

Page 21. That about twelve days before Dangerfield was taken, he told me my
Name was entered into Sir William Waller's Black Bill, and therefore he adviz'd
me to write to the Earl of Shaftsbury: I told him I durst not do that, but
would go to his Lordship, and then I desired him to go with me.

Here is another plain acknowledgment; for I must confess, that that very time
she did request me to go with her; but I then being under a most dreadful
discomposure of mind, out of a deep apprehension of the fatal errand, upon
which I had been there twice before, was not to be drawn thither again, which
backwardness of mine was the reason she her self offered to go, and do the work
I was intended for, in plain English, to kill his Lordship, which was all the
business she had there.

But being dashed in the face with the foul Guilt of a terrifying Conscience,
she came away (to use her own words) without any success.

The Stories of Jacob Clement and Ravillac had intoxicated her courage; but
when she saw it was a Man she was to kill, she could not find in her heart to
injure the Sex she loved so well.

Page 29. In January I was brought before the Committee of Lords, where
Dangerfield was asked, if I did not set him on to create a mutiny at the
Rainbow Coffee-house; to which he replied, I cannot say she set me on. That I
was angry with him for it, bid him be gone out of my house, and removed his
Quarters into the Garret for that cause.

As to the Mutiny, the remark I have made of it already is sufficient; but how
she could be angry with me, for so good a piece of service, as that was like to
prove, is as probable, as her putting me out of her house, by removing my
Quarters into the Garret, as she pretends, which she could not find in her
heart howsoever to do, as being a Place very unfit for the intimate and near
correspondence we then held; and besides, a Place only fit to receive a Lackey,
and which she ought not in Conscience to have offered to a -- etc. that paid
no less at that time than eight shillings a week for a more convenient Lodging,
in the same house, and four shillings six penee per week for one much more
convenient than either of them at Westminster.

That I being examined about a Walk, that was upon Tower-wharf, with the Lord
C. J. and the Lady Powis, and offering Ten Thousand Pounds concerning Sir
George Wakeman, made this reply, Yes, my Lords, I read it in a Pamphlet; which
Pamphlet was printed some where in China in the two and twenty thousandth Year
of the World, and showed to her in one of St. Dominick's Visions, for after all
the enquiry I have made, I never could meet with one Person, who ever saw any
such Pamphlet besides her self: And thus the Trully at Newgate, being asked
where they had their purloyn'd Booty? cry, They found it. Such was the
impudence of this Woman, rather to Droll with, than answer the (Demands of the
Council; which made them look upon her only as a bold and incorrigible Bigott.

Page 23. If any thing in the World could give a probable light where the true
Plot is managed, mine and my accusers Cases would do it.

Indeed I am much of the same opinion, for your very Defense accuses you; and
there is no Question to be made, but tho management of your deliverance was as
convincing an Argument to all Persons of understanding, how the true Plot was
managed, as might appear by your soft and gentle, and your Accusers harsh and
undeserved usage, which are the true Cases of you and your Accuser.

Ibid. That singly and alone, without the advice or assistance of any one
Catholic Man or Woman, I was left to study, manage, and support my self, to my
own expense which above a thousand Pounds, never receiving one Penny toward it,
but ten Pounds given me by a condemned Priest, five days before my Trial, nor
have I since received any thing, or the least civility from them.

Madam, this Rodomontado will not pass, as being a mere bundle of Lies and
Equivocations, which they of your acquaintance, that know better, cannot but
blush to hear you tell, as if you were prattling over your Sack and Sugar, and
others that believe, may as well believe the Story of Bell and the Dragon. You
would fain be Sainted for your Merits, which has produced this extravagant Huff
of yours, and so perhaps you may, as that Strumpet the Egyptian St. Mary; so
Famous in your Callender for exposing her Body to relieve the necessities of
the Holy Monks and Hermites of her time.

As for the expense she mentions, I take it for granted, and the only Truth she
ever told in her whole Life, but that those expenses came out of her needy
Pocket, I utterly deny; for surely her Midwives Fees can never be imagined to
have been able to bear the expenses that amounted to much above a Thousand
Pounds; which argues the falsehood of her Assertion in this Particular; for
indeed things of that Nature, are not to be managed at the expense of a
Midwives Purse, nor does it look with the Face of Innocent or ordinary conduct,
as she pretends, for here are matters of diverse kinds, such as wanted the
support of good Friends, or the Devil himself, who is said to be the God of
Riches.

Mammon himself was only able to feed those greedy Mercenaries that sucked the
Canvas Teats of her Charity, who by that means were made fit Instruments for
her and her Confederates, and then the Devil came in to act his part, which was
to stock them with fit Creatures, so that by the loss of one, three might be
produced by way of fresh supply; Therefore I give the more credit to the
expense she mentions; and am apt to think it not much short of one of the like
nature, which was Sir George, Wakemans Case, which how fitly this Woman or her
Husband were quallified in state to manage, I refer to all that know them:
Therefore in all probability there was a General Contribution, to make good
that breach; for it was a close attack, which if lost, would have shook tho
whole work, without making the Kingdom rue it.

As to my own Sex I hope they will Pardon the Errors of my Story, as well as
those bold attempts of mine that occasioned it, since what I meddled with,
though it may be thought too Masculine yet was it the effects of my more than
Religious Zeal to gain Proselytes, etc. And no one can truly say, but that I
preserved the Modesty, though not the timorousness, common to my Sex.

Religious Zeal and Modesty! Jesu Maria! what a president of an Apology is
here? we shall have shortly, by the example of this Midwife, the whole Town
filled with Vindications by all the Trulls in Whetstones-Park and all the Lewd
Corners in the Suburbs; we shall have such upholding of Fame, and good Name and
Honor among the Common Harlots, that Women that are truly honest will be
ashamed to own it. Well -- This Mrs. Elizabeth Cellier has a stupendous
Memory: I had thought, seeing it was so long ago, that she had forgot the
Practice of Religious Zeal and Modesty, that she had forgot the very words; but
I see she has not: However Gentlemen, since she has been so nimble with my Life
and Conversation, I will give you a Compendium of hers; And then you shall be
Judges of her Religious Zeal and Modesty, yourselves.

The way then she has taken for many years to preserve her Modesty, as she
calls it, has been the greatest Forfeiture of it, and occasioned the worst
Reflections upon her Morals, that ever any of the Sex has had made upon them.

For about Twenty years since, she then being the Wife of a certain Merchant of
this City, did as she says, by accident receive into her House a Comely
Italian by the Name of Seignior Pedro de Viacho; who had to attend him, a Negro
as Charming in her Eye, as his Master; at one and the same time she fell in
Love with them both, to that degree, that it exposed her to public report,
which the Seignior being informed of, made immediate Application to the Lady,
and soon confirmed the report for Truth; some time after, the sight of the
Black one day at Dinner, as he waited on his Master, so suddenly made a deep
impression in her Heart, that she was taken most violently ill of a Love
Passion, which she for the space of Ten days underwent with great impatience,
but having in this time watched all opportunities, one Evening by Twilight,
when the Seignior and her Husband were at a Tavern, she took the Black into her
Chamber; where having allowed him more Freedom than his Heart could wish for,
she gratified her own Lascivious desire. And such opportunities she often made
use of, insomuch, that both the Husband and the Seignior were Jealous of the
Moore, for the Rogue was extremely fond, and could not forbear to express great
Demonstrations thereof at several times when he was in her Company; so that a
little time produced the Effects of her Intimacy, for this passionate Lady fell
in Travail, and in some short time, and with no great difficulty, was out of
her Religious Zeal delivered of a brave Tawny Face'd Boy, to the great
amazement of all the beholders. This made a terrible noise among the
Neighborhood: So that the Seignior being a man of some repute, and not enduring
to hear such Reproaches as he often met with, packed up his Tackling and
departed for Rome, the Husband being overborn with grief, soon after departed
for Legorne, where he became a Factor and ended his days. How she spent her
time for Three or Four years after I know not; but about Twelve years since,
she lived near Holbourn, and was then become very exquisite at the Cracking
Trade, from thence she removed to a certain Lodging in Westminster, where she
met with a Second Husband as she says, hearing the first was dead, By the
Second she had diverse Children, and whilst he lived was not much exposed, but
the World in time (thorough her extravagancy no doubt on it) Frowned on him, and
he departed for the Barbados where he dyed, After this she was scarce young
enough to be a Whore, and scarce old enough to practice Bawding; so that for
some years she turned Procuress (as she her self has often told me, to a
certain great Person) by which she recovered her self, and then returned to
Housekeeping, and in Two years had gathered together, a very devout Convent of
Beautiful strapping young Daughters, of joy, whose remote practice at the Wells
in the Country, and elsewhere in three or four years replenish't her Purse; But
finding the great inconveniency of such a constant Resort of Doctors, Pimps,
Bullyes, etc. to her house, and the great threats she had often undergone, of
being sent to Bridewell for a Bawd, she removed into the City of London; where,
being by her absence become a Stranger, she set up, and professed the Craft of
Midwifery; still now and then by the By entertaining a young Courtizan for the
space of a Month or so, during the time of Delivery.

This Trade was in a short time discovered by the Neighborhood, and as soon by
the Prentices, who, had not the request of some particular persons prevailed,
did intend to have made a Shrove-Tuesday invasion upon her Enchanted Castle.
Yet, notwithstanding all this, she had cunning enough to insinuate her self
into the Affections of one Mr. Cellier a French Merchant, and by degrees
prevailed with him to marry her, to the great lamentation of all his Children
and Relations.

Some time after, she removed to Arundel-street, the place where she now lives,
and then undertook to Solicit the Good-mans business; during which time,
partly by her modest compliance with Lascivious Requests, and partly by
compulsion, she raised the Estate, and recovered a good part of it into their
own hands, which produced a plentiful livelihood, together with the help of her
moving hand. In all which time there was still room to be found for a Gallant;
for the Good Man was aged, and consequently troubled with the usual infirmities
of his Years. This sort of Life held for three or four years, still turning out
and taking into favor fresh Gallants, and among the rest a young Spaniard, who
after some large demonstrations of his Abilities, was received into favor. It
seems at first he did not perform his part of Complacency so well as was
expected; but in time, being apt, he was soon fit for the purpose, after having
undergone some correction, and received some instructions from her self, such
as the School of Venus, etc. So that in a little time, the Spaniard had made
her sensible of diverse New Transports, such, as she declared in her whole
Lifetime she had been a stranger to before, as you may guess by the following
Letters, sent to the Spaniard, who was her Agent in business of a difficult
Nature here in London, when she was at a place called Petersley in
Buckinghamshire.

The First Letter.
My Dear Spaniard,
THIS Morning about four a Clock, I awaked, and by the help of the Light I
discovered my self in the Arms of a dull and drousie Husband, but my
expectations were not answered by the usual enjoyments which onght to have
attended that hour, so that forced I was to be silent, and only divert my self
by wishing my Spaniard here. I received Yours with great difficulty, and my
Husband would have read it, but I told him, it was business concerned the L. P.
but I read it with great content; and as soon as I return, I do resolve to try
the effects of a short absence. I am very uneasy when I eat or sleep; I think
I dream of you. Your company is more dear to me, then a thousand Husbands: What
is the Country or the company of Relations? give me that Company I most delight
in. My Dear Spaniard, In the day time I retire into the Woods, in the Evenings
to my Chamber, where I embrace your Letter with Ten Thousand Kisses, and am
still unsatisfied for want of your company.

Here is a Lady desires you to make some Anagrams on these enclosed Names, pray
do so, and send them in your next, on Thursday night. I am unwilling to let my
Husband know when I receive any Letters, and therefore I will walk in the Woods
to meet the Messenger that comes from the Coach, before he come to the House,
that I may read yours with more freedom.

From Peterly. Adieu Dear Spaniard.

The Second Letter.
Dear Rogue,
I Did by great accident meet the Messenger, and my Husband was very near me,
gathering Nuts, when I received it, but I had the good luck to read it before
he came to me; I protest it has so pleased me, that I resolve to be in Town to
morrow sevennight. Give me the man of Conduct, that can turn and wind an
Intrigue to the best advantage; I hate a dull Impenetrable Skull. If the Lady
and the Servants be at the Tower, I know no place so fit as the House where you
are; but if there be any suspicion, it is easy to take a Lodging at a place in
Westminster, which I have been formerly acquainted with, and will be very
convenient. I fear nothing but that I shall not prevail with this Old Fond Fool
to stay behind me; and if he does, 'twill not be for above a Week, so that we
will make the most of the Time. If you can take a Coach and meet me four or
five Miles on this side London, I shall take it kindly.

Farewell. Yours E. C.


These two Letters by accident miscarried by her own mistaking the
Superscriptions, and were sent to two Ladies of Quality, who well knew the hand
writing, and therefore no doubt blushed sufficiently in the reading 'em, but yet
did not forget to expose them as far as they thought fit, so that now the
Intrigue being discovered by her own bad Conduct, she made application to the
Ladies, and so obtained the Letters, which let her deny if she can.

Many other pretty close passages I could relate, but I shall reserve some for
another time; And doubt not but this will demonstrate to the world how modest a
Creature she is, and how much she deserves the charitable opinion of a
Religious Zealot.

In the Postscript she tells us page 43. That on Wednesday the eighteenth of
August, I appeared before the Lords of the Council, and did then accuse Sir
William Waller, Mansell and Dangerfield of High Treason, and offered to make
good my Charge; but by delays I lost the opportunity of meeting the Gentlemen
(my Witnesses), and could not examine the principal Part that day, and by the
next he was taken speechless, as he still continues.

That she did accuse me of High Treason, is a thing unknown to me; but I know
she might well enough do it, for she had engaged me in Treason enough to hang a
hundred, and therefore 'twas strange if she could not find enough to charge one
with. But now whether she or I were the first Impeachers, that every body
knows, but how we should both own a Fact of that nature publicly to the world,
and yet both escape hanging, I know not, farther then as to my own part, as
having by the Grace and special Favor of my Sovereign received my Pardon. As
for the delays she pretends that hindered her making good her Accusation, they
might well enough be; for she says, the Gentleman her Witness was taken
Speechless, a thing somewhat strange (and that no Miracle could be done to set
him right again) and to me, perhaps a deliverance.

Here may the World see how the Judgments of God trod upon the heels of some
cursed Design; for my Accusation was only the introductory part; but how many
others might have been Shipwrackt by that black silenced Mouth, God knows: And
therefore in his good time, he stopped it with a terrible Judgment. And Mrs.
Cellier has exposed it to the World, as I pray all the rest may be in time: she
wanted nothing but that Great or Ragamuffions Testimony to make good the
charge; and for want of it, our Midwife was repulst, by this following
Expression, (viz.) You must not pretend to make Discoveries here, unless you
can make them out plainer, as for your self we believe not a word you say, etc.
That upon his single Evidence the Countess of Powis, Lord Castlemain, my Self
and other considerable persons of Quality were committed to Prison. What a fine
Reflection is this upon the King and Council, as if right or wrong they had
been committed by my single Evidence. No, 'twas not so; for it is a plain
Argument, that both the King and Council were well satisfied with a
considerable deal of coroborating Testimony in my Discovery, before that
happened, or indeed any commitment; otherwise I question, whether my Neck should
not have been in as great jeopardy, as hers now is.

As for the Treasonable Practices she mentions sworn against me by Mr. Foster,
a Justice of the Peace, it was just such another piece of villainy as her own,
wherein he accuses himself, not me; which may, perhaps, be known sooner than he
thinks of. But every person is capable of accusing others of Treason, according
to this account, no matter whether true or false; as you may see in some
Discourse which past at the (Lord Castlemain's Trial) In these Times no man
knows when he is safe from the Perjuries which so much abound, we have men
grown so insolent now adays, that upon what account, or what sort of confidence
to term it, I know not, run at whole Societies of men, and persons of all
Qualities, as if there were any thing in their Confidence could render them
better, then their own villainous Actions proclaim them to be.

It Is an easy matter to swear a man out of his Life, if such persons might be
admitted, and I believe the Devil has sent such men abroad, to render Truth
ridiculous, and for to fill the World with nothing but Lies and Perjuries; but
be it known to the World, that a man of a profligate life, though necessity
might expose him to Rob, yet is as tender of a faise Oath, as those who pretend
more largely to honesty and modesty; and without going any farther, I think
this may serve, That when I waited on Mr. Secretary Coventry for a Warrant (on
which the stress of the whole Sham Plot lay) he refused it, unless I would make
Affidavit, and I refused so to do, because it would have been folly: for the
Truth of which I refer my self to that Honorable Person. Now it is very strange
that a man who had but one single step to make, to the aggrandizing himself,
and he being one who could so easily digest false Oaths, as they seem to render
me, should be so squeamish as to boggle at one single Oath, and so consequently
lose the great opportunity of making my Fortune; but I bless my God, who has
always preserved my Thoughts free from such Villainies, and I hope, and it is my
daily Prayers, that I may become as serviceable for my King and Country, as I
have been against them.

As for Mrs. Cellier's exposing me to the World, and the Enlargements which she
has made of her own, I value them no longer, as being obliterated upon Earth,
and I hope, forgiven in Heaven. Yet of all Women under the Sky, she had the
least Reason to take notice of them. For had not I been taken for what she
makes me to be, she had certainly been e're this either in Purgatory, or else
in a worse place. There was no way to save her, but by making me ten times
worse then I was: So that she ought to have praised the Bridge she went over;
and to have the greatest veneration imaginable for my Crimes, which were the
only Engines made use of for her Deliverance; which nevertheless would never
have prevailed, had they not been in the hands of Artists, that knew very well
how to use them to the best advantage.

And so, Mrs. Elizabeth Cellier, Adieu for this time. You may go on, if you
please, and write another APOLOGY to the people upon the occasion of this
ANSWER.

Thomas Dangerfield.

FINIS.

