REFLECTIONS ON A PAMPHLET ENTITLED, Remarks on the Occasional Paper, Numb.
VIII. Relating to the CONTROVERSY BETWIXT Dr. HODY and Mr. DODWELL. And on
another Entitled A Defense of the Vindication of the Deprived Bishops, Some
time since seized and suppressed by the Government, and now Reprinted. With an
Answer to a Third called Historical Collections concerning Church Affairs.

LONDON, Printed by T. Snowden, for John Everingham, at the Star in
Ludgate Street. School.

SIR,
THOUGH I do not at all know who are the Authors of the Occasional Papers, yet I
think so well both of the Performance, and of the Prudence and Seasonableness
of the Design, as to be highly pleased to find 'em so acceptable to you. Since
I sent you the last, which was Numb. VIII, there is come out a small Pamphlet
called Remarks upon it in a Letter to the Author. Which I here send you, not
for any thing considerable, that I see in it, but to gratify your Curiosity.

There are a few things in it which I think sit to take a little notice of: And
the first is his blaming the Author of that Paper for charging the Vindicator
of the deprived Bishops a little severely on the account of his Notions and
Practice. The Remarker tells ye, that what the Vindicator has said and writ in
defense of the Rights of the Clergy, might, one would have thought, have
secured him from the Pen of a Clergyman. The Temper of the Laity in this Age
and Nation is such, that few of 'em appear very forward to defend even the just
Privileges of the Clergy; and therefore when a Layman will write on their
behalf, they ought to be so true to their own Interests, as at least to stand
Neuters the mean while. If the Learned Vindicator has writ any thing in defense
of the Rights of the Church, and the Just Privileges of the Clergy, we own our
selves much obliged to him. But the Question is, what are their Rights, and
what their Just Privileges? Did I see one of the best of my Friends endeavor
to Rob another on my account, I am a Knove if I stand Neuter; and a greater if
I side with him to deprive another of what is rightfully his. I am obliged in
Conscience and Equity to take his part, whom my Friend would Wrong, though it
were for my own Profit. It is no less honorable in a Clergyman, and no less
his Duty, to vindicate the Rights of the Laity, when others would invade them,
than it is in a Layman to vindicate the Rights of the Clergy, in opposition to
Secular Usurpations. And as it his Duty in the Point of Justice and Honesty; so
it is also in the Point of Wisdom and Prudence. For to grasp at more than one
can well hold, what is that but the ready way to lose what one has?

I must here observe how little the Clergy are obliged to Mr. Dodwell for
promoting this as one of their Rights and Just Privileges, That for the sake of
a Deprived Bishop, they ought to bring a Persecution upon the Church, go a
begging themselves, and ruin their whole Families. This is one of Mr.
Dodwell's very great Obligations, and the chief of all those which with so much
Kindness and Zeal he endeavors to lay upon us. If it be one of the Rights of
the Church, that a Bishop ought not on any account to be Deprived by the
Secular Power (which I take to be utterly untrue) Mr D. were he truly our
Friend, would allow us also this Privilege, That whenever a Bishop is once so
Deprived, and we cannot avoid it, we may peaceably submit to his Successor, to
secure our selves from that Ruin, which must otherwise fall upon us, and the
Church from such a Concussion, as would probably dissolve the whole Frame. If
he is not pleased to grant, and to defend, this Right of the Church and Just
Privilege of the Clergy, I must freely profess my Opinion of his Services: We
have very little reason to thank him.

One notable piece of Service which the Learned Mr. D. has generously done both
the Clergy and the Church, I cannot here in Justice pass by; and that his
bestowing so sublime and worthy a Character upon our first Reformers and
Martyrs, particularly upon Arch Bishop Cranmer, in his Preface to that Book The
Preface was not seized, but was published by it self under the Title of The
Doctrine of the Church of England concerning the Independency of the Clergy on
the Lay-power.
which was sometimes since seized and suppressed by the Government. A sort of
Service, which the greatest Enemies of our Church and Reformation will thank
him heartily for. Mr. Dodwell and Mr. Sanders will hereafter have the honor to
stand both together as Witnesses against the Reformers and Martyrs of the
Church of England. I desire it may be Recorded, and forever Remembered, That as
one was an open Enemy, so the other, when he wrote those black Declamations,
was no Member of our Church, but was actually engaged in a Schism against it.

What Thanks or Respect can that Man deserve from the Church, who, professing
himself one of its Members, does not study to maintain the Peace of it, but
only to advance his own Notions; and prefers his Fondling Opinions to its
Welfare and Tranquillity; and endeavors to fix a black Character on its worthy
Reformers and Martyrs?

The mention I made of a Book of Mr. Dodwell's, which was seized and suppressed
by the Government, brings me to consider another Paragraph of the Remarks,
which wants a short Comment, and ought to be set in a True Light. I don't at
all doubt (says the Remarker) but that the Government had good Reasons to seize
and suppress the Pamphlet you mention. There were possibly some things in it,
which the Person by whose order it was suppressed, did not think convenient
should be exposed to Public view. But yet since there was a Promise from one
engaged in the Controversy, That he would secure whatever should be printed in
that kind; and since after it was seized, and before it was suppressed, there
were offers made of striking out whatever was offensive, and printing those
Sheets over again, it seems something hard it should after all be condemned to
the Lining Trunks and Paper Boxes. I confess I should scarce have understood
this Paragraph, if it had not been explained by another Book of the Party,
called, Historical Collections concerning Church Affairs; In the Preface of
which there are these Words: Why may we not suspect that these Papers will be
seized, as well as the Learned Vindicators Answer was the other day, though Dr.
Hody had dared him to make a Reply, and promised him the Liberty of the Press,
in an unhandsom Letter which he sent him about August last, and it was the only
stroke in it, which savoured of Decency and goods Manners: I am apt to think
that so great a Rudeness has not been offered to so Learned a Man before: And
if the Dr. does not make amends to his Reputation, by finding some ways that
the Sheets may be restored, or by publicly declaring that it is not in his
power to have it done, he must, his best Friends being Judges, leave it in a
very low and forlorn condition.

It Is (you see) on Dr. Hody that this Charge chiefly falls; and this is that
which determined me to trouble you with these Reflections. I shall give you,
Sir, a full account of this matter, as I have had it from several, who are
intimately acquainted with the Dr. and to whom he has frequently related it
with the most serious and solemn Protestations. In their Conversation in the
University, when Mr. D. excused his not Answering the Case of Sees Vacant, upon
pretense that it was difficult to print, the Dr. told him, that if he would
take care to leave out all manner of Reflections, which might offend the
Government, he himself would assist him to the utmost of his power in the
publishing of it: This he still protests he would readily have done: And he
thought at that time that it lay in his power to obtain a Connivance for it.
Two years and half after The Case of Sees vacant was published, there came out
a Pamphlet, Entitled, Discourses upon Dr. Burnet and Dr. Tillotson, in which
Dr. Hody is earnestly desired to reserve his Vindication of the Authority of
the Civil Power in depriving a Bishop, no longer, that the most Learned and
Pious Vindicator of the deprived Bishops, who had long expected it, might
return an Answer both to that and the Case of Sees Vacant. 'Twas a great
surprise to the Dr. to find after so long a time such a Reason as that given
for Mr. Dodwel's not Answering his Book, remembering very well that in all the
Conversation, which he had formerly had with him, he never pretended that
Reason, but the difficulty of Printing; and having often told him, that he did
not design to publish his Second Book, till he saw some Answer to the First.
This was the occasion of his writing that unhandsome Letter to Mr. D. which the
Collector speaks of, the design of which he wholly mistakes. He blamed Mr. D.
for pretending such a Reason, and that he might not pretend to it any longer,
he gave him a fresh Assurance, that till he had seen some Answer to his First
Book, he was resolved not to publish his Second. About half a Year after this,
upon the Discovery of the intended Assassination and Invasion, there being a
search made for Conspirators, and Declarations, and the like, the Sheets of Mr.
Dodwel's Book, fell accidentally into the Messengers hands. So far were the
Governors either of the Church or State, from ordering them to be seized, or
the Dr. from contriving or desiring it, that neither one nor the other knew any
thing at all of their being in the Press: Though Mr. D. has been pleased to
report that it was by the Dr's means and procurement that his Book was seized.
Three days after the seizure of it, the Dr. received a Letter from an unknown
Person, and without a Name, concerning it; and this was the first notice he had
that there was any such in the World. He was desired in the Letter to make use
of his Interest to have the Sheets restored; and immediately he applied himself
to such in whose power he thought it might be to obtain a Retrieve for them.
But the Answer was, That it could not be done, because the Book was written
against an Act of Parliament; And to restore it, when once seized, would be in
effect to License it. After he had procured a Copy, and had perused it, though he
met with certain Strictures, that discovered some Rancour of Spirit, and proved
the Writer to be a little too much under the power of Gall and Spite; yet they
made no Impression; and a second time he signified his desire to have the
Sheets remitted. But the Reason being such, his desire could not be granted:
Which he took all occasions to let the Party know, by acquainting many with it.
This, Sir, is a true and full account of the matter. And by this time you are
able to judge, which of the two has acted generously and Fairly, Dr. Hody in
endeavoring to Retrieve his Adversaries Book, or Mr. Dodwel in wrongfully
accusing him. I cannot but here tell you, that I have had my self a sight of
this Book of Mr. Dodwels: And upon the perusal of it, I assure you, I think it
very much for that worthy Gentleman's Reputation, that his Book was so seized
and not permitted to come abroad. You fancy now, that there was something very
considerable in it; had you seen it, you would have been convinced, that the
Learned Mr. D. is in this Dispute very far from being a formidable Adversary,
and far from giving a just Answer to the Dr's Treatise: I hope they will be
pleased to Reprint it, if they cannot at last Retrieve it. I am sure this is
what the Dr. himself heartily wishes.

It Is the Learned Mr. D. that, of all the Men of this Age, has lain under the
Misfortune of writing a whole Book, and mistaking the Question: As it plainly
appears he did when he wrote his Vindication against the Barocian M.S. Though
in his suppressed Treatise he a little mends the Mutter, yet even in that too
he frequently falls back into the very same Error. How unhappy he is in his
Reasoning, is more than enough evident from that strange and surprising
lustance, which the Dr. takes notice of in page 14. of The Case of Sees Vacant;
He pretends to justify the present separation from our being Heretics, and
yet makes us Heretics for this very Reason, because they separate from us. A
more Illogical and Unweighed thing never dropped from the Pen of any Learned
Writer! You do not at all doubt but that in his suppressed Treatise, he offers
at some Excuse, or at least confesses his Frailty. No* No such matter. He takes
no notice of it, but wisely passes that by, as he does other things of the same
kind. You do not at all doubt but that he has endeavored to defend himself in
those several Points of History, for which the Dr. has impleaded him (as, if he
had thought fit but to step a fost or two out of his way, he might have shown
him to be guilty of a great many Errors more:) No such thing as that neither, I
assure you. All these he passes by as indefensible, without taking the least
notice of them. All this I could have forgiven him, had I found in his Book any
Answer to that which makes up the main part of the Dr's Treatise, The History
of the Churches behavior in such a Case as ours is. No, this too he perfectly
gives up, and does not so much as pretend to answer it. Instead of all this, he
is wholly taken up in disputing against a part of the Doctors first Chapter,
and in laying down certain Conjectures, videtur upon videtur, (as you know his
Way is) concerning Solomon and Abiath^r; which signify nothing.

I would not be thought, from what I have said, to Insult and Triumph over that
worthy Persons Failings and Infirmities. He that wisely and impartially looks
down into Himself, will rather desire to Triumph over his own, than over other
Men's Frailties. But I could not but take notice of these Omissions in Mr.
Dodwels Reply, which render it so extremely defective and insufficient.

I do not intend to weary you with a Confutation of what he has been pleased to
say in that Treatise. Wrangling, you know, is infinite, and you cannot but be
sufficiently acquainted with the Learned Mr. D's particular way of Thinking and
Reasoning. It Is the unhappiness of some Men's Notions, that they are founded
wholly on Guesses and Conjectures. They resemble a Pyramid inverted: When first
you look upon them, they appear perhaps pretty great, but the more you look
down toward the Foundation, the less and less they appear, till at last they
end in a Point, which is next to Nothing, and is Something only in the Fancy.

I shall only take notice, that whereas the Dr. had urged, that to avoid so
great an Evil as that of a Persecution, it is reasonable to submit to the
present Possessor; in Answer to this Mr. D. denies a Persecution to be an Evil.
If it be not, why then do they complain? But a little after Nature returns, and
there he is pleased to contradict himself: That our late Common Body (says he)
is now divided, that his late Brethren upon Principles of Conscience are now
persecuted; if he could not otherwise believe, he would feel if he had the
compassion of a living Member; if he had the Zeal of the Apostle, when he used
that passionate Expression, Who is offended and I burn not? If he had any sense
of the afflictions of Joseph.

In a word, since I have perused his Answer, I must needs say, I have been more
satisfied, even than I was before, of the reasonableness of submitting in all
such Cases of necessity. And it must be confessed that the great insufficiency
of the Answer of so learned a Man, adds much to the Credit of The Case of Sees
Vacant.

So it happend, as I was writing those words, there was sent me Mr. Dodwell's
Book just now Reprinted, with this Title, A Defense of the Vindication of the
Deprived Bishops; which is word for word the same with that which I have
hitherto spoken of. I am glad, Sir, to find my wishes so soon and so happily
answered. You will now be satisfied (for I have sent it here together with
these Papers) that what I have said of it is true. You your self will see, what
little reason the Dr had (if he were not of a Spirit far above such an Action)
to endeavor to have it suppressed.

And here for some time we will leave Mr D. and return to the Remarker. He
tells ye, that as for the Learned Dr. Hody' s share in this Controversy, it is
certain he has said nothing in his long Book, which the most impartial and
judicious of his own side can judge to be capable in any tolerable measure
either to satisfy the doubtful, or convince those that are of the contrary
opinion. Who those most impartial and judicious Gentlemen of the Dr's own side
may be, the Remarker best knows. These are Words of Course, and they signify
only thus much, That he has nothing to say. How well the Case of Sees Vacant
has been received by the most impartial, judicious, and the greatest Men of his
side, his Adversaries know but too well for their own ease and satisfaction. I
shall here for the great honor of The Case of Sees Vacant, and the Author of
it, produce you the Words of one of the most raging and envious of his
Adversaries the Author of a Pamphlet Entitled, Considerations upon the Second
Canon. Instead of lessening the Reputation of the Treatise and its Author, he
has even against his will added much to their Credit. I had here concluded
(says he) but as I was penning these few Considerations, News was brought me
that after so long consulting and caballing, Stillingfleet-Hody was come
abroad, laying about him like Goliath, knocking down no less than 6 or 7 at
once, and making bolder Challenges than ever did that mighty Philistine. After
a great deal of foaming Rudeness, with which he gives vent to his Gall and
Envy, (such as the Dr is used to meet with from his Mild and Well-bred
Adversaries, and which always falls back upon themselves) having laid down the
Dr's Proposition and Opinion, he adds: Now this, though in other Words, is the
main Principle which the Author of The Unreasonableness of the new Separation,
founds his Discourse upon, by which any Man may guess at the Genius that runs
through the whole Book. Again, I should wrong these few Considerations if I
should further wander after a Treatise, in the contriving of which more Persons
have been concerned, than Mr. Hody' s Name has Letters, etc. What can be said
more for the Dr's Honor and Reputation, than that his Adversaries cannot
believe, but that his Book was composed by a long consulting and cabassing of
the greatest Men of his side, and chiefly by one, who is by all acknowledged to
have no Superior? Stillingfleet-Hody? I do not at all wonder, if the Dr has
some inward Exultations upon so vast a commendation of his Book. Had the Title
of Stillingfleet-M -- been bestowed upon Me by my Adversaries on the account of
any Book which I had written, I should have had, I believe, within me a certain
Satisfaction, which, without a supernatural Assistance, would have mounted very
near to something of a Fault. I am apt to believe the Dr will as long as he
lives esteem this Nickname, as one of the most honorable Titles that ever can
be given him, next to that of a Christian. I am sure I should, were I in his
Case.

The Remarker goes on, concerning the second part of the Dr's Treatise: What
shall we say to the Matters of Fact, those severe Things, as my Lord of Sarum
is pleased to call them, that do not admit of Sophistry? What shall we admire
most? The Doctors great Skill and Reading in Ecclesiastical History, or his
wonderful Judgment in producing so many Examples, some from the most degenerate
times of Christianity, to prove only this, That in all Ages since the Empire
became Christian, and the Profession of our Holy Religion was not only safe but
honorable, there have been found some Men, who possibly to get or keep
Preferment, have been guilty of unwarrantable Compliances. Can those many and
Illustrious Examples, which the Dr. has produced in his History, be looked upon
by any Man of Sense and Probity, to be nothing but the Examples of some Men,
who to get or keep Preferment have been guilty of unwarrantable Compliances?
The Examples, which the Dr. produces, are not of some Men, but of Churches,
general Councils, and the whole Catholic Church; not of one Age only, but of
several Ages, in several Cases, and in extraordinary provoking Circumstances:
Not of Men that to get or keep their Preferments would be guilty of
unwarrantable Compliances, but of Men, who in other Cases most stoutly opposed
their Emperors, and were ready to sacrifice all they had in the World to the
honor of Religion. No; it is for Mr. Dodwel, and the Men of the Remarkers
Party, to produce only some few Men: What sort of Men, they know: some Men, who
through Crossness and ill Humor do not care though they rend the Church, and
disturbed the Peace of it: 'Twill be worth our while to look a little on those
Examples, which the Dr. has produced, and see who these some Men were, who to
get or keep their Preferments were guilty of such ill Compliances: Lest you
should not have the Dr^ Book by you, I shall take so much pains, as to draw out
these ill Men before you. The sight, I dare say, though it makes our Adversaries
so apt to fall into Fits, will in you raise the highest Respect and Veneration.

He begins with Abiathar, the first High Priest that appears to have been
deposed by the Lay-power; and observes, that after he was deprived by King
Solomon, Zadok, who was put into his place, was received as the true
High Priest by the Jewish Nation, and his Services accepted of God. Mr.
Dodwel's Evasion, that Abiathar was not the Supreme High Priest, but Zadock; is
sufficiently confuted by the Scripture it self, which tells us, that Abiathar
being deprived, Zadock was Anointed in his stead: Not to mention other things.

He has shown, that in after Ages, when the Highpriests were commonly deposed
by the bare Authority of the Secular Power, their Successors were readily
acknowledged as true Highpriests, and that too, though in other Cases the Jews
were at the same time most zealous Defenders of their Laws.

He has shown that our Savior himself, and his Apostles acknowledged and
communicated with those, who succeeded such as were deposed by the Secular
Governors, as true Highpriests. This our Savior would never have done, if he
had designed that his Followers in after Ages should not do the same in
Relation to their Bishops.

Had he shown but only thus much; he had sufficiently vindicated the present
Practice of our Church. But his History does not end here; He has also shown,
that the same was the Practice of the Church of Christ in all Ages, whenever
a Bishop, that was put into the place of another deposed by the Civil Power,
was known to be Orthodox, and otherwise unexceptionable.

He has shown that P. Felix II. the first Orthodox Bishop that succeeded
another deprived by the Secular Power, was received and owned by all the whole
Church who accounted him Orthodox, and is honored to this day as a Saint; though
Liberius his Predecessor, was not only deprived by the Secular Power, but by a
Heretic, and for defending the Orthodox Faith.

He observes, that when Lucius was made Bishop of Alexandria in the room of
Peter, whom the Heretical Emperor Valens had deprived; the Reason why he was
rejected by the Orthodox Party, was only because he was an Arian, not because
he succeeded another whom the Emperor had violently deposed. The People having
been nourished (says Theodoret) with the Doctrine of Athanasius, when they saw
that quite contrary Food was offered them, kept off from the Churches.

He observes that Peter, the rejected Bishop, in the Epistle which he wrote to
the Church-Catholick concerning his Deprivation, though he endeavors with a
great deal of Rhetoric to set forth the Crimes of his Successor, and to excite
in all the Church an Abhorrence of his Actions, yet he raises no Objection
against him on this account, because he was made Bishop in his place, whom the
Emperor had violently deposed.

Those Instances are of the 4th Age. He has shown in the 5th, that S. Briccius
Bishop of Tours, being violently deposed and driven away by his People, though he
did not give up his Right, but endeavored to be restored, yet Justinian and
Armentius, who were successively put into his Place, were owned by the Church
as true Bishops of that See, and there was not any disturbance in the Church on
his account: That Gregory the Historian, who himself was Archbishop of that
See, and afterward a Saint, acknowledges them as true Bishops, and ranks them
in the List of the Bishops his Predecessors: That St. Briccius himself, though
he looked upon himself to be still the Rightful Bishop, yet he owned them to be
true Bishops; and he gives Armentius the Title of his Brother; the Bishop of
Tours.

He observes, that when Theodosius had got himself to be ordained Patriarch of
Jerusalem by Violence and Murder, in the room of Iu^enalis, who had never been
at all deprived, the only Objection that the Great and Orthodox Abbot St.
Euthimius, when urged to Communicate with him, was, That he had been guilty of
many Murders; and was also a Heretic. His Answer was no more than this, God
forbid that I should approve of his Murders and evil Opinions. He observes
withal, that those Bishops, that had been ordained by the Usurper Theodosius,
were never theless acknowledged by the Church as true Bishops, and if their
Predecessors were not still living, were contained in their Sees.

He observes that Timotheus Aelurus being constituted Patriarch of Alexandria,
in the room of Salofaciolus, whom Basiliscus the Heretic, and withal a
Usurper, had deposed, was rejected by P. Simplicius and Acacius Patriarch of C
P. for this only Reason, because he was a Heretic and Parricide. When
Simplicius had heard that Acacius had forbid Timotheus to enter into any of his
Churches in the City of C P. he sent him his Thanks in these Words, without
taking any Notice of Salofaciolus's Unjust and Uncanonical Deprivation, Thy
constancy, says he, is praise worthy both in the sight of God, and in ours, in
that thou would not suffer that condemned Person to enter into any of the
Churches of C P. not only because he was a Heretic, but only because he was a
Parricide.

He has shown, that Johannes Talaias, the Orthodox Patriarch of Alexandria,
being deposed by the bare Authority of the Emperor Zeno, though after he was
deposed, he still laid claim to his Right, yet Mongus who was put in his place,
was owned as a true Bishop of that See by as many as accounted him no Heretic;
particularly by Acacius, that great and brave Patriarch of C P. and his
Successor Fravitas; as also by Martyrius Patriarch of Jerusalem, with all the
Eastern Bishops in general. That the Bishops of Dardania and Calendion
Patriarch of Antioch, in their Allegations against him, take no notice of his
being put into the place of one so Deprived, but only that he was a Heretic.
That Euphemius Patriarch of C P. and the Orthodox Party of Egypt Communicated
with him till they discovered him to be Heretical; then broke off from his
Communion. That Simplicius himself, Pope of Rome, having received a Letter from
the Emperor Zeno, touching his design to depose Talaias, was well enough
satisfied, and nothing displeased him, till he found that one, whom he
accounted a Heretic, was designed his Successor. That the same Simplicius
writing afterward to the Patriarch Acacius, concerning the Deprivation of the
Heretical Bishops, desires him to intercede with the Emperor, That either the
rejected Orthodox Bishops might be restored, or at least new Orthodox Bishops
created. Whether old ones or new ones was to him upon the matter indifferent,
provided they were Orthodox. That P. Felix III, in his Synodical Epistles to
the Emperor and Acacius, concerning Mongus's his Promotion, takes no notice at
all of his being put into the place of one whom the Imperial Authority had
deposed, but only complains of his Heresy. That the same P. Felix in another
Epistle, in which he Excommunicates the Patriarch Acacius, gives this as the
chief Reason for it, because he communicated with the Heretic Mongus. And though
at the same time he charges him with other Crimes, yet he does not obj^ct it to
him as a Crime, That he Communicated with one who was put into the place of
another Unsynodically deprived. Lastly, That Talaias himself did not think it
Unlawful for the People and Clergy of Egypt to acknowledge another for their
Patriarch, provided he were a Professor of the Orthodox Faith. He fled, says
Evagrius, to Rome, and raises there very great stirs, affirming, what? not that
another could not be owned in his stead, because he had not been Synodically
deprived, but that it was for his defending the Council of Chalcedon, that he
had been deposed; and that he, that was put into his place, was an Enemy of
that Council.

He observes, that Calendion the Patriarch of Antioch, being deposed without
any Synod by the same Emperor, they that refused to acknowledge Gnapheus, his
Successor, pleaded nothing at all for their so doing but his Heresy.

He shows that Macedonius the Patriarch of C P. being violently deposed by the
Heretical Emperor Anastasius, because he refused to condemn the Council of
Chalcedon, his Succsseor Timotheus was by all, that did not reckon him a
Heretic, acknowledged as a true Patriarch; as particularly by the two great B
shops and Saints, Elias and Flavianus Patriarchs of Jerusalem and Antioch, though
at the same time they declared Macedonius his Deprivation to be null and
invalid, and could not be induced by any Threats of the Emperor to subscribe to
it. That the Orthodox Party of C P. Communicated generally with him, and that
he was acknowledged by the Orthodox Monks of Palestine, no less than 10000 in
number, though they too at the same time condemned what was done against
Macedonius as invalid. That the great Abbot of Studium refused to be
consecrated by him, whilst he thought him a Heretic, but as soon as he had an
assurance that he was not so, without the least scruple concerning the Unjust
and Unsynodical Deprivation of his Predecessor, he readily yielded to be
consecrated by him.

He further observes, that Flavianus Patriarch of Antioch, being violently
deposed by the same Heretical Emperor, the only Reason assigned by the Orthodox
Party, why they would not communicate with his Successor Severus, was his being
an Enemy to the Orthodox Faith.

He likewise shows, that Elias Bishop of Jerusalem being deprived by the same
Emperor, his Successor John, because he proved to be an Asserter of the true
Faith, was by all the Orthodox readily acknowledged; by all the People of
Jerusalem, though they extremely hated him, as looking upon him to be one of the
chief Instruments in Elias's Expulsion; by those two great Saints, Theodosius
and Sabas, with the rest of the Monks and Inhabitants of Palestine; by Io.
Cappadox Patriarch of C P. with all the Bishops that were under him: That his
Name was preserved in the Diptycks of the Church together with that of Elias,
and that he was honored as well as he, by that Church as a Saint: That
Cyrillus of Scythopolis, speaking of him, says, he was adorned with a Divine
Prudence; and that in the Acts of the Council Sub Menna, he is styled more than
once, Archbishop of Jerusalem of holy Memory.

You may see it there proved, that though St. Silverius Bishop of Rome, was so
violently and unjustly deposed by Iustinian's General Belisarius, yet his
Successor Vigilius was owned as true Bishop of Rome by the whole Catholic
Church, particularly by the 5th general Council; and is reckoned by all to this
day as one of the true Popes.

That though Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem, was deposed by the bare Authority of
the Emperor Justinian, yet his Successor Eustochius was owned as a true
Patriarch by the same 5th general Council, and the whole Church Catholic.

That after that, when Eustochius himself was deposed by the same Authority,
Macarius being restored, was acknowledged again as a true Patriarch.

He shows you, that though Eutychius Patriarch of C P. was so unjustly deposed by
the Lay-power, and though he still laid claim to the Sea, yet his Successor John,
was received by all the Orthodox, particularly by the Clergy and People of that
City, though at the same time they exceedingly loved Eutychius, and accounted him
unjustly deprived: That Eustratius, who wrote the Li^e of Eutychius, though he
was a great Enemy to the Patriarch John, and speaks very angrily of him, yet he
no where reflects on any for owning him as a true Patriarch: That the Emperors
Justin and Tiberius, though they had a great Veneration for the rejected
Eutychius, yet they did not think themselves obliged to restore him by deposing
his Successor, but stayed till his Successor was dead, and then restored him:
That Eutychius himself, though he never gave up his Right, but looked upon
himself as the rightful Patriarch, yet he did not break the Peace of the
Church, but continued to Communicate with those that acknowledged his Successor.

He shows you likewise, that though St. Anastasius was deposed from his See of
Antioch by the Emperor Justin, without any Synodical Procedure; and though he
never gave up his Right, but always looked upon himself as the Rightful
Patriarch, yet this Successor Gregory was unanimously received by the whole
Church, by four of that Age, who are honored by the Church with the Veneration
of Saints, St. Symeon Stylites, Saint Gregory the Great, St. Eulogius Patr. of
Alexandria, and St. John Nestutes Patr. of C P. That St. Gregory the Great
communicated fr^ely with him, though he owned at the same time that St.
Anastasius was invalidly Deprived, and that he was still the Rightful
Patriarch: that he gives Anastasius the Title of Patriarch of Antioch, and yet
at the same time owned his Successor Gregory to be a true Patriarch of the same
See, and gives him the same Title, looking on the one as the Rightful
Patriarch, and acknowledging the other as the Patriarch in Possession. He sends
a Synodical Epistle to 'em both together, with this Title, which is very
remarkable; Gregorius Ioanni Episcopo C P no, Eulogio Alexandrino Gregorio
Antiocheno, and Anastasio Patriarchae Antiocheno a paribus. And this is
likewise observable that the Patr. Anastasius is placed the last of all, and
after Gregory, who stands in his proper place, because he was a Patriarch only
de jure, and not in Possession. And here I shall transcribe those words, which
Dr. Hody observes, of the Learned Annotator on P. Gregory's Epistles; Non satis
hoc advertere videntur, qui ad summos juris apices de re qualibet decernentes,
Schismatibus and contentionibus viam parant zelo PRAECIPITI NEC SATIS CAUTO.

The Doctor's History adds, that when St. Martin Bishop of Rome was violently
Deposed by the Emp. Constance because of his adherence to the Orthodox Faith,
his Successor Eugenius was received by all as a true Pope. And though he was put
into the place of one so Deposed, and who never had given up his Right; yet
he is honored by the Church as a Saint. A Saint is Deposed, and a Saint accepts
of his place. And so far was that holy Man St. Martin, from thinking it
unlawful for his Clergy and People to submit to another Bishop, that when he
heard that there was another constituted in his Room, he offered up to God his
prayers both for Him and his People, that their hearts might be established in
the Orthodox Faith.

To these he adds many more Examples of the following Ages, to show that this
was universally the Practice of the Catholic Church. He shows how great and
how worthy a Person the Patriarch Photius was, who accepted of Ignatius's See,
whom the Emp. Michael had unjustly Deposed: And observes, that the
Metropolitans of the Province of CP. though they owned that Ignatius was unjustly
deprived, and had still a great honor for him, and desired he might be
restored, yet because the Emperor would not suffer it to be done, they
peaceably yielded to Necessity, and submitted to the present Possessor.

Such as these are those Sacred Instances, with which Dr Hody has obliged us.
He has also shown us, that the same was the practice of the Ancient Church
whenever any Bishop was unjustly Deprived by an Uncanonical or Heretical
Synod, if their Sentence was enforced by an uncontrollable Authority of the
Secular Power.

By this time you see what those some Men are, who, to get or keep their
Preferments were guilty of such Compliances.

Let us hear now what is said by a very great Prelate of our Church concerning
this History of the Drs, Bishop of Sarum's Vind. p. 52. 146, etc.
and the Instances he has given. Dr Hody says he, has fully ended the Argument
that he had begun, from the Practice of the Church; and that in so convincing a
Manner, that matter of Fact seemed not capable of a clearer proof. But the not
answering his Book, is now excused upon this pretense, Because he had promised
another Treatise, Of the Power of the Magistrate in such Cases; which he has
not thought necessary to enter upon, till he sees what is said to his Book, in
which he has ^ully concluded the Argument upon which the Dispute first began:
And the not publishing this, is made an excuse for their not answering the
other. We know the true Reason why it is not answered is, because it cannot be
answered. M^n may wrangle on eternally in Points of Speculation; but Matters of
Fact are severe things, and do not admit of all that Sophistry. ' In another
place, says the same great Man; We challenge them to show us where ever a
Schism was formed upon the Lay-Deprivation of a Bishop, even when the grounds
that it proceeded on were visibly unjust, if the Faith of the Church was not
pretended to be concerned in the Matter. -- The Intruders into the
HighPriesthood under the Jewish Dispensation, and the many Instances in
Church History, that Dr. Hody has cleared beyond a possibility of denying the
Matter of Fact, are so express and full on our side, that their avoiding to
answer them, is plainly a giving up the Cause. Their leaving the general
Argument from the constant and uninterrupted Practice of the Church, and
betaking themselves to the Methods of Slander and Defamation, is such an
evident indication of a bad Cause and of a worse Management, that it is not
possible but that the generality of indifferent Men will soon discern how weak
their Reasons, and how strong their Passions are. They have in all their other
Writings built too much on the Authority and Practice of the Church to be able
with any shame to reject this Argument, and to say that they ought to be
governed by Rules and not by Examples.

We must here take our leave of the Remarker, and return again to the Learned
Mr. Dodwel. It is certain that these Words of the Bishop of Sarum, and the
challenge he gives them to Answer Dr. Hody's Book, was that which awakened him,
and put him upon publishing those Papers which were casually seized, and are
now Reprinted.

It was necessary (they saw) that something should be published, that at least
might be called an Answer: and they knew that that Name alone would do at least
some good, since the greatest part of Men look no deeper than the Title. The
challenge is to Answer the History; and yet not a word in Mr. Dodwel's Answer,
concerning those Instances of the Practice of the Church, which the Dr.
principally insists on. As I have already said, he does not so much as pretend
to Answer it. And what is this avoiding to Answer it after such a challenge
from so great a Man, but more plainly a giving up the Cause?

Mr. Dodwel's Talent is History; And if a Man of his Learning and Diligence, is
forced to give up the Cause, as it plainly appears that he is, we know not from
whom to expect it. As St. Austin says of St. Jerome, Quod Hieronymus nescivit,
nullus mortalium unquam scivit: so say I of the worthy Mr. Dodwel; What he
cannot do in a matter of History, and after so long a time (it is now somewhat
more than five Years since The Case of Sees Vacant was published) the rest of
the Party, though they are some of them Men of great Abilities and Learning, will
not think it a disparagement to themselves, if we conclude it cannot be done.

I cannot but take notice that He is so far from undertaking to Answer the Dr's
History, that he presumes to tell the World, that the Dr himself does not look
upon those Instances, which he has produced, to be of any considerable
Authority; that the Dr. himself does not value 'em. What? The Dr himself not
value the Instances which he has produced! This must needs have been great News
to him. Lest you should suspect I might possibly mistake Mr. Dodwel's meaning,
I shall give you here his own words. The Dr. (says he) professes beforehand his
own unwillingness to be concluded by such Instances as himself has produced,
though they should appear to be against him. Why so, if there had been any reason
that he should have been concluded by them. Why so, if he did not thereby own
that the Reasons given by the Vindicator against the Argumentativeness of such
Facts The Vindication excepts against examples for the depriving of Bishops by
the Lay-power, not against such examples as the Dr urges, which are only for a
quiet submission. But Mr D. frequently confounds the two distinct Questions.
were solid and concluding. And how can he find in his heart to insist
principally in his following Book on that very kind of Facts, which he has
acknowledged so unsafe to be relied on in his Preface? He cannot pretend to
argue ad Hominem, when the Vindicator had so expressly entered his Exceptions
against that whole Argument. He cannot do it in his own Person, when he
professes himself unwilling to stand by the Consequences of it. And how can he
have the confidence to obtrude that upon us, which he does not believe himself?

What ground (in the Name of God!) could he have for all this strange Talk? He
cites in the Margent these words out of the Dr's Preface: Should our
Adversaries be able to produce such an example (as I think they will never be
able) 'twill advantage their Cause but little, especially if it be one of the
later Ages, since it is not agreeable to the Practice of the Church in general.
Is it really Mr Dodwel's mistake, this? Or did he intend to impose upon his
Reader? For my Life I cannot imagine how it was possible for a Man but of a
common Capacity to be guilty of such a Mistake. For all those Examples of the
Church's peaceable Submission to the present Possessor, in so many several
Ages, which are proved in The Case of Sees Vacant, the Dr challenges Mr Dodwel
and his whole Party (and again the same challenge we here give them, and desire
they would take notice of it) to produce him any one single Instance from the
time of Aaron, the first High Priest of the Jews, to this very day, of a High
priest disowned by the Jews, or a Bishop disowned by the generality of the
Catholic Church, for this Reason, Because put into the place of another
deposed by the Civil Authority. And then he adds those words which you have
read. By which it is as clear as the Sun at high Noon, that his meaning was no
other than this, That since the present Practice of the Church of England is
warranted by the general Practice of the Church Catholic, our Adversaries
cannot be justified or excused by any one Instance on their side, if they could
produce one; especially if it were one of the later and more degenerate Ages.
If the Dr does not look upon one Instance, and that too in the more degenerate
times, to be conclusive against the general Practice of the Church, and in the
purer and more Learned Ages; does he therefore not esteem the uniform Practice
of the whole Church in general, to be Conclusive? To conclude this point, and
to satisfy Mr. D. how willing the Dr. is to be concluded by such a constant
Uniformity of Practice in the Church, I have leave to tell him, That he prefers
the Example of the Church, which is so clearly made out in his Book, to the
Judgment and Example of ten -- though I have leave to tell him, yet I will not
say how many Vindicators.

The Question betwixt Dr Hody and Mr. Dodwel is this; Whether our Practice, or
the Practice of the Party, be conformable to that of the Catholic Church in
Ancient times. It Is expected that Mr. D. should either prove all the Instances
which the Dr has produced to be false, or produce as many and as good on his
own side. If he cannot do this, much more if he cannot produce so much as one
on his own side, whatsoever he publishes with the Title of an Answer, will be
nothing but a Public Declaration, That they are not able to justify
themselves.

Time was, as Mr D. well knows, when the Practice and Example of the Church was
of greater Authority with him. When the Bishops were first deprived, and their
Sees filled, all places that were honored with Mr Dodwel's presence, as well
public as private, rung aloud of Examples. I have been often told by such as
were at that time at Oxford, and did themselves the honor to be often in Mr.
Dodwel's company, that till Dr Hody published his Baroccean Treatise, Mr Dodwel
constantly appealed to the Example and Practice of the Church. It was this, as
I am very well assured, that first put the Dr upon publishing that Treatise. As
soon as that was done, then the usual Plea was quite altered. Mr D. who before
was so full of his History and Examples, begins now not to esteem them. And The
Case of Sees Vacant, when that was published, made him utterly out of love with
them. He is now for Rules, not Examples: And he has good Reason for it; for
Rules he makes of his own, but Examples he cannot.

When The Case of Sees Vacant first came out, it was very well known, that Mr
D. and his whole Party presently fell upon a nice Examination of it. I know my
self a very intimate Friend of Mr Dodwels, who examined the Quotations of a
Chapter or two for him. Who has freely acknowledged, That he could not find any
thing but what was rightly cited, and fairly represented. Had the History been
found wrong, the Examples and Precedents of the Church had been still looked
upon by the Party as very good things: But their great fault is, They all make
against them. The Case is plainly this; We are so much in love with our own
Notions, that we will not value any thing, no not the Authority of the
Catholic Church it self, in opposition to them.

Of a piece with his other mistakes (so I choose to call them, rather than
disingenuitie^) is that which he tells his Reader in several places in his last
Treatise, that Dr Hody owns the Invalidity of all Lay-deprivations. Though the Dr
had expressly told him in his Preface, that he reserved the Vindication of the
Authority of the Civil Power in such Cases for a particular Treatise. I grant
at present (says the Dr) that all Lay deprivations are Invalid. The Learned Mr
D. has (it seems) forgot the difference between dare and concedere. It was not
the Dr's business in The Case of Sees Vacant, to concern himself with the
Authority of the Civil Power. His only business in that Treatise was to assert
the Reasonableness of submitting to the present Possessor, whether the other
were validly deprived or not, where the Power that deprived is irresistible,
and the Possessor otherwise unexceptionable. It is easy to observe, how
desirous Mr D. and the Men of his side are, to have another Cause called, and
to shift off that weight thet lies so pressingly upon them. But to this the Dr
keeps them. And I think he does very well to hold them fast where he has them.
To what purpose should we, who were not concerned in the Deprivation of the
Bishops concern our selves so much about that Question, Whether it be lawful
for the Civil Magistrate to deprive a Bishop or not? since whether that be
lawful or not, this at least we know to be lawful, The acknowledging the
present Possessor, if on all other accounts unexceptionable Whether it were the
Doctrine of the Church that Bishops may be deprived by the Lay-power for
Political Crimes, or not, we are not obliged to know. It Is enough for us that
we know, that this at least was the Doctrine of the Church (and we know it from
it is constant and uniform Practice throughout all Ages) That when once they are
deprived (though never so unjustly) and we cannot avoid it; it is lawful for
peace-sake to own the Possessor. Dr Hody may publish, if he please, his
Vindication of the Authority of the Civil Power, for the sake and satisfaction
of those, who concurred in the Deprivation of the Bishops: But we of the lower
Form, who were not at all concerned in the matter, we want no such Treatise to
justify our Practice: Our Practice is sufficiently justified by what he has
already written. I will read it, if it comes out, as a matter of Speculation.
If it can have any influence on my Practice, it will be only to vindicate
those, by whom the Bishops were deprived, against the Ragingness of such as
discharge their Choler in so liberal a manner against them; which always turns
back on themselves.

I ought not here to omit, that that Book, which I mentioned above, called,
Historical Collections, etc. was designed as a part of an Answer to The Case of
Sees Vacant. Its business is to show, that the Catholics of the fourth Age,
who refused to Communicate with Felix Bishop of Rome, who was put into the
place of Liberius, and with Gregory and George of Alexandria, who were
substituted in the place of St. Athanasius, and with Meletius of Antioch, who
succeeded Eustathius; did not refuse to acknowledge them on the account of
Heresy, but because their Predecessors had been Unjustly and Vncanonically
thrust out. And how is this proved? Why, they tell us, that the Catholics of
that Age did not look upon the Eusebians as Heretics, but continued to
Communicate with them till after the Deprivation of St Athanasius, etc. and
therefore when after that, they refused to Communicate with them, it must be
upon the account of the Uncanonical Deprivations and Successions. I shall not
wander after the foul-mouthed and raving Collector in his long wild Maze of
Impertinencies, but shall give a full Answer to the whole in half as many Words
as he has trifled away Pages.

The Eusebians of that Age, who are commonly called Semi-arians, were by some
of the Orthodox accounted more tolerable, by others downright Arians and
Heretics, though they sometimes pretended to embrace the Nicene Faith.
Sometimes the same Catholics entertained a favorable Opinion of them; at
other times, according as their Heresy showed it self more visibly in their
Practice, they declined their Communion. This was generally the case after the
Persecution and Expulsion of St Athanasius. 1. Athanasius himself calls the
Eusebians, his Persecutors, every where, Apolog. p. 692. Episcopis prope
nonaginta pulsis Ecclesiisque Professoribus Arii traditis (...). 693. ea
narranda existimo, ut tua Christianissima cura, and pietas in Deum, certo
intelligat, criminationes mei calumniasque non alio fine institutas esse, q^am
ut nobis ab Ecclesi^s expulsis, suam impietatem in Ecclesias immitterent (...).
Nam posteaquam ex veris senibusque Episcopis, alii in exilium deportati essent,
alii metu fugati, ethaici homines Catechumeni, primariique decurionum, etc. (ad
spem Episcopatus) pro pia CHRISTIANORVM fide ARIANISMVM profitebantur.(...).
Ecce tertia denuo allabitur fama, scriptum fuisse Tyrannis Auxu^is, ut me
ubicunque etiam apud barbaros perquirerent, populosque and Clericos ad
communionem Arianae HAERESIS cogerent. 698. (...), etc. 699. Quo tempore talia
scelera ab ARIANIS designabantur, nihil a me erratum: (...). -- Quid maluiffes
a me fieri in tanta saevitie calumniatorum, nihil nisi necem meam omnibus
rationibus molientium, anne id quod scriptum est? Abscondere paulisper, ut
interea temporis and S^cophantas deprehensos HAERETICOS esse constaret, (...).
Apol. pro fuga p. 719 Pro sua HAERESI, belloque in Christum, non CHRISTIANI
amplius, sed ARIANI appellantur. Cum igitur hoc sint animo and professione,
quid miri est, sieos, qui in eorum sententiam non concedunt neque impiam eorum
HAERESIN plausibus prosequuntur, ad necem quaerunt? (...). 703. praeclari
Episcopi, veritatis praecones in exilium profligantur, n^lla pro^sus de causa,
nisi quod non astipulati sint Arionorum HAERESI, nec illorum calu^niis adversus
nos fictis subscribere voluerunt; (...). Alia vide passim cousimilia, p 670. C.
807, 812, 827. per totam denique ad Solitarios Epistol^m. Ibid. p. 815.
Eusebiani igitur videntes HAERESIN suam succumbere, and Romam and ad
imperatores Constantinum and Constantium contra Athanasium scribunt: sed quia
ab Athanasio missi legati mendacia eorum refutabant, ab Impp. cum pudore
rejecti sunt; (...), etc.
Arians and Heretics. So does the Synodical Epistle Ap. Athan. p. 723. (...).
728. (...). Nonne Eusebiani studio Arianismi ad id concilium perrexerunt,
reliquis ejusdem secum sententiae adductis? Nonne and nos contra eosdem homines
eo nomine quod Arianicae Opinionis essent, scripta evulgavimus? 733. (...).
737. (...), etc. 738. Quod ideo faciunt, ut impia Arianorum HAERESIS
introducatur, etc. (...).
of the Bishops of Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis; and that of the Epist. ad
Episc. Aegypti ap. Athan. 756. non lignotum id nobis, antesignanos infelicis
Arianorum HAERESIS, mulra and gravia in Ecclesiam, molitos esse; (...), etc. Ea
enim eorum and vafrities fuit semperque hujus pestiferi propositi fuere, ut
omnes ubique Orthodoxae fidei homines and Catholicae Ecclesiae doctrinam a
patribus traditam servantes exagitarent and persequerentur, etc. Epist. ad
Ecclesiam Cathol. Vide p. 766.
Council of Sardica: not to mention the Writers of the following Ages.

The Collector was aware, that the Eusebians have every where the Title of
Arians; and therefore he tells you, that the Arianism of the Eusebians was
generally interpreted to amount to no more than their receiving a false
succession of Bishops. On this the main hinge of his whole Book turns. The
Margent will show him to have been extremely careless in his Reading; and that
they were therefore called Arians because they were believed to have embraced
the Heresy and Opinions of Arius. Athanasius in one place has these words, The
Eusebians seeing their Heresy going down, wrote to Rome, and to the Emperors
Constantine and Constans against Athanasius, but the Legates which were sent by
Athanasius confuted their Lies, and they were rejected with shame by the
Emperors. Thus he makes them to be Heretics even before he was deposed. 2.
Gregory, who was put into his place when he was first expelled, is well known
to have been a notorious Heretic. So he himself Epist. ad solit. p. 816. nulla
alia de causa, quam ut eos ad pattes ARIANORUM, and Gregorium recipiendum
compellerent. Athanasias autem non ignarus HAERETICORUM furoris, etc. (...).
817. Verum nihil illi curae erat, quam ut eorum jussa a quibus missus erat,
adimpleret, and HAERESIN stabiliret, (...), eas ob causas stult^s ille
homicida, carnifex and contumelicius, fraudulentus and in summa Christi hostis
factus est.
witnesses of him; as does also Cont. Arianos: Cum in Alexandria in Ariana
Ecclesia, cui Gregorius praeerat, presbyter esse caepisset.
St. Hilary. The Council of Sardica Sed quia eorum sycophantiae, vincula,
caedes, verbera, falsae Epistolae, contumeliae, virginum denudationes,
exterminationes, evastationes, incendia Ecclesiarum, transultusque a minoribus
civitatibus ad majores paraecias, and, quod gravissimum est, denuo per eosdem
excitata contra rectam sidem infelicissima Arianorum Haeresis reticenda non
fit; ((...)) ideo nos dilectos fratres, and comministros nostros Athanasium,
etc. innocents and puros pronunciamus, literis ad singulas paraecias missis,
ut populi cujusque Ecclesiae cognoscant sui Episcopi sinceritatem, eumque pro
Episcopo and habeant and expectent; istos autem more luporum in horum Ecclesias
invadentes, Gregorium in Alexandriam, etc. eos neque Episcopos appellent, neque
ullam cum eis communionem habeant, aut eorum literas recipiant aut vicissim
Mittant. p. 765, 766.
declares him no Bishop, and forbids the Catholics to give him that Title, and
to have any manner of Communication with him, and that partly for his other
enormous Crimes, but principally because he and his Party promoted the Arian
Heresy, against the right Faith. And this is the Reason they give for their
restoring Athanasius, and the rest that were ejected by the Eusebians.
Athanasius observes Ep. ad Solit. p. 820.
that that Council were so far from calling him a Bishop, that they did not
think he was worthy the name of a Christian. 3. George of Laodicea, who was
constituted his Successor upon his second Expulsion, had been formerly Synodus
Aegyp. in Epist. ap. S. Athan. p. 728. (...);
degraded from his Orders as an Arian, by Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, and
had afterward been deposed from his Bishopric of Laodicea, and again d^graded
by the Sardican Council p. 766. Ur^acium, Valentem, etc. and Georgium, per
metum huc ab Orient non audentem venire, sed tamen a beato Alexandro
depositum, tum quia iste and caeteri illi sectatores sunt Arianicae rabiei
((...)) tum ob reatum criminum omnes sacrosancta Synodus communi calculo
exauctoratos omnino ab officio Episcopatus summovet: Decrevimusque eos non modo
Episcopos non esse, sed ne dignos quidem fidelium communione. Imo quia separant
Filium a Patre, and Verbum a suo Patre alienant, aequum esse, eos ab Ecclesia
Catholica separari, and alienos indignosque haberi Christiano nomine. Sint
vobis igitur Anathema, eo quod verbum Veritatis adulteraverint. (...).
as an Arian, for dividing the Father from the Son in the Holy Trinity, and
adulterating the Word of Truth: and is every where branded as an St. Athan. de
Synodis Arim. and Seleuc. Georgii vero Cappadocis, Alexandrina civitate ejecti,
nulla mentio ratioq, habenda est, fed pro temporis condition, nomen Christiani
simulantis, and quaestum religionem arbitrantis: ac proinde nemo de illo
conqueri debet, fi in fide labatur homo, qui neque scit de quibus loquitur,
neque de quibus asseverat.
Arch-Heretick. Libello ad Constant. pro Athanasio: Consacrilegum tuum
Georgium, and nolentibus ejus ma^ulari sacrilegio, tantas contumelias,
tantasque intuleris poenas, ut plurimos proscripseris -- and hodie non desinas
ea facere, blasphemiam tuam and Georgii suscipere nolentibus, quae irati hosts
immanissimi barbari vix faciant. -- Nunquid potest Deus esse cum inimico suo
Georgio? nunquid ei quem non ordinaverit, quem non elegerit, potest esse
propitius? Talis est Georgius qualis suerat Arrianus (leg. Arrius) quales qui
sunt Valens and Ursacius, vel ad quem me destinasti Germanensium, Adoxius:
neque enim possent nisi de spinis spinae procedere. Haec ita se habere ex
Actibus ipsius Georgii legens contestationes Alexandrinorum poteris colligere.
-- Cohaereticum tuum Georgium mittis successorem.
Lucifer Calaritanus tells us, that the Catholics were so cruelly persecuted
by the Emperor Constantius, for what reason? was it because they refused to own
a Bishop, who was put into the place of another Uncanonically deprived? No,
'twas because they would not comply with George's Blasphemy. And P. Julius
Epist. ad Antiochenos ap. Athan. p. 751. (...).
tells us concerning the former Persecution, that it was brought upon the
Orthodox for no other reason but because they would not Communicate with
Gregory and his ARIANS.

Ruffinus Hist. Ecc. 1. 19. Ob hoc apud Mediolanum Episcoporum concilium
convocatur; plures decepti: Dionsius vero, Eusebius, Paulinus, Rhodanius, and
Lucifer dolum in negotio esse proclamantes, asserentesque quod subscriptio in
Athanasium, non aliam ob causam, quam destruendae fidei moliretur, in exilium
trusi sunt. His etiam Hilarious jungitur, caeteris vel ignorantibus vel non
credentibus fraudem.
tells us, that the Reason why the Catholics chose rather to suffer banishment
than to subscribe to Athanasius's Deprivation, was because they believed that
through him the Catholic Faith was struck at. 4. That Meletius of Antioch, and
P. Felix of Rome, who were put into the places of Eustathius and Liberius, were
by some accounted De Meletio S. Basilius Ep. 321. Qui quidem reversus referebat
nobis quos tecum habait ipse apud Damasum rev. Episcopum sermones and maerore
nos affecit, cum praedicaret fratres nostros deo charissimos nostros
comministros, Meletium necnon Eusebium, inter Arii fur^rem insanientes
recensitos. (...). Epistolam 349. ^ege. Chron. Paschale: (...), etc. B. Hieron.
in Chron. anno 329. Eustathio in Exilium ob fidem truso, usque in presentem
diem, Arriani Ecclesiam occupaverunt, i. e. Eula^ius, Eusebius, Euphronius,
Placillus, Stephanus, Leontius, Eudoxius, Meletius, Euzoius, Dorotheus; ^ursus
Meletius. Quorum idcirco tempora non digessi, quod eos hosts potius quam
Episcopos Christi judicavi. Idem ad an. 365. Synodus Antiochiae a Meletio and
suis facta, in qua Homaeousio An^maeoque rejecto, medium inter haec Homaeousion
MACEDONIANUM dogma Vindicaverunt.
Heretics, Dr Hody has already See The Case of Sees Vacant. p. 42, 43, 48.
concerning Felix, and p. 191. concerning Meletius.
shown. And this was the Reason why they were by some rejected. The Collector
spends two or three pages to prove against the Dr that Liberius being deprived
did not give up his Right and submit to Felix as Bishop of Rome. Where (for
God's sake!) does the Doctor say he did? On the contrary, this makes directly
for the Doctor's Cause, that though there was no Cession, yet they that knew
Felix to be Orthodox very freely recognized him.

But why was Liberius himself, after he had subscribed to Athanasius's
Condemnation, looked upon by the Catholics with so ill an eye? Was it not for
this, because he had complied with a wrong Succession? So the Collector says.
But it is full as false as any thing is true. The subscribing to Athanesius's
Condemnation was looked upon by many to be a Revolting to the Arian Heresy;
and besides, it is certain that the Arians themselves boasted that Liberius had
subscribed to their Doctrine. So H^st IV. 15. N^m cum Eudoxius, and quicum illo
opinioni Aetii favebant. Antiochiae Hosii Epistolam accepissent. sparsis
rumoribus divulgaverant Liberium quoque Consubstantialis vocabulum condemnasse.
(...). His per Occidentalium legatos confectis, Imp. Romam redeundi potestatem
Liberio concessit.
S^zo^en expressly tells us: And St. Ierom Ad an. 350. Quia Liberius taedio
victus exilii, and i^ HAERETICA pravitate subscribens Romam quasi victor
intraverat.
himself affirms that he actually did so. And this was the Reason why after he
was restored and Felix rejected, some would not acknowledge him, but continued
to adhere to Felix, whom they knew to be truly Orthodox.

When Hosius of Corduba was pushed on through the violence of the times to
Communicate with the Heretics Valens and Ursacius, what was the Reason that he
never could be brought to subscribe to Athanasius's Condemnation? Was it not
because he accounted even Heresy it self a less fault than to comply with a
wrong Succession? No such matter. If Athanasius says so p. 841. but p. 807. he
seems to intimate the contrary.
Hosius still stood firm in that Point, it was because to subscribe to
Athanasius's Condemnation, was to own his belief of those Crimes for which he
was deposed, which he could not do, being in his Conscience so extremely
satisfied that he was not guilty. He could not find in his heart to be guilty
of so great a Lie, and of so great Injustice to the injured Athanasius. And so
we are told by Athanasius Epist. ad Solit. p. 841. Quis cum videret Liberium
Pontificeme Roma in exilium ejici, magnumque Hosium Episcoporum patrem tot mala
pati tot Episcopos ex Hispania and aliis regionibus in exilium deportari, non
abunde animadverterit, omnes criminationes contra Athanasium and reliquos alios
falsas esse, etc omnia sycophantiis scatere? atque inde est, quod illi omnia
pati voluerunt, cum viderent eorum in sycophantiis singendis infidias. (...).
himself that the Reason why the Catholic Bishops chose rather to suffer so
cruel a Persecution than to set their Hands to his Deprivation, was because
they saw plainly that the Crimes with which he was charged, were only the
Forgeries of his Enemies.

Thus Flavianus and Elias, the Patriarchs of Antioch and Jerusalem, though^
they owned Timotheus as Patriarch of C P. yet they never could be persuaded to
subscribe to the Deprivation of his Predecessor Macedonius, because that would
have been to own a belief of the Crimes that were laid to his charge, and of
the Justice of his Enemies Proceedings.

I shall here inform the Collector, that it appears by the Testimony of St.
Hilary Libro ad Constantium: Eusebius Vercellensis Episcopus post Arelatensem*
synodum cum Paulinus Episcopus tantis istorum sceleribus contraisset, venire
Mediolanum praecipitur, collecta jam illic malignantium synagoga. -- Adest una
cum Romany clericis, and Lucifero Sardiniae Episcopo. Conventus ut in
Athanasium subscriberet, ait de sacerdotali fide prius oportere constare:
compertos sibi quosdam ex his qui adessent, haeretica labe pollutos. Expositam
fidem apud Niceam posuit in medio: Spondens omnia se, quae postularent, esse
facturum, si pro fidei professione scripsissent, etc.
himself, who suffered in the Cause of Athanasius, that the Catholic Bishops
offered to subscribe to his Deprivation, if his Adversaries would but subscribe
to the Doctrine of the Council of Nice. And the same is likewise attested by
Sulpitius Severus. Hist. Sac. II. 54. Dionysius, quia non esset assensus, urbe
pellitur. -- Liberius quoque urbis Romae, and Hilarious Pictavorum Episcopus,
dantur exilio, etc. -- Cum tamen homines parati essent, Athanasium a Communione
suspendere, modo ut de fide inter Episcopos quaereretur.
If his Adversaries would have done this, the Catholics would then have been
convinced, that the Crimes which they laid to his charge, were not forged
against him for the advance of the Arian Heresy, but might possibly be true.
This they could not persuade themselves as long as they plainly saw that his
Deposers were Enemies to the Orthodox Faith.

The Schism of the Meletians and the Paulinists of Antioch, which the Collector
so tediously insists on, that was likewise founded in Heresy, and makes not a
whit for their Cause. The Paulinists accounted Meletius and his Successors
Arians, or disowned at least the validity of their Orders. The Meletians on the
other side accounted Paulinus a St. Epiphanius Haer. LXXVII. 20. Cum essemus
Antiochiae Vitalis Paulino Sabelliani quandam dogmatis vocem objiciebat (...),
etc.
Sabellian: and he was not put upon them by any Sovereign Coercive Power (which
the Collector cannot be made to take notice of) but by Lucifer Calaritanus, who
had no Authority over them. Dr Hody had asked what Authority he had to
Constitute a Bishop of Antioch? The Collector here takes him up, and shows him
in a Digression of several Pages (if any thing may be called a Digression in
that Book) that where Heresy is concerned a Catholic Bishop has Authority any
where. Very pertinently done! As if the Dr could be ignorant of what every Body
so well knows. But how could Lucifer's Authority oblige those that accounted
Meletius Orthodox, to reject him for another? What power irresistible had he to
put a new Bishop upon them? That which chiefly continued that unhappy Division,
was the Opinion which Lucifer had instilled into his Party, that the Orders of
the other side were null, as being Arian.

To conclude; I have already challenged Mr Dodwel, and the whole Party, (and in
this I am only a Second to the Dr) to produce me any ONE single Instance of a
Bishop disowned by the generality of the Catholic Church, for this Reason,
because put into the place of another deposed by the Civil Power. The
generality is the only thing that can be of any Authority: But I Will now, for a
Trial of skill, be so bold, as to give one challenge more. Instead of the
generality in the fourth Age, I challenge the Collector (who takes himself to
be so much a Master of the Story of that Age) to show me any one single Person
throughout all that Age, that actually stood out on that account. There is not
to be found (and I am not afraid to affirm it) so much as one single Person
among all the Catholics of that Age, who actually refused to own any Bishop
that was put in by an irresistible Power, but it was for one of these Reasons;
either because he accounted him a Heretic; or because he looked upon his
Orders to be null and invalid as being derived (either immediately or
mediately) from one whom he accounted a Heretic; or because the Bishop
communicated with Heretics; or lastly, because he was for some other Crime
Excommunicated. The Donatists themselves can afford the Collector no Example:
For the Reason why they disowned the Catholic Bishops, who were backed by the
Imperial Power, was because they accounted their Orders and their Baptism
invalid, as being derived from such whom they believed to have been Traditors.
This Rule being observed, you have a full and a clear Answer to all that Long
and Verbose Collection. More Labor and more Words to less purpose in my Life I
never saw. But it is usual with Men of that size for the cleanlier conveyance of
their Tricks and Shuffles, to stare their Readers with Confidence in the Face,
and to overwhelm them with a long run of Words.

With this I leave the Matter, the Collector and all together. For the sake of
some Reverend and Worthy Persons who are unhappily engaged in the present
Division, for whom I must avow I have all along had, and shall always have, a
very great and distinguishing Respect, I shall here lay down an Example, that
relates to our own Country, which to Men of good Tempers may be of good use.
When Wlketulus, the worthy Abbot of Croyland, in the time of Will. the
Conqueror, was unjustly deprived of his Abbey, Ingulphus, the Historian, being
nominated to it; without any scruple accepted of it, though he owned his
Predecessor to have been wrongfully dispossessed. Wlketulus being a very pious
and good Man, and skilful in the Affairs of the Monastery, De Glastonia illum
ad Burgum transmisso honorifico equitatu adduxi and de Burgo ad Croylandiam
accersitum omni favore and filiali dilectione dignam videns ejus venerabilem
personam and sanctissima religione praecellentem in pristino stallo suo ipsum
posu^^ nec ipso superstite, me plenum spontum, sed semper paranymphum vel
procuratorem Monasterii reputavi. Hist. p. 79.
Ingulphus invites him to come and live with him; placed him always in his own
Stall, and honored him as his Father and Copartner in the Government. Thus the
good old Abbot lived lovingly and contentedly with his Successor to his death,
and was very useful to the Monastery.

I have only a word or two more to add, and that is to put you in mind, that
whenever you meet with any thing that may be published as an Answer to The
Case of Sees Vacant, the Dr desires you would be pleased to Read both together.
If you think he is at leisure, or of an inclination, to Answer every little
thing (and especially of their Vnderworkmen) that shall be published against
him, you will find your self mistaken. The Phenomenon of History (if I may use
that word) are so fully comprehended and solved in that Treatise, that you will
not need or desire any Reply, if you compare and weigh one with the other. As
for those, that are of such pliant Understandings, as to fancy that which they
read last, to be always the best, or to think that every thing is an Answer,
that is so called in the Title page; His Judgment is that they are not worth
Instructing, much less gratifying. You ought not to forget what he tells you in
his Preface, That he hates everlasting wrangle, and an Adversary that Cavils,
and excepts against things not material (or refuses to answer the main points)
he shall think deserves a Reply as little as one that Rails. He often reflects
on those Words of that great and good Man, his late Lord, A.B. Tillotson, and
desires to regulate his Life and Studies according to them; (it were well if
all others would do the same.) A good Man should not be very willing, when his
Lord comes, to be found as it were beating his Fellow Servants; and all
Controversy, as it is usually managed, is little better. A good Man would be
loath to be taken out of the World reeking hot from a sharp Contention with a
perverse Adversary, and not a little out of countenance to find himself in this
temper, translated into the calm and peaceable Regions of the Blessed, where
nothing but perfect Charity and Good will reign for ever.

He is not so ignorant of the nature of Humane Passions, as to hope that his
Adversaries can, at this time of day, be convinced by any thing that may be
written. For, as the Collector himself owns, Men once dipped in Schism are hardly
ever after brought to their former Consistency and Integrity. It Is TIME only
that can do this. And to that the Dr leaves them.

FINIS
Books Printed for J. Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate Street.
A New Family-Book: Or, The True Interest of Families. Being Directions to
Parents and Children, and to those who are instead of Parents; showing them
their several Duties, and how they may be happy in one another. Together with
several Prayers for Families and Children, and Graces before and after Me at.
To which is annexed, A Discourse about the right Way of Improving our Time. By
James Kirkwood, Rector of Astwick in Bedfordshire. With a Preface by Dr.
Horneck. The Second Edition Corrected and much Enlarged.

Eight Sermons Preached on several Occasions. By Nath. Whaley, Rector of
Broughton in Northamptonshire.

The Guide of a Christian: Directing him to such Things as are by him to be
Believed, Practiced, Feared and Hoped for. There are added at the end Prayers
to be used upon several Occasions. The second Edition, Corrected.

The Duty of the Clergy and Laity. A Sermon preached in the Parish Church of
Grantham, July 12. 1697. At the Primary Visitation of the Right Reverend Father
in God, James Lord-Bishop of Lincoln. By Joshua Clark, M.A. Rector of Somerby
in Lincolnshire. Printed at the Request of several Clergymen then present; with
his Lordships Approbation.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 9. line 8. read the Dr's Book. ib.l. 15, etc. r. Zadock. p. 11. l. 4. r.
were continued. ib. l. 16. r. also because. l. 36. r. the ejected. p. 14. l.
26. r. Constans. p. 21. l. 11. r. (...).


