March. 1689 The DANGER of A COMPREHENSION.
MANY Reasons lead me to oppose a Comprehension, and the first of them is the
very reason I pereive which others have given for it, That it fortifies the
Church of England against Dissenters; for since our Fear was of Popery, to
translate it so early against Protestants of other Communions, is to tell them,
that having rid our selves of Papists, we are making New Levies against them,
and that we only halt a while to recruit our Numbers, and when in a posture to
attack them, they shall not fail to feel the weight of our Power and
Comprehension. By this means, of very good Friends against Popery, we shall
grow Parties and Enemies; and if this be not to be most carefully avoided in
our present Condition, I am mistaken both in my Religion and Politics.

II. But Secondly, What need is there of a Comprehension, which carries in it a
Variation of the Old and Settled Methods of the Church, only to let in so many
Men to Church Benefices; for when all is done, that must be the Mark they aim
at, that press it on the side of the Presbiterian, since an Act of Indulgence
would else answer that Gentleman as well: And if it were a Conscientious Desire
on the other side to enlarge the Church, it would become a Duty with her to
fling off all the rest that others scruple, upon as good grounds, and which
cannot be said to be Essential to Faith or Worship, and so make but one Work of
it for this Age. Since Conscience therefore does not seem to be the Ground of
this Comprehension on either side, it must needs have but an ill bottom to
stand upon.

III. We are not, nor cannot be assured, That the alteration this brings to the
Church of England will stop here; for more Knowledge or Delusion prevailing
among themselves or others, will call for the use of the same Prudence; and so
she can never be certain and stable, but subject to change with the Postures
and Motions of Opinion or State.

IV. It has something in it of Irreverence and Levity. Two Churches to bargain
about Faith and Worship, to take or leave, add or diminish, and both Parties to
show themselves stiff or careless for the same things, as Humor or Interest
govern them, which in Men pretending to Religion, cannot fail to scandalize
those that are not so Believing or Zealous as they ought to be.

V. I consider the very differing Temper of the Two Parties, whether it flow
from Succession of Education given by the Authors or Founders of them, or the
Influence of their Principles, or that one has been used to Ease and Dominion,
and the other to want the first and feel the last, or from all of them; but
it is certain, there is a Latitude and an Hospitality, a Passion and Reverence
to Majesty, almost to an Implicit Obedience, in the Church of England, and in
the Presbiterian Communion, a Stiffness, a Meddling, a Censoriousness, not
sparing their Superiors; naturally indeed inclined to Kings, but loving them
as Boys do their Tops, to whip them. And it is this Disposition that has ever
made that Society troublesome both to Church and State. Now as Men that are not
of a Temper live best with one another at some Distance, so the Church of
England will be less perplexed, and the Presbiterian less controuled in an Act
of Indulgence than in one of Comprehension.

VI. If the Comprehension be not stated upon an Unity of Practice, it can never
endure. For look how many different Practices there are, so many Parties in a
short time there will be; and such a Comprehension can only serve to break and
dissolve, instead of strengthening, the present Church. Common Sense teaches
us, That one Enemy within doors is stronger than Ten without doors; and such
every person comprehended must render himself after a while, upon a differing
Practice from the Old Standers of the Communion. If I saw more Piety and
Charity in both Parties than formerly, I would forbid my self this liberty; but
when I find Passions as strong, and Interest as prevalent on each side as ever,
I must beg their pardon, if I sav I cannot think their Notion of a
Comprehension reasonable.

Lastly, No body has ever yet succeeded upon this Design. It has been
endeavored by great Men of several Persuasions at several times, as Cassander,
Cajetan, Erasmus, Melancthon, Phlugius, Grotius, Salmasius, Dury, and others,
as well between Papists and Protestants, as Lutherans and Calvinists, but ever
to no purpose: and tho the Ministers should come in, their People would, in all
probability, fall to their share that are left out by this Act of
Comprehension. Wherefore I conclude, It is an Attempt that shows, in some men,
more of Fancy than Judgment, and Interest than Religion; and that Iron and
Clay will as soon cement, as our Episcopacy and Presbitery, will or can join to
constitute one National Church in England.


