DON TOMAZO, OR THE JUVENILE RAMBLES OF Thomas Dangerfield.

LONDON, Printed for William Rumbald in the Old Change, 1680.

TO THE READER.
YOuth has generally its Extravagancies, and they that are seduced by the
temptations of Pleasures and bad Company in great Cities, will have their times
to sow their wild Oats: For Don Tomazo's part he has sowed his already, and
finding it such ill husbandry to deal in that sort of Grain, has resolved to
give over. And now I have thought it convenient to give the World an account of
his Transgressions, to the end that People, as many have done, may not think
him worse than he was, what ever self-interest would have made him. Nor does he
expect that any man will henceforth upbraid him for what is past, as being
under the Protection of his Sovereigns Pardon, to which all true Subjects ought
to give an awful respect and obedience.

Had it not been for the high misdemeanors of Clavel we had missed a neat and
excellent Poem, and the Discovery of a great Mystery of Iniquity. The Cheats
and cunning Contrivances of Gusman and Lazarillo de Tormes have been made
English out of the Spanish Language, as well to instruct, as to delight. And
the greatest Historians have taken as much pains to recount the Lives of Bad
Men, as of the most deserving Subjects of their Pens. Mirrors that do not show
the Deformities, as well as Beauties of a Face, are of little use. In short,
all sorts of Men may gather hence, how vain a thing it is, to contend with the
Law, and that they must inevitably incur the Misfortune of the Pitcher, by
going often to the Well. But the way to amendment is never out of date. St.
Austin himself had occasion enough to repent the Follies of his Youth. Not that
he goes about to excuse his Offenses; but this he hopes he may presume to say,
That it was not his custom to put any man in danger of his life, but himself.
He only imposed upon the belief and understandings of others, which being
deluded, misguided their Wills. And it is no small Argument, that his being so
proper for the designs for which he was called out, was half a proof, that his
discoveries were true; which perhaps had they not been ill managed, might in
some measure have made satisfaction for his past Transgressions; nor does he
despair, but that some of them may yet take effect. In the mean time, while he
lives to show that Horace's Quo semel -- is not always true; Let the Virtuous
hence observe, how laborious a thing it is to be wicked, and the Vicious learn
by his Example to amend.

THE CONTENTS.
DOn Tomazo 's Birth and Parentage. P. 4. His motives to Travel. 5. His
Preparations. 6. His Traveling to Scotland. 9. His arrival in Scotland, and
what befell him there. 11, 12, etc. His first Entertainment by his Landlord. 21,
etc. Relieved by the Lord of Corheid. 27. His Entertainment there. ibid. etc.
Robbed a second time. 29. His Poverty. Ibid. Relieved by the Lord of
Creybachborn. 31. He white-washes Boatles. 33. He returns to the Lord of
Corheids. 34. Had like to have been laid hold on in his company going to
Edinburgh. 35. His meeting with several English Gentlemen at Edinburgh. 37. He
takes his leave of the Lord. Ibid. His Travels in Scotland. 38. His Escape at
Dunfreeze. 39. His return to London. 43. His Reconciliation with his Father.
44. He falls in love. 45. And relapses into Rebellion. Ibid. His Father
threatens to put him out of doors. 46. Is pardoned. Ibid. His flights to get to
his Mistress, and the Discoveries. 47, etc. His Father turns him out of doors.
He goes to London. 57. He cheats his Fathers Correspondent. 58. And his
Apprentice. 59, etc. He takes Shipping for Cales. 63. Forsaken of his Company,
and carried to Prison upon suspicion of killing a Man in a Duel. 65. His
misery. 66. He lists himself a Soldier. 67, What befell him during his
Soldiership. 68. He is entrusted with a great quantity of Jewels, and goes away
with them. 69, 70. He goes for Leghorne, thence to Scanderoon. Orders to
apprehend him there. 71. He escapes for Grand Cairo, and meets with Don Pedro.
72. Their pastime there. 74. He returns to Genoa, and his Amors there. 75. He
departs thence for Cadiz. 76. His misfortunes there. 77. He is taken by
Thieves. Ibid. He makes his Escape. 80. He robbs the Thieves. Ibid. His revenge
at Cadiz. 81. Embarques for England, but carried to Amsterdam. 82. Sets up the
Trade of Coining in Holland. 83, etc. Discovered. 86. But escapes, and carries
away the Goalers Daughter. 87. He follows the same Trade in Flanders. 88.
Flies. 89. Returns for England. 90. Turns Pickaroon. 91. His design upon
Guiney. 92. Cast away. 93. Sets up Coining at Dublin. Ibid. Comes to Bristol.
94. Worcester. 95. Their Adventures there. 96. He goes for a German. 97. His
attempt upon the Holland Fleet. 99, etc. He goes for Holland. 105. Turns
Merchant. 106. Imposes upon the Flemings. 108. Apprehended at Exeter. 110.
Coyns Spanish Money. 111. His Feats at Lime. 113. The Lime Merchant cajoled.
117. His way of buying Horses. 118. His Feats at Kings-bridge. 123. At
Plymouth. 127. The Story of the Cornwall Justice. 128. He departs from Cornwall.
152. He falls in love with a young Gentlewoman in Somersetshire. 153. Is
apprehended at Exeter. 155. Is bailed. 157. He is acquitted, but 158. Loses his
Match. 159. Returns to London, and so for Holland. Ibid. 160. He kisses the
Prince of O.'s Hands. 161. He discourses the Prince. 162. Is employed as a
Spy. 163. His Transactions. 164, and Seq. Taken in the French Camp. 168.
Carried before the Prince of Conde. 169, and seq. His Speech. 170. He is
delivered by the Prince, and Cross employed. 172, and seq. The success. 175,
etc. He goes disguised to Luxemburgh's Army. 180. Is detained at Lisle. 181.
Cheats the Governor of his Horses. 183. His going a second time to the French
disguised. 184. Is apprehended. 185. His Story to the Duke. 186. His Release.
187. He cheats the Governor of Antwerp Castle. 189, etc. He quits the Dutch.
133. His new Exploits by Sea. 194, etc. He quits the Sea, and goes to the
French. 206. Is taken by the Spaniards, and known by the Governor of Antwerp.
208. Committed. Ibid. Condemned to death. 210. Brought to the Place of
Execution, but released. 212. Returns to London. 213. Tried at Sarum. 214. His
Exploits in London, 217. And in the Country. 221. Twice Committed to Newgate.
223. Taken notice of by Mrs. Cellier. 224.
DON TOMAZO, OR THE JUVENILE RAMBLES OF Thomas Dangerfield.
THe first Corrupters and Seducers of Youth, especially if active and
sprightly, are the whispers and temptations of Pleasure, and that which Boys
call Freedom, Men Extravagant Looseness: Which inclination in forward
Striplings being once inflamed by the inconsiderate severity of Parents,
labors with more violence to cast off the yoke of Bondage; so that unwilling
to be under the continual awe and terror of the Lash, they rather choose to
stand to the favor of Fortune, and the compassion of the wide world, then the
cruel mercy of them that begat 'em. A Cynical way of Education, which perhaps
many may have learned from the morose Documents of Solomon's whipping Proverbs,
and still as eagerly prosecute, not observing the ill success it met with in
his own Son. Upon which instigations, no sooner has incensed Extravagancy
resolved to take it is flight, but immediately Vice appears in all her Harlotry
attire, and exposing all the splendor of her gaudy allurements, so hampers
unwary Innocence in the Nooses of Necessity, that not knowing which way to
disingage it self, the Scene quite alters. So that of a sudden Innocence
becomes criminal, before it knows what a crime is, and young offenders incurr
the displeasure of the Law, ere they hardly understand what the Law forbids.
Till at length perceiving what they have done, and not believing themselves
safe from the punishment of lesser facts but by committing greater, they
abandon themselves to those unhappy stratagems, which because they relieve at
present, are by them looked upon as the effect of Fortune's favor and their own
prudence; so that encouraged by success, they cannot forsake the delightful
practice of those Enormities, which maintain the sweet and tickling pleasures
of riot and debaushery. So easy a thing it is for Parents to beget, so
difficult a task to hit the true method of Education; for want of which, so
many lofty Genius's, so many active courages, so many soaring and refined wits,
all tender pieces, ready for all the fair impressions of virtue, have quite
alter^d their Bias; so many blooming Expectations have perished in the deep
Abysses of mistaken Conduct, and irregular severity. How near the Subject of
this Story was to falling from this fatal Precipice, the ensuing Relation will
declare, which, it may be, well believed, will prove neither unpleasing nor
unprofitable to the Reader, or rather an incitement to acts of Virtue, when he
shall observe the pains and labors which extravagance undergoes to support it
self in profuse and guilty Luxury.

Don Tomazo (for so he must be called, as having put his name into the Spanish
Garb, to which he was most accustomed in his Travels) was by birth of English
Parents, born in Essex, no less famous for pleasure then plenty. His tender
years were under the eye and government of his Father, a person of a severe and
disobliging austerity. In him perhaps it might be thought paternal care, who
observing which way the current of his Son's inclinations ran, deemed it the
safest course by violence to stop the stream of his unruly passions. And indeed
there was sufficient cause of suspicion, and the Father had a fair prospect of
what the future would produce, by the early exercises of his Son's childish
Talents. For which reason poor Don Tomazo was not only daily rated and
rebuked, but frequently and vigorously chastised, and exposed to the rigid lash
for every trivial misdemeanour. This surly usage so disengaged the frank and
generous humor of Don Tomazo, which was to have been corrected rather by
Lenitives then Corrosives, that he looked upon his Father as a Master rather
then a Parent, and himself to be a Slave rather then a Son. So then for redress
of these grievances, there must be a speedy remedy provided, for finding out of
which his tender wits were soon employed. They argued in his brain, that there
was no living at home, therefore he must venture abroad, and that if a
servitude must be endured, it was more easy to be born under the frowns and
spurns of Strangers, then of near Relations, where Extravagance had no body to
thank but it self for the hardship it suffered.

In the midst of these serious Consultations, the Devil and Ill-Luck soon found
him out a Meet-help for his purpose; a pure Satanical Privy-Counsellour, even a
Servant of his own Fathers. He was called by the name of Jemmy, a Scot by
Nation, Nature and Conditions; Indigent, Cunning and Perfidious: true only to
the Son to cheat the Father; perhaps out of a desire to revisit his Household
Gods, at the expenses of a defrauded Master. To this Instrument of Beelzebub,
the young disgusted Squire discloses all the Secrets of his Heart, tells him
the occasion of his discontents, and his design to throw off the Yoke of
Paternal Severity, which since there was no way to do but by Traveling, he was
resolved to take that course, and therefore requested both his advice and
assistance. Jemmy listened to this Discourse like a Sow in the Beans; he applauded
his design, magnified his Youthful Courage, and by a large Encomium upon the
worst of Countries, persuaded the Credulous Stripling to Steer toward the
North Pole, to the Land of his Nativity, whither he might be sure of a faithful
Guide, and when there, of an Assistant in the midst of Wealthy and generous
Relations. This being concluded, they were both sensible that it would be very
uneasy Traveling without Horses; but that care was soon over, when Don Tomazo
called to mind that his Father was well stored with that sort of Cattle, and
being their own Casuists, they easily overcame all scruples of Conscience, upon
a supposition that an Heir in a case of necessity, might anticipate a small
pittance of his Inheritance, and that the so doing was positively no Theft. But
then again well knowing that neither Horse nor Man could Travel upon the Road,
without Corporal Food, and that it was in vain to swear at an Hostler, or to
kick a Chamberlain without Money in Breeches; it was farther agreed that the
young Squire should fly to London, there to take up what Money he could among
his Father's Correspondents, and that trusty Jemmy upon notice given of his
success, should precisely meet him at the Rendezvous, which was before
appointed at St. Alban's. These blessed beginnings were so fortunately favored
by the assistance of their friend Monsieur Satan, who was loath to lose two such
fair Gamesters, that all things being accomplished according to their hearts
desire, away hastens Don Tomazo to St. Alban's, and there meets his punctual
Companion with his Fathers two Horses; and so well mounted, the young Master
and the young man, Knight-Errant-like, set forward upon their Northern
Progress. By the way to make the Journey the more pleasant, Jemmy, who was
endued with a nimble utterance, and the true faculty of Scotch lying,
entertained his Master with several discourses, and among the rest, told him
such extravagant stories of the sweet pleasures, the contentment and plenty
which he should meet with at his Fathers stately Mansion, that he had raised
Don Tomazo's expectations Steeple high. But after some days travel, there befell
them a small occasion of delay, which somewhat abated the Squires jollity: For
it so happened, that Jemmy, already possessed with one Devil, was seized with
another Devil of an Ague, which entered him with that violence, that to
exorcise the robustious Spirit, they were forced to lie still for four or five
whole days and nights; in which time Don Tomazo's Father had been amply
informed which way the two Edomites were marched with the Spoils of his Purse
and Stable. How fatal this discovery might have proved to these young
Practitioners in iniquity may be easily conjectured, had the Father been eager
to follow them. But he being more tender of his credit, as disdaining the world
should know how his grave Experience had been over-reached by two raw
Whipsters, then to make a noise of his losses, neglected the pursuit; so that
upon Jemmy's recovery, the two Knight-Errants set forward again, without any
disturbance, But Jemmy, as unsound in body as in mind, having ventured too soon
into the sharp winter air, (for such was the season of the year which they
chose for their Journey of pleasure) before they could accomplish four days
travel more, fell into a new distemper, to the great grief and sorrow of Don
Tomazo, who had then no small reason to doubt the loss of his Guide, and pillar
of his hopes, as finding himself, for the love and friendship which he bore to
Jemmy, now more likely to be exposed then ever to the misfortunes of unhappy
Undertakers, easily foreseen, but so not easy to be prevented, especially
considering the great expense he then and still was like to be at. These
reflections, and the thoughts of being a stranger, without having any Bills of
Exchange for future supply, among a rude sort of people that would no longer
respect him then his money lasted, which was not likely to be long, at the rate
of Nurses and Pothecaries Bills, were sufficient to have confounded all the
cogitations that an unexperienced Stripling could muster together. But Fortune
and good Husbandry so well agreed to encourage Don Tomazo in his first Essays
of Gusmanry, that in three weeks time, Jemmy not yet mellow enough for the
Devil's palate was well recovered, and able to undertake the remaining part of
the Journey. And indeed he had then more reason then ever to promise a
retaliation of that care and kindness which his Master had shown him in his
Sickness: nor, to say truth, could Don Tomazo accuse him in the least while he
was yet in England, where he was as lavish of his acknowledgements as could be
expected, and protested such works of supererogation at home, as if his Fathers
Opulent Seat had been the Mansion of Gratitude it self. But the Reader shall
soon find the vast difference between Scotch Promises and Scotch Performances.

Well -- after a cold and tedious Journey, all weather-beaten as we were, at
length we arrived at Jemmy's Father's Palace, lying in the County of Anderdale,
near a Town called Moffut. When Don Tomazo beheld it, he was so far from being
over-ravish'd with joy at the sight, that he took it for some enchanted Castle,
in regard he could not see so much as one stone of all that magnificent Pile,
which Jemmy all the way upon the road had been building in his fancy. Rather he
was more than usually surpised at the humility of the Structure, and the
lowliness of the Owner. Had he not been a Scot, you would have sworn him a
Turk, regardless of his habitation in this world, in expectation of Fools
Paradise in the next. It was a Hovel, or rather Stie, in length about six and
thirty foot, not covered Cathedral-like with Lead, nor yet with glittering
Copper after the Swedish manner, but according to the Scotch custom, very
meanly thatcht with oaten Reeds; not such as the Arcadian Shepherds pip'd
withal, but plain downright illiterate Straw. The fire was made near the
Bedside, at one end, which for want of a Chimney, wrapped the whole Family,
Guests and all, like so many Ixions, in a continual cloud of Eye-tormenting
smoke. Near to the Bedside lay the Corn and Hay, which you may be sure was not
worth its weight in Gold: and at the other end, without the distinction of
Partitions, stood two Sheep, a Cow, and the Squires Horses: So that it may be
verily believed, that Virtue her self in all her exiles and persecutions never
lived in such a Homely Hermitage: and Marius, when he lay hid among the
Bulrushes in the Fens of Minturnus, might be thought to have lodged in a Palace
to this ill-favored resemblance of Noah's Ark.

So soon as we came to this unfortunate Apartment, the Old man, overtaken with
joy not only to see his Son, who had been absent from him several years, but to
behold him in an equipage so Gentile, after the English mode, could not forbear
bedewing his Cheeks; but when Jemmy fell* on his Knee to crave his Fathers
blessing the old man, who well knew he had none to give, stood amazed; What a
muckle Dee'l, quoth he, is the Carle wood? Whereupon Tomazo observing his
astonishment, acquainted the old Bacon-fac'd Lown, that it was the only
customary way for Children in England to acknowledge their respect and duty to
their Parents, and that Jemmy had done it purely out of natural affection, and
to show his improvement in English Behavior and Education. Thereupon the old
man seeming to be better satisfied, condescended to the breeding of his Son,
and Embraced him. Which Ceremony being soon over, he requested the Squire to
enter his Polyphemes Den. But Don Tomazo being very hungry, and not finding the
place proper for many Complements, came close to the point, and demanded what
Provision they had in the House? To which they made answer, that they had good
store of Oatemeal and water, but neither Flesh nor Fowl, Milk nor Butter, Bread
nor Drink; and which was worse, that none of these Creature Comforts were to be
had for money within six miles of the place; so that poor Don Tomazo who had
always fared well at a plentiful Table, began to curse his man Jemmy, who after
such mountainous promises of a splendid Entertainment, and Princely Viands, had
betrayed his longing Appetite to such miserable Commons, hardly worth the
acceptance of a Country mouse. But Jemmeys Mother, discovering discontent in
Don Tomazo's face, and taking pity of his Youth, or rather for joy of her dear
Darlings return, began to comfort up our desponding Stomachs with the hopes of
a notable Banquet. This, after the expense of all her Huswifery, proved to be
that sumptuous Scotch Dish, called a Steane-Bannock, which was a certain
Composition of Bean, Peas'n, Barley and Oat'n-meal mixed together with water,
and made into the form of a large Cake, and being set to the fire against a
stone, and so baked, was to be eaten with water; and this without first or
second Course was the cream of their entertainment: a strange sort of
Philosophical Diet that no way answered Don Tomazo's pampered Expectations.
Supper, if so it might be called, being thus soberly dispatched at the mere
instance of craving hunger, the weary Guests were no less desirous of repose,
then they were before of food; to which the old man replied, that 'twas the
Fashion in that Country for the Family to go to bed all together, and not one
before another, and therefore in regard that Don Tomazo and his Son had
prevailed with him to be conformable to an English Ceremony, he would constrain
them to be conformable to one of his Country Customs. Don Tomazo not a little
disgusted at his Diet, and like to be worse pleased with his Lodging, began to
enter into a serious consideration of his forlorn Condition. He found on the
one side how miserably he had been frustrated by his man Jemmy, whose faus
tongue he now began too late to curse; he saw himself in a wild Desert among a
sort of Savages, more prone to make him a prey to their cruelty, then afford
him relief: which on the other side filled his Head full of jealousies and
fears, as now misdoubting that his trusty Man Jemmey had some further designs
rather of mischief then of kindness, as being privy to the small Treasure he
had about him. To repent was irksome, to fear, below him. There were no shady
Woods for Nightingales to lull him into soft slumbers; no murmuring Rills, to
which he might make his sorrowful complaints; no kind Hermites to invite him to
their Cells. All his comfort was in Hope, and the Compassion of his Guardian
Angel.

In the midst of these Distractions Don Tomazo perceived through the thick
smoke, which forced those Tears from his Eyes that he ought more willingly to
have shed, the two aged Parents, and five Children, of which Jemmey was one,
preparing for bed; which made him desire leave that he might sit up by the Fire
all night. But that request would by no means be granted him; so that poor Don
Tomazo was constrained to uncloath, and go to bed with the rest. But in that
comfortless place he was so far from finding any Sheets, that he scarce found
Woollen enough to cover him from the nipping Cold. However, all things
considered, the old Man was very friendly; for he laid the distressed Don
Tomazo by one of his brawny sides, that smelt like Hung-Beef; a kindness more
then ordinary; though it fell out to the unspeakable detriment of the sadly
tormented Squire; for the warmth of his Body had soon summoned together
multitudes of that creeping Vermin, Lice, the common curse of the Country;
which finding the easy penitrableness of the young Squires tender Skin, and
the sweetness of his well-nourish'd Blood, fell to their fresh Viands, with
such an eager appetite, that the unhappy Don Tomazo, incessantly tormented with
the continual nippings of those hungry Animals, would be often starting up in
his Litter to throw off his Shirt, to prevent those villainous Insects from
taking possession of the folds of his under Linen; for which the Old Man as
often rebuked him. But alas! it was impossible for the suffering Don Tomazo to
obey the checks of his surly moroseness, while the sharp-set Vermin were so
busily employed upon his Carcass, which it was as natural for the rest to
endure, as it was to sleep. This restlesness of Don Tomazo at length made the
peevish Cinque and Quatre angry; so that at last he began to cry, Don Tomazo
was a subtle Karle, and intended to be immodest with his Daughter. Whereupon in
a grumbling tone he commanded him to surcease his cunning excuses and lie
still: insomuch that the afflicted Squire was compelled to comply with his
austere Governor, and to spend the rest of the night in wishes for the
slow-paced Morning. Which had no sooner displayed her comfortable Light, but up
he rises, leaving the whole Family asleep, designing to be gone forthwith, and
rather to expose himself to the mercy of the cold Winds, the severe Weather,
and the unknown Passages of the rugged Mountains, then to the barbarous
kindness of such a savage entertainment for another night. Thereupon, in order
to his farther progress, he puts on his Boots, and leads forth his Horse; but
going behind the House with his Steed in his hand, (for to avoid the trouble of
leading, he had left his other Courser at Jemmey's disposal, as the reward of
his Fathers obligations) here Fortune showed him one of her cursed slippery
tricks, which had like to have cost him his sweet Life, and put an end to all
his disconsolations. For stepping by chance upon certain rotten Boards covered
with Snow, that lay over a deep Well, the treacherous Boards giving way, in
dropped Don Tomazo, who had like to have drawn his Horse also after him, had not
the Bridle broke. Well it happened for the unfortunate Squire, that the Water
in the Well was frozen to a considerable thickness, else you might have bid Don
Tomazo good night by the Name of Nich'las. But the Ice putting a stop to his
farther descent, he received no more hurt then a slight bruise by the Fall. So
odly sometimes bad and good luck conjobble together. However, there he was
forced to stand in a kind of cold Little-ease, or Lobspound, being fallen much
lower then was within his reach to get out again. Now by that he had remained
there for some time meditating upon his misfortune in Chil-blood, Jemmey gets
up, and perceiving his Master gone, runs into the Backside, where he finds the
Horse in a cold Trance, wondering what was become of the Grass that used to
grow in England, but could not imagine where Tomazo should be. In that amaze he
flies about to seek him, but not succeeding in his Search, away he posts to
Moffutt. In the mean while the Old Man rises, who finding both his Son and Don
Tomazo absent; yet seeing their Horses, could not conjecture what the Dee'l
should be become of 'em. He waited, for some hours, with patience, expecting
their return, but neither appearing, away goes he also to draw Drie-foot after
both. The Old Man proved a cunninger Huntsman then the Son; for he tracing the
Footsteps which he observed in the Snow, came directly to the Well, where he
found the unfortunate Don Tomazo, who espying the Countenance of his supposed
Deliverer, invokes his aid, and begs his assistance to help him out of his
Winter Sweating-Tub. But Don Tomazo was extremely deceived in the humor of the
Churlish Chuff; for he perceiving his Prey in the snare, told the shivering
Squire that there were more words went to a Bargain: You, quo he, would have
deflow'red my dear Moggee, and therefore you shall stay there a while to cool
your courage. Nay farther, qho he, I am apt to believe, that because I spoiled
your sport, you have taken your revenge upon my Son, and made him away; so that
until he be found, you are not like to stir. This was a sad Morning Lecture to
poor Don Tomazo, who would have given all the Shoes in his Shop for a warm
Chimney-corner; but there was no help for no remedy. For the old Villain, full
of mischief, leaving him to his Soliloquies, returns to the House, and there
consults the Hag his Wife, and his Daughters, as ready as himself to exercise
their cruelty upon poor Tomazo, well understanding by Jemmey's information,
that he had, what they had been but little acquainted with, both Silver and
Gold about him: And therefore having framed their design, they came to the
Well, let down a Rope, and bid Tomazo to fasten it about him. To these glad
Tidings, as to a Voice from Heaven, Don Tomazo cheerfully condescended; so that
obeying such welcome Orders, they presently drew him up. But he was no sooner
come forth, but the Old Caitiffe was as yare for his Cash; who with a grim
Aspect threatened to stab him with his Durk, a doleful sight God wott, if he did
not fairly deliver all he had. Thereupon Don Tomazo finding himself under the
Paws of an unavoidable violence, put his Hands into a Pocket that contained
about three Pound in Silver, which the false old Miscreant took. But not so
contented, he further told Tomazo of the concealment of his Gold, which he must
either part with, or with his Life; and with that pulled him down by main force
in the Snow, menacing nothing less then downright murder if he did not speedily
give it him. Don Tomazo did by no means like this bitter Breakfast; loath he was
to part with the life of his Enterprise, and it was as sad a thing to think
that he should take so much pains to travel into Scotland to be buried in a
Well. While he was in this peck of troubles, the Wife and Children more
merciful, prevailed with the old Tyrant to spare his Life, but to examine his
Clothes for the Gold, which he soon found; and then fetching forth the
despoyl'd Tomazo's Horse, bid him be gone, hoping, in regard the Ground was
thick covered with Snow, and Don Tomazo an absolute Stranger in the Country,
that either he might fall into some hole and be starved, or else never be able
to give any account of the Place where he had been so courteously entertained.
But Don Tomazo's better Fortune so guided the Horse, and the barbarism of the
old Ragamuffin had so imprinted all imaginable Observations in Tomazo's Memory,
that they were never to be forgotten.

In this forlorn condition Don Tomazo, having wandered till some time before
the next night, and about ten Miles from the Den of his grisly Robber, happened
to espy a small Village, to which he rode with great joy. There the Scene
altered, and he found something of generosity in an ancient Gentleman, who was
called the Lord of Corheid, and owner of the Village, to whom Don Tomazo,
after he had made an Apology for himself, gave an account of the Old Man's
entertainment. Which being delivered by the dismantled Squire in English, the
Lord could scarce understand the meaning of his Story, till by frequent
repetition he better apprehended the matter, and then gave credit to the
Relation; promising Don Tomazo withal, that he would use him more kindly. Upon
which he bid the empty young Gentleman welcome, and commanded him to be as free
as if he were at his Fathers House: Moreover he assured the poor disconsolate
Traveller, that the next day he would send his Warrant (for he was in
Commission of the Peace) for the whole Family, which had been so barbarous to a
Stranger, which he performed accordingly; so that both the Parents, and all the
Children, together with Jemmey himself, were brought before him. There they met
to their sorrow, their injured Guest, who charged the Old Man so home, that he
could not deny the Fact, especially when being searched, the joyful Don
Tomazo's Gold was found about him. Thereupon the old Rogue, his Son Jemmey, and
the Daughters, were all packed away to Goal.

By this time the good Lord of Corheid, being truly sensible of the heinous
abuses that had been put upon the succourless Don Tomazo by this same crew of
Scotch Monsters, and also possessing a natural tenderness of Heart, took such
an affection to Don Tomazo, that he requested him to remain in his House, till
he could more opportunely dispose of himself. Which kind and seasonable offer
Don Tomazo was unwilling to refuse, especially finding the temper of that whole
Family so truly generous; so that he took the boldness to continue there near
upon forty days. During which time he had so won the Lairds favor, that he
called Don Tomazo his Son, and was often wont to take him, when he went a
visiting, to the Houses of several Persons of Quality, by whom he was so nobly
and familiarly treated, that it would be a foul ingratitude not to acknowledge
their most obliging generosity.

Now was Don Tomazo as it were in a serene Calm after a violent Storm, living
at ease and in plenty; he had seen himself revenged upon those violators of the
Laws of Hospitality; he found his Money all restored, and his company
acceptable to the chiefest in the Province: Which had inspired so much
greatness into Don Tomazo's Breast, that he, according to the Proverb, Taking
that for his Country where he fared best, did not much care to quit his Post.
However, considering with himself in the midst of his Delights, that it would
be a rudeness beneath the breeding he had shown, to trespass upon the Laird's
good Nature beyond reason, he bethought himself that it was high time to take
his leave, yet with a promise to return, (for such was the Lairds obligation
laid upon him, provided he could find no better Quarters.) Whereupon he set
forwards, being furnished with a Letter of Recommendation to a Person of
Quality that lived about fifteen Scotch Miles from the Lairds House, the most
part of which way lay over the Mountains. But now behold another jades trick of
that fickle Whore that Men call Fortune. She had for forty days together given
the exalted Don Tomazo her sweet Milk, but now she resolves to kick down the
Pail; as if by checquering the accidents of his Travels, she intended betimes
to teach him what he was to trust to, if he relied upon the mutability of her
humor. For by that time Don Tomazo had rode about six of the forementioned
Miles, from a little Cave between two Rocks out leaped a Brace of St. Nicholas
Clerks, who violently seizing the Person of the Squire, took away not only his
Gold and Silver, that had already been in so much jeopardy, but also his Horse
and Clothes, stripping him to his very Shirt: In lieu of which they gave him a
piece of an old Pladd, adding withal, that that sort of Clothing would make
him as perfect a Scotch Man as either of them; and thus penyless, dismounted
and naked they left him to pilgrim it over the Snowy Mountains, without so much
as directing him one step of his Way.

You may now easily conjecture, that this unfortunate Youth had reason
sufficient to condole the calamity of his condition. And indeed there was no
Person of pity that did not highly blame these rigorous proceedings of that
hare-brain'd Beldame Fortune; but she made answer for her self, that they could
be no true-taught Sons of hers, that were not bred up in the School of
Affliction: Experience was not to be learned by living at a certain rate of
content and plenty: It was the mixture of good and bad luck that was the
Mistress of Knowledge. Quo she, this young Gusman will be the better for these
two Robberies, and this damned Walk over the cursed Rocks, as long as he lives.
This is the way to try whether he have courage, whether he have patience,
whether he have ingenuity. And so indeed it happened; for though at first the
stripped and ransacked Cavaleer could not forbear lamenting the rashness of a
Journey that had brought him into so many almost intolerable misfortunes; yet
resuming his natural courage, rather then return in that miserable condition to
the good Lord, (who would most certainly have clothed and entertained him as
before) he resolved to march forward, and to try, since he had no more to lose,
how he might revenge himself by getting something from a People that had taken
all from him; a task very difficult to be performed among the Sons of Poverty
it self, in a Country as barren of Riches as the Mountains that disfigure it.
Full of these thoughts Don Tomazo steers his course by accident to another
Lairds House, whose Title was the Lord of Creyback Borne; to whom the rifled
Squire related his last misfortune only, omitting all the former Passages, nor
owning that he knew any Person in the Country, but only that he was traveling
to Edinburgh, where he was in expectation of meeting with some Friends. This
Lairds compassion was not much inferior to that of his first acquaintance; for
when Don Tomazo had told him his Story, he clad him with a Suit of his Sons
Clothes, civilly entertained him all night, and the next morning, after he had
directed him the best way to Edinburgh, gave him also three Pounds Scotch,
which is five Shillings Sterling, to bear his Charges.

From hence Don Tomazo walked on, till he came to the old Town of Peebles,
about ten Miles from the last Lairds House, and still in the same County, where
it fell out that he met with the very Persons that had so lately discharged him
of the burden of his Clothes and Money; but though he kept 'em company, and
drank with 'em, till he had spent half his small Stock, their disguises were
such as preserved them altogether from his knowledge, till it was too late to
prosecute his revenge.

His Tut'ress Fortune had a mind to keep him fasting, on purpose to put him
upon Trials of skill. She knew Necessity, and the lowness of his Pocket, would
soon constrain him to summon his Wits to a Consultation for Replenishment.
Every Fool can put the Sweat of his Tenants in his Pocket; He Is the darling of
Fortune that carries his Estate in his Brains. She never forsakes the bold and
daring, O brave Wits! for by their prompt assistance Don Tomazo, now at a
desperate pinch, had called to his remembrance a way what to do; not to laze
under hedges, not to go whining from door to door, to court penurious Charity;
but to cheat the Crafty, out-knave the Knave in grain; to white-wash Boatles,
one of which is the sixth part of a Penny, so as to make them pass currently for
a certain Scotch piece of Silver, called a Forty-peny Piece, which amounts to
twenty Boatles in Copper. Of these Pieces Don Tomazo, by the help of some
Ingredients which he bought at Peebles, had got good store, which being by him
vended for good, in a weeks time put about five Pounds in his Pocket. And thus
you see the wide World is no dangerous Sea for one that can swim.

With this jolly recruit Don Tomazo, now a Don indeed, returns to his friend
the Lord of Corheids, to whom he related the manner of his being robbed the
second time, which the good Gentleman could hardly believe, till Don Tomazo had
described one of the Persons most exactly well, and the other so near as could
be possible. The first happened to be one of the Lairds Tenants, who had often
seen Tomazo, and knew of the Gold and Silver's being restored to him at the
Lairds House. The temptation of which booty prompted him to act a crime, which
he had never been guilty of before. But that lame confession served neither his
nor his Companions turn; for being both apprehended, they were both sent to
Goal, Companions in their punishment, as they had been Associates in the Crime.
Which put Don Tomazo into some apprehension of his own danger, fearing lest his
condition might be the same, should he linger much longer near the Places where
he had so lately been sowing his counterfeit Pieces. But Fortune that desired
his improvement only, not his ruin, found out a way to deliver him. For about
two nights after, as the Lord was sitting by the Fire with his Family, and Don
Tomazo, there arose a discourse concerning the misfortunes of Don Tomazo; at
which the Lord fell into a rapture of admiration, how miraculously Heaven had
delivered the Unfortunate Stranger; saying very devoutly withal, That surely
Providence had reserved him to be an Instrument of some great Work or other.
And therefore, lest the noise of Don Tomazo's Gold and Silver might prove a
Bait for others to destroy this precious Instrument, he resolved the next
morning to go for Edinburgh, to look after the prosecution of the Prisoners,
and to take Don Tomazo along with him, as indeed the Proceedings of Justice
required. Now the Road to Edinburgh lay through a Village called Per^essen,
where Don Tomazo had been very busy in vending his Forty-peny Pieces. So that
as he passed through the Town, the Person who had exchanged the greatest part,
espying him, ran to stop his Horse; at which the Lord being surpised,
demanded of the Fellow, whether he intended to rob him? No, said he, but I want
some Money which that Person, pointing to Tomazo, cheated me of about five days
since. But the Lord had too good an opinion of his Son Don Tomazo, to give
credit to his Story; but rather believed that the noise of his Gold being
spread over the Country had set the People a gog to be hanged for it. So that
the Lord, putting Don Tomazo before him, without taking any farther notice of
the Villagers complaint, rode on. By which means Don Tomazo escaped a scouring,
and got clear to Edinburgh with his true Friend the good Lord, who carried him
to one of the Judges to give in his Testimony against the Prisoners; but Don
Tomazo being under age, could not be admitted as Evidence against them, and so
they were all acquitted.

At Edinburgh Don Tomazo accidentally met with certain English Gentlemen, whose
curiosity had lead them to travel into those Parts. These Gentlemen knew Don
Tomazo, to whom he related the occasion of his coming thither, as also how he
had been treated, as well by the Lord in particular, as others: He also gave
them an account of his misfortunes and deliverances; which as they were Stories
pleasing to the Ear, induced them to take Don Tomazo for a Companion, and to
make the same provision for him as for themselves. After which they went with
Don Tomazo to wait upon the Lord, to give him thanks for the great favors he
had shown their Countryman. Which piece of Complaisance was so grateful to the
Lord, that after he had drank a Bottle or two in the Company, with Tears in
his Eyes (for such was his affection to his new Son) he took his leave of
Tomazo in particular, and then of the rest of the Gentlemen. Where note, that
it is not for Clowns and Men of sullen tempers, but for Persons of accute
compliance, and airy behavior, to be Gusmans.

With these Gentlemen Tomazo traveled through diverse parts of Scotland, which
proved a very pleasant Journey; in regard those Gentlemen had Letters of Credit
to most Persons of Quality in the Country; by whom they were for the most part
very nobly entertained with good Music, and other Rarities; nay in some Parts
their splendid Equipage produced such credit of it self, without their Letters,
that some Gentlemen of the Country would stand at the back of a Chair, waiting
while they sat at Dinner, using no less then the Title of Lord to the meanest
of them, though they endeavored as much as in them lay to persuade them to the
contrary. Thus having traveled almost through the whole Country, and meeting
nothing worthy observation, the Gentlemen faced about homewards; when coming to
a Town called Dunfreize, upon the Borders of England, they concluded there to
rest for a Week or so: in which time they became acquainted with several of the
Inhabitants of the Place, with whom they used to drink smartly. One day among
the rest, as they were merry at a Tavern, an old Woman came into the Room to
beg a Glass of Wine, and in particular of Don Tomazo; who for that very reason
refused to give her any, unwilling to assume a preeminence in the company of
Friends to whom he was so much beholding. At which the Woman went away,
refusing to take Wine from any other Person, but threatening Don Tomazo with
most dreadful misfortunes, and an immediate Curse that should attend him; which
the Gentlemen little regarding, drank on to that excess, that very few, if one
went home sober.

That night Don Tomazo was not in a condition, but the next morning he went to
look after his Horse, which he found in such a posture as amazed him; for his
Body was drawn up in such a strange manner, that his Head and his four Feet
were all in a huddle together; besides this, the color of his hair was
altered, and a thick white Foam bedaub'd his Chaps from one side to the other.
This putting Don Tomazo in mind of the Woman's threats the night before, made
him suspect her for a Witch. Which he found upon enquiry had been the hard
opinion of her Neighbors for many years. Upon which information Don Tomazo,
possessed with immediate revenge, or rather to draw blood of her, according as
his Nurse had taught him, went to the old Woman's House, where he found her
cutting of Wood. So soon as she saw him, it seemed to Tomazo, that the
antickness of her behavior was such as showed her jealous of Tomazo's design
in coming to visit her, who while she discoursed him smoothly and calmly
enough, waited for nothing but an opportunity to surprise her. At length,
perceiving she had got a great Stick in her hand that she could not easily
cleave, Don Tomazo very officiously desires her to give him the Bill, and to
hold one end of the Stick, to which she readily consenting, Don Tomazo, having
by some discourse or other obliged her to look another way, with a home stroke
cut off one of her Thumbs, and so leaving her to curse and ban him to the
Devil, went immediately to the Stable, where he found his Horse upon his Legs
in decent order, and feeding as well as if nothing had ever ailed him.

This accident of the Witch, if such she were, exalted Don Tomazo to a very
high pitch; as believing he was, or should be some great Hero. For, quo he,
Ulysses was beloved by a Witch, and Aeneas was beloved by a Witch; St. George
was charmed by a Witch, and Don Tomazo was beloved by a Witch. So that had he
given her Wine, and not cut off her Thumb, who knows what happinesses had been
prepared for him. But having cut off her Thumb, she withdrew her affections
from him, and was so far from advancing his Fortunes, that she complained to
the Magistrates of the Town of the loss of her Joint; for which she accused the
English Lad, as she called him. Whereupon the English Lad was sent for, and
upon a full examination of the matter, committed to Prison. For indeed he owned
the Fact, and upon what occasion he did it, but could not make out by any sort
of reason why he should assume the doing of justice to himself. The rest of the
Gentlemen offered to be his Bail; but nothing would serve but one of Tomazo's
Thumbs, which the Magistrate protested should be cut off, and given to the Old
Woman to burn before his face. Which rigorous Sentence you may be sure did not
a little trouble Don Tomazo. But Fortune, who knew he had more occasion for his
Thumb then the Old Woman, was for none of those Mosaical Executions, so that
what by her assistance, and the Gentleman's industry, a Rope was conveyed to Don
Tomazo, by means whereof he made his escape out of the Goal, without paying his
Fees; and so being privately conveyed out of Town to a Place where his Horse
stood ready, he received directions to post with all speed to Carlisle, and
there to stay at an Inn appointed, till the Company came to him. Which by the
good conduct of Fortune, and with no small hazard he accomplished* being
pursued almost to the Walls of the City. About a week after arrived his
Companions, who being suspected to have been privy to Tomazo's Escape, were
detained by the Magistrate till they had paid their ten Crowns apiece to the
Poor of the Town, which amounted to a considerable Sum, there being five in
number.

These Gentlemen being come to Carlisle, found there their beloved Tomazo, for
which they were not a little joyful; their kindness to him being nothing
inferior to the Lord of Corheids.

From Carlisle they set forward for London with all speed; where in a little
time being safely arrived, the Company separated, and Don Tomazo was left to
himself; who though so near his Parents, was almost in as bad a condition as at
his first entrance into Scotland. But necessity prompting him to some serious
resolution, the Story of the Prodigal Son took possession of his Pate, and he
began to study how to be reconciled to his Father. A kind Office which was soon
accomplished by the Intercession of a particular Favorite of his Fathers, who
so far prevailed, that Tomazo, after a hearty sorrow and deep contrition for
his Crime, was again admitted into his Fathers favor: both expecting various
effects of the past Ramble; the Father believing that the Son, now well read in
the Lectures of necessity, would be more careful how he plunged himself into
the same Exigencies again; and the Son presuming, that the Father now knowing
what it was to want a living Child, would be more tender of provoking him for
the future. In both which Conjectures both were mistaken. As for Tomazo (for
while he is under his Father's Roof we must un-Don him) for about half a year
he continued very patiently within the bounds of modesty. But the continued
austerity of his Father, together with certain Impressions that Love had made
in his Heart, soon put his discontents into an uproar, and quite altered that
composure of mind, which had given such life to their hopes of his becoming a
new Creature. The Don began to close again with Tomazo, and all his passions
being in a ferment, so alarmed his Father, that he was forced to double his
Guards. However, notwithstanding all the Fathers diligence and correction, the
Son, having laid aside all thoughts of reformation, and forgotten all his vows
and protestations of penitence, betook himself so far to his former more
natural, and consequently more pleasing extravagancies; so that the Old Man, no
longer able to endure the bad Examples which he gave in his Family, one day in
the Garden took an occasion to acquaint Tomazo that he must depart those Walls.
This Sentence sounded very harshly in Tomazo's Ears; and therefore duly
weighing the misery of an eloignment from his beloved Mistress, a near
Neighbor, the great dangers he had escaped in Scotland; his present ease, and
the apparent extremities he should be exposed to by the Casualty of new
Travels, he began to intercede with his Father, whose good nature at that time
was easily prevailed with to have some farther patience, provided his Son would
keep up to his promises of mortification. But Tomazo being engaged in an Amor
with a loving Female, that was the sole and first Mistress of his affections,
had not the power to perform his engagements, and therefore found out a ready
way to unravel all his Fathers hopes.

This Mistress of his was Daughter to a neighboring Gentleman, in her
thirteenth year, of no great Fortune, more then what Nature and Art in point of
Education had accomplished her withal; which for the most part are the chief
allurements of Youth, especially such as are not capable of taking a prospect
of their future well-being. Between these two Children, as I may safely say,
for Tomazo was not then above fourteen years of age, there was an amorous
intreague so cunningly managed, as could hardly be expected from such early
Lovers. To which purpose the Damsel, who had a Father as severe in all
particulars as Tomazo's, had ordered our meetings in the night; to the end she
might steal her enjoyments, when the old Gentleman thought her most secure,
that is in English, fast asleep. Tomazo's condition was the same. So that for
several nights they entertained each other with all the amorous caresses that
an innocent and harmless converse could afford. But it so fell out, that Tomazo
was unfortunately suspected by his Father, whose Argus Eyes kept a continual
Watch upon him, even to that degree of strictness, that nothing would serve but
that Tomazo's Quarters must be removed to a Chamber, the passage to which lay
through his Fathers. So that it was almost impossible for Tomazo to meet his
Mistress that night, as by solemn Promise, sacred among Lovers, he had engaged
himself to do. But Love, that has more ways to the Wood then one, furnished him
with an Expedient; for Tomazo, considering the vast damage it might be to him,
to disappoint a Lady that ventured all for his sake, resolved to make the
attempt, though it were through his Fathers Chamber. With this resolution of a
deeply-smitten Gallant, up he rises, puts on his Clothes, and laying in his
place a Periwig and a Block with the face of the Block turned to the Wall, and
carefully healed up for fear of catching cold, he takes a Sheet along with him,
and adventures cross the old Gentleman's Chamber, who being more wakeful then
Tomazo expected, over-hear'd him, but yet let him alone, well knowing the door
to be fast, and the Keys of all the House to be safe by his Bed side. Tomazo
understood all that before, and therefore not to put himself upon vain and
fruitless delays, he takes his Napkin and his short Stick, Utensils that he had
ready fixed, goes to the Window, and having with much Art, but no noise, drawn
the Bar, he fastens his Sheet, let himself down into the Garden, and thence
with no less speed then joy, repairs to his Mistress, whose patience was almost
tired with waiting for his company, which she had scarce enjoyed above two
hours, but break of daylight forced them to retire. But before that time,
Tomazo's Father, having heard something trip through his Chamber, concluded
that it was his gracious Son; but because he was almost assured that he could
find no way out of the House, he therefore expected his immediate return, which
not being made, the Old Gentleman, mistrusting some treachery in his own Sense
of Hearing, consulted his Wife. She was of the same opinion, that it was
impossible for Tomazo to get out of the House, and therefore undertook to
persuade her Husband, that Tomazo was returned to his Chamber. However, the Old
Gentleman, not being satisfied, gets up, and taking a Candle examins the Bed;
where finding a Head with hair that lay very snug and quiet in a true sleeping
posture, he could not imagine but that Slipstring was fast in Morpheus Chains,
who was then indeed in the Fetters of his Mistresses Arms. But Jealousy and
Age, being generally such inseparable Companions, it would not out of the Old
Gentleman's Pericranium, but that either some Hobgoblin or some Thief had been
visiting the Secrets of his House: and therefore resolving to be farther
satisfied, once more up he takes the Candle down Stairs he rumbles* and
examines all the Doors* but finding all fast in a pelting chafe to be put thus
to dance about in the cold in his Shirt, up he comes again; when* lo, as he
ascended he spied a pittance of the Sheet hanging within the Window* whither he
marched immediately, and observing the posture of the contrivance* concluded
there was a Robbery in the case. Thereupon the Old Gentleman calls up his
Servants, and bid 'em search the House: who finding all things in due decorum,
brought in an absolute Ignoramus, to the great amazement of the Master and
themselves: in which astonishment he returns to his warm Wife, and relates the
Story to her. She presently called 'em all Fools, and bid 'em call up Tomazo,
who there was no question to be made would soon unfold the Mystery. Thereupon
one of the Maids was sent to wake him; who receiving no answer, began to jog
the Block, believing it to have been the drowsy Body of her Masters Son; which
she did so rudely, that the Block, turning, the black Physiognomy of the graven
Image, star'd her full in the Countenance. Which so terrified the Maid, that she
ran to her Master crying out, that Tomazo was murdered, for he looked black
in the face. Upon which the Master and Mistress both rose, and went into
Tomazo's Chamber; where upon a true examination of the whole matter, they
discovered the Plot, and so leaving the wooden Idol in the same posture, as it
lay when the Maid first found it, they went to bed in expectation of Tomazo's
return; who soon after made his silent entry, and having rectified the
disorders of the Window, stole barefoot through his Fathers Chambers, who
heard him well enough, into his own, and with much inward satisfaction for the
purloyn'd pleasures he had had, went to supply his broken rest, not dreaming he
was discovered, in regard he found all things as he left them. But woe is me,
before Tomazo was well settled in his repose, the Father, no longer able to
conceal his passion, came to correct the amorous Night-walker. Tomazo, by the
cloud upon his Fathers Brows, perceiving the Storm coming, pleaded hard for
mercy, beseeching his Father to consider, that the innocence of his years could
not draw him forth to any more then only a merry-making with honest and civil
Persons, some of whom he well knew. But that would not qualify the incensed
Old Gentleman, who at first laid on very smartly; but observing no returns of
childish howling, but rather a manly suffering, and passive submission to
Paternal Authority, he forbore any farther Schoolboys chastizement, which he
saw was but thrown away upon one that so little regarded it; and upon Tomazo's
further entreaty came to a Capitulation, which produced these Articles of
Agreement, That the next fault that Tomazo did commit, he should be thrust out
of doors, never more to see his Fathers face again. This was a doleful
Sentence, yet but a Flea-bite to the irresistible commands of Love. An Article
with a Father was not to stand in competition with a Promise made to a
Mistress. And the Devil would have it, that he had made one to meet her again
the night following in the same place. So that, after the mode of Princes,
Tomazo soon found a flaw in the Treaty, and was resolved to venture a breach,
though he lost the reversion of all his Fathers Dominions. Thereupon, being
informed, that his Father, who looked upon him as a Carthaginian of no faith,
was resolved to lock him into his Chamber the next night; by way of prevention,
Love inspired Tomazo to go in the daytime and pluck up one of the Boards under
his own Bed, which gave him free passage into a Cellar, and so through a Window
as before. That done, the hopes of enjoying his Mistress made Don Tomazo very
pleasant the rest of the day, having made so fair a progress already, which
gave his Father no less cause to suspect that he had some notable Stratagem in
his Pate, that made his Heart so light, and therefore that night he resolved to
watch Tomazo's motion himself. Which being come, and the usual hour having
summoned the Family to bed, Tomazo was locked into his Room; where, after he
had made a seeming preparation to go to bed, he fell to work, and first having
removed the Board, he let down his Clothes with a Line, the passage not being
otherwise wide enough for his Body: then he descended himself, like an Angel
from the Roof of a Playhouse, and thinking himself as secure as a Thief in a
Mill; but no sooner was he in the Cellar, but at the same moment his Father was
in the Room, who immediately seizing the Line, drew back all Tomazo's Clothes,
and left him to meditate in the cold Cellar all night in his Shirt, having
nothing to keep him warm, but the heat of his desire; a sort of practice of
Piety which no way agreed with Tomazo's temper. These disappointments did but
serve to height'n Tomazo's Resolutions, whose Fires meeting with reciprocal and
equal Flames, burnt with that ardent heat, that the least separation from the
Object of his Love, was a gash that wounded to the Heart, not to be endured.
Love of it self, crafty and subtle enough, is a mere Devil in a young Gusman,
lawless as an Irish Torie, as impatient as Ajax, and as choleric as Hector. So
that had not his modesty argued hard against it, he had ventured, as he was in
his Shirt, to show himself a punctual Lover to a most faithful Hero, who had
spent all the night in waiting and moaning, and moaning and waiting for her
dear Leander, till the Tell-tale Sun began to peep into her amorous Sanctuary.
At what time, despairing, sighing, and accusing the Infidelity of her young
Gallant, she retired to her broken rest; while on the other side the Old
Gentleman came not only to release his languishing Prisoner, but also to
discharge him without Fees out of his House; according to the Conditions of the
Treaty so lately concluded. Which as soon as he was apparel'd was absolutely
performed, and poor Peel-Garlick turned adrift into the wide World in a worse
condition then when he traveled for Scotland; for then he had the Blessings of
Money, now not a Boatle in his Pocket.

It was now high time to consider what course to steer. The last disappointment
of his Mistress had so confounded him in his Amors, that he had not the face
to appear in his Mistress's ^ight. He thought it a crime so far beyond
forgiveness, that he durst not crave it. And therefore giving her over for
lost, (for he was yet but in his Love-primmar, and had not learned those
Lessons of cajeoling tender Damsells, which afterward he became a Doctor in)
he abandoned all his Amorous Thoughts, and rather chose the retirement of a
Hay-cock the remaining part of that day, there to condole his Destiny. So soon
as it was night, with the Beasts of Prey, to avoid his discovery, he began his
Rambles, steering directly for London, once more to try his Fathers credit,
which proved not so hidebound as the Old Gentleman intended. Who suspecting
that Tomazo would make bold with it, as he had formerly done, had, by way of
prevention, fairly warned all his Correspondents not to pay any Money upon his
account, without a Warrant under his own hand.

Now was Tomazo, with a slender stock of Nine-pence, arrived at Englands
Metropolis, where he was hard put to it to find a Lodging. However, he ventured
courageously into a public House, and having refreshed himself with a moderate
Supper, he calls for Pen, Ink and Paper, and then drawing a Letter of his
Fathers out of his Pocket, he did most exactly counterfeit the Old Gentleman's
Hand, to a Person of his acquaintance, for thirty Pound; who not at all
suspecting the Note, but extremely jealous of the Messenger, of whom he had had
some former experience, was at a wicked Nonplus what to do about the delivery
of the Money. At length, rather then run the risco of disobliging Tomazo's
Father, the politic Citizen found out an expedient; which was, that he would
send his Servant and the Money with Tomazo to his Father, to which Tomazo
cheerfully agreed. So the Money was immediately delivered to the Servant, with
positive orders not to part with his Treasure to any Person living but Tomazo's
Father. With these Cautions the Knight of the burning Pestle and Tomazo set
forward toward his Fathers forbidden Gates. Upon the way, Tomazo, full of
invention, often courted his Companion with the Temptation of drink, a Bait
that would not take with a zealous Writer of Shorthand, so jealous-pated, that
when he came to a House upon the Road, where he had a mind to rest himself, he
delivered his Charge to the Master of the House to secure it, while he took a
nap. Tomazo wholly intent upon his Prey, and watching all opportunities with
the vigilance of a Tigre, was not a little troubled at this reserved wariness
of the coy Purse-bearer. But such was Tomazo's patience, that he stifled all
his discontents, and still beheld his Companion with the careless glances of a
merry Countenance.

After some hours of slumber and repose, Tomazo and his cautious
fellow-traveller set forward again; but going over a Heath, they met with
several Persons that informed them that if they went such a Road, they would be
certainly robbed, as they themselves had been but just before. Which so alarmed
the Cuckow-brain'd Prentice, who was ordered to deliver his Money to none but
Tomazo's Father, that to prevent a compulsion to breach of Trust, he examined
Tomazo what private ways there were that led to his Fathers House? Blessed
Mercury soon inspired Tomazo, so that he presently called to mind a solitary
by-way through long Grass and Corn, which proved so tiresome, that the careful
Londoner, to ease himself in some measure of his Burden, believing he could
deal well enough with Tomazo, most inauspitiously desired Tomazo to relieve his
weary Arms. Tomazo most affectionately embraced both the Opportunity and the
Bag; so that from that time they carried it by turns, to the great but
different comfort of each other. About eleven a Clock at night (for so eager
was the faithful Trustee to be at his Journeys end) it came to young Iscariot's
turn to bear the Sacred Load; who had no sooner lodged it next his Heart, but
Judas's own Devil possessed him, and presently taught him a trick, that
Monsieur Blunderbus should be no more troubled with his Burden. For Tomazo
passing by a heap of Stones, privately, but with a dext'rous slight of hand,
takes up a good big Brickbat, and lays the adored Mammon in its place. Soon
after, Tomazo being to go over a Bridge, makes a false step, as if he had been
near a fall, and drops the Stone into the River. Which the City-Dromedary
hearing, demanded what it was? It Is the Money, replied Tomazo; Pox take it, quo
he, let it go and be hanged, -- better let the Money fall, then suffer my self
to be sous'd at this time a night. The poor Seagul was in such a dismal
consternation at the news, so that his Senses were just packing up their Awls
to be gone from a place where they prophesied that they should be but very
rudely entertained by the Passion of the Master, upon his Boobies return; in so
much that Tomazo, who all the while laughed in his sleeve, would have given
something to have had his Picture as he then looked. In this amazement trusty
Tom-Fool would have persuaded Tomazo to have put off his Clothes, and to have
gone into the Water to make search for the Money, which Tomazo, to avoid all
suspicion, willingly offered to do, but withal told Nickapoop, that it would be
but a vain attempt without the help of a Candle. So that he easily persuaded
the tame Dottrell, now as submissive as a pumped Bailiff, to stay by the Bridge
while he went back to certain Houses about half a mile off to get a Light. In
his way, Tomazo had recovered and secured his Money, and so making forward to
the Houses, called up the People, told them the misfortune of young Nicodemus,
desired their assistance, and sent them all, for a company of Fools, to the
Bridge, where while they were poking, and groping, and treading a Mortar in the
Water with their bare feet, Tomazo having traversed his Ground, and taken
another Road, had made a fair step in his way back to London, leaving
Tom-Tottie to con the short Lesson of Experience which he had set him. So far
Tomazo had reason to applaud his own Ingenuity. But Fortune would have her
turns and her changes, to show him he was yet but a young Gusman, and that
there were others superior to him, whose Art was not to be learnt by Rules of
Accidence or Grammar, but by a suffering Experience. For he had no sooner
secured himself in the City, but he fell into the company of certain
Town-Bullies, who carried Tomazo, to Speirings Ordinary, where having easily
allured the young Squire into play, they soon reduced the thirty Pound, for
which he had taken so much pains, and which he looked upon as one of the
Trophies of his Mercurial Stratagems, to twenty Shillings, to the great grief
of Tomazo, who, to add to his afflictions, had received Information that his
Father was also in pursuit of him. For the dejected Counter-scrubber,
perceiving as well by the vain search that the People had made, as by the not
returning of Tomazo, that the Serpent had been too crafty for him, with a heavy
Heart jog'd on to the Old Gentleman's House, and there told the uncomfortable
Story, not daring to venture his Masters displeasure, though there were not
above two Inches difference in the depth of their understanding, only the
Master trusted the Man, and the Man trusted Tomazo.

Upon this Alarm Tomazo makes down for Gravesend with all speech, where he was
informed* that several Ships lay bound for the Straights. Whither Tomazo
resolved to venture, rather them fall again under the Jurisdiction of his
Father. There it was that Tomazo, to whom Fortune was never more kind then when
she had emptied his Pocket, while he was treating with one of the Captains for
his Passage to Gadiz, met with two of the Gentlemen, with whom he had traveled
in Scotland, bound in the same Ship, for the same place. To those Gentlemen, as
to his Confidents, he made known his condition, and related all that had
befal'n him since the time that they parted at London. True it is, that the
Stories of his Extravagance were not so pleasing to their more serious humors;
however, for old acquaintance sake, they promised to take such care of Tomazo,
provided he would be governed, that while he continued with them, he should
want nothing that was convenient for him, (a kindness easily within their
Power, as being the Sons of Persons of Quality, and Heirs to fair Estates;) and
thus far Tomazo had Greymolkin's luck, still to fall upon his Legs.

While the Ship was under Sail, the two Gentlemen and Tomazo had several
Consultations, how to shape their Travels after they came ashore; in order
whereunto it was agreed, that they should travel all Spain first; and after
that set Sail for Egypt, from whence they would visit India, China, Tartarie,
and so through Muscovie and Germany home into England again. Full of these
designed Rambles, they arrived at Cadiz, from whence they made have to Madrid,
where they had not been above four days, but one of the Gentlemen happened to
kill a Spanish Count, which occasioned an immediate and diligent enquiry after
all Persons that had been in his company. Thereupon the Gentlemen, upon notice
of the search given them by a Blackamore-Maid that served in the House where
they lodged, stole away afoot though all the by-ways of the Country, shaping
their Course for Ligorn, and leaving miserable Tomazo behind, without either
Money or Credit, who in two days after was apprehended, and in that blessed
condition committed to Goal. There he found several other English People, whose
Crimes were only their acquaintance with the Gentleman that had killed the
Gount; which Gentleman's Name (the sequel of the Story so requiring) is to be
henceforward Don Pedro Perguelio. But such was the kindness of the Spanish
Justice, that when the Search was over, all the Prisoners were brought before
the Court, where nothing appearing against them, they were all discharged. Had
not Tomazo had a wonderful Love for the Light of the Sun, it had been all one
for him to have confessed the Fact and been hanged, as to starve for want of
moldy Crusts: Such were the violent persecutions of a hungry Stomach, under
which Tomazo pined and wasted at that time. But, if it had not been for these
blessed Butts, of which you shall meet with anow, before the Story concludes,
poor Tomazo had been half worm-eaten by this; but then I say, it so fell out
one day, as Tomazo was walking upon the Parade among the Soldiers, for his
inclinations were always Martial, a certain Captain, whose Name was Don Pedro
del Viejo Castello, perceiving Tomazo, by his Habit, to be a Forreigner, asked
him his Country; to which Tomazo replied, of England; for which the Captain
liking him much the better, persuaded him to list himself in his Company, which
lay then at Puerto Ferrara, promising him due payment of his Wages, which came
to three halfpence a day; but withal by his deportment giving Tomazo to
understand that there might be some hopes of advance, and better usage for an
Englishman, then for the riffraff of the Country. The Offer, considering the
nick of time, was as welcome to Tomazo, as Rain to the parched Earth, he having
been a Stranger to all sort of Sustenance for some time. So that now being
advanced on a sudden from the Grave, to be a Gentleman Soldier, he again
resumes his forsak'n Title of Don, and marches away in state to his new
Quarters at Puerto Ferrara. There he lived about three quarters of a year, upon
his forementioned allowance, and the augmentation of a pound of Bread a day; at
the end of which term, the Garrison was in a most violent manner besieged by
the Portugueses, with whom the Besieged had many Encounters; in one of which
the Colonel of Tomazo's Regiment being killed, Don Pedro del Viejo Castello
succeeded him in the employment: who not forgetting Don Tomazo in his
advancement, whose courage and behavior had very much won his Heart, took such
a special care of him, that he raised his Pay from three halfpence to four
pence, and after that, for some works of super-arrogation that Don Tomazo
performed, from four pence to eight pence a day. About which time the Besiegers
drew off, leaving all their Trenches in good order, and retreated home for some
time; which gave the Town both leisure and opportunity to recruit. During this
Calm, the rest of the Soldiers, who had recovered their Spirits, envying Don
Tomazo's Prosperity, and the great esteem which his Colonel had for him,
entered into Cabals and Consultations among themselves to contrive his ruin;
but finding no success in their Spanish Plots, a Brace of the Conspirators
undertook to attaque him by main force; and in pursuance of their design, one
evening, at the turning of a Corner, set upon him with that violence, that Don
Tomazo was very severely wounded; but having recovered himself, he drew forth a
Pistol, and shot one of his Assailors, who soon after died of his hurts: and
while he was in pursuit of the other, a Corporal came in to his assistance, who
took the other, and secured him upon the Guard. Nevertheless, upon the death of
the first Aggressor, Don Tomazo was tried by a Counsel of War; where, upon a
full examination of the Fact, Don Tomazo was acquitted with great applause, and
the other Assailant that was taken, both degraded and cashiered. This Exploit
made Don Tomazo more famous then before, and more esteemed and redoubted in the
Garrison. So that when the Enemies returned again, and renewed their Attacques
upon the Town with that fury, that the Inhabitants began to be apprehensive of
the loss of the Place, several of the better sort delivered their Jewels to a
very considerable value to the custody of Don Tomazo, the better to secure 'em
upon the surrender of the Town. Which (...) no longer, after several rude
Assaults, able to hold out, yielded upon honorable Conditions, and so the
Spanish Garrison marched forth, and as one of the Number, Don Tomazo. Who now
possessed of so fair a Booty, and knowing the danger of Delays, went to his
Colonel for a Passport. The Colonel, unwilling to part with Tomazo, promised
to advance him to a Commission, and to make his Fortune, provided he would stay
in his Service. But Tomazo, who had an unknown Fortune within the compass of
his Breeches, gave those pressing Arguments for his departure to his Colonel,
and pressed him so home, that at length vanquished by Importunity the Colonel
granted him his Pass; by virtue of which Don Tomazo posted away for Ligorn, as
fast as his Legs would carry him, and there embarked for Scanderoon, whither,
he was informed, some English Gentlemen had taken Shipping about fourteen days
before, with a resolution to visit Grand Cairo. When he came to Scanderoon,
upon enquiry, by all descriptions he guest them to be the Persons that had left
him to his shifts at Madrid, which was the reason he was not very sollicitous
to follow them. At Scanderoon therefore he stayed, till upon the sale of some
of his Jewels to a Jew that was bound for Ligorn, he was informed by his
Landlady, an English-woman, that that there was an express come with Orders to
apprehend him. For the Jew coming to Ligorn, presently offers his new Purchase
to sale, and, as the Devil and ill luck would have it, to a Merchant nearly
related to the very Person from whom Don Tomazo had received them, who had also
particular order from his Relation, to seize all such Persons as should expose
any such sort of Jewels to sale, of which he had sent a particular description.
So that the Jew being questioned about the Jewels, informs against his Chapman,
and discovers where he was. Thereupon Don Tomazo thought it high time to shift
his Quarters, and posts away with all imaginable speed for Grand Cairo; where
if a Man do but alter his Habit, it is impossible to find him out. To which
purpose he puts on the disguise of a Turk, and in that dress one day met with
his old Fellow-Traveller, Don Pedro Perguelio, who admired to find Don Tomazo
in such a Mohammedan Garb; but being acquainted in few words with the occasion,
he received ample satisfaction; more especially when Don Tomazo farther told
him, that at that distance from his Country, he could in that Heathenish City
command a thousand Pound. Which was at that time no Rodomantado, in regard the
Jewels were worth above four times the value. Certainly there can be no greater
pleasure in this World, then for one distressed Gusman to meet another of the
same Order flush in the Trophies of succesful project; Gusmans being the only
relict of the Golden Age that have all things in common; so that if one has it,
the rest never want. So that it is but reason that the Purses of Fools should
pay Tribute for the maintenance of such a noble Generosity. Don Pedro was upon
his last Legs, when the happy accident to meet a Member of the Fraternity so
richly laden, made his Heart dance in his Breast without a Violin. On the other
side, Don Tomazo understood that it had not been so much the ill husbandry of
Don Pedro which had brought him so low, but a generous Charity to two English
Gentlemen his Comrades, who died there of the Plague, the Expenses of whose
Sickness, together with their Funeral Charges, had exhausted him to a very
small Remainder. So that as if the two deceased Gentlemen had left Don Pedro
the Executor of their gratitude, from thence forward Don Pedro and Don Tomazo
entered into an inviolable League as well offensive as defensive, in so much
that though they were two Bodies, there were the same thoughts and the same
mind in both, and an united force now managed all their intreagues.

Grand Cairo is a City famous for its situation, and the variety of Pleasures
it affords all Persons so well able to purchase 'em as then Don Tomazo was; who
resolving to know the difference between three halfpence a day, and the
splendour of unlimited plenty, concluded with his friend to debarr themselves of
no freedom or recreation which Money could command in the greatest Mart of the
World. But as the Sea it self would dry up, without the continual supply of
swelling Rivers, so it was impossible for Tomazo's unreplenish'd Bag, had it
been as deep as Virgils Passage to Hell, to answer the Expectations of a Brace
of Scattergoods, that thought it would never be evening: till at length their
inconsiderate profuseness having reduced their lean Bank to the low ebb of not
above a hundred and fifty Pounds, Repentance stepped in, and put them in mind of
the calamities of Poverty, a very unsuccessful remedy to cure the Surfeits of
Excess, among the pitiless Adorers of Mahomet. Thereupon they began to think of
a new Ramble; and understanding that there was a Caravan of 800 Passengers
ready to depart for India, both the Dons agreed to make a part of the Company.
But the season of the year for passing the sandy Deserts proving more
tempestuous then usually, gave them leisure enough to spend a hundred and
twenty Pound out of their low Stock, (for the curses of the credulous
Portugueses had by this time taken their desired effect) so that they
perceiving no more then thirty Pound remaining, altered both their Resolutions
and their Habits, and embarked from Scanderoon for Genoa, where they continued
fourteen Months, to the total consumption of all the Portugal Booty. Then it
was that Necessity put Don Tomazo to employ the Talents of his Youth, to which
purpose he made Love to a Genoese Widow, over whose Affections in a short time
he had obtained a Conquest, that very fairly answered both his own and his
Friends Expectations. But having made that Post too warm by debauching the
Woman, getting her with Child, and wasting her Fortunes, they departed
incognito in an English Man of War, that brought them safe to Cadiz. Where they
behaved themselves so well, that the Merchants gave them daily invitations, and
were very free in all manner of accommodations. But one day among the rest, Don
Tomazo, to retaliate the Kindnesses they had both received, (for true Gusmans
never mind Morality) proposed to his Friend Don Pedro a Design, which had it
taken effect, would have made them Masters of a new Fortune to the value of
above five hundred Pound. But it so happened, that as they were walking upon
the Beach, in a deep Consultation about the most compendious and effectual way
to proceed in their attempt, not minding their way, they were rambl'd about a
League from the Town, where they were overtaken by three English Gentlemen, who
were in pursuit of eight Land Pirates, for a Robbery and Murder they had
committed the night before upon the Person of Thomas Lucie Esquire;. These
Gentlemen requested their assistance, which they readily promised and joined in
the Pursuit. After a chase of four hours they found one of the Criminals
sitting upon a Sand-hill, who pretended himself half dead. This crafty Devil
sat there as a Decoy, having planted his other seven Confederates under the
Sand, whence they were all ready to rise with Pistols and Stilletoo's if
occasion required; as indeed it most unfortunately fell out. For the Gentlemen
eagerly falling to search and examine the single Pickaroon, he presently gave
the watchword to the rest, who presently rising from their Ambuscado, fell
upon the Gentlemen, not a little surpised at their number, and their
Instruments of death, with that violent fury, that one of them was killed
outright, having received near twenty stabs with a Stilletto, and the other two
so wounded, that they were left for dead. Tomazo was shot in the Back and
Shoulder, and Don Pedro pricked in five or six places with a Spanish Tuck, and
both conveyed by the Victors among the great Sand-hills. The other two, who
were left for dead, made such hideous outcries, through the extremity of their
Pain, that a Spaniard fishing not far from the Shore, came and took them into
his Boat. Don Tomazo and Don Pedro had the good luck to taste of the
Free-booters mercy, who very carefully dressed their Wounds, as if natural
instinct had prompted them to be kind to Persons that lived upon the spoil as
they did; and when they were in a hopeful way of recovery, persuaded them to
enter in their Society, and to run the risco of their Fortune: which there was
a necessity for the two Dons seemingly to condescend to. Nor was it long after
the completing of their Cures, before those Sons of Rapine had cut them out an
Employment. For those Miscreants hearing of a parcel of Merchants that were to
pass by their Territories, set the two Dons to guard a Pass upon the Road to
Madrid, which was convenient for an Escape if need required, while the
Master-Rogues, having met with the unfortunate Merchants, robbed them of their
Goods and Money to the value of six thousand Pounds Sterling, of which they
gave a reasonable proportion, according to the justice of Thieves one among
another; promising that the next time they should be both equally concerned.
From thence they made to their Sanctuary among the Sand-hills; a Place which
did not afford those delights to the English Gallants that their Hearts panted
after when their Pockets were full. Whereupon Don Tomazo and Don Pedro agreed
to make their Escape in the night; which an odd accident much facilitated to
their advantage. For one night among the rest, which proved darker then
ordinary, one of the Pickaroons being upon the Watch, certain flashes of
combustible Meteors appearing among the Sand-hills, so terrified the guilty
Sentinel, that he awaked his Companions, who believing the Country was risen
upon 'em, and hearing Don Tomazo and Don Pedro affirm withal, that they had
heard the Voices of strange People, put the villainous crew into such a
Consternation, that for their better security, they concluded to march off
several ways by couples, having appointed a Rendezvous when the danger was
over. The two Dons keeping together, steered directly for Cadiz, being followed
by two more of the Gang aloof off. Upon the way they met with two of their old
acquaintance in the Town, with whom they presently agreed to pillage the two
Pickaroons that came behind, which they did, leaving them sorely maimed and
beaten upon the place, and so with light Hearts and heavy Purses continued
their Journey to Cadiz: where being arrived, they were entertained with great
joy by their former Correspondents. Being thus got together among their
Friends, the main discourse of the Company was about two English Gentlemen that
had been most barbarously used by eight Thieves, and of two other English
Gentlemen that were gone away with the Robbers. Thereupon Don Tomazo having
first made enquiry how the Gentlemen did, and understanding they were safe and
well, began to relate the whole Story, confessing himself and Don Pedro to be
the two lost Sheep; and after that gave them an account of the last Robbery.
Which happened not a little to their disadvantage; for one of the Merchants
that had been robbed being then in company, spared not to bellow forth his
Losses and his Usage; insomuch that the two Dons being conscious, that they had
about them some of the Goods which the Merchant had described, and unwilling to
run the risco of a discovery, thought it very conducing to their future safety
to refund what the Merchant laid claim to, and to put the rest into the Hands
of the Magistrates, who promised them an ample recompense for their fidelity;
but were never so good as their words. Which cost one of the Spanish Merchants,
by way of revenge, a Cornuting; Don Tomazo having entered into a League of
Familiarity with his Wife, to the production of a very comfortable subsistence
for himself and his Friend while they continued in the Town. At length,
perceiving no more good to be done there, and finding several Ships bound for
England, they embarked for the Land of their Nativity in one, which by the
Masters ill conduct, had the ill fortune to be cast away; so that there had
been an end of all the Ships company, and the two young Gusmans had been
coffined in some Sea Monsters Belly, had not a Dutch Vessel been so kind as to
send out their Boat, and save all the Men, whom they carried along with them to
Amsterdam. A Place to which Don Tomazo and Don Pedro were both absolute
Strangers. But finding several English there, they told their Tale so smoothly,
that they found very compassionate entertainment among their Countrymen. During
which leisure time, Don Tomazo having made his interest with a Burger's Wife,
had soon wheedl'd the Loving Soul out of three hundred Guilders, which
amounted to near thirty Pound English. With this Money the two Dons having
picked up and joined themselves in confederacy with two more Spaniards of the
same Order, Philippo de Mexico, and Gulielmo Porfeire, fell to the National
Cheat of Coining; wherein, after they had cut their own Stamps, they were so
successful, that in two months time they had filled all Amsterdam so full of
double Stivers, composed of three parts Copper, blanched with Arsenick, and one
Third Silver, that there was hardly any other Money stirring among the
Butter-boxes. By which piece of dangerous Industry, they advanced their Stock
to twelve hundred pound Sterling. All which being rightly considered by the
four Engineers, they forsook Amsterdam, and retired with their Bank into
Zeland. Where they were no sooner arrived, but the twelve hundred Pound had so
inspired them with high thoughts, that then little gains were looked upon as
ridiculous, and nothing would serve less then ten thousand Pound apiece. For
the raising of which Princely Sum there was a general consultation of all four
Heads; wherein it was concluded, that Doublon Stamps, Ducatoon Stamps, and all
sorts of Stamps for Spanish Gold should be forthwith prepared; but the Metal
could not be fixed, till near four hundred Pound of the main Stock was
embezel'd in Experiments, and necessary Expenses. But then, Fortune, loath such
Men of Art and Industry should lie any longer idle, found them out a
Composition to their Hearts desire, consisting of one Third Copper,
artificially tinctured with Yellow, one half Third Gold, and half Third Emery,
and one Third super-fine Silver. Of which Metal they made about 2000 l.
according to their modest computation, and the Conscience they used in putting
them off. Which that they might do with the more facility and speed, they dealt
with all Persons, bought the best Commodities, and gave the largest Rates. And
for the better management of the Affair, every Confederate had his particular
employment assigned him. Philip de Mexico, and Gulielmo Porfeire, were to
reside at Middleburgh and prepare the Coin; Don Pedro was the Merchant that
bought the Goods, and Don Tomazo the Factor, who resided at Gaunt, whither all
Commodities were sent, and immediately exposed to sale, or transported to
Places more secure. But this Trade lasted not long: For Philip de Mexico being
a Person inclined to all sorts of debauchery, one day gave a certain Female,
that had caressed him with more then ordinary civilities, one of his
counterfeit Pieces, who having a sudden occasion for Money, as Women of that
Profession are seldom Hoarders, carried the Piece to exchange for Silver with a
Goldsmith, who had forfeited his judgment by being bitten with about 30 Pieces
of the same nature before. Whose revenge exasperating him to a strict
examination of the Woman, she was constrained to discover where she had it; and
then to go along with the Officers of the City, and show them Philip's Lodging,
who was immedately surpised and apprehended with all his Materials and
Instruments about him, and, without enquiry after farther proof, committed to
Prison. This apparent discovery, and the great alarm it gave the whole City,
was notice sufficient for Don Pedro and Gulielmo to shift for themselves, who
made all imaginable have to Don Tomazo, to whom they related the doleful
disaster, and the sad tidings of their interrupted Commerce. Thereupon Don
Tomazo sold off all his Merchandise, and having quartered his Companions in a
Village near to Gaunt, he went himself to Middleburgh, with an intention to use
all his endeavors to help Philip out of the Briars. But by that time he had
been twice with Philip in the Prison, and had ordered all things ready for his
Escape, there came in the middle of the night several of the Officers of the
Town to seize Tomazo, upon information given to the Heers against him by Philip
himself, who not believing it was in Don Tomazo's power to bring him off, was
in hopes, by an ingenious confession, and the conviction of Don Tomazo, to save
his own Bacon. But his treachery did him no kindness. For he wanted Money,
without which there is nothing to be done in that, nor in any other part of the
World. On the other side Tomazo had plenty, and with his Golden Showers so
mollifi'd the Goalers Daughter, that she not only brought him an Iron
Instrument to dig his way through the Wall, a Rope to let himself down, and a
Boat to receive him, but accompanied him her none tender self, leaving Father
and Mother for the sweet satisfaction of her fleshly appetite. Being both safe
in the Boat, away sailed Feliciano and his Feliciana to Flushing, and from
thence without any Provision put to Sea, where they drove, almost starved to
death, upon the Wide Ocean, till Fortune threw them at length upon the Coast of
Flanders; at what time they quitted the Boat, and traveled the Country by Land,
like a Tinker and his Doxey, till they came to Don Pedro and Gulielmo, to whom
Don Tomazo gave an account of the kindness Philip would have done him in
requital of his pains and friendly Intentions. Nor was it long after that we
heard of poor Philips being transported to the other World in a Caldron of
boiling Oil, according to the Sentence of his Judges; which sort of terrible
Execution did not little startle the rest of the Confederates, yet not so as
altogether to daunt 'em in the progress of their profession. For Don Tomazo,
Don Pedro, Gulielmo, and the Goalers kind Daughter, whose Name was Mariana,
removing to Brussels, they fell again in that Place to their Zeland sport,
resolving to hazard the other Caldron; where, after they had made a considerable
quantity of Coin, they took their several Stations and Employments of
Merchandising, till all their Pieces were gone. Which good success encouraged
them to go on afresh. But so it fell out, that Mariana, who had altered her
Habit, and went for a Dutch Minheir, and Gulielmo, going one day to Court to
buy Horses of Count Monterey's Servants, were spied by a Person of Quality, of
whom they had purchased other Horses before, and paid him two hundred Pistols
of Coin out of their own Mint. This same Person was a certain Count, who made
such a noise, that the whole Court was alarmed, the Parties accused were both
apprehended, and sent to eat the Bread of affliction in Lobbs-pound; where they
endured no small torment both of Body and Mind; especially Mariana, whose
misfortune was the greater for want of her dear Don Tomazo. But neither were
his Love nor his Jealousy so importunate nor so vehement at that time, but
that he was content rather to trust the Spaniard with his Mistress, then
venture his Carcass for them, as he had done for Philip. A piece of ingratitude
which his Conscience and Self-preservation were forced to dispense with at that
time, in regard he was too well known to be their Solicitor. Which was the
reason that both the wary Dons stole privately away for Dunkirk, there to
attend the Issue of Gulielmo's and Mariana's Imprisonment; who in a short time
after were both convicted by their own Confessions, and forced to evaporate
their Souls in boiling Oil, as Philip had done; by an Infernal Torment in this,
the better to prepare them for the bituminous Tan-pits of the other World. The
news of which hellish Execution reaching the Ears of the two Dons at Dunkirk,
the very thoughts of Dutch and Flemish Crucibles so cooled their courages, that
for the future they resolved utterly to abandon the Melting Trade. And
believing that Time would obliterate the memory of these extravagancies, they
resolved to employ themselves in Travel, as they did through most Parts of
France. But returning for Calice, with an intention to embarque for England,
the boiling Oil had so perfumed those Parts, that not able to endure the scent,
they retreated to Diepe, from whence they arrived safe and sound at Rye in
Sussex, where when they came to cast up their Accounts, they found themselves
reduced to 500 l. apiece; a sound Foundation, could they have had the patience
to build upon it like either Suttons or old Audleys.

But they had no skill in Grazing, or Maulting, or setting up of Brew-houses,
by which they had known as many ruined as raised: They were for the quick
dispatch: They were for drink and be rich: They looked upon themselves like two
Children of Israel, and all the World beside as Egyptians; from whom they
thought it no crime to borrow in their necessity. And Gusmans call that
Necessity, when they want Fuel to feed the heat of their Prodigality.

The inseparable Don Tomazo and Don Pedro being thus returned into their Native
Country, like two Sons of Priam, Per varios casus, per tot discrimina Rerum,
made have to London, the Grand Receptacle of all the most refined Virtuoso's in
Gusmanry, where they made it their business to repair the loss they had
sustained by the parboyling of their Spanish Companions. Nor was it long before
they had found out a parcel of Projectors as fit for intreague as themselves,
to whom they communicated a certain Conundrum, which they had just coddl'd in
their continually working Brains; the sum and shape of which piece of Midwifery
was this: That six Persons should lay down 300 l. apiece to fit out a Privateer
to Sea; a Gudgeon quickly swallowed among Persons that took all for Fish that
came to Net. Thereupon there was a Person employed to go to Dunkirk to buy a
Vessel, and to fit and Victual her out to Sea. They that made the Grand-Councel
at London were to pick up Men, and to have them ready to go aboard, when the
Vessel should arrive upon the Coast of England; wherein the concording Gusmans
were so punctual, (for the Sinews of their War began to wast) that the Men
being conveyed away in Boats, the little Dreadnought set forward in pursuit of
her design, which was no less then the intended Destruction of the whole Guiney
Trade. See here the difference between a Spanish and an English Gusman; the one
pursuing a poor hungry Plot upon his penurious Masters Bread and Cheese; the
other designing to grasp the Riches of the fourth part of the World by the
Ruin of a National Commerce.

Thus with a firm belief that they should have ballasted their Ship with
Dust-Ore, they hois'd their Sails; but being driven by most violent Storms upon
the Coasts of Ireland, they lost both their Vessel and all their Hopes; no
other good luck attending that Voyage, but only that of saving the Men, which
were in number above three hundred, who dividing into small Companies for
convenience of Travel, took several ways to seek for new employment: by which
means the Coast of Guiney escaped a most desperate scowring, and the African
Company had a very great deliverance. Don Tomazo and Don Pedro, so lately Men,
though now but Mice, kept still together Companions in misery, and coming to
Dublin, by the instigation of pure necessity, (a thing which the morose Law
never considers) fell to their old Trade, which was to counterfeit Guineys, and
broad Pieces of Gold. Which after they had done, and carried on about two
Months, some as good and as expert at the sport as themselves, not enduring
interlopers to their own prejudice, traced 'em out, and found their Quarters.
Where they gave the Dons very courteously to understand, that that small City
was already too well stocked with Gravers of the Kings Image, and therefore
desired the Right Worshipful Copper-smiths to depart, lest worse befell them.
Upon which kind advice the two Dons took shipping for Bristol, a Place much
more fit for their purpose. There, being loath to draw Bills, and break the bulk
of their London Stock, with a poor inconsiderable Bank of thirty Shillings, of
which fifteen were Milled, they began again. Those fifteen Milled Shillings did
the Two Dons Knights Service; for being double guilt, and in-laid with
Scepters, they marched off currantly. Upon which Foundation they wrought so
long with ease and little expense, till they had well lined their Pockets, were
well mounted, and in a good condition to ramble.

From thence, well knowing the danger of staying too long in a place, they rode
to Gloucester. Where after they had made up near three hundred and fifty of
their own St. Martins Ware, they were disturbed by an officious Rumor, and
forced to ride the Country. During which Journey of pleasure, in exchange
either for good Money or Commodities, they put out all their illegitimate Pieces
to Nurse. After which, like a little running Pestilence, they went to infect
the City of Worcester. There the Two Dons met accidentally with four other
Persons of the same profession; who being pursued by the Country, were
apprehended in their Company. At what time one of the Strangers, to prevent the
Fatality of a Search, conveyed under the Table into Tomazo's hands a certain
Bag both large and weighty. Don Tomazo was with Child to know the Contents, and
therefore being got to his Lodging, his dear Pylades and he made bold to open
the Bag; in which they found six Letters to as many Gentlemen in the
neighboring Counties, a Note of considerable Sum of Money left with an
Innkeeper at Bridgenorth, and 220 false Guineys most artificially and
elaborately ordered. The Letters they opened, took Copies, and sealed up again;
having found by the Contents how Affairs stood with the Gentlemen to whom they
were directed. Thus fortunately provided Don Tomazo and Don Pedro departed
forthwith, and galloping tantivy to Bridgenorth, they received 337 l. from the
Innkeeper. From thence they took their Rounds to visit the six Gentlemen, who
being all Persons of valuable Estates, and fearing to run the bloody hazard of
having their spotless Reputations brought upon so dangerous a Stage, upon the
delivery of the Letters, and a relation of the misfortune that attended the
Persons from whom they came, willingly bled their fifty Pound apiece for an
obligation of Secrecy. The Two Dons having thus made the best of their Market,
left the Gentlemen for that time, and took a Ramble for Stourbridge, where
being forced to continue, by reason of an Accident that befell Don Tomazo's
Horse, they lived to the height of their Estates. During which demorage, Don
Tomazo's behavior (always taking among the tender Sex) had infused such a
passion into the Heart of a Gentlewoman in the Town, who wanted neither Wit nor
Caution to manage her amorous Diversions, that partly out of gratitude, partly
for profit, (for he seldom loved but for his advantage) partly for pleasure,
his friend and he were forced to encamp in that Place much longer then they
intended, Don Tomazo passing for a German, and humouring that pretense with
broken English. All that while Don Tomazo lost no time in improving the
advantage of his Amors, nor spared for any sort of Caresses which he thought
were proper to entertain so kind and bountiful a Lady. But that Post growing
too hot, through the jealousies and suspicions conceived of Don Tomazo and Don
Pedro, in regard of the high rate they lived at, the two Sparks were forced to
remove; though not without taking leave of the young Lady; who was so concerned
for the loss of her dear German's society, that the magnetic Virtue of his
Embraces had almost engaged her in a resolution to be the Companion of his
Fortunes. But Don Tomazo not desiring to travel with the expensive Molestations
and Inconveniences of Female Luggage, diverted her affectionate humor with
such powerful Arguments, that at length they parted, though not without some
Briny Deluges that overflowed the sorrowful Ladies Rosy Cheeks. Don Tomazo
having thus disengaged himself from the Labyrinths of Love, after a prodigal
wast of his Venerial Ammunition, set forward, with his other self Don Pedro,
for London, where they ranted with a profuse pomp and vainglory for about half
a year, till finding their Exchequer grow low, they began to think it time to
recruit. Neither was it for such extraordinary high-soaring Gusmans as they to
play at ordinary Games; whose prodigality was not to be supplied by the dipping
of Country Squires, or the little Cheats of high and low Fullums.

At that time the French and Dutch were at Daggers drawing; and they
understanding that there was a Fleet of Holland Merchantmen in the River of
Thames, very richly laden, to the value of eight hundred thousand Pound, all
outward bound, under a Convoy of two Men of War, of 40 Guns apiece, and very
well manned, concluded upon a design to surprise these Ships and their Convoy,
and to make them Prize, by virtue of a French Commission, with which they were
already furnished. First then in order to this attempt, by their acquaintance
with some of those Seamen, who had been fellow sufferers with them in their
intended Voyage to the Coast of Guiney, they raised a very considerable number
of Men, which by the leave of the Captains of the Dutch Men of War were to be
put aboard their Ships, under pretense of being raised as Recruits by certain
Officers employed from Holland for that purpose. And it so happened that
Tomazo's great diligence had found out a parcel of such Sons of Necessity, as
had not only Dutch Commissions, but as good a Will to the Design as himself.
These Persons treated with the aforesaid Captains for the carrying over so many
Men for the Service of the States, which the Captains were very willing to
undertake for the good of their Country. So that in two days time, the whole
Fleet lying at Gravesend, the Major part of the Men were sent aboard, in the
Habit of new raised Men, but all resolute Sea-Tories, and privately well armed
with Poynyards and Pistols. These were to have been the fatal Instruments of
the grand Surprise. For it being the custom at Sea to divide the Ships Company
into three parts, that make three Watches, of which one is to be always upon
the Deck, it was so laid, that the English, in the dead of the Night, after
they had secured the Powder-Rooms, should run upon the Decks, shut down the
Hatches to keep down those that were below, and cut the Throats of all that
made resistance above. By which means having got the Command of the Men of War,
they might with ease have commanded the Merchantmen, and so have made for the
French Ports, where their Commissions would have born them out.

About two days after the Men were thus disposed of, the pretended Dutch
Officers sent down about forty large Trunks, of a prodigious weight, with
particular care to put them aboard in the night, for fear of meeting with the
Searchers. All which Trunks were filled only with Hey and Bricks, to possess
the People with a belief of some considerable Treasure, or some great quantity
of Arms that might be in them, to avoid the suspicion of Men whom they saw
entrusted with such a ponderous Charge.

By this time the Wind stood fair, and the English Officers were ordered by the
Dutch Captains to repair aboard with the rest of their Men; in order whereunto
they went all down to Gravesend, where the Officers having sent their Men
aboard, went themselves ashore, and in their company Don Tomazo and Don Pedro,
the Master-wheels of this confounded piece of Mischief, under the Notion of
Servants to one that passed for a Lieutenant-Collonel. Thus far things went
prosperously on, and the Gale of Fortune blew as fair, as the Wind then
favorable to the Voyage. But the Devil's in that thing called Fond Love. Which
has made me think that the Poets did ill to couple Mars and Venus together,
considering how many brave Martial Designs have proved abortive through the
open-heartedness of Amorous Folly. For to the total destruction of this
Babel-like structure of two unwearied Brains, it happened that one of the Men
who went last aboard, and was to have been a private Sentinel, was married
forsooth to a Dutch-woman, who had so ravished, or rather infatuated him, upon
the Leave-taking Night, that, like the hair-brained Curious, he could not
conceal from his charming Fulvia the great Design he was going upon. Whereupon
the plaguey Dalilah, out of a pure affection for her Countrymen, went and
discovered the grand Plot to the Dutch Captains, who were at first struck with
a strange kind of Terror to see themselves so near the brink of danger; but
soon recollecting themselves, they kept their discovery close, not making it
known to any but the Officers of the Ships. After that, having prepared all
things for a close Fight, they ordered all the English which were above to go
under Deck upon pain of death, which they did all but some resolute Fellows,
who being overpowered, were beaten, wounded, and forced down. Which petty
Conquest being thus obtained, and the fatal Sinons secured in the Bodies of the
two Trojan Sea-Horses, one of the Captains was sent ashore to entreat the
English Officers to come aboard, in regard the Fleet was ready to set Sail. But
those Sons of Guilt and Jealousy reading something more then ordinary in the
Dutch Captains face, one of them, with a loud Oath, swore, they were all
undone, and was making an offer to shift for himself; but the Dutch having
raised the Town, had so beset the Houses, that they were apprehended every
Mothers Son, and delivered up to the Magistrates, with a general Information
against them of the Crime, and of the Design they had in hand, but not a word
in the least of the Men which they had secured in the two Vessels. The Dutch
Captains having thus escaped a Danger ten times worse than that of Scylla or
Charybdis, weigh Anchor, and being safe arrived at their intended Port,
acquaint the Great Minheirs what a Whirl-pool they had so narrowly missed, and
delivered up all their Prisoners to the mercy of the Hogen Mogens, who ordered
them to be sent to the Indies for eight years, while they that were seized at
Gravesend were discharged for want of farther prosecution, and so returned to
London. In which wide Place, neither Don Tomazo nor Don Pedro durst show their
Heads, as having not only spent their own ill-got Bank, but run in debt to
defray the Charges, which you may be sure the Expenses of such a Design would
require. Such is the Fate of Gusmanry, sometimes to abound, and sometimes to
want Bread. In which condition the two reduced Projectors were forced for a
while to sit and bite upon the Bridle: Till in some short time, having raised
so much Money as would pay for their Passage to Harlem in the Low Countries,
they embarked for that Place, where the two Dons prevailed with a certain
Merchant to furnish them with thirty Pound, for the re-payment whereof they
drew a Bill upon another Merchant of their own invention and nomination at
London. Thus set up again, they departed for Amsterdam, where they possessed
the English with so firm a belief of their being young Irish Merchants, who had
suffered Shipwreck; that they, compassionating their condition, assisted them
with Money and credit to the value of a hundred Pound. Which good success in
those two Places made them resolve to try how high they could build upon this
same odly begun Foundation of the Worlds opinion. Which is many times the
beginning of a Trade that advances several to vast and real Fortunes. In order
to this Design, away they go to Rotterdam, where they found an English
Merchant; who being newly crept into the World, struck in with Don Tomazo and
Don Pedro, who pretended to be of the same Profession; and that they would send
for Goods out of Ireland with the next opportunity. Upon which score the Dutch
Merchant furnished his two new Partners with Wines and other Commodities to the
value of 400 l. which were presently shipped off for Flanders by the general
consent of all the three.

Into that Country the inseparable Couple followed their Game, and at Bruges
set up their Staff. There, for a short Apprentiship served their turn, they
fell to trade with the Merchants of the City, and bartered their Commodities
very fairly for Irish Goods, and with good advantage. And which was more, very
honestly from time to time sent the effects to their Correspondent at
Rotterdam; who by that Hocus of just dealing was so satisfied with the reality
and good intentions of his two Irish Chapmen, that they continued trading
together for above a year, in which time he had furnished them with Goods to
the value of 3457 l. for which the two Dons returned him still most punctually
Commodities of equal value, to the great content of the Rotterdamer, and the
great Reputation of the two English Gusmans. Who in this time, by virtue of
their Commerce with the Merchants of Bruges, and the great entertainment which
they gave them, were grown to be as high in the credit of the City-Merchants,
as with their Correspondent at Rotterdam, every one courting their Custom, and
expressing how deeply they would trust 'em for their farther encouragement.

One would have thought this genteel and gainful way of living, the kindness of
Strangers, and their own gratitude, should have obliged these two Dons to have
kept within the bounds of Reason and common Honesty. But there is that Letchery
in some Men to triumph in their frauds, and to be profuse at the Expenses of
other Peoples Purses, that they cannot be contented with other Gains then those
that will satisfy their Prodigality; and the toil of keeping Accounts was a
labor too tedious to their Mercurial Brains; and therefore they were now for
reaping the Harvest which they saw ripe for their Sickle. The Sun shined, and
they must make their Hey. The Merchants had fairly promised, and they resolved
to try how far they would be as good as their words. Volenti non fit injuria
was a Matchiavillian Maxim that very much prevailed upon their Consciences,
none of the tenderest at that time. Thereupon they took up several parcels of
Goods to the value of 2000 l. or upwards; which being shipped off for England,
away marched they after their Prey; and taking Ostend, Newport, Dunkirk,
Calice, and indeed all the considerable Ports between that and St. Malo's, at
the same Places, by virtue of several counterfeit Bills from several Parts, but
more particularly from Rotterdam and Bruges, they raised, all expenses born, an
additional Stock of ready Money, amounting to one thousand five hundred and
seven Pounds; with which recruit they bore away to the Port of Exeter, where
the two Dons thought to have found the Ship which carried their Goods. But
being arrived there, they understood by a Merchant concerned in the same Ship,
that the Master and some of the Company had carried the Vessel and Goods to
Bayon, and had there exposed them to sale. Nor was this all; for the same
Merchant, keeping a Correspondence at Bruges, and by the intelligence he had
received from thence, concluding Don Tomazo and Don Pedro to be the two Persons
complained of for the exploit they had there so lately committed, caused them
to be both arrested in the Names of his Flemsh friends, to whom he sent word of
the Embargo which he had laid upon their Persons. The Bruges Merchants had no
sooner received the Information, but they sent over a Person to treat with the
two young Sparks, who being unwilling to lose time by lying in Prison, the
worst place in nature for Men of their Profession, came to a seasonable
composition, and having to their great grief refunded 1360 l. were presently
discharged. Happily for them; for they were no sooner gone, but fresh Orders
came to the same Merchant from several Persons out of France to detain them
upon their accounts. However, the Birds being flown, there was an end of that
prosecution. The guilt of the two Dons made them wickedly jealous of the
diligence that would be used to entrap them, and therefore they made all the
have they could to London, where they lay still a while, till they thought the
danger over.

This Terror being past, the two Dons fell to new Consultations, and finding
the ill success of Merchandising, they resolved to set up the old trade of
Coining, wherein they were more expert, as being more suitable to their
Genius's. In order to the better management of which Affair, like Men of
gravity and prudence, they consulted the Statutes of the Kingdom, by which they
found the counterfeiting of Spanish Gold to be the least dangerous in point of
Penalty. And therefore having got their Materials and Confederates, such as
broken Goldsmiths and Guilders all in a readiness, they fell so sedulously to
their business, that in fourteen days time they had made as many Doublons, and
double Doublons, as amounted to the value of 3245 l. according to the price of
their Mint. Part of these Pieces Don Pedro and Tomazo undertook to put off, in
the West and Northwest Parts of England. To which purpose they took their
Progress well mounted, genteelly clad, well attended with Servants, besides the
traveling Grandeur of led Horses. However, they did not always appear in this
Splendour, but at certain times, and for color of some great Designs; having
for Projects of lesser moment other disguises and pretenses. Among the rest
they had an easy excuse for their stay at Seaport Towns, in expectation of
Ships from several Parts: During which demorage, it was no difficult thing to
put off thirty or forty of their Pieces, and then remove to another Place:
Neither was Lyme in Dorsetshire the Scene of one of their meanest Exploits.

In that Place lived a Merchant nearly related to their Correspondent at
Rotterdam, upon whom they had a Design of no less than three or four hundred
Pound thick. This Man was a wary Person, and one that having been often
scalded, dreaded the Fire; which made the Enterprise much more difficult;
however, the Resolution of the two Dons was such, that they resolved to attempt
it, as they did in this manner.

Don Tomazo and Don Pedro, with their Servants and Horses, in great splendour,
went to Lime, where they took up all the chiefest Inns of the Town, Don Tomazo
(and Don Proteus himself could have done no more) having now Metamorphos'd
himself into the Shape of a Spanish Count, to whom he pretended, the King of
England, and several of the Nobility, had given several Horses, and Liberty to
buy more, and to transport them at his pleasure, for the Service of his own
Sovereign. In prosecution of which Affair, he had been in the adjacent
Counties, and had made several Purchases, which he daily expected in that Town;
and was therefore come to make Provision of Hay, Corn and Stabling for their
Accommodation, till he could have the Convenience of Shipping them off;
insomuch that the Country People that came thither to Market, were forced to
set their unregarded Beasts in the Streets, to make room for the Spanish
Count's Horses. During the Spanish Count's Continuance at Lime, which was about
four days, he sends for the Merchant upon whom he had fixed his Design; and
after he had amused him with a Noble Entertainment, entered into a Discourse
with him about his Horses, and how he intended to have them transported;
desiring him, either to assist him with his Advice, or else himself be pleased
to hire him some Vessels for that purpose. An Employment which the Merchant
readily undertook, and to that purpose, brought four or five Masters of Ships
to the Count, with whom his Lordship soon agreed for the Passage of his
numerous Cavalry. The next day, the Merchant being present, the Count received
an Account from one of his Servants, who pretended he came from the Horses,
that they were at such a place; but that his Agents had bought more Horses then
they had Money to pay for, and therefore desired the Money might be sent them.
Presently the Count, calling for his Steward, bid him go, and fetch as many
pieces of Spanish Gold, as would make up the Sum. Which being brought as soon,
the Count desired the Merchant to exchange them for Silver. Which the Merchant
undertaking to do, went home, carries the Gold along with him: and sending for
three more of his Friends, they all laid their Heads together, to make trial of
the pieces; which they did by all the usual ways of Touching, Cutting,
Weighing, and the like. But the Metal was so superexcellently tempered, that
they could make no other discovery, but that it was absolutely real; so that
the Merchant returned with the full Change in Silver, which the Count
immediately delivered to one of his Grooms, who carried it away. The next day,
the former Messenger returns again to Lime, and tells the Count, that all his
Horses were seized, in regard the Country People had consulted together, and
were of Opinion, that the Horses were to be transported contrary to an Act of
Parliament, and without the King's leave. At which unexpected news, the Count
was seemingly strangely alarmed and surpised; and in a Passion, as well
counterfeited as his Spanish Gold, commanded his Groom to make ready his
Horses, pretending to go in person to dispute a business so prejudicial to his
grand Affairs. On the other side, for the prevention of all disturbance and
delay; and to show, that he came not into England upon a First of April Day's
Errant, being as it were come to himself, he desired the Favor of the
Merchant, to ride Post to London, to give the King an account of the Abuse and
Scandal he had suffered from the Country, and to pray His Majesty's Warrant
for the Release of his Horses; and in consideration of his trouble, allowed him
one of his Servants to wait upon him, and ten Pistols to bear his Charges, with
assurance, that at his Return, he should find the Count at Lime. The Merchant,
as well to oblige a Person of so much Honor as the Spanish Count, as to serve
his Neighbors, who were not a little discomposed at the loss they should
sustain by the Count's being so rudely disappointed, set forward with more then
good speed to solicit for the Count: For upon his Arrival at London, the
Count's Gentleman, who had his Private Instructions, to prevent the Merchants
going to Court, sent for a Confederate, that well understood his Lord's
Affairs, who presently entered an Action of 4000 l. against Spanish Count's
Ambassador, and arrested him as he was going to Whitehall, with a crew of
pretended Officers of his own garbling. In this Condition they hurried the
helpless Merchant to Prison, as they made him believe; but indeed to one of
their own Private Haunts, a certain dark Diabolical Cellar, where they so
roughly entertained the terrified Stranger, that to free himself out of the
Clutches of such a surly sort of Rake-shames, he was forced to draw Bills upon
his Correspondents in several places; which being received, and due
intelligence given to the Count of all Proceedings, the poor Merchant of Lime,
who had by this means moulted a good part of his gayest Feathers, was
discharged out of Captivity. As for the Count himself, and his Retinue, they
soon quitted that Post, and having altered their Habits, and changed their
Horses, ranged up farther up into the Country, not deeming the Seaports proper
to be visited, while such Exploits as these were fresh in Memory. So like are
these sort of Gusmans to the Tartars, who, when they have devoured the Products
of one place, remove into fresh Accommodation.

But though they had changed their Horses, they did not alter their Pretense of
buying Horses. To which purpose, Don Tomazo, now acting the part of a Jocky,
rather then a Spanish Count, made it his business to ride with a Servant, up
and down to Farmers Houses, having first inquired the names of such Gentlemen
as lived nearest thereabouts, and also taken a Prospect as far as he could of
their Qualities, their Honors, and their Conditions.

It Is well known to be the Custom in many parts of the West of England, for
many Farmers to breed up Horses of Fifty, or Sixty Pound a Pair, and sometimes
of greater Value. Such Horses as these, Don Tomazo would often cheapen, and
sometimes bargain for; but when the Seller, and the Purchaser came to the
Point, Don Tomazo had no Money which was passable, nor was it his intent it
should be so; as knowing well the Humor of those sort of People, which was to
raise the Country presently, to make a thousand Hubbubs, and put all the World
into Noise and Uproar; whereas a Gentleman having been smitten under the Fifth
Rib, will first consider his own Reputation, and hold a private Emparlance with
his own Reason; of which, some are so highly conceited, that they would not
have the World believe, they could be out-noddl'd, for the half of their
Estates. They observe themselves to be the great Idols of Wit and Parts, to
which the People offer in the High Places of the Country; but should it once
appear, that their Divinity-ships had once been subject to the Frailty of
having been cully'd and cunny-catch'd by Mortal Gusmans, their Oracles would be
no more frequented among the Vulgar, and the smiles of the Gentry would expose
them to the Satirical Extension of the Forefinger; which was a punishment of
their unwary Folly, that so over-awed their considerative Prudences, that
hardly one in twenty ever divulged the Tricks that Don Tomazo put upon them.
And therefore, because they were best able to bear the Loss, most ready to put
it up, and most easy to be played upon, (as depending upon their own Judgments)
in point of Morality, in point of Policy, and to save trouble, Don Tomazo
seldom dealt with any other then those of his own Rank, Gentlemen.

Having made this Digression, for the better Instruction of the Reader, we
shall clear the foregoing Axiom by the following Demonstration. For as has been
already hinted, when Don Tomazo had bargained with any Farmers, for one or more
Horses, he still told them he had not current Money to pay for his Markets; and
therefore desired them to send one of their Servants to such a Gentleman's
House, where he was certain to be furnished with English Coin; delivering
himself in such a manner, as if he were most intimately acquainted there.
Thereupon the Farmer would presently order a Servant to ride along with their
Genteel Chapman, who, by the way, never failed to intoxicate the credulous
Bumpkin with the promise of some Gratuity for his pains; and then to make him
perfect in his lesson; which was, to give such a short account of Don Tomazo,
as he himself directed him. The Fellow being thus prepared, and inspired with
expectation, so soon as they came somewhat near the House, was sent before, to
enquire whether the Gentleman were within? A Question which Don Tomazo could
have resolved before; but done on purpose to give the Gentleman opportunity to
enquire of the Servant, who the Person was that was coming behind? For then it
was, that the Country Fellow generally gave his Worship this Answer, That
either he was a Person of Quality, and of his Master's Acquaintance, who had
bought Horses of one that lived in such a place; or else, that he was a near
Relation to his Master, who had brought Horses of another of his Acquaintance:
Either of which Pretenses so formal, and so probable, were enough to prevail
with a Gentleman always ready to oblige his Neighbors. So that by these
Artifices, Don Tomazo seldom failed of having his Gold changed, or Silver lent
upon it, with his promise of sending for it again in such a time. But the Fish
being caught, Don Tomazo had no more business either with that Farmer or his
Servant; and therefore at parting, he only gave the Fellow a small Reward, and
bid him tell his Master, That he was gone to such a place, quite contrary to
that Corner of the Wind, whither he was bound, and would be with him in three
or four Hours, in which time he was got out of reach to his next Convenience.
For Don Tomazo, and his Brethren, always so managed their Business, that they
rode first about the Country to inform themselves of every thing material,
before they made any attempt; so that when they once began, two or three days
put an end to all such Designs as they had in those Parts of the Country.

During the time that these Pranks were played, the Lime Merchant being
returned home, full of Choler and Revenge, had made a strange hurly burly in
the Country; but could hear no Tidings of his Count. So that all things being
once more still and quiet, Don Tomazo and Don Pedro resolved to take the
opportunity of the Calm, and to favor their beloved, the Seaports, with a
fresh Visit. Among the rest, they arrived at length at a place called
Kings-Bridge in Devonshire. There coming in upon a Market Day, Don Tomazo found
diverse Gentlemen, and several of their number, in whose Faces he could read a
Chapter fit for his purpose, better then some Astrologers. And indeed the
Circumstantial Accidents fell out so propitiously, that they seemed, as it
were, to assure him of Success. For upon a sudden, not only about the Town,
but all the Country round, there fell so deep a Snow, that neither Horse nor
Man could travail. By which Confederacy of the Season, Don Tomazo, and Don
Pedro came familiarly acquainted with several of the said Gentlemen, under the
notion of Persons that were newly arrived from Spain. This happy time of
leisure afforded Don Tomazo a kind Opportunity to enter his new Acquaintance
into Play, (which is one of the laudable Exercises that waste our time in these
parts of Europe) at which sport, he gave them leave at first to win much of his
Spanish Gold, which some of the Gamesters, having been Travelers in that
Kingdom, pretended to understand, as well as the losing Stranger, who, to give
the better Color to his Design, seemed not a little troubled at the loss of
his Summum Bonum, the only true Friend to a Traveller. But the fickle Diee,
in faith, soon altered their Carier, and ran so much on Don Tomazo's side, that
in a short time he had taken Captive good store of the Gentlemen's Coin, who
were so fond of the Gold, that rather then part with it, they borrowed Money in
the Town to pay their Losses. But this same sport was too hot to hold; so that
the Gentlemen weary at length of ill Luck, and tired with the Inconveniences
of losing, as having taken their leaves (besides the satisfaction for Don
Tomazo's Gold,) of near a hundred pounds of their own Money, thought it high
time to knock off, and return to their several Habitations.

At their several Departures, there was one of the Company, that prevailed with
Don Tomazo and Don Pedro to ride with him Home; where they were not only
received with a most hospitable Accommodation by the Gentleman at his own, but
by him also carried to a Person of Qualitie's House not far off, where they
were likewise entertained with no less kindness then plenty. But such is the
ill nature of Gusmanry, that it spares neither Friend nor Foe: For of this very
Person of Quality, who had been so civil in his Entertainment, did Don Tomazo
very gratefully buy two Horses, for which he paid 147 Pistolets, and sent them
away by his Servant. This Scene being over, they were in haste to be gone; and
therefore to avoid the sour Sauce that might happen to season the sweet Viands
of their Entertainment, they took their leaves of the Civility of those Places,
and set forward for Plymouth; but giving out that they intended for London.

When the two Dons came to Plymouth, e're they had time to alight, Don Tomazo
was spied by a Person that knew him, who informed him, that his Master was in
the Town. This News was to Don Tomazo like Aloes and Honey, a strange mixture
of Sweet and Bitter. For the Gentleman was his acquaintance, but one of the
Persons that had won some of his Gold at Kings-Bridge; so that Don Tomazo,
suspecting that the Gentleman was come thither to make trial of his Gold,
thought it not proper to stay there. Thereupon the two Dons turned their Horses
Heads; but as they rode by a Goldsmith's Shop, Don Tomazo's counterfeit pieces
began to ferment in his Pocket: So that at their Instigation, Don Tomazo
deeming it a foul Shame, that he should come into such a Town as Plymouth, and
leave no Monument of his Fame behind him, alights at the Goldsmith's Shop, and
desires Silver for as much Gold as amounted to 14 l. 10 s. 9 d. The Goldsmith
satisfied with the Trial he made, delivers the Silver demanded; and so the two
Dons, having given that great Town a small Taste of their Ingenuity, steered
directly for the Country of Cornwall, where they found great Opportunities of
Business, played several Pranks, and among the rest, this in particular.

Don Tomazo having taken up his Quarters at a Town called Pensanse, and Don
Pedro at another called St. Ives, both Seaports; lay there, without taking the
least Cognizance of each other. They had been such strangers one to another for
some Weeks, that the one had not been in the others Company but once, and that,
as it were by an Accidental Meeting. So that it was impossible for the Country
to imagine or suspect any such thing as an Intimacy between them; which was the
Foundation upon which many Designs were laid, and brought to perfection.

One time among the rest, it hapn'd, that Don Tomazo being at Church upon a
Sunday, paying his Devotions to something or other; Cupid finding him at a loss
for an Object of his Zeal, fixed his Eyes upon a very pretty Lady, whose Beauty
made no slight Impression in Tomazo's Heart. The inflamed Lover, whose business
it was, always to use the swiftest Expedition in his Affairs, now more
violently hastn'd by his amorous Impatience, returns to his Quarters, and makes
all those diligent Enquiries after the Lady that Lovers are wont to do; which
concluding with such a passionate Joy, that all their Answers satisfied his
Expectations, the People easily from thence drew their wonted Conjectures, and
presently reported, that Don Tomazo, who past for the Son of a Person of great
Quality in the North, was deeply in Love with such a Lady. This Report flew
like Lightning, and was presently bandy'd from one Tittle-tattle to another,
till it came to the Father's Ear, with all the Embellishments of
Multiplication, in reference to the Behavior and Gallantry of the Enamored
Esquire. The Father was tickled at the Tidings, and as it is the fashion of the
Unwary, to look upon distant Prospects with a Magnifying fancy, thought it but
an act of Paternal Affection to advance his Daughters Fortune; and the Daughter
her self, proud of the Conquest of her Victorious Beauty, already imagined her
self riding in her Coach and Six Horses, the adored Mistress of many Tenants,
and the charming Wife of a brisk, bonny, and wealthy Heir. Thereupon the
Justice comes thundering to Pensanse, to take view of his Son-in-Law, and having
found him out, took an occasion to fall into a sifting Discourse with Don
Tomazo, who had all his Story so Geometrically framed, and delivered it with
such a careless Exactness, without the least Hesitation, that the Cornish
Chough, was not only taken with his Person and Behavior, but so intoxicated
with his Narrative, that he invited him over to his House. Don Tomazo kindly
accepted his Invitation, and accordingly gave him the Honor of his Company
home; where he had leisure enough to unbosom his Affections to the Young
Isabella, the Name by which hence forward she shall be known.

Some time after, the Justice, his Wife, and his Daughter, went to visit a
Gentleman of their Acquaintance, that lived not far from St. Ives, who after
Dinner, informed the Justice of a Gentleman that quartered at St. Ives, that
was certainly the best Company that ever he met with; withal, That he was a
Spaniard, whose Curiosity had brought him thither to view the Country. Upon
which rare Character of an intimate Friend, the Justice desired he might be
sent for, as he was, with all speed. But when he came, the Country Gentleman,
who only thought to complete his Pastime with the mirth of some Comical Droll,
was strangely out of Countenance, and in a Surprise, believing his Old
Acquaintance had put some Trick upon him. For such was Don Pedro's Air and
Deportment, that the Justice took him for no less then some Person of High
Quality; which was no small trouble to the Justice, to be put out of the road
of his Rural Addresses, and Country Complements; and forced on a sudden to
recollect the Exercises of his Youth at the Dancing-School, for new Congies,
and Refined Expressions. For indeed, Don Pedro might well have past for such a
one as the Justice took him to be, in any part of the World. He was a Person so
comely, that few Spaniards were like him, very Fair, full Eyed, with a lovely
Head of Long Hair, as black as a Raven's Wing, and a Body most curiously
proportioned; to which his Graceful Carriage, his affable, sweet, and
complaisant Humor, his fluencie of Speech, and his Noble Equipage, were such
charming Additions, that it was no wonder Cupid took his Stand in such a Face,
and bent his Bow to kill two Birds with one Stone. I say bent, because at that
time, I believe the God of Love made use of a Cros-bow, in regard of the
Crossness of the Shot. In short, the Mother and the Daughter were both shot
Plumb-dead at the same time, insomuch, that there was no Peace or Quiet in
either of their Bosoms, till they had prevailed with the Justice, (who could
hardly think his Mansion worthy such a Guest) to invite Don Pedro to his House.
But at last, overcome by their Importunity, and his own Ambition, he took the
Confidence to give him a Solemn, and Cardinal-like Invitation, which Don Pedro
readily accepted. You may be sure, the Entertainment could not choose but be
splendid, where the Master consulted his Honor, the Mistress her deep
Affection; and no question but the Daughter sat up late, and had a Finger in
every Pie, and every Tart. Nor was the Female diligence of those two Love-shot
Ladies, less, to dress, and trim, and trick and adorn themselves, with all the
Ornaments their Trunks and Cabinets could afford. What Fairs and Christnings
saw but seldom and in Parcels, that D. Pedro saw at once, and every day
displayed; while the Mother strove to renew the Youth of her past Beauty, the
Daughter to beautify her present Youth.

All this Don Pedro contentedly observed; and as he was extremely acute in his
Observations, after Dinner, he gave Madam Isabella an occasion to convey a
little Billet into his hand; at what time the Mother took an Opportunity to
slip another into his Pocket, ignorant of what her Rival Daughter had done.
Neither indeed, was Don Pedro aware of the Mothers contrivance. So ambitious
they were, which of the two should make the first and deepest Impression in Don
Pedro's Heart. The two Ladies having thus disburthen'd their Affections, the
one into his Pocket, the other into his Hand; Don Pedro, after a power of
Complements and Kindness, took his Leave, and being returned to his Quarters,
drew forth the Billet which he had received from Mrs. Isabella, wherein he read
these following Lines.

SIR,
THe first time I saw you, the Idea of your Perfections, caused a violent
Passion in my Heart, which having ever since tormented me, pardon the Flame
that enforces me to let you know the Wound you have given me. I doubt not, but
that a Person of your Quality will be careful to manage this Secret, with that
Prudence, as shall be no way to the disadvantage of a person so young and
tender, that languishes for your sake.


Don Pedro was so startled at the reading these short Ejaculations of a wounded
Heart, that he wrote a Letter to Don Tomazo, and within enclosed the Billet,
desiring him to consider, what Design would be most likely to succeed among
People that had laid themselves so fairly at the Feet of their mercy, and as it
were, put their Lilly white hands into the Lion's Mouth. Withal, he cautioned
Don Tomazo for the future, to avoid suspicion, to write his Mind, and send his
Servant with it, to be left in a hole of a certain Rock half way between
Pensanse and St. Ives, which was afterward observed. But when Don Tomazo came
to read the Billet which Don Pedro had informed him came from the Justices
Daughter, he was in a strange Quandary: for he loved her himself, even beyond
the pleasures of his Profession. He could not imagine the reason of his
Misfortune, not dreaming the Young Lady had been such an early May-cherry, so
soon to allure the Gatherer's Hand; of whom, he then himself had no other
hopes, but as the Paternal Heat of her Father's Care, mellow'd her for his
Embraces: Of his Approbation Good Will, and Favor, he thought himself
Cock-sure, as well for that they had been more intimate together, as in regard
the Deportment, and Natural Parts of Don Tomazo, were not much inferior to
those acquired Endowments of Don Pedro. But while Don Tomazo's thoughts were
thus Tennis-ball'd between Love and Gusmanry, the Lady her self sent him a
Cordial, that soon composed this Disorder of his Senses. For within two days
after, Mrs. Isabella finding a convenient Opportunity, and as young and
innocent as Don Tomazo thought her, willing to have two Strings to her Bow,
writ Don Tomazo the following Letter in Answer to one of his.

SIR,
YOur immediate Passion surprises a Person so great a Stranger to things of
this nature; and besides, you men (as I I have been informed by my Mother) are
most kind things till your ends are accomplished, and then as full of slights;
But if I could be satisfied of the reality of your affection, it would be more
serviceable to your Interest. But, alas! how shall I credit any thing from a
man who burns and dies, Swears, Vows, and Protests, and all in one single
Minute, quite contrary to the thoughts of his Heart. This from a person so
great a stranger, as well to your Self, as to the thing called Love, as I am,
You may, if you please, value as a piece of Liberty I allow you, to be what in
Yours you express.


This Letter from so young and so unexpected a piece of Female Treason did not
a little damp the Amorous Don Tomazo's flame. He saw how the subtle Traytress
was only coaxing poor Tomazo with the shadow, while she was disposing the
Substance to Don Pedro: cunningly providing, that if Don Pedro should slight
her proffered fondness, then to accept of Don Tomazo's Courtship. This double
dealing of Mrs. Isabella, though unlook't for, was upon better consideration,
the more welcome to Don Tomazo, to support the Morality of that injustice which
he intended the Family: which while he was meditating how to bring to pass, his
Servant brought him a Letter from the Rock, with another Billet in the Belly of
it. For, by this time, Don Pedro's Servant, after his Master had shifted his
Clothes, had found the Justice, 'seignior Cornudo Elects Wives Love-Letter in
one of the Pockets; which Don Tomazo reading, found these violent Expressions
of an Amorous Fury:

Most Fair and Dear to me of all your Sex,
WHose Charms no Creature is able to resist, I that have lived in the state of
Marriage this twenty five years, a just and dutiful Wife, and, as I thought, to
the best of your Sex, am now so altered in my respect to that Thing called an
Husband, that I hate him for your sake; for which I would quit all my immediate
plenty, to enjoy your dear Company but one hour. Pity the weakness of a Woman,
and do not slight a Passion so great, that no Breast can conceal; and consider
how I break the Impalement of a virtuous Life Forty three years long, to come
to the Embraces of your self, whom I love above all the World. Let not my Age
render me insignificant, but meet me to morrow at the Mount.


Don Tomazo having read this Letter, could not choose but laugh, to see the
infidelity of the Daughter so prettily revenged by the wantonness of the
Mother, who was all this while in a fiery torment, like St. Laurence upon the
Gridiron; believing that if Don Pedro had not slighted her, he either would
have met her, or else she should have heard from him.

It seems Don Pedro knew nothing of this Letter, before his man had found it;
and therefore not to lose his opportunities, having received some private
Instructions from Don Tomazo, he thought it high time to answer both his
Clients, beginning first with Madam Isabella, in this Language.

Fair Isabella,
WHen I had perused your Little Charm, I found my self under a thousand
Constructions: But by the Contents thereof, being truly sensible of your great
Affections for me, assure your self, nothing on Earth shall labor more to
retaliate those your Favors, nor manage the whole matter with more safety to
your self then I will. So if you will but meet me at the Little Rock, I shall
there express what is now too much to expose in written Lines.

Adieu.


After he had wrote this, and was assured of Isabella's coming to the place
appointed, Don Pedro, apprehensive that the absence of the Daughter might raise
jealousies in the Mother, and put her upon the search, like Ceres after her
Daughter Proserpine, to prevent her, sent* her this Julep to qualify the heat
of her Fever.

Dear Madam,
I Cursed my ill Fate a thousand times, for concealing your Billet so long from
me: For I never knew of it, till shifting my Apparel; and then my Valet du
Chamber found it by accident in the same pocket, which I suppose you put it.
But the Contents thereof has given me such demonstrable satisfaction of your
great and good Inclination to me, that it puts me under no small surprise to
qualify my self for the reception of so much Honor, the least grain of which,
as coming from you, I shall more esteem then my Life, and finally make it my
study how to embrace you with such a tenderness as may be most proper for a
Lady under the circumstances of so great a Passion. And from hence forward to
prevent the jealousy of a Husband; let us only meet and not write. For nothing
is of more dangerous consequence then Letters of such a nature as this, when
once discovered; especially by a man so apt as the Justice. I will meet you to
morrow at the same place you appointed, and the same hour.

Adieu.


At the receipt of this Letter, the Lady was so transported, that for that day
all the Gayety and Pleasure she had ever show'n, or enjoyed in her whole Life,
seemed to be recollected, and rendevouz'd in her Countenance. She thought of
nothing but of reinforcing her amorous Heat, that she might be able to meet her
Dear Don Pedro's Fires, with equal Flames. Her Heart danced the Canaries in her
Bosom for joy that she should so soon be happy in the Embraces of her Beloved
Spaniard; and the continual meditations of her Brain upon these voluptuous
felicities did so employ her thoughts, that her Daughter might have had the
opportunity to have lost more Maiden-heads then Hercules got in one night, for
any enquiry her Mother made after her. Thus was the Mothers security the
Daughters safety, who by this time had lost her troublesome Virginity in those
Embraces, to which the other was the next day to resign the Matrimonial Loyalty
of many years. So little does the continual sight of a Gold Thumb-Ring control
the temptations of a wanton Appetite.

Isabella having by this means obtained a full satisfaction from Don Pedro, and
now become as wise in the Natural Philosophy of Love as her Mother, left her
Instructor a thousand sweet kisses in pawn for an assurance of her farther
Society, and with the modesty of a Nun, returned home to laugh in her sleeve at
the Cheat she had put upon the vigilance of her Mother, and all her Female
Guardians. But before Don Pedro and she parted, there was an agreement made,
that whenever D. Pedro came to the Justices House, it should be under pretense
of making Love to her, who had already given him the surest pledge of her
affection. For, under that color D. Pedro being now to manage the Intrigue
between the Mother and him, where lay the stress both of his and D. Tomazo's
design, and the prospect of their gain, it was necessary to uphold the amorous
correspondence which he and Isabella had begun.

And now the happy Hour was come, D. Pedro and the enamored Mother met; and he
that had so deliciously fed the Young Kitlin, was now to purr it with
Grey-maulkin the Elder; whom he entertained with such variety of Embraces, that
she protested, all the Justices Cornish Huggs were but Bavin-bands to 'em.
Which gave her such an intrinsic Satisfaction, that she enjoined D. Pedro to
stay in those Parts a Month longer; and indeed, till those Quarters were grown
almost too hot to hold either him or his Company. In order whereunto, she had
contrived a way for his coming to the Justices House. But D. Pedro not deeming
her way so commodious as his own, acquainted the Mother with his Affections to
her Daughter; who thereupon approved of his Intentions, and having resolved to
act conformably to the Design; they parted for that time.

Don Pedro being returned home, wrote a Letter to be left at the Rock for D.
Tomazo, wherein he gave him an exact account of what had past between him and
the two Ladies; and farther desired D. Tomazo with all speed to get himself
introduced into Isabella's Company, and to make his Addresses to her, wherein
he promised to be assisting, so soon as there appeared any public Acquaintance
between them.

This Letter, Don Tomazo read, with great regret, cursing Pedro's happiness,
and his own ill Conduct, not so much for the Love he bore the dissembling
Isabella, as for that he had not made the same Improvement of his Opportunity
that Don Pedro had done; but finding it was now Don Pedro's Intention to carry
on the Common Advantage, and that the Design began to ripen, he easily rid his
Head of those impertinent Imaginations, and two days after gave a Visit to the
Justice, who being at home, entertained him with great Respect; and among the
rest of the Discourse, knowing Don Tomazo was well skilled in the Spanish
Tongue, informed him of a Famous Spanish Gentleman that was in those Parts,
well worth his Acquaintance. Of which Don Tomazo seemingly made slight, telling
the Justice, that he was a Young Man, and did not know what Inconveniences the
Knowledge of that Gentleman might produce. But the more Don Tomazo slighted it,
the more earnest the Justice was to send for Don Pedro. So that Don Tomazo,
unwilling to disoblige the Justice by his Obstinacy, suffered himself to be
overruled. As soon as Don Pedro came, Don Tomazo entertained him with all the
Ceremonies according to the Gravity of Spain, and afterward discoursed him in
the Spanish Language, which fell out luckily for their Business, in regard that
none of the Justices Family understood what they said.

This Interview between the two pretended Strangers, Don Tomazo and Don Pedro,
first begat a Familiarity, then frequent Meetings; and at length, by the
Justices Consent, his House became the General Rendevouz. During which time,
Don Pedro having had the frequent sight and handling of his enamored
Mistress's Jewels, had got such a perfect Idea of the shape, form, and bigness
of the Pearls and Stones, and afterward drawn them so exactly in Paper, that
there was no question of the Success of the Design. Thereupon Don Tomazo
dispatched away his Man to Exeter, who there bought up several Pendants of
counterfeit Pearl, and Bristow-stones, so well matched, that they were hardly
to be distinguished from the Originals. Which being brought to Don Tomazo, he
delivered them to Don Pedro; who watching his opportunity, which the fond
Dotage of Issabella's Mother often gave him, by opening her Cabinet, and
displaying her Wealth, to dazzle his Eyes, and oblige him to the satisfaction of
her desires, took an honest occasion to pay himself for his Drudgery, by taking
out the real Substances, and conveying the Counterfeit Shadows in their places.
Which being done, for about three days after, Don Tomazo and Don Pedro drank
the Justice very hard; and indeed, made it their business to keep him elevated
for the most part of their Stay, after the moral Exchange which Don Pedro had
made with his Wife. During which time, one Evening, the Justice being bowsie,
they took an occasion to make a Repetition of the great Favors he had shown
them, promising those Returns, which they neither durst, nor ever intended to
perform. In the Conclusion of which most lofty Complements, some Discourse
arising about Mrs. Isabella, D. Pedro caught at it, and spared not to say,
that he loved her beyond measure, and little less then his Life; but he came
short of D. Tomazo, who swore by way of Reply, that she was more dear to him
then Life it self; and in pursuit of his Zeal for the Lady, requested the
Justice to declare, if it were his Intention to dispose of his Daughter in
Marriage, and if it were possible for her to love Tomazo and Pedro both alike,
on which of the two he would soonest bestow her? The Justice being ravished to
hear such a brisk Contest about his Daughter, between two such great Persons of
Quality, was at first in a Dilemma; but at length, heightn'd by the the other
Round, and the more generous Protestation of D. Tomazo, frankly declared in
favor of him. At which D. Pedro seemed to take Snuff, but carried it off for
the present; and so they drank on all three, till the Ladies were gone to Bed;
but then D. Pedro and D. Tomazo took an occasion to slip out of the Room,
leaving the Justice alone, who perceiving they did not immediately return,
presently began to reflect upon the discourse that had past between 'em. With
that he ran to the Garden door, at which they went out; where he had not stood
long, before he heard the clashing of Swords. Which so amazed his Worship, that
in a trice, the whole Family was alarmed, and the Justice with some of his
Servants, came in great haste to part them. In this counterfeit Fray, D. Pedro
had pricked D. Tomazo in the Arm, more like a Surgeon then an Enemy, which, with
another green Hurt that Tomazo had received but a little before, past for two
great Wounds. The Justice caused his Servants to take D. Tomazo into the House,
while he labored to appease Don Pedro, who seemingly, would fain have had the
the other Touch with D. Tomazo. But his violent Passion, at length submitting to
the Justices Mediation, he was prevailed with to go to Bed. The Scuffle being
thus over, and the great Mischief prevented, the Justice visited Tomazo, who
all in a boiling Choler, lay swearing, he would make D. Pedro smoke for the
injury he had done him, and what he would make him pay for Damages. The Old
Gentleman gave him all the Sugar words he could think of, and sent for a
Surgeon, whose Honesty D. Tomazo easily tempted to delay the Cure, to enhance
the Bill of Costs. After that time, the two Rivals never met, D. Tomazo
returning to his Quarters; and the Justice for his own Reputation, so ordered
it, that there was no noise made of the dangerous Duel. Nevertheless, D. Pedro,
who all this while, lay at Rack and Manger in the Justices House, and took that
care of his wife, to find her other sport then visiting her Cabinets, seemed to
be not a little afraid of his Rival, and therefore persuaded the Justice to
give D. Tomazo a Visit, and withal, to pump him in reference to his demands for
Satisfaction. To whom D. Tomazo protested, that 500 l. should not reconcile
'em. But the Cure being over, D. Tomazo was persuaded by the Justice, (whom
they found very much pleased with his Office of Mediation) to treat with D.
Pedro, who was willing to refer himself to D. Tomazo, as not thinking it
convenient to incumber himself with the Laws of the Nation, to which he was a
Stranger. So that at length, D. Tomazo was overruled by the Justice, to take
225 l. Accordingly Don Pedro laid down the Money in Spanish Gold, which D.
Tomazo refused, as not being the Coin of England. Thereupon D. Pedro, mainly
desirous to be rid of Trouble, requested the Justice to take the Gold, and
furnish him with so much Money, which he not having in the house, courteously
sent to Pensanse for, and delivered it to Pedro, who upon the Payment thereof
to Don Tomazo, received a full and ample discharge, but refused to have any
more to do with such a litigious Gentleman.

By this time having stock't all that Country with their precious Metal, by a
Letter from the rock, they agreed to be gone, as they did in a most slovenly
manner. For without taking leave of the Justice, who was so courteous, or his
Wife, who had been so kind, or the Daughter, who had been so tenderly loving,
they took horse of a sudden, and vanished out of the Country, leaving nothing
behind 'em but the Remarques of an old musty Proverb, Happy are they that
beware by other men's harms. Neither were they very scrutinous to know what
Curses or Lamentations followed 'em from the Justices House, who they knew had
no great reason to be over-zealous in their pursuit.

During this pleasant Ramble, the two Brethren in Evil had returned several
considerable Sums to London, and disposed of all their counterfeit Peruvians.
And now, coming to a certain Market Town beyond Exeter, the little God, with a
muffler about his Eyes, found a way to shoot a new Passion into Don Tomazo's
heart. He that had so long defied the yoke of Wedlock, was now altogether for
the Bonds of Matrimony. He had met with an Object beautiful and rich, that had
enslaved him even to a sense of Honor, as if the sickness of his Love had
caused a qualm of Honesty in his mind. So that having succeeded in his
Courtship, he resolved to be faithful to one he entirely loved. And now all
things being concluded, and nothing wanting toward consummation but the
Ceremony of the Church, Don Tomazo rides back to Exeter to provide the Nuptial
Ornaments. By the way, at another Market Town, he met with some Gentlemen of
the Country, who persuaded him to dine with 'em at an Inn; Where, after they
had drank pretty hard, one of the Company (who was Master of the Inn where Don
Tomazo quartered at Lime) began to relate the whole Story of a certain Exploit
that was done at his Town by a pretended Spanish Count; and at the conclusion
of his Story pointed to Tomazo, saying, that the Count was as like him, as ever
he saw any man in his Life, only that the Count wore a Perruke, and Don Tomazo
his own Hair. This Narrative did not a little disorder Don Tomazo's
Cogitations; but he who had the confidence to out-brazen the stern looks of so
many Dangers, scorned to betray his fear of such a scarecrow as this: and so,
putting a good face upon the matter, with a Story of the same nature with his
own Concern, which led to others quite different, he lulled the Lime-man's
Relation asleep; and for fear it should wake again, he kept the Company so well
soder'd together with pleasing Healths, that all manner of Stories were forgot,
there being not one in the Company but what was carried to bed. Only Don
Tomazo, having been more careful of himself, rode to Exeter that night, to meet
a more unlucky Misfortune. For early the next morning after he came thither,
the Ostler of the Inn where his Horses stood, taking one of them to the
Farriers, upon some occasion or other, a certain Person casting his Eye upon
the Beast, demanded of the Ostler whose it was? who answered, He knew not.
Thereupon the Person who asked the Question waited till the Horse was led back,
and following him to the Stable, there found the very Horse on which Tomazo
rode when he changed his Spanish pieces with him at Plymouth, for 14 l. odd
money; for so it fell out, that this was the very Individual Goldsmith that had
been nick't in that manner. Who thereupon went to Don Tomazo's Lodging, and
caused him to be apprehended. A sad Catastrophe to a Person that dreamed of
nothing but Epithalamiums and Hymenaeal Flambeau's. Presently he was carried
before a Magistrate, by whom, upon the Justices Information, he was committed,
but left Bailable. Don Tomazo being thus in the Climm, and well knowing that
the report of his being in Prison would muster a wicked Battalion of the same
Crimes to his destruction; to prevent the threats of his hard Fate, writes away
a Letter to a Gentleman who was a Justice of the Peace in the County of Devon,
whose Surname he then assumed to himself; wherein he gave him to understand his
Condition, and that he was a person nearly related to him; and therefore
requested his Worship (for nothing less then a Justice of Peace of the same
County would serve) to favor an innocent Stranger, so far as to stand for one
of his Bail; pretending, as well he might do, that his Imprisonment would be
his Ruin; as being a person that came not into the Country to utter false
Money, but to court a young Lady, that lived not far from him; of which he
would give his Worship a farther Account, if his Request were granted. Don
Tomazo's Letter was well considered and scanned by the Justice, before he sent
an Answer; and enquiry was also made by his Order, after this new discovered
Kinsman; by which the Justice finding many of the Circumstances to be true, as
Don Tomazo had expressed, believed the rest, and wrote him word, that though he
knew him not personally, he was satisfied that he had such a Kinsman in the
World, and believed him so to be; and therefore rather then suffer a Relation
to lie under such a Scandal, he promised to bail him off, which was immediately
done by himself and another Justice of the Peace, whom he had engaged to stand
with him. With this new Relation Don Tomazo went home, where he was civilly
entertained till the time of his Appearance at the Sessions. During which
Interval, being brought acquainted by his Cousin, with the Justices of the
Peace of the County, he had so insinuated himself into their Favor, that
several of them had obliged themselves by Promise to be his Friends, which made
him resolved to stand his Trial. When the time came, the Goldsmith exhibited
his Indictment against Don Tomazo, wherein he charged him with having exchanged
at his Shop, a certain weight of Metal for so much real-money; but that when
he went to melt it down in his Forge, the whole matter by putting a smart Fire
under it, evaporated with that Violence, that his Servant standing on the other
side of the Forge, having received some of the Vapor into his Nostrils,
swonded away to the great wonder of his Master. Upon this Indictment D. Tomazo
was found guilty of a high Misdemeanour, and fined 45 l. which was afterward
brought down to 40 s. and presently paid with great Joy. For upon Payment of
his fine, no other charge coming against him, he was acquitted by Proclamation.

D. Tomazo having thus escaped the Goldsmith's Tongues, almost as bad as St.
Dunstan's, and made all the Expedition he could, to render his Acknowledgments
to the Gentleman he was so much obliged to, made as much haste out of the
Country, and with his other self D. Pedro set forward for London, no more
regarding his intended Marriage; which indeed had been to little purpose. For
his Mistress's Relations having heard of his Misfortunes, and that he had been
no Sufferer for his Religion, took that Paternal care, as to send their
Kinswoman far enough out of his reach. When the two Travelers arrived at
London, and had cast up their Accounts, it appeared by their Books, that they
and their Confederates had uttered in this Kingdom 4050 Pieces of their sorts
of Spanish Gold, amounting to near 5000 l. Sterling. Of which, being divided
1700 l. came to Don Tomazo's and D. Pedro's Share; all which, together with the
stock they had before, and the Jewels which they had borrowed of the Justice's
Lady (clear booty to them two) rose to a very considerable Value; and yet no
such vast Sum neither, for those that had been sowing and reaping all over
England.

Now you will say, What became of all this Money? Oh! never fear it, you shall
have a faithful Account of it by and by. You Will be impertinently questioning
too, Why did not these two Dons put themselves in a Way? So they did, and that
in as fair a way to be hanged as ever they did in all their Progresses through
all the ways of Great Britain. Now loosing, and ventring Life and Limbs to
impose upon Princes and Generals, as they did before to cozen Goldsmiths and
Country Gentlemen. But how you will approve of their ways, is not for them to
determine.

For to tell you the truth, the two Dons finding London the coolest place in
England for men of their Profession, now grown by continual Persecutions,
rather like the Stoves in the new Bagno, then like a gentle Egyptian Oven to
hatch more mischief in, resolved to pass over into Holland, with a Resolution
to serve the Prince of Orange, and so they did more tricks then ever he thought
they deserved thanks for. To which intent, they took their Leaves of their
Native Soil, like two Philosophers, carrying all they had along with them:
though it were a hard thing to judge whether their Country were not as glad to
be rid of them, as they were to be rid of their Country. But let it be as it
will, they were no sooner entered upon the Stage of Holland, but they were
admitted to kiss the Princes Hands. Such an Ascendant has the dazzle of Garb and
Behavior over all Mankind, and all, because the Body of Man is not as
transparent, as it is brittle. Soon after they had performed this Ceremony,
they had leave to enter themselves as Volunteers; for there were no Commissions
to be had for Money, it being then at the beginning of the Campaign. During all
which time of Military Duty, and the Winter following, the two English Sparks,
not considering that their Bank was to be fadom'd, or rather, building upon the
fair Promises made them of Employments, that would soon replenish the Vacuums
of their empty Bags, what with Item for excessive Eexpences; Item for Gaming,
that bane of Plethorie Pockets, were brought to sing Lachrymae over the last
penny. So that, for want of foresight, seldom regarded by the great Masters of
Art in Gusmanry, having disposed of all their Equipage and Bravery, for it came
to that at length, they were resolved however not to starve. And therefore to
prevent that miserable pining Death, Don Tomazo, who had some knowledge in the
Art of Fortification, as being one that had often built Sconces, took the
boldness to wait upon the Prince, to whom he expressed the great desire he had to
serve his Highness to the utmost of what he was capable. Then, for Don Tomazo
was always one that kept close to his Text, he made known to the Prince the
necessity he was in, not forgetting to mind him of the good Services he and Don
Pedro had done at several places, and more particularly the Siege of Grave,
which were not unknown to the Prince. Who thereupon bid Tomazo look about, and
find out something within his Highness's disposal, and that then both he and
his Friend should not fail to see the Effects of his Highness's Favor
answerable to their Expectations. But Don Tomazo not to be balked by those
plausible Evasions of Courtship, came close to the Point, for it was money he
wanted, and thereupon he acquainted the Prince, That if he would order him a
hundred pound, he would undertake to serve him as a Spy in the French Army.
This the Prince desired Time to consider of, and in a short time communicated
the Secret to some of his Council; who being as truly sensible as himself of
the great want of Intelligence among the Dutch, persuaded the Prince to employ
Don Tomazo, since 'twas his own Voluntary offer. In pursuit of this Advice, the
Prince sent for D. Tomazo, and told him, provided his Friend D. Pedro would
condescend to be left as a Pledge, he should have a hundred pounds to put him
into an Equipage fit for the Prosecution of his Proposals. For the Prince had
had several tricks put upon him by the English before, which made him the more
cautious. Upon this, Tomazo advises with his Friend D. Pedro; and as they two
were not wont to Spaniolize in their Consultations, the matter was so ordered
to the Princes Satisfaction likewise, that Don Tomazo, as much to his
Satisfaction likewise, received the hundred pound. Upon the receipt whereof,
away went Don Tomazo for Brussels, altered all his Habits, and in the disguise
of a Boor of that Country, trudged to the French Army, that then lay encamped
near Sogny, under the Command of the Prince of Conde. There Don Tomazo got a
full view of all their Standards, Cannon, and the manner of their Encamping; as
also, a very near account of the number of their Men, both Horse and Foot. With
this Discovery Don Tomazo returned to Brussells, where he put all things into a
formal draught, exactly representing the whole Camp; which being showed to the
Prince of Orange, he compared it with one which he had received before from
another person of the same Occupation. By which Comparison, the Prince found D.
Tomazo to be a very fit Person for his Employment; and therefore encouraged
him, and promised him, that so long as he could furnish them with good
Intelligence, he should want neither for Money nor Advance. Thereupon Don
Tomazo returns to Brussells, where finding several of the Country People, whose
Houses had been plundered, and themselves stripped by the French, so miserably
poor, that they wanted Bread: Don Tomazo picked up one of these forlorn
Creatures, which by Conversation he found most acute, with whom he prevailed to
undertake such Enterprises as he should put him upon, and to follow his
directions; for which he promised him half a Crown English a day. The Boor
taking Don Tomazo for an Angel sent from Heaven to relieve his Misery, embraced
his Offer with all the readiness imaginable. So that Don Tomazo having given
him full Instructions, sent him about his business. Upon his Return, the Boor
gave a very good Account of things, which being put into Form, together with
such other Discoveries which Don Tomazo had made (unknown to the Boor) he
presented them to the Prince, who still received more and more Satisfaction
from the Labors of his new spy.

Sometime after, D. Tomazo had by the Diligence of his new acquired
Confederate, prevailed with ten or a dozen more of the same stamp, and in the
same Condition to list themselves in his Service for the same Pay. By this
Increase of Number, his Intelligence notably increast, insomuch that his double
Diligence had highly advanced him in the Favor of the Prince, who believed
that whatever Tomazo brought him, was clearly gotten by his own Hazard and
Industry, as indeed the best part of it was; for you must always allow the
Master to outdoe the Servants.

These smaller Attempts so well succeeding, D. Tomazo was desired by the Prince
of Orange, to use all his art to insinuate himself into an Acquaintance with
some of the Prince of Conde's Family or Attendents, promising that if it could
be accomplished and any Service accrue from thence, no Sum of Money should be
wanting for Gratification, or Reward, or Remuneration, or whatever ye please to
call it. D. Tomazo thirsting after Fame and Money, and believing that having so
many Irons in the Fire it would not be long e're some of them proved hot enough
to strike, readily undertakes the Affair; to which purpose he provides a Frock
of Sackcloath, a pair of wooden Shoes, (for such is the Habit of the Boors in
those parts) a Rundlet of Brandy, and a parcel of Tobacco. This Rundlet had two
Divisions, the one for the Soldiers Liquor of Life, and the other for
blacklead Pencils, and Parchment, and such other necessary materials. In this
Garb, who the Devil could know so great a Person as Don Tomazo? So that under
this disguise, he walked about the French Camp, grateful to the Soldiers for
the sake of his Tobacco and Brandy; and watching his Opportunies, took several
Memorandums very considerable. But loytring one day carelessly about the
Quarters of the Prince of Conde, one of the Captains of the Guard called to Don
Tomazo, who believing him not worse then Cerberus, and in hopes that a Sop
would have stopped his Mouth, proffered him a Taste of his Cordial Liquor. But
the Captain suspecting him to be what he was, ordered him to be searched, and
kept him upon the Guard four whole hours. This was an Accident that set all the
Pulses of Don Tomazo's Brain at work; and all little enough to hammer out new
Spirits to supply the want of those which he had lost in the Fright. But those
little Vulcans soon recruited his Arteries, and the Devil too, the Father of
Lies, unwilling to loose a Servant, gave him a List with a cast of his Favor.
For after something of a serious Study upon such a ticklish point of Life or
Death, D. Tomazo called for the Captain, and desired he might be carried to the
Prince of Conde; at which the Captain laughed and saluted Don Tomazo's
Posteriors with a contemptible Kick or two; asking in great Derision, What
Business such a Beast as he could have with the Prince? So strangely may a
Captain be mistaken. But Don Tomazo urged his Importunity so home, that
Marshall D' Humieres passing by, and hearing the brandy man so boldly demand
to speak with the Prince of Conde about Business of Importance, came up to him
and asked him What it was? To whom Don Tomazo made a submissive Answer, That it
was of that high Consequence, that for his Life he durst not impart it to any
but the Prince himself. Away went the Marshall, little thinking, that Satan
had sent him of an Errand, and gave Notice to the Prince of D. Tomazo's
Importunity; who thereupon sent for the Brandy-Merchant, not to buy any of his
Ware, but to understand his Business. Then it was, that D. Tomazo, with a
respective Bow, not like that of a Strong-water-man, desired Privacy with his
Highness, as not daring to give any Account of his Business to any person
living but himself. Thereupon, the Prince considering there were such things as
Disguises in the World, and frequently made use of, and that it was in his
Power, with one puff of a Mort-bleu, as well to hang a Varlet, as to reward an
Instrument, ordered all People to withdraw: which being done, Don Tomazo
opening his Mouth without Fear or Trembling, thus began.

Sir, it is intended by the Prince of Orange, that his whole Army shall march
to Oudenard about four days hence; in order to which, all things are in
Preparation: thirty Battering Cannon are to be sent from Gaunt to meet them;
the Prince being resolved to besiege the Town with all the Vigor imaginable;
and to render the Enterprise more easy, four Engineers are to be sent into the
Garrison to morrow, to dismount the Cannon, which is to be done with the
consent of some of the Gunners already tampered with, and made for their
Purpose. Farther, when the Dutch are ready to open their Trenches, the great
Water Damm in the middle of the Town is to be sprung by another Engineer, by
the consent of the Persons there concerned, of whom they are already assured.
Which being done, and the Water fallen, the Enemy intends to attacque the Town
on that side. Now if your Highness think fit, I will return to the Dutch Army,
and make farther enquiry into the particulars of this design, which when I have
done, I shall be ready to go to Oudenard, and discover to the Persons your
Highness shall appoint, the very Engineers, and their Accomplices themselves.
The Prince hearing such a Formal Story from such an Annis-seed-water-Robin, as
he took Tomazo to be, was not a little surprised, which caused him, as any
General of reason would have done, to ask Tomazo what he was? how he had lived?
what had induced him to make this Discovery? and how he came to be privy to
such a considerable Secret? Adding withal, that he could not believe the Prince
of Orange would ever communicate a Design of such Importance, to a Person of
his Low Degree.

To this Don Tomazo, not thinking it necessary to run through the whole Course
of his Life, replied in short, That he was a Captain in the Prince of Orange's
Army, that he was intimately acquainted with all the Chief Officers; that he
had been diverse times at their Councils of War; and often had had the Honor
privately to discourse the Prince of Orange, the Princes of Curland, Nassau,
and Friezeland; by which he made it out, that there was probability enough,
that he might be acquainted with part, though not with all their Designs. And
lastly, that as to his Inducement, to make the Discovery, it proceeded merely
from the great Honor and Esteem he had for His Majesty of France, whom he was
most ambitious to serve.

The Prince, having thus duly weighed the Circumstances of the Story, and
finding nothing but what was very likely to be true, surrendered his Belief to
D. Tomazo's smooth Tale; and the more to oblige him, ordered his Valet du
Chamber to present him with forty Quadruples, to the value of 160 l. Sterling;
which pleased D. Tomazo much better then the Kicks of the Breech which the Surly
Captain gave him. Which being done, the Prince gave him farther hopes of his
Favor, even to high Advancement, if he made out the discovery as he had begun;
and so, having enjoined him to return with all possible speed, in order to his
going to Oudenard for the Apprehension of Don Tomazo's Traitors in the Moon, he
dismissed the well satisfied Mundungus-merchant from a most dreadful Agony,
with the sweet Consolation of Fidler's Fare.

Don Tomazo having thus by dint of Wit, delivered himself out of the Lion's
Den, and finding that he was able to deal with two Princes at one time,
resolved to play his Game out. To this Intent, away he goes directly to the
Prince of Orange, and to him, without any Concealment, relates all that had
past between the Prince of Conde and himself. A Story which very much pleased
the Prince, and caused him to laugh heartily. At the Conclusion of his
Narrative, Don Tomazo was commanded by the Prince, to return at the time
appointed; which he did accordingly, and found immediate Admittance to the
Prince of Conde, to whom he told the same Story as before, only with some
Alterations and Additions. Which so convinced the Great General of the Truth of
the Fable, not believing that though a man had counterfeited once, he would
ever be such a Fool to venture again with the same Lie in his Mouth, that he
ordered Don Tomazo to go directly by such a Token to the Marquis de Chamilly,
then Governor of Oudenard, and give him an Account of the whole matter, as
from the Prince. All which Don Tomazo exactly performed; but then pretending to
the Marquis, that the Persons were not yet come, and that it behooved him
therefore to stay till they came; that Liberty was soon allowed him. During
which time, he made it his Business to walk and view all the Fortifications, as
well Private as Public; as also, to take several Memoirs of what he thought
proper for his Purpose. And though it was not to be expected, that the Marquess
should be so liberal as the Prince of Conde, yet did Don Tomazo so well order
his Governourship, that he Chamilly'd him out of forty Pistols; and so having
modeled all his draughts and Observations, he watched his Opportunity, and
stole out of the Town, though with no small hazard; the French being the most
careful in the World how they let any persons pass in or out at their Garrisons
without a strict Examination.

By this time the Prince of Conde had received an account from some
Correspondent of his in the Dutch Army, that the Prince of Orange had sent an
Engineer to Oudenard, and that he did intend to beleaguer it. Which piece of
imperfect Intelligence from a known Friend, agreeing with Don Tomazo's Story,
so startled the Prince, that he now believed every word Don Tomazo had said.
And thereupon, raises his Camp from Charleroy, and marches quite cross the
Country to cover Oudenard; into which he put three thousand fresh men with
Provisions, continuing his Camp upon the Downs, in expectation of the Prince of
Orang's Coming. Of whom in four days after he heard another Story, for the
Dutch taking the Opportunity of the discamping and long march of the French,
presently surrounded Charleroy, the place they had all along had their Design
upon; which forced the Prince after a tedious March to Oudenard for the
Apprehension of Don Tomazo's invisible Ingineers, to hurry back again to the
Relief of Charlery, where he had no small Trouble to raise the Besiegers, not
daring to give them Battle, though he had much the Advantage: And it may be
truly said, that this invented Chimaera of Don Tomazo's, the product of a mere
Accident, had so disordered the Measures of the French Counsels, by sending
their General from post to pillar, that they could not recover their Senses all
that Summer. From such small Beginnings often times arise the most fatal
Revolutions in the World.

For, to say Truth, the Siege of Oudenard was never dreamt of, till Don
Tomazo's Return from thence with the Marquis's Pistols, and his presenting the
Prince of Orange with the Draughts and Observations he had made. But then the
Prince consulted all his Engineers, and diverse Councils of War were held upon
the occasion of Don Tomazo's discoveries; which were found to be of that
Consequence, that the Dutch fell in good earnest to the Siege of Oudenard;
which put the Prince of Conde to another Dance of Attendance upon their
Masterships, to rouse 'em from that haunt. Which hapn'd very much to the loss
of the Besiegers, and more for the Prince of Conde's honor, though Don Tomazo
had put him to trot hard for it. However, there were some Commanders of great
Experience among the Dutch, who were of Opinion, that had the directions which
Don Tomazo gave them, been rightly managed and kept private, the Success of the
Enterprise could not have failed. But that which occasioned the ill Successes
of the Dutch, I mean not only in this particular, but at other times, was first
their ill Conduct in not concealing the good Services, nor indeed the names of
the persons of those they put upon such Employments as these, and then, so
often communicating their Designs to such as gave immediate notice to the
French; by whose Advices, the Dutch Spies were so often discovered and hanged,
that others being discovered, their Intelligence was very insignificant, till
Don Tomazo undertook the business, who so ordered it, that he had several
Emissaries up and down in the French Army, and some that waited even upon some
of the Principal Officers themselves, which he had in daily pay; beside others
that continually trotted between them in the Army and himself, who with Don
Pedro, still kept his Quarters in some Spanish Garrison nearest his Business,
modelling collateral designs of another nature.

The next Summer, the face of Affairs was somewhat altered, the Prince of Conde
being removed into Alsatia, and the Duke of Luxemburgh, made General of the
Army in Flanders; which clearly disordered Tomazo's former Settlement: So that
he was forced to go himself to new model his Affairs, which he effectually
performed. For he got Don Pedro to be a Valet du Chamber to the Duke himself;
by which means, Don Pedro became very Serviceable to him. His Correspondence
being thus settled, and carried on for near four Months, D. Tomazo found, that
some of the Spanish Governors were not so kind to him as he expected, and
therefore he made his Complaint to the Prince of Orange, who soon after,
procured Letters of Recommendation from the Duke de Villa Hermosa, not only to
those, but to all others, which Don Tomazo had occasion to visit. A certain
sort of Utensils, which he knew how to make use of.

Some time after, there hapn'd certain disorders among the Confederate Spies,
which could not be well settled, unless Don Tomazo appeared among them in
Person, and as it fell out, no other place would serve but the Duke of
Luxemburgh's Quarters themselves. In order to this difficult Journey, Don
Tomazo puts on the Habit of a Merchant, gets as many Pass-ports as were
requisite for a Man under such Circumstances to travel with, and so sets
forward on Foot toward the French Camp. By the way, he narrowly escaped the
pursuit of several Boors in the Province of Artois, who would certainly have
stripped, if not murdered him, had he not showed them a good pair of Heels; the
use of which he well understood: For it was common with him to travel fifty
miles a day in that Country. He had no sooner got clear of this cursed Crew,
but he met with another party, about half a Mile off, as bad as themselves.
Through these he had no other means to escape, but by making his way by main
force. Which so provoked those Bloody Varlets, that some of them let fly
several shot at him from their Fuzees, while others set a running after him,
thinking to have overtaken him; and perhaps they might have won the Race to the
loss of his Life, had he not met with some of the Horse Guards of Lisle, then
scouting abroad, who, observing what had past between the Boors and him,
presently seized him, and sent him away to the Garrison. Where he was detained
by the Captain of the Guard, notwithstanding that he showed him his Passports;
who told Don Tomazo, that he was a Spy, and only forced in by a party of their
Men, who were gone out but a little before, and that therefore he should stay
till the Party returned. Don Tomazo vexed at this stop, acquainted the Captain
with the real occasion of his traveling that way, which was to wait upon the
Duke of Luxemburgh; but nothing would serve, till at length the Soldiers
coming back, and giving the Captain an Account, how he had been pursued by the
Boors, and how they had seized him, to secure him out of their Clutches; he was
presently discharged; but ordered to attend the Governor, who was desirous to
see him, having heard of his deliverance out of the hands of the Sons of
Belial. The Governor liked Don Tomazo so well, that he would fain have
entertained him in his House, as being unwilling to part with him, always
acknowledging the great Obligations the English had laid upon him in his
Extremity, in remembrance whereof, he thought himself engaged to be kind to Don
Tomazo. But he, knowing the urgency of his own Affairs far better then the
Governor, pretended that his Errand was to the Duke of Luxemburgh and then
told him so much of his business as concerned the French Interest. Whereupon
the Governor, sorry that he had detained D. Tomazo so long, to make him
amends, by expediting his Journey, caused his Groom to saddle two very good
Horses, and to attend D. Tomazo, till he saw him with the Duke. This kindness
of the Governor Don Tomazo could very well have born with, had not the Groom
been ordered to see him with the Duke. For Don Tomazo being resolved to make
the Governor, who had given him nothing but a parcel of good words, pay for
his loss of time, had already designed to take the Horses in Execution for his
Debt. All the matter was how to get rid of this impertinent Groom: Which put
Don Tomazo upon his Invention that seldom failed; and at this time proved most
faithful to him, for as he was riding before by a piece of enclosed Ground,
upon a Pretense that he had seen a Hare, he had flung his Cane over the Hedge;
and therefore prayed the Groom to alight and fetch it him again, while he held
his Horse. Don Tomazo finding this the only time to prevent his being brought
before the Duke of Luxemburgh, left his Conductor to return home a foot, and
rode clear away with the Horses to Mons, a Garrison of the Spaniards. Upon his
Arrival there, he was presently carried by two files of Musketeers to the
Governor, then the Duke of Arescot, who had had Letters of Recommendation in
the Behalf of Don Tomazo from the Duke of Villa Hermosa before. To the Duke Don
Tomazo told the whole Story of his Travels, and how he had served the Governor
of Lisle for detaining him from his Business. Thereupon the Duke caused the
horses to be sold by beat of Drum, upon the sale of which Don Tomazo received
six and forty pound, which he put up in his Pocket to drink the Governor of
Lisle and his Grooms Health.

Two days after, the Duke sent a Convoy of 800 Dragoons to Brussels, for
Provisions. Thither with them went Don Tomazo, and there considering the
pressing want of his Appearance among his Confederates in the French Army, he
resolved to adventure once more. To which purpose he dressed himself up in a poor
Habit like a Woman; and so setting forward, the next day made his private Entry
into the French Camp. Where after he had settled all his Affairs, scowr'd and
oiled all his Wheels, and set 'em at work again; as he was coming away, it
being in the Evening, a certain lascivious Horse Officer mad to be riding a
fresh Country Wench, would needs have been forcing up D. Tomazo's Coats; so
that the young Amazon, not willing to be discovered, was forced to use her
utmost Strength to keep the boystrous Officer honest. Thereupon, as all
Repulses in Love beget Revenge, the disappointed Cavalier not believing so much
Strength in that Sex, and disdaining to be so slighted by a bumpkinly Trull,
commanded some of his Soldiers to search Tomazo, which when those rugged
men-mid-wives had done, and made the true Discovery, the enraged Hotspur caused
D. Tomazo to be tied neck and heels, and secured as a Spy. Now was Don Tomazo
in a bushel of Troubles, and one would think past all Redemption; but give a
man Luck and coyt him into the Sea. In this Condition therefore, D. Tomazo
arming himself with his wonted Confidence, sends to speak in private with his
amorous Officer, which being condescended to, Don Tomazo gave him such a parcel
of Demonstrations so satisfactory to a Fellow that had more Treachery then Wit,
that he not only ordered no more noise to be made of the Business, but at the
Request of D. Tomazo, went himself to tell the Duke of Luxemburgh, that there
was a person stolen out of the Prince of Orange his Army in Woman's Apparel, to
make some Discovery to his Excellency, whereupon the Duke sent for Don Tomazo.
But having heard how the Prince of Conde had been trout-tickl'd, and resolving
that no Body should make a Gudgeon of him, so soon as Don Tomazo was brought
before him, sent for several Officers who had served in the Army when the
Prince of Conde commanded, to come and view Don Tomazo, but it so happened,
that now there was not one that could remember him, upon which Assurance the
Duke was willing to hear what Don Tomazo had to say; which was to this Effect,
as close as all the Wit he had could prompt him to lay it; That an English
Colonel in the Dutch Army had a great Inclination to serve the King of France,
and to that purpose, would so order his Business, that all his Men and Officers
should privately convey themselves into the French Camp, provided the Duke
would assure them of the same Employments in his Service, as they had under the
Prince of Orange: And farther, that the said Colonel had employed him, who was
one of his Corporals, to treat with his Excellency about it. This Tale of a
roasted Horse seemed very probable to the Duke, by reason of the frequent
Revolts of the English to the French, in regard of their better Pay and Usage.
Thereupon the Duke obliged Don Tomazo to assure the Officers, that they should
not only have the same Employments, but also Considerations of greater Value;
and to give Don Tomazo an occasion to applaud his Bounty, with his own hand,
put into D. Tomazo's Paum, ten Pistols for a Taste; for which, Don Tomazo
having made a Scrape or a Court'sie, he cannot well remember, with a most
cheerful Heart withdrew: and being now from a Mouse in a Trap, advanced to be a
Man at full Liberty, repairs to the Prince of Orange, to whom he related the
and bad Fortune that had befallen good him, since the last time that he had
waited upon his Highness: which so well pleased the Prince, that he remembering
the Proverb of the Pitcher, kindly persuaded Don Tomazo not to venture any
more, as indeed he did not intend; but seemingly refused to give over, keeping
his private Correspondence still with his Agents in Pay, though that knack of
his were unknown to the Prince.

But by this time the Winter approached, and the Rivulets of Money not flowing
so freely from the Prince's Springs, as if there were no need of Intelligence
in the Winter; Don Tomazo, who thought he deserved as much in the Winter as in
the Summer, and therefore apprehended himself to be slighted, sent for Don
Pedro out of the French Army, and resolves to set some Engine at work. To this
purpose, Don Tomazo, taking Don Pedro along with him, went to the Governor of
Gaunt, with whom he was sure there lay perdue a Letter of Recommendation from
the Duke of Villa Hermosa in his behalf, as there did with all the rest of the
Spanish Governors. To this same great Man of Trust, Don Tomazo pretended, that
D. Pedro was going upon particular and immediate Service into the French Camp;
but wanted Money to defray the necessary Expenses of the Design. Upon which
Assertion of such a known Minister among them as Don Tomazo, Don Pedro was
presently furnished with 30. l. With which Pretense, they visited all the most
considerable Governors of the Spanish Garrisons, which produced a notable
Heap; for they never got less than Twenty pound at a place.

At length, having no more but one to visit, who was a great Grandee, they
resolved to strike him home. To which intent, they took up their Quarters in
Antwerp; and as they never wanted Tools (for Don Tomazo had provided himself of
a Signet with the Prince of Orange's Arms; they counterfeited a Letter from the
Prince to Count Salazar then Governor of Antwerp Castle, in these very Words.

SIR,
LEt this Person, the Bearer hereof, be furnished with 400 Pistols and four
Horses, at the Request of

P. Orange.


This Letter was carried by Don Tomazo, alone; and being showed to the Count,
who had not the least suspicion that it was written at Don Tomazo's Quarters in
Antwerp, ordered the Money forthwith to be paid, and the Horses to be
delivered; which you may be sure were none of the worst. For the Count was so
civil to the Prince, as to give Don Tomazo the Liberty to go into his Stable,
and make Choice of such as he should think most proper for his purpose. And for
prevention of the bad Effects of Second thoughts, as well as for their own
ease, Don Tomazo requested the Count, that he would permit one of his Grooms to
ride along with him. A request soon granted to the Spy-master General of
Holland. Having thus done all their business with success, Don Tomazo and Don
Pedro rode directly like Castor and Pollux to Dunkirk; where being stopped by the
Out-guards, Don Tomazo, with a kind of impatient Countenance of Business,
desired to be carried forthwith before the Governor; to whom, so soon as he
had the Liberty of a private Audience, he related in part what he had done to
the Advantage of the French; that his coming to that Garrison, was to serve the
King his Master, and as such a one desired to to be entertained. Upon this the
Governor received both Don Tomazo and Don Pedro with great Civility, giving
them Permission to dispose of their Booty. But Don Tomazo being willing to lay
some kind of Obligation upon the Governor, for the Proverb tells ye, there is
daubing in all Trades, as an Acknowledgment of his Favor, presented him with
two of the best; the other two they put i'their Pockets, and having given the
Groom a small Gratuity for his Attendance, and money to bear his Expenses, they
dismissed him with as ponderous a Complement to his Master, as they thought his
Memory was able to bear, which by that time was as welcome to the Count as the
sound of his Passing Bell. For before the Return of the Groom with his vostre
tres humble's, the Prince of Orange passing through Antwerp in his way to the
Hague (the Campaigne being then broke up) the Spanish Count believing he had
laid a great Obligation upon the Prince never to be forgotten, gave him to
understand, how ready he had been to observe his Highness's Commands, in
furnishing Don Tomazo according to his Request, expecting some mountainous
Complement for his great Care. But the Prince not knowing what the Count meant,
instead of applauding his Sedulity, fell a laughing, adding withal, that it was
a Trick, and that he must pay for his Learning. No not so, replied the Count,
for I have your Highness's hand to show for what I have done: and presently
drew the Note out of his Pocket. The Prince read it, and showed it to all the
Chief Personages about him, who could not gainsay, but that it was the Prince's
Subscription, and his Secretaries Writing. However, in regard the Prince could
not remember either the Time or the Occasion of such a bountiful piece of
Writing, it was by all condemned for a Cheat, and so the Count lost his Cause.
Nevertheless, the Prince more sensible then the rest, of the Motives that had
induced D. Tomazo to make such an ill use of his Ingenuity, protested, that if
Don Tomazo were with him again, he should not be so slighted as he had been,
for that he had done him very great Services; and therefore could not well be
blamed for carving for himself, what ought to have been with more Freedom
allowed him.

Weary now of the Land Service, for a while, they resolved to commit themselves
to the Mercy of the Ocean; and to venture the Hazards of three unruly Elements,
Fire, Air, and Water all at once. In order to which Resolution, the two bold
Sparks, flush with the Spoils of the Flandrian Governors, make a League with a
Privateer at Dunkirk, and so hoisting sail, they steer away for the North-East
Sea; Where after they had taken several Prizes, D. Tomazo was ordered by the
Captain to officiate in one of the best, as his Lieutenant. Now would it not
vex a man of Sense to be in Possession of a Peruvian Mine, and in a moment to
loose it again through the Folly or rather Madness of a company of unruly
beasts? For this some prize wherein Tomazo was, being well stored with Wine, as
well as other rich Commodities, had given the Seaman such a fatal Opportunity
to steep themselves in the Juice of the Grape, that while their heads swam, the
Ship run aground upon the Isle of Amelandt; in which condition D. Tomazo and
the rest of the Seamen having pillaged her of the best of her lading, left her
to the mercy of the next Tide, and got a shore, which being discovered by two
Dutchmen that belonged to the Vessel before she was made Prize, the Country
rose upon the miserable sons of Misfortune, took them every Mothers-son
Prisoners, and carried them to Harling in Friezland, where after they had
stripped them, and eased them of their rich plunder which in Gold, Jewels,
Neck-laces of Pearl and other Commodities of the highest Value found upon no
more then 13 men, amounted to no less then 15000. l. Sterling; they were so
charitable as to deliver them some of their Seamens old Clothes, to cover their
Nakedness, and so with five Shillings apiece to bear their Expenses, turned 'em
like a sort of Christian Dogs out of the Town, to enquire their way home to
Dunkirk, which is near a hundred Leagues; So little Compassion do Malefactors
find among the wicked themselves.

In their way, the chiefest place of Note was Amsterdam, where D. Tomazo having
entered into a Confederacy with two of the stoutest and acutest of the
distressed Gang, resolved to make a full stop; leaving the rest to take their
own Course. Here Don Tomazo, hourly instigated by his late Sufferings and
Losses fresh in Memory, thinking no Injury he could do so merciless an Enemy,
could equalize the Miseries which they had caused him to endure, sought all
Opportunities to satisfy his importunate Revenge. Nor needed he long to wait,
for those Occasions are always at the Elbow of those that dare adventure to
attempt. And so it now hapn'd, for at that time, several East India Ships,
being newly returned home, lay below a certain place called the Pampus, not
being able to get over the Sands, till they had lightened themselves by
unloading some part of their Freight. To which purpose, several small Vessels
of thirty and forty Tun apiece, were employed to carry the Goods so unladen up
the River to Amsterdam; all which D. Tomazo and his Comrades with Teeth
watring, and Fingers itching well observed. And therefore knowing their
Condition to be desperate, and that if their Courage did not put an end to
their Misery, their Necessity would soon send them for another World, for which
they were not yet ready; they resolved to play at Hazard and venture Neck or
nothing. With which Resolution, they made bold to borrow a small Boat from
Amsterdam, and to set sail toward the Pampus upon the Trial of their Fortune.
By the way they met with a Vessel of forty Tuns laden with Indian Goods, which
in the height of their indigent Fury, they presently took, though guarded by
nine men, whom they made Prisoners. With this Prize, the three daring
Adventurers sailed close by the Ship from whence the Goods were taken, whose
Company well knowing that was not the way to Amsterdam, let fly several Shot at
Don Tomazo's Prize, however all to no purpose, they had as good have thrown
their Caps at it, for the Vessel running right before the Wind, got presently
out of their Reach. But coming up with the Texel at the Mouth of the River, the
Gunner of that Fort having observed the Shot which the East India Giant had
made at Tomazo's Pigmee, sent his Iron round Robins after him too, which made
several Loopholes in the Sails, and some few in the Hull of the Vessel, but all
to little or no effect, so that now being quite out of their Reach, and as they
thought, out of Danger, they put boldly to Sea, and steered their Course
directly for Dunkirk. But when Fortune has a mind to play her Christmas
Gambols, the Devil's in her, she is as wanton as a Kitten; no body knows where
to have her, sometimes she is as kind as an Inn-keeper's Daughter, sometimes as
froppish as a Quakers wife; sometimes as sweet as a Whore in Drink, sometimes
as testy as a loosing Gamester. As for Example, you shall see how she dealt
hith poor Don Tomazo, before she harbored him in his desired Port. For no
sooner were he and his two Comrades with their Prize upon the wide Ocean making
for Dunkirk, but they were kenn'd by a Rotterdam Man of War, whose Business it
was, to cruise about and clear the Coast; who judging by their course that they
were no Friends of his, gave them Chase, and about an hour after, coming up
with them, took the Vessel. Upon his first Examination, he found the Indian
Commodities; and upon a farther Search, the Skipper whom Don Tomazo had stowed
in a little hole in the Hold, who gave the Captain a full Account of the whole
Transaction. Whereupon the Captain sent away the Vessel for Rotterdam, but kept
Don Tomazo and his Associates in Affliction on board his own Ship, which was to
continue at Sea a Month longer, by Order from the States General. Thus much for
Don Tomazo, whom Fortune had deprived of the Profit of all his fair Hazard and
confined to an abstemious poor- John Diet; Now you shall see how she bob'd the
Captain of the Man of War. For about a Week after, certain Privateers hap'ning
to pass the Channel, being three in number, the Captain made all his Sail, and
coming up with one of their Prizes, retook her, and after that another, which
the three Pickaroons observing, and well knowing their strength, for they had
eight or ten Guns, and a hundred Men a piece, two of them resolved to attacque
the Man of War, while the other was sent to retake their Prizes, which being
resolved, the Dutch Man of War was boarded, and after a smart Fight, compelled
to yield. The Dutch Captain thus bejaded, and his Ship secured, Don Tomazo
appeared in his Likeness, and gave the French an account of his Exploits, which
so well pleased the Privateers, that they highly applauded him. But Don Tomazo,
full of Revenge for the good Booty he had lost, requested the Captains to spare
him a little Money, and six men besides his two Comrades; for that he was
resolved once more to try his Fortune upon the same Coast; which Request of his
was not only granted, but one of the French Captains, mainly pleased, both with
Don Tomazo and his Proposals, resolved to make one of the Company, and for his
security, took his Commission with him, which was for both Land and Sea. By
this time, the other Privateer, had retaken the two lost Prizes, and so they
all steered directly for Dunkirk, taking the Valiant Defender of his Country
along with them, to feed upon the same Bread of Affliction which he had
intended for Don Tomazo. So various are the Chances of whimsical War. At the
same time, D. Tomazo, the Captain and his Crew, took a small Boat, and made for
the Land; and being got ashore, parted Company, and went by couples directly to
Rotterdam. Where, after they had continued four days, they found probability
enough of good store of Purchase, though not so rich as what Tomazo had already
lost. But the main Booty they had fixed their Eyes upon, was a great Fly-boat,
which lay in the Road before Rotterdam, but that day returned from Cadiz, very
richly Laden, having in her a Months Provision, twenty four Guns mounted, all
her Sails furled to the Yard, and above half her Men gone ashore. This Vessel
Don Tomazo and his Crew resolved to attacque in the Night. And for the better
carrying on of their Enterprise, D. Tomazo with the Company, went to a Village
called Lyren Damm, and set it a fire; to the end, that while the People were
busi'd for their own Security, they might with more freedom do their own Work.
Which fell out very luckily; for the Fire had consumed six Houses and four
Ships. During which time, D. Tomazo and his Company had taken the Fly-boat from
seventeen Men that guarded it. Who being secured without any Noise, they cut
the Cables, and let the Vessel drive with the Tide, before they loosed so much
as one Sail: till being almost out of sight, they spread their Canvass Wings,
and made all the way they could. So kindly does one Mischief assist another.

Being now got below the Brill, they spied a very gay Pleasure-Boat under Sail,
and bound for Rotterdam. At the sight of which they brought their Ship to an
Anchor, manned out their Longboat, and Boarded the little Yacht with the usual
Fury that the hope of Purchase inspires, that they soon made themselves Masters
of her, four great Minheirs, and their Wives, together with nine men more, and
four Seamen. These fine Folks had been taking their Pleasure all the day before
at Sea; but Don Tomazo and his Company got the Profit of their Voyage at Night,
which consisted of several good Watches, Jewels, Necklaces of Pearl, and Chains
of Gold, to a considerable Value. The Pleasure-Boat they sunk, and then carried
all their Prisoners aboard their great Vessel, who being disposed of, they
weighed Anchor, and set Sail, till they were clear out at Sea. At what time,
they put the Minheirs and their Company into the two Shallops, which they had
made use of for the Conquest of their Prize, and sent them home to bewail their
Losses, having above a League to the Shore. While the Minheirs and their Wives
were lamenting the sour Sauce to their sweet Jollity, Don Tomazo and his Crew
divided the Spoil, and being assisted with a thumping Gale at Nore Nore-East,
in a short time arrived in Ostend Road; where, being spied by a Privateer
belonging to the Town, who guessed her to be a Prize taken by the French, he
gave her Chase, and in two Hours reached her. Don Tomazo, and the Captain his
Comrade, would not fire so much as one Gun, till the Ostender was come within
half Shot; but then bringing four Guns double laden, to bear upon him all at a
time, they so raked his Sides, that not liking his Entertainment, he sprung his
Luff, and lay by to repair his damages, while Don Tomazo kept on his Course,
and in twelve or fourteen hours after, arrived safe in the Splinter.

The Arrival of Don Tomazo with this Prize, was more welcome to his owners,
then Summer to the Swallow. Who, after they had highly caressed and entertained
him, exposed the Ship and Goods to Sale; and upon Receipt of their Money, gave
Don Tomazo and his Fellow Captain 4600 l. for their Shares, the Ship and Cargo
being worth eight times as much, considering that there was found at the Bottom
of the Vessel, a great Chest, crowded with Pieces of Eight, not less worth then
two thirds of the Purchase. Don Tomazo and the Captain thus contented and
satisfied, generously rewarded the Seamen with 300 l. a man, and gave the
Prisoners which they had brought along with them twenty Crowns a piece to bear
their Expenses home. Wherein they showed nineteen times more full Ounces of
Charity, then the Dutch had shown them before at Harling.

Don Tomazo being now at some leisure, began to enquire after his beloved
Friend Don Pedro; concerning whom he had this Account, That Don Pedro had been
also put into another Prize, and that they feared he had undergone the same
Misfortune which Don Tomazo had suffered upon the Coast of Amelandt. Soon
after, Don Tomazo received a Letter from Don Pedro, that the Ship with which he
had been entrusted, was cast away: which Letter was writ, not for any Truth
that it contained, but only for the cold Comfort and Satisfaction of the
Owners. For indeed the Company had agreed with Don Pedro, to run the Ship to
Leith, and there expose her to Sale. But the Scots being too cunning for them,
laid up the Vessel, and only gave Don Pedro and his Mates enough to bear their
Charges to Dunkirk; so that upon their Return, they were forced to make good
the Truth of Don Pedro's Letter, by affirming the Loss of the Prize; which was
too true to their Cost.

The two Dons being thus reunited; and having drowned in the Pleasures of the
land the Memory of their Salt Water Afflictions, and purged themselves from the
scorbutic Humors of hung Beef, and Groynland Fish, resolved to try their
Talents once more upon the Terra Firma. In Pursuit of which Resolution, away
they went to the Duke of Luxemburgh's Army then encamped not far from Mons. So
soon as they came thither, upon their Addresses to the Duke, they were both
admitted Volunteers in his own Regiment of Foot, and soon after advanced, D.
Pedro to be youngest Lieutenant, and Don Tomazo to be youngest Ensign in the
same Regiment; the Duke not suspecting in the least, that one of these two was
the Person that had put so many Furberies upon himself, and the Prince of Conde
his Predecessor. About half a year had these two Dons enjoyed their
Commissions, at what time the French and Dutch Armies met at Cenneff, which
occasioned a most terrible Fight, wherein to the unspeakable Grief of Don
Tomazo, Don Pedro was slain, and Don Tomazo himself taken Prisoner, and which
was worst of all, by a Party of Horse, that belonged to Salazar Governor of
Antwerp Castle, of whom Don Tomazo had borrowed the Money and Horses in the
Prince of Orange's Name. These needy Spaniards having uncas'd Don Tomazo, found
in his Pockets several rough Draughts of Antwerp, Mechlen, Ipre, Lovain, Gant,
and several other Spanish Garrisons; upon which they conjectured him to be a
Spy, and so publicly declared him to be. The Noise of a Spy's being taken in
time of Fight, and by his own men, made the old Count eagerly desirous to see
this same Thief of Intelligence; But no sooner did Don Tomazo appear in his
Sight, but the Cunning Governor at first View without Spectacles, knew him to
be the Person that he had furnished with the Money and Horses, as already has
been related. So that without any farther Examination, Don Tomazo was committed
close Prisoner to Antwerp Castle, and by the Counts Order, guarded day and
night by four Sentinels, to prevent any Discourse, or Conveyance of Letters.
This severe Confinement lasted about four Months. In which time the Misfortunes
of an English Gentleman had entered the College of Jesuits at Antwerp, and was
more particularly taken notice of by one Father Worseley, who was the only man
among them that made it his business to gain Proselytes. He therefore, at the
Instigation of his Zeal prevailed with the Count, to discourse Don Tomazo: A
request easily obtained by one of his Order and Function. When Father Worseley
came to discourse Don Tomazo in English, Heavens, what a Refreshing it was to
him! For he had not spoken to any Person whatever in ten Weeks before.
Presently Don Tomazo besought the Old Father to take his Confession, (for Don
Tomazo shrewdly guessing at the Occasion of his Charitable Visit, was resolved
to prevent him of the Trouble of a Conversion) which he did accordingly, and
therein, as Don Tomazo had ordered it, had some sort of Information of Don
Tomazo's Case. From thence forward, the Old Father looked upon him as his Pupil,
procured him a better Provision of Diet and Lodging, and came often to visit
him, as well to confirm him in his Faith, as to fathom the Bottom of his Crime.
And at length, the Father's good Opinion of his Penitent, moved him to so much
Compassion, that having thoroughly sifted his Case, and understanding, that the
Draughts which the Spaniards found in his Pockets, were the Effects of his
Employment under the Prince of Orange, and that the Prince had been presented
with all the Copies of them, he resolved to take a Journey to the Prince to
know the Truth of the Matter, which he soon found to be real; and that the
Prince was sorry for Tomazo's Misfortune.

During these Negotiations of the Old Father, Don Tomazo was brought before a
Court Marshal, convicted for a Spy, and sentenced to be shot to Death by two
Files of Musketeers; but upon Don Tomazo's Application, he was allowed five
Days Time for him to prepare himself for another World, neither he knowing of
the Father's Journey, nor the Father of his Condition. But it luckily fell out,
that the Old Father returned before two of the five Days were expired, and
brought along with him a Letter from the Prince of Orange, to the Duke de Villa
Hermosa, purporting the great desire he had that Don Tomazo should be
discharged. But the Old Father, having all the Count's Revenge, and Interest at
Court to deal with, found it hard to get the Prince's Letter allowed: so that
all he could obtain for the present, was a Reprieve for fourteen days longer.
In that time the Father made another Journey to the Prince, and then returned
with two Letters, one to the Duke, and another to the Count, which gave them
both such Satisfaction, that Don Tomazo was ordered to be discharged. But the
Old Father desirous to try whether Don Tomazo were a true Son of the Church or
no, kept him still in ignorance of his Proceedings; and still admonished him to
prepare for Death, as Don Tomazo did according to all the ceremonies of the
Romish Church, as being indifferent to him since he must die of what Religion
he died. So that now the time prefixed being quite expired, Tomazo was brought
to the Tree, bound fast, the Soldiers in his sight ready presented, the Old
Man on his Right Hand, the few Ejaculations he had were spent, and he ready to
give the Sign, when the Old Father seeing the Constancy of his devout Son,
unbound him, and with Tears embraced him (an odd kind of Ambition in those
People to heighten the Merits of their Obligations) crying out, My Son, thou
shall not die, for God has intended thee for some good and Pious Work.

Don Tomazo thus discharged was taken by the old Father to the Jesuits
College, where the Members of the Order, raised him a Collection of thirty
seven pound, which put him into an Equipage to return to the French Army; where
he was no sooner arrived, but he was informed by an English Soldier, that Don
Pedro was slain, that all their Equipage and Money was seized, for that the
Duke of Luxemburgh had understood, as indeed their Papers demonstrated no less,
that his Lieutenant and Ensign, had been both Spies for the Prince of Orange.
It was a hard case for a man to lose all the Treasure and sweet Booty, for
which he had so often ventured his Life; but Don Tomazo rather chose to abandon
all, then stand to the Mercy of the Duke of Luxemburgh; and so with a heavy and
disconsolate Heart, he took his way for Calice, from thence he crossed over to
Dover, and so came directly to London.

Being come to London, his first Endeavor was to find out an Associate fit for
his Turn, of which he could not well miss among so much Variety. So that having
leagued himself with one (as he thought) according to his heart's desire, and
raised a small Sum of Money, they two fell to the Old Trade of Counterfeiting
Gold. So that in a short time, they had made and uttered a considerable
quantity, presuming to visit several Parts wherein Don Tomazo had been before.
Which bold Attempt proved very unsuccessful. For having dispersed several of
their Illegitimate Guineys in Wilishire, Dorset and Hampshire, they were
pursued and taken in Dorsetshire, and both upon Information, committed to
Dorchester Prison.

Some time after, Don Tomazo was removed to Sarum, there to be tried according
to the Law for his Offenses committed in those Parts. A thing that could not be
avoided; so that he was convicted, and suffered the penalty of his Sentence:
and which added to his Affliction, he had no fair Prospect of his Release, as
not having wherewithal to satisfy the irresistible Demands of the Jailer. But
Fortune, sometimes his Friend, as well as sometimes his Foe, soon found out a
way to bring him out of this Labyrinth. For in a short time after, one of the
tender Sex, among whom he had always a Friend in a Corner, came and made him a
visit so full handed, that Don Tomazo soon purchased the Liberty of his Heels.
Which being obtained, away he comes for London; where he first sought out, and
soon found a Companion. For Iniquity seldom prospers without Confederacy. This
Companion of his lent him his helping hand to the Old Profession; for they knew
that the readiest way to have Money, was to make it themselves. And therefore,
after they had stored themselves with a sufficient parcel of their own
Manufacture, and were able to set up for themselves, away they gallop to
Newmarket, where it was their course to bett high, but never both of the same
side. So that if the one lost, the other was sure to win: and the Gains of the
one, easily made good the others Losses: for the loss of near a hundred Guineys
of Don Tomazo's quaint sort of Metal, did not amount to above Seven pound. This
Trade continued for some time with good Success; there being hardly a
Horse-race, or a Cock-match that escaped the two Guiney-merchants. But that
trade failing at length, D. Tom. and his Companion turned Graziers, and
frequenting the Fairs and Markets up and down the Country, bought several
Droves of Cattle with their unlawful Coin; for which, when they had driven them
off to another place, they soon found Chapmen, as being Persons that could
easily afford good Peniworths. But the Cries of the Country Farmers began to be
so loud, when they found what a bad Exchange they had made, that Don Tomazo and
his Companion not able to endure the Noise, were forced, after a Trade of four
Months continuance, to quit a Calling so prejudicial to all the Landlords and
Tenants in the Country. So true is the Proverb, That nothing violent is of long
Continuance.

Thus, no where safe, and continually lying under the Curse of wasting
perpetually what was ill got, the two Knights of the Order of Industry,
resolved to take their Pleasure at Sea. To which purpose they bought them a
Vessel of about Forty Tuns, and having manned her with persons fit for their
purpose, they lay perdue, sometimes in the River's Mouth, sometimes in the
Chanel, to meet with Merchants Vessels that were homeward bound. Out of which,
Don Tomazo and his Friend bought several good Peniworths of the Seamen with
their counterfeit Gold, till they had almost loaded their Vessel. Which done,
away they made for some convenient Port, and exposed their Goods to Sale for
good Money. This was a way less hazardous, but very expensive, and therefore
not answering expectation, was soon laid aside.

The Sea Trade failing for this reason, and the two Merchants near broke, D.
Tomazo and his Comrade parted, after which D. Tomazo taking a Journey into
Berkshire, to sow his Yellow Grain in that Soil, was apprehended, and
committed to Prison for endeavoring to enrich that County with his precious
Wealth. There he was kept half a year in Durance, and sorely threatened to be
sent to Heaven in a String; but not liking that way of traveling to Bliss, he
so ordered his Affairs, that he was discharged without any Trial, though
cruelly gripped with the pangs of Poverty. For when the Prison Doors were opened
to him, all his Revenue was but three shillings. But Industry soon increast it.
For out of that small Sum, one being a Milled shilling, he presently made a
Counterfeit Guiney, and past it off with a Certiorari for good. Which fruitful
Return, soon produced a new Recruit; so that in a short time, he saw himself
the Father of two goodly Twins, or Bags of a hundred pound a piece, begot by
his own labor. This round Sum warmed his Invention, and put him in an Equipage
to go on with a New Project. In order to which, away he returns for London,
hires several Servants fit for his purpose, according to the method of
Trim-tram, and takes at least fourteen or fifteen Lodgings of good Note in the
City. Which Lodgings were generally near the Shopkeeper, or the Merchant that
was to suffer under his Contrivance. These Boroughs of his, he would visit
several times in a day, lying sometimes at one and sometimes at another, till
he had lain a night a piece in each; which being, as he thought, long enough,
he began his Frolic as follows.

Don Tomazo staid in his Lodging, and sent a Servant, as it might be, cross the
way to a Goldsmith, to bring him such and such Parcels of Rings and Jewels of
such a sort to show them his Master. Presently either the Goldsmith or his Man
came along with the Servant in hopes of some great Customer. But when Don
Tomazo had fixed upon such Jewels and Rings which he seemed to like best, and
agreed upon the Price, the Goldsmith having left the main Purchase with Don
Tomazo, was desired to walk up another pair of Stairs with his Servant, if the
House admitted of such a Convenience, there to receive his Money. But no sooner
was the Goldsmith in the Trap, but the Servant, who you may be sure was a
special Trout, locked the Door upon the poor Mouse, and presently both Master
and Man slipped away together. At another place, having bought another parcel of
the same Commodities at the same Rate, he would send his Servant with the owner
of the Goods to some Cashier or Banker of Note, to be there paid for his costly
Ware, and while his Trusty Servant and the Goldsmith were trotting to the
Receipt of of Custom, away tript D. Tomazo to another Lodging, leaving his
Servant to make his Escape and shift for himself as well as he could. And of
such an Exploit as this, a certain Goldsmith in Lumbard Street had the
Misfortune to have the woeful Experience to the loss of 275 l. 17 s. 6 d. Now
you are to understand, that when D. Tomazo had once begun his Diabolical
Progress, he used all the Expedition imaginable in his dispatches, and removals
from place to place, in regard it behooved him never to leave off till he had
made an effectual Visit at all his particular Abodes; which was done to all
Intents and Purposes in the space of nine hours, by which he got more then the
best Day-labourer that works at Paul's: the reward of those few Hours pains,
amounting to no less then 1625 l. For he looked upon it as a Calling too mean
for one of his Quality to make Childrens Shoes.

But this Trick made too great a noise to be played over again. So that Don
Tomazo was resolved to knock off, and live for some time upon the Spoil. In
order whereunto, like an honest Master, he first discharged all his Servants,
to whom he gave 35 l. a piece, which amounted to 525 l. there being fifteen in
all; and then retired into the Country. But neither could he there rest long;
for though he went under the most absolute disguise imaginable, yet it would so
happen, that some or other still knew him. So that in short, by removing from
place to place, and living at the rate of a Lord, his massy Sum in two years,
was reduced to an hundred and fifty pound, with which D. Tomazo set forward
again for London, the only Stage proper for a Gusman, to act his parts upon, in
order to the projecting some new Enterprise. But no sooner was he come to Town,
but a Gentleman of Worcestershire, with whom D. Tomazo had been traffiquing by
way of Exchange, to the value of 170 l. met him in the Street, and began to
make a Noise, which D. Tomazo finding no way convenient for his Interest,
whispered the Gentleman in the Ear. Which gentle motion of Don Tomazo's Lips,
having conveyed to his irritated Senses, a short promise of Satisfaction,
stopped the violent motion of the Gentleman's Tongue. Thereupon away they went to
the Tavern, where Don Tomazo would fain have been rid of his troublesome
Companion; but he stuck so close to him, and kept him so charily within the
reach of his Eye, that Don Tomazo, to his unspeakable Grief, was forced to come
to Composition, and to pay the Gentleman 120 l. This forced Putt of Moral
Satisfaction brought Don Tomazo very low. Hating therefore that Want should be
his Master, he resolved to have one stroke more with his Hammer, and so fell to
the old Trade of Coining. Which work, by the help of two more Assistants, being
completed, and a good stock of Pieces being made, they had laid their Design
to take a Ramble into Essex to dispose of their Gold, that made others poor and
themselves rich. Being upon their Journey, they took Hackney in their way,
where one of the Sparks, having his Pockets full of Gold, would needs have the
World to take notice of it; and to that end, at a place where he and his
Companions had called to drink a Bottle of Wine, pulled out his Gold by
handfuls, and exchanged one of his counterfeit Guineys to pay the Reckoning.
The King's Picture dazzled the Vintner's Eyes at first; but they were no sooner
gone, but, happily for Essex, the Cheat was discovered, which put the whole
Town upon a swift pursuit, and such a one as proved indeed so very swift, that
the whole knot of Money Changers was quite unti'd, all of them taken and
carried over the Fields to a Justice of the Peace. By which means D. Tomazo
took the advantage to dispose of his Guineys in the long grass. Nevertheless,
that poor shift would not do, Don Tomazo was sent to Newgate for Company, tried
at the Old Baily for Company, and fined 50 l. for Company, and so was remanded
to Newgate for Company, where he lay a whole year, not able to pay his Fine;
and at length obtained His Majesty's Most Gracious Pardon, by which he was
discharged.

Having this ill luck in Company, he fell to the old Trade alone, with the
assistance only of one Servant. But whether Fortune had taken a peek agaid
Coiners, or whether Mercury were turned honest, and had disposed of his
Influencies another way, so it hapn'd, that D. Tomazo having sent his Boy to
the Silver Market one Evening in the shape of a Vintner's Servant, to exchange
some few counterfeit Guineys, the raw Messenger was taken, carried before a
Magistrate, examined, and upon his Examination discovered his Master. Whereupon
D. Tomazo was as soon apprehended, and sent to wait upon his Man to Newgate.
'Twas an ill jobb for one Misfortune so soon to fall upon the neck of one
another; But there was no avoiding these home-thrusts of Fate. And therefore D.
Tomazo, to make the best of a bad Market, made all his Applications to his
Servant, and so far prevailed upon his good Nature, to recant his Charge
against his Master, and take the whole business upon himself; which he did,
with that exactness and fidelity, that D. Tomazo being tried first, was
acquitted. But being forced to lie a good while before he could purchase his
Liberty, as being charged with Actions to a great value; then it was that Mrs.
Cellier, having heard of D. Tomazo's Fame, and believing him brisk for her
turn, gave him her first Visits, which produced those Transactions between
them, that have lately made so great a Noise in the World. For an account
whereof, the Reader is referred to the Narratives themselves.

FINIS.

