A DISCOURSE Concerning the ONE ALTAR And the ONE PRIESTHOOD Insisted on by the
ANCIENTS In their Disputes against. SCHISM. WHEREIN The Ground and Solidity of
that Way of Reasoning is Explained, as also its Applicableness to the Case of
our Modern SCHISMATICS, with particular Regard to some Late Treatises of Mr.
RICHARD BAXTER. BEING A Just Account concerning the true Nature and Principles
of SCHISM according to the Ancients.

By H. DODWELL, M. A. and sometime Fellow of Trinity College near Dublin.

(...).

Conc. Gangren. Can. 6. Cod. Can. Eccl. Assric. Can. 11. If any one keep
private Ecclesiastical Assemblies in opposition to the Church, and shall dare,
in contempt of the Church to perform Ecclesiastical Offices, without the
presence of a Presbyter allowed by the Bishop, let him be Anathema.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took, at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

A PREFACE.
TO truly generous Spirits no Interests are dearer than those of the Public,
Sect. 1. The Discovery of Truth how obliging.
and to truly Conscientious there are yet no Public Interests more dear than
those of Truth, especially such Truth as has relation to Religion. This being
that wherein the good of mankind is most eminently concerned, whoever serves it
obliges every particular Person, who ought accordingly to acknowledge the
Obligation, if he would approve himself grateful and ingenuous. But tho all
Mankind receive it, yet no sort of Persons have more reason to be sensible of
an Obligation of this nature, than they who undertake the Enquiry of Truth as a
particular Employment. These, as they ought in reason to be presumed most
convinced of the value of such Truths; so they are, more than others, served in
all Discoveries of this kind, whoever he be that is their Benefactor. Others
are served in the promotion of their greatest most concerning Interests, but
these are also served in the Gratification of their particular Desires.

Sect. 2. The Obligingness of Useful Objections.
ON this Account all Proposers of Expedients for New Discoveries of necessary
and useful Truths, ought to look on themselves as highly obliged by useful
Objections. Metaph. L.II.
Thus Aristotle owns an Obligation to those who have gone before us in such
Enquiries tho without the desired success. And Socrates, as he was the Son of a
Midwife, so he professed himself to imitate his Mother's Art in examining the
Inventions of his Predecessors, whether they were true and solid Births, or
only like the Effects of Wind and Tympany. When the Objection is prudent, and
fitted to the Hypothesis which is to be tried by it, tho it be a Mistake, if it
be a Popular one, and likely to come into the minds of others, it is
notwithstanding very useful (for facilitating the reception of such a Truth
with such persons) to prevent it, and to speak particularly to it. For all
lawful Arts are to be used for recommending Truth as well to the Capacities and
Affections of all who are concerned in it, as to the Understandings of the
ablest and most competent Judges. If it prove to be an unforeseen Phenomenon,
whatever the Event be, the Information will still be very useful. If it be
solvible by the Hypothesis, it will be a great Confirmation of the Truth of it,
that it sits other unknown Phenomenon as well as those for which it was
purposely calculated, especially where the agreeableness with Phenomenon is the
principal Argument for proving an Hypothesis true, as it is in many Cases
wherein Mankind is very confident. If it disprove it in one single Instance, it
will then give warning so to limit the general Proposition as that the
disproved Instance be not included, and withal so to limit the Proof, when a
proof a priori is insisted on, as that nothing be allowed in the proof, which,
if it should be allowed, would favor the Instance so disproved, which must
mightily improve the Evidence above what it had appeared formerly. If it should
utterly disprove it, yet even so it could not be ungrateful to any who
preferred Truth before his own Party, or his own Inventions. It would take him
off from fallacious confidences, and put him upon nobler and more beneficial
Enquiries.

Sect. 3. No Interests served by such Objections as are unuseful.
BUT then this Obligation only holds when the Objections are truly useful. When
they are otherwise, they are neither beneficial to Mankind in general, nor to
either of the litigant Parties in particular. Not to Mankind in general when it
is not Truth, but Victory, which is the thing contended for. If there had been
any thing more solid in the Glory of a Victory, yet it were only the Interest
of a private person, or a private party, that had been promoted by it. Truth
alone is that which can pretend to be the common Interest of Mankind, as well
of the Conquered as of the Conqueror, and the very Divisions and Animosities,
and Rancors, which naturally follow on such Defenses, are certainly great and*
public mischiefs where there are not Truths, and Truths momentous enough to
make amends for them. Nor is the Success any way beneficial to the Conqueror
himself As Truth it self is not discovered by such Objections, so they are very
hurtful where they are not serviceable for such Discoveries. They are puffed up
with the thoughts of it, they are hardened in their Sin against any remorse
when they make others think that they can justify them by Principles, they are
diverted from more profitable Enquiries, and still kept off at a distance from
all hopes of Peace and Reconciliation. Much less can it be thought beneficial
to the Conquered, when, besides the unhappiness of being overcome, he has no
Interest to be promoted, no desire to be gratified, by it; nay, besides the
calamity of his Mistake, he is withal liable to all the dangerous Consequences
of the Mistake it self.

TO resolve therefore whether I be obliged to Mr. Baxter for his Objections,
Sect. 4. The unusefulness of those of Mr. Baxter.
I shall not take upon me to be Judge in my own Case. The prudent Reader is and
ought to be Judge between us, whether his Objections be indeed useful and
beneficial. Yet there are withal some Rules of judging so very plain and
obvious as that I think it cannot look like any prejudging or imposing on him
to mention them. The very mention is Evidence enough with equal Judges, and I
do not intend to give the Reader, or my self, much more trouble than that of
mentioning them. Such is that of starting New Questions. His starting New
Questions.
I will not undertake the many particulars wherein Mr. Baxter has offended in
this kind. Such is that, of his calling for a particular account of all Persons
succeeding each other in their Ecclesiastical Offices from the Apostles times
to ours, when I had prevented it by proving that a presumptive Succession was
sufficient, where no particular failing can be proved, as I have shown it may
be proved in the Case of most of the Ordinations of his Nonconforming Brethren.
This he very well knew, and frequently mentions, nor does he ever once, that I
can find, offer to disprove what I have produced for it. Yet, as if he had
again forgotten it, he is ever and anon calling for Catalogues through all the
Periods of Succession. I will not charge him with Insincerity in doing so, but
methinks it is very strange Forgetfulness.

Sect. 5. His impertinent Question concerning an Universal Church Sovereignty.
IT were endless to recount all particulars of this kind, it is so usual with
him in speaking to any one Question to start many new ones, and upon all
occasions rather to multiply Heads than to speak accurately to any particulars.
But one Instance there is which I cannot well omit, because he seems so pleased
with it, that he designs it for an Argument of a particular Volume, wherein I
must also be more particularly concerned, and insists on it as a proof of his
slanderous Accusations of me. This is that he would have me prove, Ans. p. 69.
That the Universal Church has a Visible Supreme Government besides Christ.
When I do this he promises he will no more trouble me with lesser
Controversies. He means no doubt a Government over the Universal Church
collectively. For neither he, nor any one else who maintains a Visible
Government over particular Churches besides Christ, can deny but that such a
Government, by extending to all particular Churches must include that which is
Universal; and, by having no Visible Government above it, must consequently be
the Supreme of all Governments that are Visible.

BUT what relation has this Question to my Charge of SCHISM against the
Nonconformists? Sect. 6. Of no use in our present Dispute.
Of what Use can his Objections be, either for disproving my Charge, or much
less for answering my Arguments? Had I grounded my Charge of SCHISM from the
Catholic Church on any such Notion of a Form of Government of the Catholic
Church collectively; he might have had some pretense of diverting to that
Question. But I was all along expressly cautious of distinguishing the question
of SCHISM between Churches and Churches, as disputed with the Romanists, from
the Question concerning particular Churches and their revolting Members, which
was that I undertook against our Nonconformists. Accordingly I managed the
whole Charge against them, that they were guilty of SCHISM, for separating from
their particular Churches, and their particular Bishops, whilst living in his
Jurisdiction. This I proved through the Book. And yet that they might not
undervalue the Charge as if they were SCHISMATICS only to a particular Church,
yet so as still to retain their Unity to the Universal Church, according to the
fancy of the Latitudinarians; I therefore came at last to prove that SCHISM
from their particular Churches must, in the Consequence, divide them also from
the Universal Church. Plainly I never grounded my Charge of SCHISM on any one
Form of Government common to the whole Catholic Church, nor on any one
Individual Judicatory, but on a Form so common to all, as it is multiplied
according to the multiplicity of particulars, yet multiplied so as that all
particular Churches are obliged by God, and their own common Interest, to
ratify each others Censures, and to preserve a common Correspondence. So
little ground Mr. Baxter had, from my Principles, for that invidious Question
concerning an Universal Sovereignty.

IN vain therefore does he charge me with Opinions concerning this Universal
Church Supremacy, Sect. 7. His Charge perfectly groundless.
when I deny the Foundation of all such Opinions, the thing it self. As my
Principles did not oblige me, so neither did I ever give him any the least
occasion for those slanders which he is pleased to charge me with. Where did he
ever hear me say that the Government of the Catholic Church collectively ought
to be either Monarchical or Aristocratical, Answer to my Letter from Shrewsbury.
either in the Pope or in a General Council? Where did I say that the Pope
ought to be Principium Unitatis? I am so far from saying it that I have lately
disproved the contrary pretense of de Marca in that very particular. Dissertat.
Cyprianic.
Where did I say that the Pope ought to have any Primacy or Presidentship in
general Councils, or that it belongs to him to call such Councils, and to him
alone; so that they are but unlawful Routs or Rebellions, if they assemble
without his Call? Or that they are SCHISMATICS, who dissent and disobey this
Supremacy? How will he prove that, because I do indeed assert this Power to the
Bishop, in reference to the Assemblies of his own Presbytery, within his own
Diocese, therefore I must grant the like Power to the Pope in the Assemblies of
the Bishops? Yet this is all the occasion I can think of that might lead him
into such Mistakes. Where did I say that the French Church are no Papists,
whilst they own the Popish Communion? tho I believe many of them are so, rather
by Faction, than by Principles, who deny the Fundamental Principles of Popery
as a distinct Communion. But I cannot think it any way Just that others, who
agree with them only in those Principles so destructive of Popery, should, for
that reason, be accounted Papists, whilst they do not agree with them in their
Communion. Where did I say, that our Communion was with any part of the Roman
Church, Ans. to Dr. Sherib. p. 198, 199.
either Jesuited, or others? Ans. to Let from Shrewib. Consid. of Pres. con.
Where, that the Councils of Constance or Basil were no Papists? He knows I
have proved the Council of Constance (and the French Church too) guilty of the
Hildebrandine Doctrine of Deposing Princes, etc. Where did I once call Thomas
Aquinas Saint, as he says I am used to do? Ans. p. 13. Consid. ib.
He knows that I have also charged him with the Deposing Doctrine. Where did I
mention a word of the Terms either of Cassander or Grotius, as if I thought
them sufficient for a lasting Peace? He may charge me with what he pleases, if
he may be allowed this Liberty of inventing Assertions for me. So far have I
been from saying any of these things with which he charges me, that himself
does not pretend (as I am sure he could not) the least Authority for so
mischievous Accusations. He pretends no word in any Discourse, no Expression in
any of my Books, no certain Information from any who could pretend to any
Reason of Knowledge. And let the Reader judge whether this became the Sanctity
and Conscience to which he so much pretends.

YET I deny not but that the whole Church is governed by the Episcopal College.
Sect. 8. The Government of the Catholic Church by the Episcopal College
explained.
This is an expression for which he takes all occasions of traducing my Lord of
Ely. But that Holy and Learned Prelate knew very well the Language of that
Primitive Christianity which flourished long before the Rise of Popery, tho Mr.
Baxter, it seems is not acquainted with it. It is the constant Phrase of S.
Cyprian in his Epistles, and of those who were concerned in them. And by it
they mean no more than the multitude of particular Ordinaries who were called
Collegae in the language of those Ancient Laws, as being of a Rank and Order by
themselves. This I have lately proved in a Latin Discourse on those Epistles.
Diff. Cyprianic.
But thence to infer an Universal Church-Supremacy would be as vain as if one
should infer an Universal Secular Supremacy, because all Nations are governed
by a multitude of Secular Governors. Only I confess that herein is a disparity,
That all Ecclesiastical Governors are more obliged to maintain a mutual
correspondence, and to ratify each others Censures than Secular Governors are.
And it was from this very Principle that I inferred, That whoever was lawfully
deprived of the Communion of any one Bishop or Church, must thereupon lose his
Right to the Communion of the whole Episcopal College, and consequently of the
Catholic Church as including all particulars. And what has Mr. Baxter to say
to this way of Reasoning? If he have any thing, let him once, at least, be
persuaded to undertake the Arguments by which I proved it.

Sect. 9.
BUT it is Mr. Baxter's usual way to judge of the Language of Antiquity by
Modern Notions and Circumstances of Affairs in England. And perhaps our
Academical Colleges, or Collegiate Churches make him fancy that, when we speak
of an Episcopal College, we must mean some such Bodies of the Bishops
cohabiting together, and ready to assemble as often as there is occasion.
Accordingly he asks, Ans. to Dr. Sherl. p. 219.
Where is that College that governs you? Which way had you their Mandates? Were
they gathered from all Nations in the Christian World? Who compared their
Votes? What were the cases put to them* etc. And having fancied this to be our
Doctrine, it was indeed easy to make it look like an Universal Aristocratical
Supremacy.

But sure he could not think that S. Cyprian, Sect. 10.
or any of his Contemporaries could allude to any of our Modern Colleges.
Collegia in his time, and according to the use of the Roman Laws, did not, in
the least, imply Cohabitation. The Consuls were called Collegae, wherever
they inhabited, whether in the City, or in what part soever of the Roman
Empire. The Guilds and Fraternities, as we now call them, were then called
Collegia, who, even by our Modern Customs, are not obliged to cohabit, much
less according to the Customs then received in the Roman Empire. So little
occasion he had for even mistaking S. Cyprian. But possibly he did not bethink
himself how much S. Cyprian was concerned in this matter. Could he therefore
unwillingly mistake Us? His very Expostulations now mentioned plainly imply,
that he knew we could not so much as pretend to any such Body, as now extant in
any part of the World. And how could he think that we could own a Government
from a Body which we did not believe any where existent? With what ingenuity
can his Brethren charge us with owning a foreign Jurisdiction, when what is
(...) where cannot be foreign?

SO far are these Fictions from being our* Doctrine, Sect. 11. His Fictions not
only against our Principles; but also against our Interest.
as that they are indeed against our Interest to hold them. Had we done so we
must then have been accountable to another Adversary in defense of our own
Churches against the Innovations of the Church or Court of Rome. And for my own
part, he and his Brethren might perceive by my Preface, that I was particularly
wary of giving no advantage to the Church of Rome in my charge of SCHISM
against the Nonconformists, and that I had therefore purposely set forth my
little Discourse of the Fundamental Principles of Popery, that the Papists
themselves might see that I would speak nothing unagreeable thereunto in
dealing with our own SCHISMATICS. But had I owned the Pope as a Principle of
Unity, I must have owned what I there proved to be the Fundamental Principle of
Popery, and consulted as such. And then how could I have defended our own
Churches from SCHISM, as being divided from the Principle of Unity? If men will
take up things so contrary to our Principles and our Interest, and yet withal
so very destitute of any thing that might give a well-meaning person an
occasion of mistaking us, the Accuser of the Brethren will never let them want
Arguments for invidious, tho groundless, Accusations. He is pleased to call Us
Designers. We are, no doubt, Ans^ p. 62.
much beholden to his Candor, that he did not call us Plotters, tho many of his
Readers will think he meant no less. But can he tell any of the Designers that
have done more for reconciling us to Popery than his Brother Le Blanc, and the
Author of the Catholic Theology?

ALIKE unuseful are his Personal Objections. Sect. 12. His Personal Objections
useless.
The Answer to them were very easy, but very unuseful for public Writings.
They are perfectly impertinent to the strength of an Argument, or the merit of
a Cause. What matter is it what Communion I my self am of if my Arguments prove
them SCHISMATICS for dividing from the Church of England? Nor are such
Discourses like to be grateful to the Readers who are not concerned as we are.
They will not be pleased to find Histories of our Lives where they expected
just Informations concerning the true nature of SCHISM. Besides, the natural
tendency of such Arguments is exasperation and bitterness, the very Plague of
Controversial Discourses, and which usually makes them so mischievous and
unsuccessful. The Accused will think his Reputation concerned when he is
needlessly accused without any exigency of the Cause. And the Accuser will again
think his concerned in justifying his Accusations. And by this time both
Parties are too much interested to yield to Truth, if it prove unfavorable to
their Party, and Readers also are too much prejudiced against ungrateful Truths
when their manner of Proposal is withal so ungrateful and disobliging. I am
sensible what disadvantage it will be with popular Readers, not to take notice
of such things as would make but an ungrateful entertainment to such as were
judicious, and I am withal sensible how much more numerous this kind of Readers
are. But I am willing to venture the ill opinion of such Judges, rather than
allow my self the liberty of any thing that may look like gratifying
resentment. I cannot think it a good account of my time, and I know very well
how such employment does gradually degenerate from a defense of Truth to
Animosity and Rancor; and whatever Mr. Baxter may do, (who yet seems naturally
to be of a temper warmer than mine) for my part I am not willing to venture my
self under the Temptation. He seems to have quite forgotten his own submission
of these Personal Disputes to the Dean of Canterbury, himself can best tell how
consistently with the duty of a good Conscience.

ALIKE unuseful are his Objections concerning the Consequences of my Doctrine
so very dreadful to his Brethren. Sect. 13. His Objections concerning the
Consequences of my Doctrine unuseful.
Where they do really follow, he and they are more concerned than I am, and it
will the more oblige them to take care that they be very sure those Principles
are not true, which, if they should prove so, would make their condition so
very sad and deplorable. And his mentioning them with Declamatory Arts of
raising odium against my Person, and Prejudice against my Writings, is so far
from being a kindness to the persons whom he pretends to gratify thereby, that
it is indeed the greatest mischief he can do them if he do not first secure
them from my Principles. Never let him upbraid me with rigor, or boast of his
own Latitudinarian Charity. Our Affections will never change the nature of
things, nor recall any Divine Establishments. As no rigor of mine can make any
severe Principles truer, so neither will any pretended Charity of his make them
falser than they were before. It may make them the more senseless of their
danger, but never the securer from it. Where his Consequences do not follow, it
is no matter whether they be true or false. If he would deduce any Consequences
from my Principles, which he could justify to be Just Consequences from my
Principles, and yet prove them false with an Evidence and certainty exceeding
those by which the Principles themselves were proved true, such Consequences as
those would indeed be good Arguments against my Principles, and I should think
my self obliged to account for them. But it is not his way to be accurate in
proving any thing. He is rather for multiplying Assertions and Arguments than
for improving any one Argument to any purpose.

NO less unuseful are his imaginary statings of our Controversies. Sect. 14.
His false statings of our Controversies unseful.
This is a usual Art with him of making every Case worse than really it is, and
then raising his Readers Passions as if it were indeed as bad as he has
represented it. If any of us dispute against the obligation of the Covenant,
Answ. to Dr. Still. Sermon.
This must be taken for a Pleading for Lying and Perjury, and he tells us that
he hopes one day to see these Wickednesses taken by us for Cardinal Virtues.
Who would not think by this that we of the Church of England did indeed defend
Lying and Perjury? If we dispute for Ministers Obedience to their Ordinaries,
in an indifferency, he will aggravate the indifferent Case with such
Circumstances as are neither true, nor, if they were so, would leave the Action
any longer indifferent, and then argue as if this were our actual Case. If
Nonconformists, who have taken Episcopal Orders, and promised Canonical
Obedience, be obliged to obey Bishops, forbidding their Preaching in
Conventicles, then Bishops may forbid all Preaching, and all Hearing, and all
Christian Assemblies, and all public Worship of Christ; for there is nothing
so wicked but he will suppose Bishops may be guilty of it, how much soever it
be against their Interest. And because it is not lawful to forbear all
Christian Assemblies for any Commands of Bishops whatsoever; therefore he
concludes it unlawful (if he will conclude any thing pertinent to our purpose)
to forbear Conventicles for them. Just as if a Child should argue that because
it is not obliged to forbear all meat at the Parents command, or the
Physicians, therefore it ought to obey neither, if they should, like Jonadab,
impose any Abstinence in Diet in particular Circumstances. If we again think
Magistrates who will be true to their Consciences, obliged in Conscience, to
lay out their Talents for the Interest of that Church which themselves believe
not only true, but the only safe way to Salvation, and for the suppression of
SCHISM and Heresy which themselves believe destructive to their Subjects
Souls; this is calling upon them to persecute, tho discoursed only in private;
this is calling for the Haltar and Fire and Faggot, tho, I doubt not, he knows
very well, that these are no Legal Punishments of himself, and such as he, and
that we of the Church of England as much dislike Capital Punishments for
differences only in Opinion as himself can desire. Yet after all it seems he
finds it much easier to give ill words, and to make the Assertion and the
Assertors odious to persons interessed in the Consequence of it, than to answer
the Argument produced for it. He has not so much as offered at any Expedient to
reconcile the Magistrates Duty with such connivance, as he would certainly have
endeavored if he had indeed preferred Truth before the Interest of his party.

AS little useful are his Objections that if they should prove true will
overthrow Criteria allowed by the consent of disinteressed Mankind, Sect. 15.
His Objections which overthrow the Criteria agreed on (...).
allowed by his own party, nay by himself in Cases wherein he is disinteressed.
There is nothing so certain in this Life but what all wise men know is liable
to many Objections, nothing so unlikely but what withal is capable of some
likelyhoods more than vulgar capacities are able to resolve. This gave occasion
for the Academicks and Scepticks to deny all Certainty, and to the Sophists to
profess an Art of Discoursing probably on any whatsoever Paradox. Must we
therefore never proceed to practice, or not practice with any confidence, till
we have first resolved all the Subtilties which may be objected against it?
Must none ever move who is not able to account for all the Arguments against
the Possibility of Motion? Diogenes was of another mind, who did not think such
Objections worth the Answering. If therefore he and his Brethren be agreed with
us that God both intended Peace and a Visible Government in the Church in this
Life, and that he has instituted means for the preserving them, and that the
means so instituted by God are sufficient for the Ends for which he has
designed them; then it will plainly follow, that no such Objections are to be
heeded, as overthrow either the possibility of a Visible Peace, or the
practicableness of a Visible Government.

Sect. 16. His Answers hitherto as insignificant as his Objections.
TO these and the like Topics of Unuseful Objections it were easy to reduce
the greatest part of Mr. Baxter's late Discourses on this present Argument of
SCHISM. Nor is he more happy in his Answers than in his Objections. I do not
see any thing of mine so much as solidly attempted by him. Indeed his Genius is
more for Objecting than answering, which as it is a very useful Talent when
managed by a prudent conscientious person; so nothing can be more pernicious to
Churches Peace, if he who has it be naturally passionate. Such a one shall
never want appearances for embroiling Christians in irreconcilable SCHISMS and
endless Controversies. But as for Answering I cannot, for my own part, think of
any thing which even himself can mistake for a just Answer. He can hardly think
his Remarks upon my Summary to be so, when he has not undertaken the Proofs
referred to of any one single Proposition in my Book. He has taken no notice of
that former part of my Preface to my Letters wherein I showed that his past
performances could in no sense deserve the name of a Confutation. He has not
meddled with that part wherein I gave my Grounds why I thought him self
convicted. Much less has he attempted any thing in Answer to my last Letter,
either in his last Answer, or in his Treatise of Episcopacy. Pref. to Answ. to
Dr. Stillin. Sermon.
He is pedantically ambitious of the last word. And, for my part, he may easily
obtain it if he cannot be prevailed on to answer to more purpose than he has
done hitherto.

HOWEVER to let him see how desirous I am to make my acknowledgments for any
things Sect. 17. The Usefulness of this present Subject.
I can find in him that is really useful, I have undertaken this Argument of
the ONE PRIESTHOOD and ONE ALTAR, as that which is indeed the most
considerable, and the most frequently inculcated, in his late Writings. And I
heartily thank him for it. Perhaps he will not be so thankful to me when he
finds his Objection retorted into an Argument against himself, That the ONE
Priest can be no other than the Bishop, and the ONE ALTAR no other than that of
the Episcopal Communion; when he finds what unexpected Light, the Examination
of this one Argument has given us for discovering the whole nature and
mischievousness of SCHISM; when he finds of what Consequence it is like to
prove for answering a great part of what he has produced for his Parochial
Episcopacy.

YET the Unusefulness of his Objections is not the only discouragement for
dealing with this person, Sect. 18. Mr. Baxter 's unwillingness to own
Conviction.
tho it be indeed a great one. His Unwillingness to own Convictions, where they
are indisputably manifest, is that which gives us no hopes of doing good with
him, where the public is not also gratified by some useful Information. I
instance in a very plain notorious Example, his prevaricating concerning Aidan
and Finan. Terms of Concord.
He had told us more than once that they were only Presbyters, and that
Venerable Bede had called them so. This I disproved by many and very express
Testimonies of that same Author, who calls them both Bishops, and acknowledges
that they had a Cathedral, and a Diocese, the whole Kingdom of Northumberland,
as large as any of our modern ones. This I showed before it was Printed, to a
Friend of his who then seemed fully satisfied of his mistake. He, I doubt not,
acquainted Mr. Baxter with it, and I believe, gave occasion to his Postscript
to his Answer to the excellent Dean of S. Paul's. It is not possible for him to
clear himself, but either by denying that he said that Venerable Bede had
called them Presbyters, or by producing the places where he did so. But in his
Answers he neither does, nor attempts, either of them; yet cannot find in his
heart to acknowledge his Mistake in so plain a matter of Fact. Answ. p. 2.90,
155.
How then can we believe his frequent Protestations of his readiness to receive
Conviction?

NOR is he alone in this Disingenuity. Another Brother of his, Sect. 19. The
Disingenuity of another Author of the Party.
of much greater diligence and skill in these things than Mr. B. has likewise
betrayed the same averseness to fair acknowledgments of indefensible Mistakes.
I mean the Author of the No Evidence for Diocesan Churches, etc who shall for
me be nameless, seeing he desires it. Mr. Baxter had referred me to him for an
Answer, which occasioned my Letter from Shrewsbury to show how little I was
concerned in him. On this occasion I warned him of a small, but very plain
mistake, his translating (...) Thousands, as a trial of his candor if he should
think fit to engage with me farther; which notwithstanding had not been made
public, if his Friend Mr. Baxter had not published it without my leave. In his
Postscript to his Defense of his former Book (I cry him mercy for having called
it a Pamphlet, tho I meant no hurt in it) he is pleased to charge me with three
Mistakes. 1. That I said that he traslnated (...) by the definite number of
Thousands. 2. That I said he did it more than once. 3. That I said he did it
sometimes where his Argument was grounded on it.

LET the Reader judge between us, where the Mistake is, Sect. 20.
whether on his part, or mine, P. 7.
He tells us the number of the Antiochians out of S. Chrysostom, that they were
(...), which he translates 20000. He may indeed say that the word (...) is
often put for an an indefinite number. But where can he find it so when the
number of Myriads is so distinctly expressed as it is here? Again he makes the
(...) in Eusebius equivalent to the Thousands in S. Cyprian, Ibid.
and accordingly translates it Thousands. Why did he not keep to the number of
Myriads in the English rather than alter it into another number if his design
had been only to express an indefinite number? Ibid.
Yet once more, on occasion of Theodoret, who had said that many Myriads did
meet in one place to hear, He tells us that two or three Myriads are more than
can well hear any one preach. Certainly he again meant Thousands when he speaks
of hearing well and conveniently, for one Myriad is much more than can hear in
any of our modern Auditories. It is no way probable that he could mean two or
three Myriads indefinitely. If he did not, then I have gained my first two
Points, both that he mistook Myriads for Thousands, and that he mistook it so
more than once. Possibly our English Translation might have given him the
occasion of this Mistake, which renders the word as he does. Jud. v.14.

BUT was he not, at least mistaken, where his Argument was grounded on his
Mistake, Sect. 21.
and where his Interest required that he should not have been mistaken? This he
would fain persuade us: But whether truly will easily be known by the occasion
of his producing these Passages wherein he is so mistaken. That was to account
for the Passage produced out of S. Cyprian by the excellent Dean, wherein he
says that thousands of Tickets were granted by the Martyrs in favor of the
lapsed, in each of which several persons were also included. To disprove this,
and withal to prove what he drives at in that whole Discourse, that their
Cities generally were answerable to our modern Parishes, even the greatest of
them to the greatest of our Parishes; he undertakes to show that Carthage could
not be so populous as that account of the Tickets would make it, because even
Antioch, which was one of the greatest in the Roman Empire, had but twenty
Myriads in it. I do not now dispute how true his Observation is concerning the
numbers of Antioch, and the mind of S. Chrysostom, tho I think he is mistaken
in them. That is a work proper for his Learned Adversary. But it is very plain,
by the tenor of this Reasoning, that it was highly his Interest to contract the
numbers of the Antiochians, because that was his best way to contract the
number of the Carthaginians; and that 20000 was much more for his purpose than
200000, because the former number came nearer to the number of S. Martin's
Parish, which is the largest Precedent he can find among us. The later number
is so little for his Interest, as that it would most effectually confute him.
It would be a third Instance, besides Rome and Alexandria, of a Diocesan City,
vastly exceeding our most populous modern Parishes. Thus manifestly he is out
in all his three Particulars, tho he has hitherto been so backward to
acknowledge it. And indeed his whole attempt to make the Roman Cities
answerable to our present Market Towns is so extremely incredible to one so
versed in the Histories of those Cities as this Author is, as that it is very
hard, on this account also, to excuse him from another Charge of very great
Servility to his Cause and Disingenuity in owning his Convictions.

I AM very sorry that I am obliged to take notice of such things in such
persons, and shall be heartily glad, Sect. 22.
if they will, for the future, keep so close to the Cause, as that we may, on
neither side, either take or give occasion for such personal Digressions. It
will be undoubtedly our common Interest to do so. We shall thereby keep our
selves more innocent, and be withal more serviceable to the Interest of Truth,
and of the public, to our secular and our eternal peace, if, instead of our
other Contentions, we would rather emulate each other in these things, who
shall, most of all, divest himself of prejudices and of the favor of his party;
who shall express the most sincere zeal for Truth and Conviction whithersoever
they may lead him, and withal who can manage the Cause himself thinks good with
the least personal offense of Adversaries, I mean such personal offense as is
separable from the Cause. How happy might our Nations and our Churches be, if
these things were the principal Objects of our disputing Emulations. And how
can any well meaning person answer it to God, or his own Conscience, if he will
not contribute, in his own proportion, to such a public and universal
Happiness?

NEXT to the Observation of these now mentioned Rules, Sect. 23.
all that I shall further desire from any who shall think fit hereafter to
answer what I have written either here or elsewhere, is, that he would be
pleased, not to content hlmself with general and loose Objections, but apply
what he shall say distinctly to some particular Proposition of my Summaries,
and so apply it as to have regard to the Proofs produced for it. This will
better enable the Reader to judge where the Failing is, whether in the
Objection, or in the Answer. Certainly much better than the ordinary looser way
wherein he must himself be at the pains to find out the Application.

I HAVE only one thing more with which I will, Sect. 24. The Usefulness of the
Notion of the Immediate Presidency of the Supreme Being in our Disputes against
the Romanists.
at present trouble the Reader, that is, to observe how the Doctrine here
promoted concerning the immediate Presidentship of the Supreme Being and the
(...) as the general Mediator, if it appear agreeable to the ancient Sentiments
of the Primitive Christians, must fundamentally overthrow all the pretenses for
Invocation either of Saints or Angels, both in the Roman and the Eastern
Liturgies. If this be so, then there will be no reason to believe these
Tutelary Offices, allotted to Saints or Angels on which their Invocation is
necessarily grounded, I mean such Offices as allowed to them over Christians.
If this be so, then there will be no reason so much as to desire their
Intercession in presenting our Prayers, because, even there, whatever Power is
allowed them, is not permitted to their own Disposal, but determined by
particular Divine Appointment, so that they can do neither more nor less than
actually they do. If this be so, they cannot avoid the charge of Actual
Idolatry who are guilty of that Invocation, how so much soever it were
otherwise in the power of created Beings to perform what is desired from them
in such Forms of Invocation. It will hence plainly follow, that all things thus
prayed for, can be actually granted by none but the Supreme Being alone; it
will therefore follow that all Prayers for them before, and all Thanksgivings
for them after, they are received, are therefore actually due to him alone: it
will therefore follow further that all Prayers or Praises to Creatures for such
Benefits as are usually mentioned in such Forms must be actually the robbing
the Supreme Being of that Honor which (on these Principles) is in Justice due
to him alone, and giving it to his Creatures, which is that we commonly
understand by the notion of Idolatry; it will follow that they must be liable
to this Charge, not only in the judgment of our Modern Reformed Churches, (for
which they will, no doubt, be less concerned) but in that also of those
Primitive Churches who proceeded on those Principles from which these
Consequences do so necessarily follow, for which themselves pretend a
Reverence. And that which is the peculiar advantage of this above other popular
Reasonings, is, that this will hold tho they should fail. And for my own part,
I do not think it justifiable to charge any Adversaries, no not even the
Romanists themselves, with any thing which, even in my own Judgment, I cannot
undertake for.

THE CONTENTS.
Introduction. How the Ancients reasoned for Unity of Communion from the Unity
of the Priesthood, and the Unity of the Altar. Sect. I. Mr. Baxter makes them
reason quite contrary to the Design and Interest of their Cause. Sect. II. An
account of his way of managing this same Reason. Sect. III. This Reasoning of
no force, but as designed by the Ancients, who used it. Who neither could
design the Inferences deduced thence by Master Baxter. Sect. IV. Nor could
design the Premises true in such a sense as that the Inferences would follow
from them whether they would or no. Sect. V. The Design of the present
Discourse. Sect. VI. p. 1 Chap. I. The Solidity of the way of Reasoning from
Jewish Precedents in these very Instances of their Priesthood and Altar. 1.
This way of Reasoning for Unity from one Altar and one Priesthood was deduced
from the nearest and freshest memory of the Apostles. Sect. I. This being
granted will be sufficient to show that the condemnation of SCHISM on these
Principles must needs have been agreeable to the Sense of the Apostles
themselves. Sect. II. 2. This way of Reasoning is more likely to have been
taken up from Jewish Notions than Heathenish. Sect. III. How usual it was for
the Christians of that Age to reason from Jewish Precedents. Sect. IV. Used in
these very Particulars of their Priesthood and Altar, by S. Clemens Romanus.
Sect. V. By S. Paul himself. Sect. VI. Used not only as Arguments ad Homines,
but as such as were really conclusive of the Things they were designed to
prove. Sect. VII. p. 13. Chap. II. The Solidity of the same Topic, as to the
Principles of this Unity. 3. This way of Reasoning holds as to this particular
Inference, That this one Priesthood and one Altar, ought now, as well as
formerly, to be Principles of Unity. 1. The Reasoning from Jewish Precedent to
the State of Christianity holds, tho not as to the same things, yet to the same
in proportion. Sect. I, II. 2. It holds particularly in matters of Privilege.
Sect. III. 3. As Unity is a Privilege common to the Mystical and Literal
Judaism, so the proportional Way of Reasoning holds also as to the Principles
of that Unity. Sect. IV, V, VI. 4. The Unity intended to be proved by the
Christians from this One Priesthood and One Altar was that of an External
Visible Communion. Sect. VII. 5. This Dispute was not between Individual Altars
of the same Communion, but between different Altars, as Notes of different
Communions. Sect. VIII. 6. Therefore, by the One Priest the Ancients could not
mean only Christ, nor by the One Altar only an Invisible Communion with Him.
Sect. IX. p. 27
Chap. III. How far the Jews were confined to the Use of One Altar. Application
to Mr. Baxter. The Jews expressly confined to One Altar, which Josephus
understands as a Preservative of Unity. Sect. I. But 1. This One Altar was only
for public Assemblies of the whole Nation. Sect. II. 2. This did not hinder
other places for Religious Assemblies. Sect. III. 3. This did not hinder Altars
of Memorial in other places. Sect. IV. 4. This did not altogether make the Use
of other Places and Altars Unlawful, even for Sacrifices. Prophets might, and
did ordinarily use them. Sect. V. They seem to have been allowed for their
Ordinary Sacrifices which did not require Assemblies of their whole Nation.
Sect. VI, VII. p. 40 Chap. IV. Independence of any other Altar on their
National Altar was by the Jews condemned as inconsistent with their Unity.
Proved from Instances of Altars so condemned. The only thing which the Jews
thought inconsistent with their Unity, as derived from One Altar, was the
erecting an Altar owning no dependence on the National Altar, or Rivalling it
in its Prerogatives as a National one. Sect. I. Enquiry into the Particulars so
condemned. That of the Tribes beyond Jordan. Jos. XXII. Sect. II, III, IV.
Those of Jeroboam. Sect. V, VI, VII. p. 51 Chap. V. Concerning the Samaritan
Temple and Altar and Priesthood, together with other Temples and Altars. The
Unity of the Priesthood first insisted on by the Jews in their Disputes against
the Samaritans. Sect. I. Our Savior himself declared himself against the
Samaritans. Sect. II, III. This Case of the Samaritans happening after the
Old Testament Scriptures, is, for that Reason, more applicable to the Times of
the Gospel. Sect. IV. The Samaritans not excluded from the Name and Privileges
of true Israelites, on account of the falsehood of their pretenses to
Israelitish Extraction. Sect. V. The true ground of those false Pretenses.
Sect. VI. Nor on account of their Idolatry. Sect. VII, VIII. The true State of
that Controversy explained from the Words of the Woman of Samaria. Sect, IX.
The History of the Occasion of that Difference. Sect. X.XI. The Right of the
One Priesthood referred, on both sides, to be decided by Succession. Sect. XII.
The Altar of Ahaz. Sect. XIII. The Altar and Temple of Onias in Heliopolis.
Sect. XIV. Not SCHISMATICALLY designed by him. Sect. XV, XVI. Nor did it prove
SCHISMATICAL in the Event. Sect. XVII. No SCHISMATICAL Succession to the High
Priesthood kept up there. Sect. XVIII. How far this instance went to the
justifying the Primitive Christians in reference to the Jews. Sect. XIX. The
other Jewish Temples mentioned by Onias Idolatrous. Sect. XX, XXI, XXII. p. 65
Chap. VI. The Privilege of the Jews, as the Segullah, or Peculiar People,
consisted in having the Supreme Being appropriated to them for their God. The
Force of this Argument as applied by the Jews to their SCHISMATICS from
Judaism. 1. The God of Israel was indeed so proper to the Israelites, as the
Gods of the Nations were to their respective Nations. Sect. I. The Demons of
the Nations were only of limited Power and Jurisdiction, and, as they thought,
overpowered when the Nations, for whom they were concerned, were conquered.
Sect. II, III. The Privilege of the Jews, as the Segullah, consisted in this,
That whereas none but Inferior Demons were appointed for the Tutelars of other
Nations, the Supreme Being was pleased to undertake the management of them
immediately, in his own person. Sect. IV, V, VI, VII. The Advantages the Jews
had above other Nations in this regard. Sect. VIII. Wherein consisted the Sin
of worshipping those Tutelary Demons. Sect. IX, X, XI. How Angels were employed
by God in the Government of the Jews. Sect. XII. Wherein God's peculiar Care of
the Jews consisted. Sect. XIII. p. 110 Chap. VII. The way of Appropriating a
God (according to the Customs of those Times) was by Sacrifices received in One
Place, and from One Altar, and One High Priest. 2. The way of appropriating a
God to a Nation was by Sacrifice. Sect. I. The popular Sacrifices were to be
considered as Ceremonies of Covenanting, and particularly of Covenanting with
their Gods as well as with one another. Sect. II. These Sacrifices were
confined to particular Nations. Sect. III. Especially their Mysteries. Sect.
IV. The most Ancient Sacrifices were generally thus confined. Sect. V. How this
was consistent with the Heathens permitting the Worship of the Gods of other
Nations besides their own. Sect. VI. The Covenanting Symbols of Unity that were
used in their Common Sacrifices. Sect. VII, VIII. The Sacrifices were also
Natural Means of promoting this Unity of the Sacrificers with their Gods. Sect.
IX. The Consequences following hereupon. Sect. X. 3. The National Panegyres or
Assemblies for participating in those National Sacrifices confined to a certain
place. Sect. XI. Moses very probably alluded herein to the Practices of the
Egyptians. Sect. XII. 4. In the Panegyres so fixed, all the Sacrifices then
feasted on were to be received from One Altar. Sect. XIII. The Reason. Sect.
XIV. 5. The Affairs of that One Altar always, managed by One Chief Priest.
Sect. XV. p. 142
Chap. VIII. The Jewish Sacrifices, as Mysteries, caused a Mystical Union and
Communion with God, dependent on their External Communion with their High
Priest. The Jews, before our Savior's coming, had taken up this way of
mysticizing their Law. Sect. I. The Jewish Sacrifices were most properly
Mysteries. Sect. II. How these Mystical Sacrifices promoted a Union with the
Deity by a Union with the Priesthood. 1. The admitting Persons to the Mysteries
was the peculiar Office of the High Priestoood. Sect. III. 2. In this Office
the High Priests represented a more Sacred Person than their own. Sect. IV. The
Demon peculiarly concerned in this affair of restoring Souls was the
Demiurgus. Sect. V. It was thought impious for any Creature to intermeddle in
it as a Creature. Sect. VI. The Jews understood their own Worship to perform
the Office of Mysteries. Sect. VII. The (...) was the Demiurgus peculiarly
concerned in Revealing the Heavenly Mysteries. Sect. VIII. The Jewish High
Priest represented the (...) herein. Sect. IX, X. None but the High Priest did
so. Sect. XI. 3. The High Priest represented the (...) particularly in relation
to the Benefits of the Mystical (...) and (...). 1. Union and Communion with
the Father was to be procured by Union and Communion with the (...). Sect. XII.
A mystical (...) owned in the Hellenistical Philosophy of those Times. Sect.
XIII. How appropriated to the (...) by the Principles of the same Philosophy.
Sect. XIV. The same (...) the Principle of Union both to the Sensible World.
Sect. XV. And to the Intellectual. Sect. XVI. 2. Union and Communion with the
(...) was supposed to depend on external Communion with the High Priest as one
who particularly represented the (...) in this Office of mystically signifying
and causing this External Unity Sect. XVII. p. 185
Chap. IX. The Christian Bishops were answerable to the Jewish High Priests.
The Solidity of this same way of Reasoning as urged by the Primitive Christians
against their contemporary SCHISMATICS. The general Principles on which they
proceeded were granted by the Generality of that Age. Sect. I. The way of
Reasoning from Sacrifices admitted also under the Gospel. Sect. II, The
Reasoning from Mystical Sacrifices indeed most proper to the State of the
Gospel. Sect. III. The Primitive Bishops designed in imitation of the Jewish
High Priesthood. Hence the Custom of their wearing Frontlets. Sect. IV. And
that of their confining the Succession in Churches to the Family of their first
Bishops. Sect. V. This Design very agreeable to the Change intended by our
Savior. Sect. VI. An Account why, for a while, the Christians might defer the
committing that eminency of Power into the Bishops hands with which they were
entrusted afterward. Sect. VII, VIII. Hence also the Absoluteness of
particular Bishops in S. Cyprian's time. Sect. IX. However this same Reasoning
will oblige all to a strict dependence who live within the same Jurisdiction.
Sect. X. The same way of Reasoning from Jewish Precedents will include whole
Cities within the same Jurisdiction. Sect. XI. How inclinable the Christians
were to take up these Arts of Uniting Citizens. Sect. XII. The Solemn
Anniversaries of the Jews being continued among the Christians were to be
understood as Obligatory in the Times of Christianity; and their being observed
in particular Cities employed that the Bishops of those Cities were answerable
to the High Priests. Sect. XIII. p. 229 Chap. X. The City Jurisdictions were
Answerable to the Jurisdiction of the High Priest. Tho Christians of the same
City had been left to their Liberty whether they would unite, or not, yet,
supposing them united, Subjects must have been obliged to their actual Terms of
Union. Sect. I. 1. In that Case, it must have been indifferent, and therefore
Lawful, for them to unite so. Sect. II. 2. This way of Union being once agreed
on, tho the Agreement had been only Human, yet the Obligation to Subjects and
Posterity would have been Divine. Sect. III. 3. Tho the particular Instance had
not, yet the Power by which even that Instance had been determined, had been
from God. Sect. IV. 4. The Determination of the Limits of Jurisdiction was a
thing absolutely necessary for preserving Unanimity among themselves in
propagating their common Christianity. Sect. V. 5. The most equal way of
determining these Limits, among Equals, is that of Occupation. Sect. VI, VII.
This way of determining them will not oblige us to a Recourse to express
Scripture. Sect. VIII. All Church Members were obliged, by the anient Canons,
to a Personal Attendance at the Bishops Altar at some solemn Times. Sect. IX.
The Ground of that Custom in the Jewish Precedent. Sect. X. p. 273 Chap. XI.
The Primitive Christians did, and, by the received Principles of those Times
were obliged to own their Eucharist for a Mystical Sacrifice. The Sacrifices
and High Priesthood of the Gospel are Mystical. Sect. I. Such a Sacrifice
necessary under the Gospel as may answer the public Sacrifices under the Law.
Sect. II. This Mystical Evangelical Sacrifice must be expected from some
positive Institution of the Gospel. Sect. III. Eucharistical Sacrifices most
suitable to the State of the Gospel. Sect. IV. Hence probably the very name of
Eucharist. Sect. V. Christ's Priesthood being the Priesthood of Melchizedech,
his Sacrifice ought also to be the Sacrifice of Melchizedech, that of Bread.
Sect. VI. Not only this Reasoning, but the Inference deduced from it, were
granted and used by the Ancients. Sect. VII. Supposing the Notions of those
Times, they must needs have taken the Eucharist for a Mystical Sacrifice. Sect.
VIII. On account of it is being a Mystical Sacrifice it had, according to the
Principles of those Ages, a juster Title to the Name of a Sacrifice. Sect. IX,
X, XI. And to the Thing. Sect. XII, XIII. 295 Chap. XII. The same Christians
did, and, by the same Principles, were obliged to, own their Bishops for
Mysticai High Priests. The Bishops were thought to represent a Divine Person.
The seven Angels of the Divine Presence had their Office in the restoring of
Souls. Sect. I. To these S. John accommodated his precise number of seven
Churches in Asia. Sect. II. Sometimes the Bishops represented the Person of
Christ himself, and then his seven Angels are represented by the seven Deacons.
Sect. III. How fitly this agreed to the Circumstances of the first Beginnings
of Christianity. Sect. IV. The name Bishop seems originally designed to imply a
Mystical Representative of a Divine Person. Sect V. The Comparisons of the
Bishops in Ignatius to God, and Christ, etc. accounted for. Sect. VI. The
Mystical Representations of Ecclesiastical Officers in the Revelations. Sect.
VII. There could be no Mistake in taking their Church Officers for Mystical
Representatives. Sect. VIII. The force of the Inference relating to Union with
Christian Bishops. Sect. IX. Tertullian's Futuri Judicii Praejudicium
explained. Sect. X. How consequently the Primitive Christians reasoned hence
for proving those who were disunited from their Bishops to be also deprived of
the Mystical Invisible Union with Christ himself. Sect. XI. And of the Benefits
of that Invisible Union. Sect. XII, XIII, XIV. p. 328 Chap. XIII. The
forementioned Reasoning applied to the present Case of our Modern SCHISMATICS.
The Applicableness of this same Reasoning to the Case of our Modern
SCHISMATICS. Gospel Constitutions designed perpetual. Sect. I. Unity designed
perpetual. Sect. II. Even that of this Life. Sect. III. Christ designed and
instituted Means sufficient for perpetuating this External Unity. The same
Means of erecting the Church into a Body-Politick as conducive to the
perpetuating an External Unity Now (as Then) and for Ever. Sect. IV. The Means
of confining the Benefits of the Covenant to the Solemnities of it by Sacrifice
as conducive to the same purpose of erecting a Body Politic now also, and for
Ever. Sect. V. Our Christian Sacrifice of the Eucharist is of a perpetual Use.
Sect. VI. And perpetually useful for the same purposes as in the Apostles Time.
Sect. VII. And therefore perpetually useful in order to the partaking in the
Invisible Heavenly Sacrifice. Sect. VIII. No communicating with the Father and
the Son but by Communion with the Bishop. Sect. IX. This same Reasoning, if it
was good in S. Cyprian's time, is still as good as it was then, and will be so
for ever. Sect. X. These Symbolical Representations are not otherwise to be
interpreted. Now than they were in the Primitive Times. Sect. XI. Our
Adversaries, in their separate condition, can lay no claim to the One Altar.
Sect. XII. Nor to the One Priesthood. Sect. XIII. The sad condition of
SCHISMATICS. Sect. XIV. How little Friends they are to Souls who are for
prejudging persons against our Reasons by Popular Arts of raising Odium against
our Cause, or our Persons. Sect. XV, XVI. p. 368

A Summary of the Reasoning presented in one View, according to the Method of
the Book.
Premisals Preparatory.
1. THis way of Reasoning for Unity from One Altar and One Priesthood was
deduced from the nearest and freshest memory of the Apostles. Chap. 1. Sect. 1.
2. This way of Reasoning is more likely to have been taken up from Jewish
Notions than Heathenish. 3. 3. It was usual for the Christians of that Age to
Reason from Jewish Precedents. 4. 4. Used in these very Particulars of their
Priesthood and Altar. 5. 5. Used not only as Arguments ad Homines, but as such
as were really conclusive of the things they were designed to prove. 7. 6.
Solid also as to this Particular, that this Priesthood and Altar ought Now, as
well as among the Jews, to be Principles of Unity. Chap. II.
The Enquiry made first concerning the Solidity of this Reasoning as used by
the Jews against the Samaritans.

The Assertion. The Jews did condemn all Altars independent on their National
Altar, and all Priesthoods independent on their Public National High
Priesthood, as prejudicial to their Unity.
1. Proved True. Chap. III, IV, V. 2. Accounted for as to the Reasoning by
which it appears to have been True. 1. The God of Israel was indeed so proper
to the Israelites, as the Gods of the Nations were to their respective Nations.
Chap. VI. 2. The way of appropriating a God to a Nation was by Sacrifice. Chap.
VII. to 10. 3. The National Panegyres or Assemblies, for participating in those
National Sacrifices were confined to a certain place. ib. 11, 12. 4. In the
Panegyres so fixed, all the Sacrifices then feasted on were to be received from
One Altar. ib. 13, 14. 5. The Affairs of that One Altar always managed by One
Chief Priest. ib. 15. 6. The Jewish Sacrifices were Mysteries as well as
Sacrifices, and, in that regard, caused a Mystical, as well as a Civil, Union
betwixt God and those who communicated in those Sacrifices. Chap. VIII. 1. The
Jews before our Savior's coming, had taken up this way of mysticizing their
Law. ib. 1. 2. Particularly their Sacrifices were most properly Mysteries. ib.
2. 3. These Mystical Sacrifices promoted a Union with the Deity by a Union with
the Priesthood: For 1. The admitting Persons to the Mysteries was the peculiar
Office of the High Priesthood. ib. 3. 2. In this Office the High Priests
represented a more Sacred Person than their own, that is the (...). 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11. 3. The High Priest represented the (...) particularly in relation
to the Benefits of the Mystical Union and Communion. This proved: 1. Union and
Communion with the Father was to be procured by Union and Communion with the
(...): 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. 2. Union and Communion with the (...) was supposed
to depend on External Communion with the High Priest as one who particularly
represented the (...) in this Office of mystically signifying and causing this
External Union. 17.




The same Enquiry 2. concerning the Solidity of the same Reasoning as used by
the Primitive Christians against their contemporary SCHISMATICS. Chap. IX.
1. The way of Reasoning from Sacrifices admitted also under the Gospel. 2. 2.
The Reasoning from Mystical Sacrifices was indeed most proper to the State of
the Gospel. 3. 3. The Primitive Bishops were designed in imitation of the
Jewish High Priesthood. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 4. This way of Reasoning will oblige
all to a strict dependence who live in the same Jurisdiction. 10. 5. The same
way of Reasoning from Jewish Precedents will include whole Cities within the
same Jurisdiction. 11, 12, 13. 6. This measuring of the Jurisdiction of
Churches by the Jurisdiction of Cities had been Just by the Right of
Occupation, tho no Scripture-Precedent could have determined any thing
concerning it. Chap. X. 1. In that Case it must have been indifferent, and
therefore Lawful for them to unite so. 2. 2. This way of Union being once
agreed on, tho the Agreement had been only human, yet the Obligation to
Subjects, and Posterity, would have been Divine. 3. 3. Tho the particular
Instance had not, yet the Power by which even that Instance had been
determined, had been from God. 4. 4. The Determination of the Limits of
Jurisdiction was a thing absolutely necessary for preserving Unanimity among
themselves in propagating their common Christianity. 5. 5. The most equal way
of determining these Limits, among Equals, is that of Occupation. 6, 7, 8, 9,
10. 7. The Mystical Sacrifice, Answering the Priesthood of the Bishop under the
Gospel, was the Eucharist. Chap. XI. 1. The Sacrifices under the Gospel are
Mystical. 1. 2. Such Sacrifices are necessary under the Gospel as may answer
the public Sacrifices under the Law. 2. 3. This Mystical Evangelical Sacrifice
must be expected from some positive Institution under the Gospel. 3. 4.
Eucharistical Sacrifices are most proper to the State of the Gospel. 4, 5. 5.
Christ's Priesthood being the Priesthood of Melchizedec, his Sacrifice ought
also to be the Sacrifice of Melchizedec, that of Bread. 6, 7. 6. Supposing the
Notions of those Times, the Ancients must needs have taken the Eucharist for a
Mystical Sacrifice. 8. 7. On account of its being a Mystical Sacrifice, it had,
according to the Principles of those Ages, a juster Title both to the Name and
Thing of a Sacrifice. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 8. The High Priesthood, ascribed by
the the Primitive Christians to their Bishops, was also Mystical. Chap. XII.


The same Enquiry 3. concerning the Solidity of the same Reasoning with regard
to the present Case of our Modern SCHISMATICS. Chap. XII.
Proposition proved. That the same Reasoning which was good in the Case of the
Primitive Christians against SCHISM holds still good in the Case of our Modern
SCHISMATICS, and will hold good against SCHISM for ever.
1. Gospel Constitutions were designed perpetual. 1. 2. Ecclesiastical Unity
was also designed by God to be perpetual. 2. 3. That Ecclesiastical Unity which
was intended that it should be perpetual, was also to be understood of a Unity
in this Life. 3. 4. This Perpetuity being thus designed, it must follow that
Christ designed and instituted Means sufficient for perpetuating this External
Unity of this Life. 4. 5. The same Means of erecting the Church into a Body
Politic, is as conducive to the perpetuating an External Ecclesiastical Unity
Now ( as Then) and for Ever. ib. 6. The Means of confining the Benefits of the
Covenant to the Solemnities of it by Sacrifice, as conducive to the same
purpose of erecting a Body-Politick Now also, and for Ever. 5. 7. The Federal
Sacrifice to which these Benefits of the Covenant are now confined is that of
the Eucharist. Proved
1. Our Christian Sacrifice of the Eucharist is of a perpetual Use. 6. 2. It is
perpetually useful for the same purposes as in the Apostles Times. 7. 3. It is
therefore perpetually useful in order to the partaking in the Invisible
Heavenly Sacrifice.. 8.
8. No communicating with the Father and the Son but by Communion with the
Bishop. 9.

The same Reasoning more closely managed, and in some things improved.
SAcred Unity (to which SCHISM is opposed) is to be derived from ONE ALTAR and
ONE Presiding PRIEST as Principles of Unity.

This proved true 1. From Hellenistical Principles as urged by the Jews against
the Samaritans.

1. This Sacred Unity was designed originally to the Supreme Being as a Deity
appropriated to the Segullah, or peculiar People. 2. This Sacred Unity to the
Supreme Being was to be transacted by a Covenant to be made with him by
Sacrifice. 3. That Sacrifice which, by the Principles of those Ages, could
unite with One God, was to be received from ONE and the same ALTAR. 4. The
Affairs of that ONE ALTAR were, according to the Customs of those Times,
generally managed by ONE Supreme Presiding PRIEST. 5. This Unity as Mystical
was transacted by the Sacraments principally as Mysteries. 1. The Unity here
designed is not barely an Rxternal One of this Life, but as conducing to an
Invisible Unity of the other Life as transacted and procured by this Visible
One. 2. This Invisible Union (which is here called Mystical) was properly to be
expected only from Mysteries as that for which Mysteries were principally
designed. 3. The way of transacting this Invisible Union in Mysteries was
understood to be by Representing the Invisible Union by Visible Symbols, and so
obliging God, by virtue of those Symbols as Legal Ones, to ratify invisibly
what was transacted in their Visible Mysteries. 4. This Mystical Union did most
essentially consist in a Union to one common Head as a common Principle to all
particulars so united of their Mystical Unity. 5. The way of uniting to this
Archetypal Head, or Principle of Unity, as transacted in Mysteries, was by
first uniting persons to an Image or Representative of the Archetypal Head,
which was to be a common Head to all subordinate Representatives, as its
Archetype was also a Head to it self and all united with it.
6. In this Multitude of subordinate Representatives, whoever was legally
united to the last was, in the same way of Interpretation of Law, understood to
be united to the first Archetypal Head of all. 7. The first Archetypal Head or
Principle of all this Mystical Unity was thought to be the Supreme Being, the
(...) as the Platonists called him, the (...), or Father, as the Hellenists as
well as the Primitive Christians called him, in opposition to the Son. 8. They
who were united to the High Priest, by the Principles of these Hellenists, by
being so united to the High Priest, were united also to the Father. 1. They who
were united to the High Priest were also on that same account of this Mystical
Reasoning, united also to the (...), of whom the High Priest was a designed
Representative. 2. They who were united to the (...) were, on the same
Principles, united to the Father who was taken for the Head of the (...), and
of whom the (...) was supposed to be the (...) of (...), that is the express
and lively Representative.
9. They who communicated in the Sacrifices offered by the High Priest, They,
and they alone, were, in this Legal way of Judging, supposed united to the High
Priest. 10. They who communicated in Sacrifices offered by any of the Inferior
Priests owning a dependence on the High Priest, were for so doing, judged to
communicate in Sacrifices offered by the High Priest himself. 11. They who did
not communicate at the One great Altar, where the High Priest was obliged to
officiate in person, and where every clean Male was obliged to attend in person
at the three great Anniversary Festivals, were, on that account, judged not to
communicate in Sacrifices offered by the High Priest. 12. They who communicated
with other Altars owning no dependence on that one great Altar in reference to
their Anniversary Solemnities, were, for so doing, judged not to communicate in
Sacrifices offered by the High Priest; and they who communicated with Altars
owning such a dependence (as for Example with that of Heliopolis) were
therefore judged to communicate with the One great Altar, on which they owned a
dependence, and accordingly accounted of as if they communicated in the
Sacrifices offered by the High Priest himself in person. 13. They who
communicated in these Sacrifices and this ONE ALTAR were, in some way of Legal
Interpretation, judged to communicate in the Archetypal Sacrifices, and the
Archetypal ALTAR relating to the Archetypal High Priest who was represented by
the Visible One. 14. They who thus communicated in the Archetypal Sacrifices
and Altar were judged to be thereby united to the Archetypal High Priest, as by
communicating in the Visible Sacrifices and Altar they were united to him that
was Visible. I mean both to the immediate Archetypal the (...), and to the
Original, the Father also. 15. They who were thus united to the Archetypal High
Priest became thereby entitled to all the Mystical Benefits of that Union. 1.
As united to his person, so they were entitled to all those spiritual
influences derived from Him as the Head to all his Mystical Body, answering the
derivation of vital Influences from the Head to each particular Member in the
natural Body. That is to the Spirit as a Principle of Spiritual or Mystical
Life, answering the Animal Spirits in the Natural Body, both as it must assist
them in the performance of their Duty, and as it withal infuses Supernatural
Comforts when they have done it. 2. As united to his Sacrifice, so they come to
be in Covenant with him, and to be entitled to all those Promises on God's part
of the Covenant, which, by the Hellenists were thought Mystical as this New
Covenant it self was so. Such were, 1. Remission of Sins, which by the Apostles
Reasoning on those Principles, seems proper only to this Mystical Sacrifice. 2.
Heaven answering the Literal Canaan, etc. 3. The deliverance of their Souls
from the Slavery of their Bodies, and the Power of the Devil the Mystical
Pharaoh and Egypt. 4. Especially with relation to their future State which was
thought the proper work of Mysteries.

16. They who were thus disunited from the sensible High Priest were, in a
Legal Way of judging (which God, as transacting these things by Legal
Covenanting Symbols, was obliged to ratify) disunited also from the Archetypal
High Priest, and his Sacrifice and Altar. And 17. Accrrdingly cut off from all
Legal Right to the now mentioned Benefits of the Mystical Union, whether those
of Union with the person, or with the Sacrifice, of this Archetypal Principle
of Unity. 18. They who were disunited from the One Sensible Altar were also
disunited from the One Sensible High Priest. 19. They who either owned another
Rival Altar for their National Anniversaries, or another Altar independent on
the public National One, for even their less public Selemnities, were, for so
doing, judged disunited from the One Sensible Altar which was ingredient in the
Principle of their External Unity. 20. They who were, on any of these accounts,
disunited from the One Sensible Altar were also, by the same Principles of
Reasoning described in other Instances, judged disunited from the Archetypal
Altar, and its Sacrifices, and the Covenant to be made, or the other Benefits
to be impetrated, by those Sacrifices.
2. From the same Principles as received and ratified by the Primitive
Christians, and urged by them to their contemporary SCHISMATICS.

Here I premise.

1. That the Reasoning from Old Testament to Gospel Institutions is allowed in
the New Testament it self. 2. Even where a Change was made under the Gospel
from the Old Testament Precedent, yet even there the same Reasoning is allowed
from the Old Testament Type to the New Testament Antitype. 3. This way of
Reasoning from Old Testament Types to New Testament Antitypes requires, that
tho the Things be changed, yet still they remain the same in proportion. 4.
Their remaining the same in proportion requires that the Antitypes perform the
same Office in the New Testament as the Types did under the Old. 5. This way of
Reasoning from Old Testament Precedents to New Testament Institutions is
allowed under the Gospel in these very Instances of the Priesthood and the
Altar.
Now then for proving the Proposition, it followed, 1. That there ought under
the Gospel also to be One Altar and One Priest answerable to those under the
Law. And that it was actually true was granted by the Primitive Christians. 2.
This One Priest under the Gospel who was thought answerable to the Jewish High
Priest was the Bishop, and the One Altar among the Christians answering to the
One Jewish Altar at Jerusalem was the Communion Table where the Bishop himself
officiated in person. 3. The Bishop therefore and his Communion Table was to
perform the same Office to Christians, as the Jewish Altar and Priesthood had
performed among the Jews. 4. The Bishop therefore and his Communion Table were
to be Principles of Unity to Christians, as the High Priest and his Altar were
formerly to the Jews. 5. As this Unity here spoken of was a Mystical Unity, so
there was more reason to expect it from the Bishop and his Communion Table than
from the High Priest and his Altar. 1. This Mystical Unity was most properly to
be expected from Mysteries, and therefore from such Sacrifices as were Mystical
Sacrifices, and by so nuch the rather to be expected from them by how much the
more Mystical they were. 2. The Christian Eucharist was, and was believed to
be, a Mystical Sacrifice, and more properly Mystical than the Jewish Sacrifices
themselves. 3. The Christian Bishops were, and were also believed to be,
Mystical High Priests, and as properly so as the Jewish High Priests were
believed to be so by the Hellenists. 4. Among Mysteries those were judged to
have most Mystical Virtue which approached nearest to the Archetypal Mysteries.
5. The Christian Eucharist and their Bishop were, by the Primitive Christians
judged to approach nearer to the Archetypal Sacrifice and High Priest than the
Jewish Altar and Sacrifice and High Priest.
6. This mystical Unity was that which was thought to be the most beneficial
Unity, and that indeed alone which related to the Good of Souls, and the future
State. 7. This mystical Unity was indeed most proper to Christianity as a State
of mystical Israelitism, and as designed by Christ himself with a particular
regard to the good of Souls, and a future State. 8. The Mischiefs therefore
supposed to be incurred by these Violators of Christian Unity, were of the same
sort with those to which the Heathens thought them obnoxious who were Violators
of their Mysteries. 1. The Heathens thought the Violators of their Mysteries in
danger of a present Punishment from their offended Deity, either of Sickness or
Death, as the Christians thought concerning their own unworthy Communicants. 2.
The Heathens thought them under an (...) or Piaculum, and so obnoxious to the
hauntings of Furies and ill Demons, as the Christians Excommunication was
accounted a Delivery of such persons unto Satan, by whom the Corporal Evils
were inflicted. 3. As the Mysteries were themselves thought advantageous for
the (...) the return of the Soul to Heaven, so the want of them was supposed to
leave them in the (...) the mire of these Terrestrial Vehicles which were
thought to detain them, and make them incapable of ascending to their Heavenly
Happiness. Which was also agreeable to the Sentiments of the Primitive
Christians concerning excommunicate persons.
9. Whosoever set up another Altar for the public Assemblies within the
Bishop's Jurisdiction distinct from that of the Bishop (as in the case of
SCHISMATICAL Bishops in a See already occupied) were, on the same account
guilty of the Violation of this mystical Unity among Christians as the Abettors
of the Samaritan Altar and High Priesthood in opposition to those of Jerusalem
were among the Jews. 10. They also who set up Altars within the Bishop's
Jurisdiction independent on his Altar, as in the Case of Rebelling Presbyters
were also, on the same account, guilty of the Violation of this mystical Unity
among Christians, as the Abettors of Jeroboam's high places in opposition to
the celebration of the Solemn Anniversaries at Jerusalem were among the Jews.
11. As every Bioshp was thought answerable to the High Priest at Jerusalem; so
every City with its Jurisdiction was thought answerable to the Jurisdiction of
Jerusalem. 12. Tho there had been no such Right for determining the Limits of
Jurisdictions from the Old Testament Precedent, yet Occupation had been
sufficient, when proceeding on such common Rules of Equity as had been at first
agreed on, and between Equals. 13. He who, by any of the Cases now described,
had been disunited from the Communion of any one Bishop, had been also
disunited from the Communion of the (...), that is, in the Language of those
Christians, of Christ the Invisible Bishop. 14. Whoever was thereby disunited
from Christ the Invisible Bishop, was accordingly indeed, and in Right,
disunited from all Bishops of the Catholic Church, who were accordingly
obliged, on account of the preservation of their common Correspondence and
Unity, to exclude him from their own particular Communions, also respectively.
15. The preservation of the Unity of each particular Church was the common
Interest of all particulars. 16. The Violation of the Unity of any one
particular Church was, in Consequence, a Violation of the Unity of all
particular Churches. 17. The Violation of the Unity of all particular Churches
is, by a necessary Consequence, the Violation of the Unity of the whole
Catholic Church in general.


3. From this same Reasoning as holding good still, and as applicable also to
the Case of our Modern SCHISMATICS.

Proved as in the Former Summary.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THE CONTENTS.
How the Ancients reasoned for Unity of Communion from the Unity of the
Priesthood, and the Unity of the Altar. Sect. I. Mr. Baxter makes them reason
quite contrary to the Design and Interest of their Cause. Sect. II. An account
of his way of managing this same Reason. Sect. III. This Reasoning of no force,
but as designed by the Ancients, who used it. Who neither could design the
Inferences deduced thence by Master Baxter. Sect. IV. Nor could design the
Premises true in such a sense as that the Inferences would follow from them
whether they would or no. Sect. V. The Design of the present Discourse. Sect.
VI.

THe Unity of the Catholic Church in Conventicles of SCHISMATICS, is (in the
Language of the most ancient and accurate Writers against SCHISM, especially
Ignatius and S. Cyprian, from whom later Antiquity has received the same Terms)
expressed as grounded on the Unity of the Priest and the Altar. In which way of
Reasoning they conclude, that they who partake at the same Altar, and of the
same mystical Sacrifices offered thereon, and receive their portions of this
Sacrifical Feast from the Ministry of the same Priest, whose Office it is to
offer those mystical Sacrifices on that same Altar, that they, and they alone,
are to be judged to belong to the same Society, confederated by those
Sacrifices. And on the contrary, that they who set up other Altars in
opposition to that one Altar, in order to the confederation of distinct
Societies, owning no correspondence with the Original Altar: and they who set
up a distinct Priesthood by themselves, owning no dependence on the Priest
related to that Altar, cannot, by virtue of this Sacrifical Confederation be
judged to belong to the original Society, nor can consequently be entitled to
the Privileges of the Society from which they are so divided. This One Altar
those Ancients understand of the Original Communion, and the one Priest of the
Bishop who was possessed of the Church when the Separation was first made; And
accordingly conclude farther, that whoever keep not to the original Communion,
and do not own the Authority of such a Bishop and his Canonical Successors
within his own Jurisdiction, are, for these very Reasons, cut off from the
Original Churches, and from all just and legal Claims to the spiritual Promises
and Privileges of Churches.

THESE Things, one would think, Interest of a beloved Cause and Party. And I
know not whether we have a greater instance of this human Frailty than Mr.
Baxter. He it is that will needs persuade us, that this very same Reasoning
which was made use of by those Fathers, for proving all those Diocesan
Societies and Assemblies SCHISMATICAL, which are maintained in opposition to
the Diocesan Bishop, does indeed prove the contrary; That in that very same
Case it proves that the Diocesan is the only SCHISMATIC. This had indeed been
more excusable, if he had taken the Argument fingly, and vindicated it from the
unskilfullness of their management of it. Then he might indeed pretend to show,
with some consistency to his own undertakings, that it did prove the contrary
to that for which the Ancients had produced it. But when he is not content with
this, but will needs pretend further, that his Doctrine, as well as his
Reasoning, is the Doctrine also of Ignatius, and S. Cyprian; That they as well
as he, were for defending subdivided Diocesan Assemblies against the Authority
of their Diocesan; That they as well as he, charged the Diocesans (that was
themselves, in the Cases concerned in their Disputes) with the SCHISM of such
Divisions; That accordingly they, as well he, should unchurch the Diocesan
Ordinaries for not allowing the Exercise of Discipline by Felicissimus, and
such like Presbyters independently on Ordinaries, within their Ordinaries
Jurisdiction, for not owning such divided Factions and Assemblies headed by
single Presbyters for proper Churches, and entitled to the Privileges that were
proper to truly Ecclesiastical Assemblies; that is indeed that their whole
Disputes were by themselves designed against themselves, and in favor of their
Adversaries: it is very strange how he could be so confident of so weak
Conjectures as those are which he uses in a Case, of it self, so extremely
incredible. But such gross mistakes as these they are usually guilty of, who
will venture rather to expound Authors by single Expressions, not thoroughly
understood, than inquire into the true History of the Dispute, and the matter
of Fact that occasioned it, and the Interest and true design of the Dispute it
self, as fitted to the Case for which it was designed.

A PARADOX so incredible Ancients limit this Unity by one Altar, that is, as he
conceives, by one single Communion Table; and by one Priest, that is, as he
also understands it, by one single Ordinary Minister. Whence he concludes, that
the notion of a single united Church then included no more than could
ordinarily maintain Personal Communion from the same Table that could
ordinarily assist the Ministry of one single Minister, and ordinarily meet in
the same place, even in those primitive Times of Persecution, when it could not
be safe for many to meet so. He concludes, that this being so, whosoever were
thus united in a single Congregation, and under the persoanl care and
inspection of a single Minister, must consequently have been united to a
Church, and could not be judged SCHISMATICS for want of any other Terms of
Union. He concludes, that the Union of Diocesan Churches, supposing many
Congregations thus united among themselves, cannot accordingly involve such
Congregations in the Crime of SCHISM, if they refuse those further Terms of
Union, whilst they yet retain the Union of one Altar and one Priest, which was
then thought Catholic, and from which alone the Reasonings now mentioned made
it SCHISMATICAL to depart. That this being so, the Diocesans themselves, if
they refuse Communion to Congregations so united, or, which amounts to the same
thing, impose their own Terms of Union on them (which on these suppositions,
cannot be Catholic) must themselves be judged to be the Violators of Catholic
Unity, and SCHISMATICS, not those Congregations whom he supposes to do no more
than assert their own just Liberty against Usurpation and Uncatholick
Impositions; That this being the present Case of our Nonconformists: they are
also justifiable, on the same Principles, from the Guilt of SCHISM.

BUT enough has been already said Authority of those ancient Authors who first
used it. The very expressing of the notion of Catholic Unity by one Altar, and
one Priest, is not taken from the Language of the New Testament. Hence it
follows further, that this whole Reasoning depending wholly on the Authority of
them who first used it, cannot consequently hold in any Cases but those for
which they designed it, and must undoubtedly be false in all such other Cases
for which it was impossible that they could design it. These things therefore
being thus premised, several things have been already suggested to show, that
in the Judgment of the Ancients no such Consequences could be designed, as our
Adversaries are in interest concerned to draw from this way of Reasoning. It
has been shown that they could not possibly oppose, or defend the same things
that are hence opposed and defended by our Adversaries. They could not possibly
oppose Diocesan Churches, because their own were so, as properly as ours are
now. They took in whole Cities, how populous soever, and how full soever of
Christians, together with the whole Jurisdictions belonging to those Cities.
Those Cities were as great and populous, and as full of Converts to one
Communion as ours are now; nor can our Adversaries produce one single instance
wherein the numbers of Converts made them subdivide one City into several
Churches independent on the Jurisdiction of the whole, as they must have been
by the Principles on which our Adversaries proceed in this Case. And which is
very considerable in this matter, See my second Letter, Sect. 7.
those very Cities of those Countries, which were first converted by the
Apostles, of Palestine, and Syria, and the lesser Asia, and Greece, were
generally very great and populous, and suddenly filled with multitudes of
Christians. Yet even there we never find that the Apostles themselves thought
that multitude a sufficient reason for multitudes of independent Jurisdictions;
nor can we find the least Footsteps of any such original Constitutions, even in
those Churches themselves, as far as any warrantable Histories can inform us.
Nor could they possibly defend the independence of particular Congregations on
Diocesan Jurisdiction, that being the very case of the Adversaries which whom
they had to deal. Second Letter against Mr. Baxter. Sect. 2.
Ignatius plainly disputes against all Sacraments, without the consent of the
Bishop, and does as plainly include Presbyters in the number of those whom he
makes subject to the Bishop. How then is it possible, by his Principles, that
there could be any Priest or Altar in a City independent on the Bishop? Ib.
Sect. 32.
S. Cyprian does not only (from these Principles) condemn the opposite
Assemblies of Presbyters against their Bishops, but even of Anti-Bishops
themselves. What greater assurance can we desire that he thought all City
Altars, and all City Priests, of what rank soever, obliged to a strict
dependence on the common Church of the City, and on their common Bishop, who
already was canonically possessed of the City Jurisdiction? That was generally
the Case with the Novatians and the Donatists. And why should they interpret
the separate Assemblies of such persons to be an erecting an Altar against an
Altar, if they had thought them to stand on equal Terms, if they had not
thought all City Assemblies obliged to a dependence on the common City Altar
and Bishop? Where no Duty is owing, the erection of a new Altar cannot be
interpreted as an opposition to the old one. Thus Mr. Baxter and his Brethren
argue. And thus would those Fathers also have argued, if they had been of Mr.
Baxter's mind.

THUS impossible it was, that those design the Consequences deduced from their
Principles by our present Separatists. Nor could they understand the Principles
themselves in any such meaning as that the Consequences should naturally follow
from them, whether they would or no. When this appears, there will no pretense
remain for our Adversaries misunderstanding them. They mention indeed but one
Priest in a Church, but they make him assisted with Colleges of Presbyters and
Deacons. Who sees not that by the one Priest they could not mean ordinary
Ministers, but only the City-Bishop? Yet these very expressions Mr. B. can
occasionally quote, without observing how they make against him. Their
mentioning such Colleges plainly implies, that they did not think the one
Priest obliged to perform all his care in his own person. If that had been
possible for him, and they had thought him so obliged; what need had there been
of so many Assistants? And what will then become of the greatest part of Mr.
Baxter's Reasonings? They mention One Altar, yet at the same time they mention
several Communion Tables, which will utterly overthrow their Inference, that
they must therefore have consisted of single Assemblies. This has been lately
proved against them by a most Learned Adversary. He proves it from S.
Augustine, than whom, Dr. Stlling. Unreason. of Separat. Part 3. S. 9.
none does more largely insist on this Argument in his Disputes against his
contemporary Donatists. I have also elsewhere shown, Second Letter against Mr.
Baxter. Sect. 53.
that even by the Principles of Ignatius, and others of the first Ages,
Presbyters were also also allowed the power of administering the Lord's Supper
by the Bishop's leave. What matter is it whether there were standing Altars in
the several places of such Administrations? Tho there had been none, it will
not thence follow that there were no different Assemblies. I have shown how
great multitudes might have communicated from the same Altar, See. Let. ib.
greater than could ordinarily meet in the same Assemblies, especially in such
times of Jealousy and Persecution. If these things be thus understood, as they
were understood by the Ancients, it is easy to foresee what little ground will
remain for our Adversaries Inferences.

WHAT then will remain further positive account of the true occasion and design
of the use of these Phrases, from whence we are to understand the meaning of
the Ecclesiastical Writers in using them, and may judge both of the Truth of
their Principles, and the solidity of the Inferences by them deduced from these
Principles in this matter, and may also judge how applicable these Reasonings
are to the Case of our present Non-conformists. When these things are cleared,
I know not what can be desired further for clearing the solidity of our present
Applications.

CHAP. I. The Solidity of the way of Reasoning from Jewish Precedents in these
very Instances of their Priesthood and Altar.
The Contents.
1. This way of Reasoning for Unity from one Altar, and one Priesthood was
deduced from the nearest and freshest memory of the Apostles. Sect. I. This
being granted will be sufficient to show that the condemnation of SCHISM on
these Principles must needs have been agreeable to the Sense of the Apostles
themselves: Sect. II. 2. This way of Reasoning is more likely to have been
taken up from Jewish Notions than Heathenish. Sect. III. How usual it was for
the Christians of that Age to reason from Jewish Precedents. Sect. IV. Used in
these very Particulars of their Priesthood and Altar, Chap. 1.
by S. Clemens Romanus. Sect. V. By S. Paul himself. Sect. VI. Used not only as
Arguments ad Homines, but as such as were really conclusive of the Things they
were designed to prove. Sect. VII.

reasoning for Unity from one Altar, and one Priest was not first taken up in
the later Ages of the Church, but deduced from the nearest and freshest memory
of the Apostles. Ignatius himself, who lived in their times, and was conversant
with them, and was by them made Bishop of Antioch, we see uses it. Had it been
taken up in Ecclesiastical Times, the Reasoning would rather have been from the
Terms that were more familiar and usual in the custom of the Church to others
that were less familiar, as from Principles more easily granted, and better
understood, by the vulgar. They would rather have proved the necessity of one
Priest from the necessity of one Bishop, because this later was in the later
usage of the Church, the much more usual name by which that Office was known.
That therefore they take the contrary way of Reasoning, it is a plain sign,
that when this Argument was first taken up, it was better known what was meant
by Priest and Altar, than what was meant by Bishop and Communion Table; and
that it was more easily granted, that the Unity of the Priesthood and Altar did
oblige to Unity of Communion, than that the Unity of the Bishop and Communion
Table did so. This way of Reasoning is plainly accommodated to the first
beginnings of Christianity, when the Duties of Christianity were rather to be
gathered from Concessions antecedent to Christianity, than to be recommended by
its own authority. Which Observation will withal add much to the Validity of
the Reasoning, that it was first taken up before the extraordinary Gifts of
Inspiration ceased, and in fresh memory of the Apostles themselves, upon the
first appearing of the Case of actual SCHISM.

BEFORE the Case of actual SCHISM it is unreasonable to expect express Censures
sin of SCHISM. And if immediately upon the first appearance of the Case, they
proceeded on these Principles in condemning it, and withal the Case appeared
before the memory of the Apostles Doctrine could have been forgotten; then it
will plainly follow that these were the Principles by which those earliest Ages
were directed, in judging concerning the sense of the Apostles. Either
therefore the Apostles left no certain Principles for preservation of Unity in
the Churches instructed by them, or we must suppose those Principles forgotten
in so short a distance of time; or we shall have reason to believe that these
were the Principles and Reasonings on which the Apostles themselves would have
proceeded in judging concerning this Case, if it had fallen out in their own
time, and they had thereupon been obliged to give their own judgment concerning
it. This Consequence will hold, tho the Apostles had delivered nothing
concerning it from express Revelation. For in such Cases the Providence of God
plainly supposed that other means of human Information were sufficient, when it
did not undertake to secure them from the errors of such Popular Reasonings,
especially where the Errors would have proved of so dangerous Consequence as
they must in such a Case as this concerning the obligation to Unity. But in
such a Case wherein the Apostles had been left to their own Reasonings, we see
it is usual for them to reason from Popular Notions received among the
Hellenistical Jews. And therefore all such Reasonings from Notions so received
in the Apostles times, must be granted to have been secure from actual Errors.
Whence it will further follow, that the Reasonings of the next Age from Notions
popularly received in the first Age, must have been the same; and therefore as
certain, as if they had been used by the Apostles themselves, thus unassisted
by actual Inspiration, and indeed as infallible as Inspiration it self, when
this was the only reason why Inspiration was not given them, because the
Inspirer thought these Reasonings sufficient without it to secure them from
actual Error, in such a Case wherein he was so obliged to secure them.

SECONDLY therefore I observe Reasoning was, as I said, taken from Notions
antecedent to Christianity; so much more probably from Judaism than Heathenism,
tho both of them had Altars and Priests among them. For Heathenism was a
Religion wholly condemned by the Christians, and therefore utterly unfit to
give any Authority to Reasonings for positive Constitutions. But Judaism was a
way of which the first Christians were always very cautious of speaking
dishonorably. Most of the first Converts were Jews by Nation, and still
retained a great reverence for the Constitutions of the Old Testament, and
therefore with them such Reasonings from Old Testament Precedents must have
been very prevalent. Besides the whole History of the New Testament Disputes,
S. James's Words are very full to this purpose, Act. 21.20 not to trouble my
self with naming more. Accordingly the first Converters utterly disowned any
design of abrogating the Law. Our Savior himself professed he came not to
destroy, S. Mat. 5.17. Luke 16.17^
but to fulfill it. And one principal inducement made use to bring them over to
the Christian Religion, was indeed, that Moses S. John 5.45.
in whom they trusted, had given Testimony to our Savior, that of him all the
Prophets Act. 10.43.
had born witness, etc. And therefore all the change they owned from the
Ancient Establishments, was not pretended to be from Judaism to another
Religion, but only from a Literal to a Mystical Judaism; from a Circumcision in
the Flesh, Ephesians. 2.11. Romans 2.28, 29.
to a Circumcision in the Spirit; from being the Seed of Abraham's Flesh, to
being the Seed of his Romans 4.1, 11.
Faith, which he had being yet uncircumcised. And this state of mystical
Judaism it self they prove from Testimonies of the Old Testament it self, as
proper to the New Covenant to be made with them in the later days, in that
(...) of which their so much expected Messiah was to be Prince. This they
performed so fully, as that upon the whole they made it appear, that the
Literal Judaism it self was only designed to shadow the Mystical as that which
was principally designed by the Holy Ghost, and the Sacred Writers themselves.

PURSUANT hereunto whatsoever Jews in their Disputation, they show that the
same also belonged to Christianity in a sense much more beneficial, tho
mystical, as indeed more proper to a state of mystical Judaism. Nor do they
only accommodate their own Constitutions to the ancient Predictions (that was
easier, tho there had been no relation between them) but they also reason from
them as often as they had any new occasion from the Controversies of that Age.
And considering the Principles they proceeded on, the Reasoning was indeed very
solid and prudent. For this being granted, that the things which befell the
Patriarchs, 1 Cor. 10.11.
happened to them as Ensamples, and were written for the Admonition of the Age
of the Apostles, upon whom the Ends of the World (so much spoken of by the
Prophets) were come; That whatsoever was written, was written designedly for
the instruction of those later Ages; That it was suitable to the way of
Prophecy to foretell and command by way of mystical Representations; That all
the external Worship of the Jews was designed by the Holy Ghost himself like so
many Prophetic Visions to represent and shadow the Duties of those in whose
times the Prophesies were to be fulfilled and understood; It was indeed as
proper and reasonable for them to infer their Duties from mystical
Interpretations of the Levitical Worship, as it was constant and customary for
Prophets to gather their own Duties from their own Visions, and from mystical
Interpretations of their own Visions, when together with the Visions themselves
the Interpretations were also revealed to them. However as to us, it may
suffice that these Principles are plainly supposed, and this way of Reasoning
plainly allowed and proceeded on in most of the Disputes of the New Testament,
not only for the Conviction of Adversaries, but for Information of themselves,
as the Reasonings on which the credit of Christianity it self was recommended
and received by most of the Converts of those Ages, as those upon which the
Apostles themselves believed it, as those which were suggested to them by that
Inspiration by which they were guided in their Preachings, and therefore must
have been solid, if any thing was so, I do not say in Christian, but in any
other sort of received Revelations.

I WILL not now digress to other Priesthood and the Altar, which are the more
immediate Subject of my present Discourse. Even these very Terms are mystically
applied to Christianity by Authors of Ignatius's Age, who notwithstanding wrote
before him, and particularly so applied when they had occasion to reason from
the Levitical Patterns to deduce Obligations under the Christian Religion. Thus
Clemens Romanus reasons to the Corinthians. From the budding of Aaron's Rod in
Testimony of the Divine Election of Aaron and his Posterity to the Priesthood,
Ep. 1. ad Corinth. Sect. 43, 44.
he proves the like Sacredness of the Episcopal Office among the Corinthians,
that the gifted Laics might not presume to take that Calling upon them without
the like Authority derived from Men empowered by God to give it them. Ib. Sect.
40.41.
From the Subordinations of the Temple, first of the High Priest, then of the
Ordinary Priests, then of the Levites, last of all of the People, he infers a
necessity of the like Subordination of the Corinthian Laity to their Bishops
and Deacons. From the set place and time of offering the Levitical Sacrifices
in the Temple, Ib. Sect. 48.
which it was piacular in any of them to transgress, he urges a like Duty of
observing the set times and places of Ecclesiastical Assemblies. How very
differently from our modern Adversaries, who are so far from admitting such
Consequences as these, as that, if any thing, even of Decency, or moral
Prudence, was observed under the Law, they immediately disclaim it as
Levitical, and, for no other Reason than it is having been observed then, decry
it is obligation under the Gospel.

YET not S. Clemens only (who yet Apostles mind than these men) but the Apostle
himself allows and observes the same Reasoning, and in the very same Instances
for which I am at present concerned of Priest and Altar. So he argues for the
Right of maintenance, That they who minister about holy things, live of the
things of the Temple; 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.
and they which wait at the Altar are partakers with the Altar. That even so
has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel. Plainly supposing that our Clergy answers the Levitical Priesthood, our
Churches their Temple, our Communion Table their Altar; and that what was
thought equal in their Case in the Provisions of the Old Testament is for that
very reason to be taken for ordained in the Case of the Gospel-Minisry. There
is no other Evangelical Ordinance so much as pretended for it in that whole
Chapter. If there had, there had been no need of so many Reasons to recommend
it. Yet this very Reasoning is rejected as Levitical in us by those Enthusiasts
who oppose the Right of this worldly maintenance. But so far is the Apostle
from their mind in this particular, as that he allows a higher obligation to
this way of arguing from the Precedent of the Levitical Priesthood. He reasons
from the Aaronical to the Melchizedechian Priesthood, from the Priesthood of
mortal men to the immortal Priesthood of the Son of God. Heb. 5.4, 5.
No man took the honor of the Levitical Priesthood unto himself, but he that
was called of God, as was Aaron. So also Christ glorified not himself to be
made an High Priest, etc. And every High Priest is ordained to offer Gifts and
Sacrifices. Heb. 8.3.
Wherefore it is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer. And as
none had Right to eat of the Jewish Altar but Israelites, so when he is to
prove that Literal Israelitism is not the Israelitism that can challenge
Privileges, he does it by this Argument, that We have an Altar whereof they
have no right to eat which serve the Tabernacle. Heb. 13.10.


Levitical Precedents in these very Instances. And if we consider what stress
was laid on such Arguments, there will be reason to believe them not only
prudent, ad homines, considering the Concessions of those with whom they had to
deal, but solid as to the Reasons of the Things themselves. They were the very
inducements upon which most of the Jews received their very Christianity (to
which they had been disposed before by the mystical Expositions of the Essens
and Hellenists, very soon after the Scriptures of the Old Testament had been
translated into the Greek, by the procurement of Philadelphus) and such
inducements as that it is probable many of them had never been converted, but
upon these Inducements. And these Jews were at first the only Converts, and
those who were made use of for the conversion of others. How requisite
therefore was it that the grounds on which themselves believed should be solid
and substantial? Besides Arguments ad homines are only made use of for a time,
till the person be disposed for better conviction, by receiving the whole
Systeme to which he is to be proselyted. Till then it may be prudent to reason
with him on Principles which he does at present more firmly believe, tho he has
less reason to do so, that he may not be confounded with too many Disputes at
first. But when upon a more through understanding of the Doctrine, he finds
those first Inducements either false or erroneous, his belief then of the same
Conclusion must be grounded thenceforward on Principles proper to the Systeme
to which he is converted. But these kind of Reasons we find made use of, not
only by Converts at first, but after their Conversion; not only by persons not
thoroughly instructed, but by such as were of greatest repute for their Skill in
Christianity, even by the Apostles themselves; not only in their Debates with
Unbelievers, but with them also who were Proficients in the Christian Religion.
Indeed these mystical Reasonings were thought properest for Proficients, as
appears by the Apostle's Digression, Heb. 5. from verse 11. to the beginning of
Chapter 7. where his whole Discourse concerning the backwardness of those he
writes to, is only to make way to show how unqualified they were for the
mystical Discourse that follows concerning Melchizedec. And it was the
Privilege (in the ordinary way of Instruction) to acquaint such as were
initiated in their Mysteries, with the fullest Discoveries of the true Designs
and Reality of Things. Besides the Apostles generally in their proofs of new
Discoveries, Act. 15.
in their Debates with each other, use this same way of mystical Reasoning, a
plain sign that even in those inspired Ages, it was more believed than the
Apostles themselves.

CHAP. II. The Solidity of the same Topic, as to the Principles of this Unity.
The Contents.
3. This way of Reasoning holds as to this particular Inference, That this one
Priesthood and one Altar ought now, as well as formerly, to be Principles of
Unity. 1. The Reasoning from Jewish Precedent to the State of Christianity
holds, tho not as to the same yet to the same in Proportion. Sect. I, II. 2. It
holds particularly in matters of Privilege. Sect. III. 3. As Unity is a
Privilege common to the Mystical and Literal Judaism, so the Proportional Way
of Reasoning holds also as to the Principles of that Unity. Sect. IV, V, VI.

Chap. 2.
4. The Unity intended to be proved by the Christians from this One Priesthood
and One Altar was that of an External Visible Communion. Sect. VII.

5. This Dispute was not between Individual Altars of the same Communion, but
between different Altars, as Notes of different Communions. Sect. VIII.

6. Therefore, by the One Priest the Ancients could not mean only Christ, nor
by the One Altar only an Invisible Communion with Him. Sect. IX.

THIRDLY therefore. As this way of Reasoning from Jewish Precedents is solid in
general, and solid in these very Instances of Priest and Altar; so it holds
particularly in such Inferences as these are, for which they Unity, That as the
One Priest and the One Altar were the Characterisms of Unity in the Jewish
Constitution; so that Priesthood and Altar among the Christians, which was
shadowed by the Jewish Priesthood and Altar, ought now also, by the same parity
of Reason, to be taken for the Characters of Christian Unity. For in this way
of reasoning from Prophetic Resemblances, tho the Reasoning do not hold, as it
does in other Precedents, that the Precedents and the things represented by
them must be of the same kind; Yet 1. There is a Reasoning that does hold as
solidly as in the other, and that is particularly in the Proportion between the
things represented by them in the Prophecy, and those which answer those
Representations in the Antitype. Thus the seven Ears of Corn and the seven Kine
in Pharaoh's Vision were indeed of different natures from the seven years of
Famine and Plenty that were represented by them; Genesis 41.30, 31.
but yet because the seven blasted Ears devoured the seven good Ears, and the
seven lean Kine devoured the seven fat ones, he thence gathers that the seven
years of Famine had much exceeded the overplus of the seven years of Plenty,
if it had not been discreetly managed. The like might have been shown in the
like reasonings from other Prophetic Visions, not only of the Scriptures, but
even of the Heathens themselves in their mystical Oracles, and, which were of
the same kind, in their Interpretations of Portentous Appearances (if it had
been needful to enlarge on it) that this was the constant and received way of
expounding, and reasoning from, these Symbolical Representations.

Perpetuity of Literal Judaism, as there is that the seven years of Famine and
Plenty must have been Ears of Corn, or Cows, or that the Persian and Macedonian
Monarchs in the Vision of Daniel must have been Rams and Goats. This very way
of reasoning it self supposes a difference in nature between the Types and
Antitypes. But yet the Correspondencies are still supposed the same.
Accordingly as it is supposed in the Reasonings of the New Testament, that all
matters of Privilege that were challenged by the Literal Jews did as properly
belong to the spiritual and mystical ones; so if Unity with God, and among
themselves, be one of these Privileges, this must also have been fore-shadowed
as belonging to the Christians.

Privilege to belong to the mystical Jews, that is, the Christians, in a higher
and more beneficial sense than to the Jews themselves, as far as the Truth it
self exceeds the most ingenious Representations* The Rest of Canaan was a Rest
from only forty years fatigue in the Wilderness, and from their Slavery in
Egypt, but ours is an eternal one, as far exceeding theirs as Heaven is beyond
Canaan, and the Slavery of Sin and the Devil exceeds that of Pharaoh. Their
Moses was only faithful as a Servant, our Jesus as a Son. Their Messiah was
expected as a Temporal Prince, Is. 9.
ours is also a Prince of the World to come. And notwithstanding their boasts
of Justification by the Law of Moses, Act. 13.3 9..
yet by our Savior we are justified from things from which we could not be
justified by the Law of Moses. And therefore the New Covenant of our mystical
Israelitism is said to be a better Covenant, and established on better
Promises, by the Author to the Hebrews. And he proves it to be so by this very
Argument, Heb. 8.6.
that the Law having been only a shadow of good things to come, Heb. 10.1.
and not the very Image of the things themselves, could not make the comers
thereunto perfect, plainly supposing that the Gospel which does that which the
Law could not, in making the comers thereunto perfect, must therefore give the
originals of those things of which the Law gave only the Shadows and
Resemblances. Thus as the original Archetypal Ideal Beings are called the true
Beings in the Language of the Platonists, whose Notions are generally alluded
to in the New Testament; so the true Beings are still supposed to perform their
Office to more beneficial purpose than their Representations. The true Bread
given by Christ gives a more solid Nourishment than Manna, which was given to
the Patriarchs in the Wilderness. S. John 6.49, 50, 51, 58.
They died that were fed with that, but the Bread which came down from Heaven
was such, as that a man might eat thereof, and not die, but live for ever. He
that drunk of Jacob's Well was likely to thirst again, S. John 4.13, 14.
but he that drunk of the Water which Christ was to give him, was never to
thirst more. And accordingly the Unity belonging to the Mystical Israelitism of
Christianity must be so far from falling short of that Unity of the Jews, as
that, in order to the ends designed by this Unity, it must be more effectual
and substantial than that of the Jews themselves. Whence it will follow, that
as the benefits are greater which are gained by this Unity, so the loss must
also be greater, which is incurred by this Separation, and consequently the
obligation must be greater to adhere to our mystical Priests and Altars now,
than that was whereby the Jews were obliged to adhere to the Levitical Priest
and Altar. I shall not yet compare them, till I have first explained the Unity
of the Jewish Church derived from their Priest and Altar.

THIRDLY therefore, as this Unity in general is the common Privilege of the
Literal and mystical Judaism, but in a more beneficial sense proper to the
mystical; so the Reasoning will especially hold in the Principles of it, That
as the Unity of the Jews was derived from their one Priest and one Altar, so
the Unity of Christians must be derived the same way from what is answerable to
the Priest and Altar among them. For this Proportion was the main thing that
was argumentative in Prophetical Resemblances. As in the instance now
mentioned, because the seven blasted Ears devoured the seven good ones, and the
seven lean Cows the seven fair ones, yet so that neither the blasted Ears, nor
the lean Cows were in appearance better for having devoured the full Ears, and
the well-favoured Cows; Joseph thence concludes, that the abundance of the
Years of Plenty would have made no appearance in the extremity of the Dearth,
if the Fruits of the plentiful Years had not been wisely ordered by a provident
forecast and frugal management. This being no otherwise revealed to him but by
his own Reasoning from Pharaoh's Dream, so that Joseph himself owns, that it
was to Pharaoh that God had made the Revelation what himself intended to do in
that particular, Genesis 41.25.
his whole Reasoning is manifestly grounded on this general Supposition, that
the same proportion which was between the blasted and fair Ears, and the lean
and fat Cows in the Dreams, should also be between the years of Famine and
Plenty in the Event, so that this is plainly supposed as an undoubted Maxim in
such Reasonings. NOW it is plain that this Divination by Dreams, where truly
Divine, was one way of Prophecy, and that this Symbolical Theology, (as the
supposed Areopagite calls it, from the Platonists) was the proper way of God's
conversing with men; and therefore here it is as natural and proper to reason
from Symbolical Representations, as it is to Reason from Literal Expressions in
dealing with Men. Especially considering that, in the Case I am speaking of,
these Symbols of the Law were purposely fitted to represent their Antitypes
under the Gospel; and so fitted as that they, who should live in those later
days, when those Prophecies concerning mystical Judaism were to be fulfilled,
might know their own Duty, and within what Bounds they were to confine their
Innovations according to the ancient Predictions concerning them, that is, how
far such Innovations were agreeable to the mind of God in his ancient
Predictions. THUS it is plain that they understood God, and thus it is most
agreeable designed to be understood by them, that they might not be misled in
so understanding him. But in the Particulars for which I am concerned at
present there were yet more particular Presumptions that this indeed was God's
Design. For as it was not to be doubted that God designed Unity for the
Mystical, as well as the Literal Israel, so he would certainly have been more
express in the signification of his mind, if he had intended any change in the
Principles of this Unity. But seeing there appears not the least intimation of
such a design, seeing he was pleased to continue a mystical Priesthood, and a
mystical Altar in the Mystical, as well as the Literal, Israel. Who would not
thence conclude that he intended the mystical Priesthood and Altar should still
be the Principles of Unity to the mystical Israel, as the Literal Priesthood
and Altar had formerly been to the Literal? And seeing the very Terms of Priest
and Altar were not the proper Language of the New Testament, why should they be
used at all, but only to signify that they were equivalent under the New
Testament with those things which had properly born their Names under the Old,
and were to perform the same Office? Thus it appears that this way of Reasoning
holds particularly in this Case concerning Unity. I now proceed in my intended
Method.

FOURTHLY therefore, it is Primitive Christians was plainly designed to
characterize a visible external Communion, and a visible external Unity,
distinct from other divided Societies or Assemblies of Heretics and
SCHISMATICS. This is plain in the Disputes of Ignatius, which are plainly
designed against such as baptized or celebrated their Agapae, or Communion, Ep
ad Smyrn. Sect. 7.
without the Altar of the Bishop, or did any thing relating to their
Ecclesiastical Assemblies without his Authority. And so in all the Disputes of
S. Cyprian, whether with Felicissimus, or the Novatians, these Arguments are
used against them who acted separately from the Bishop, in receiving Penitents,
or rejecting them, as the Novatians, which were Acts of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, or in setting up Anti-Bishops within a Jurisdiction already
Canonically possessed. And therefore their design against such Adversaries as
these were, must have been to show that the Bishop's Altar, in opposition to
those Separate Altars, was the one Altar, and the Bishop himself that One
Priest, which were to be the Principles of Catholic Unity, in order to the
proving all them divided, who were not in Communion with the Bishop.

AND fifthly, this Dispute was not between Individual Altars of the same
Communion, but between different Altars as Notes of different Communions.
Ignatius, as he blames them who officiated without the Bishop's consent, so he
expressly grants the Validity of that Eucharist which was administered either by
the Bishop, or by him to whom the Bishop permitted it. Ep. ad Smyrn. ib.
In vain therefore does Mr. Mede gather from hence, that there was then only
one Communion Table in the Bishop's House. In vain does Mr. Baxter, that the
Multitude of the Church consisted in one Congregation, which could meet
constantly in the same place. This was utterly impertinent to the Disputes of
those times. They were all of one Altar, who were of one Communion, from how
many Tables soever they communicated, and they only belonged to a different
Altar, and set up Altar against Altar, who owned a different Communion. This
was plainly all which they were obliged to mean by the interest of those
Disputes.

AND therefore sixthly, by the One those Ancients could not mean only Christ,
nor by the One Altar, only an invisible Communion with him. This would have
been as confidently, and as unconfutably, pretended to by their Adversaries, if
their own confident Affirmations must have been allowed to pass for Arguments.
When therefore they used these Topics as argumentative to Adversaries, their
meaning must have been and was that the means of communicating with Christ the
invisible Priest, was by communicating with him that was visible, and the means
of partaking of the invisible Altar, was also by partaking of that which was
visible, and consequently that they who were not in external Communion with the
Bishop, could not partake of the invisible Bread, nor the invisible Priesthood.
So Ignatius expressly makes disrespect to the (...). Ep. ad Magn. Sect. 3.
visible Bishop to redound to the invisible, and makes him to be deprived of
the (...). Ep. ad Ephesians. Sect. 5.
Bread of God who does not partake of the Communion of the Bishop. This way of
reasoning was pertinent to their design, this was actually used by them.
Whether consequently to the Jewish Notions alluded to, will best appear when we
have first explained what those Notions were. If it were so, it will then
appear, from the Principles already laid down, that it must have been cogent
and solid.

CHAP. III. How far the Jews were confined to the Use of One Altar. Application
to Mr. Baxter.
The Contents.
The Jews expressly confined to One Altar, which Josephus understands as a
Preservative of Unity. Sect. I. But 1. This One Altar was only for Public
Assemblies of the whole Nation. Sect. II. 2. This did not hinder other Places
for Religious Assemblies. Sect. III. 3. This did not hinder Altars of Memorial
in other Places. Chap. 3.
Sect. IV.4. This did not altogether make the Use of other Places and Altars
Unlawful, even for Sacrifices. Prophets might, and did ordinarily use them.
Sect. V. They seem to have been allowed for their Ordinary Sacrifices which did
not require Assemblies of their whole Nation. Sect. VI.VII.

I PROCEED therefore to show Jewish Notions concerning this Matter, I mean
those which were received among them in the first beginnings of Christianity.
And the first thing of these that was insisted on, was the Unity of their
Altar. In their first establishment by Moses they were confined to one place
for the offering of all their Public Sacrifices, Deuteronomy. 12.11, 12, 13, 14. This
Josephus, by whom we may judge of the sense of the Jews of that age,
understands thus: (...). Ant. L.IV. c. ult. p. 121. C.
He plainly understands it as a prohibition of other Altars, and that for this
very Reason of Unity. One reason indeed is the Unity of their God, which does
not take away the Use, but only the Obligation of using several Altars. The
same God was oftentimes worshipped in several Nations, Vide Falconer de Number.
Apamens.
and several places, and under several Denominations, and on account of several
Virtues, with several Altars. But where the Deities were different, there they
were not to be worshipped at the same Altars, unless it were for some peculiar
reason agreed on by their Divines, as in the Cases of the Pantheon, of the
twelve Gods, the Dioscuri, Pluto and Proserpine, and the Cabiri, etc. And this
was a thing which they, who were newly come out of Egypt, had need to be
particularly warned of, where every Nomos had a distinct Deity, and those
things were deified in some places which were abhorred in others, which
accordingly kept them in perpetual rancors and animosities against one another.
Vide Juvenal. Sat.
And the Polytheism, they were in danger of from their Idolatrous Neighbors,
included multitudes of Gods, not only for Hills, 1 King. 20.23.28.
but for Valleys; not only for Nations, but Jer. 2.28. Is. 36.18, 19.
Cities; not only for Cities, but Ezekiel. 16.24, 31.
Streets, etc. And therefore even this Reason of their having only one God
common to their whole Nation would not only prevent all necessary Obligation to
multiply Altars to him, but make it prudent to forbid them, lest their very
multiplying Altars to their one God should look like an acknowledgment of many
Gods in their Practice, at least, might give too plausible a pretense to them
who were otherwise of themselves so very inclinable, as we see they were, to
Polytheism.

THE other Reason is, because the Hebrews themselves were but one Nation,
several Altars had made and signified their being distinct Nations in
extraction. Before I come to show how this One Altar was a Constitutive of
Unity, I shall first consider in what sense the Altar it self was only One, and
to what extent it did unite. Therefore this Altar was indeed for Assemblies.
There was but one public Altar in the whole Nation, before which all the clean
Males were to assemble thrice every year. But these Assemblies Mr. B. I suppose
himself will grant to exceed the care of any single Priest. How then can he
barely from the name of one Altar infer that the Christian Assemblies united by
it were no greater than such as could ordinarily communicate at the same Table,
and partake of the personal Ministry of the same Priest? Was it not much easier
for great Multitudes to receive inconsiderable pieces of Bread from the same
Table than it was for them to make a solemn Feast on Sacrificed Beasts from the
same Altar?

One Altar at Shiloh or Jerusalem did not hinder their Assembling within their
own Tribes, and their Assembling for Religion, and their having stated places
appointed for such Assemblies elsewhere besides Jerusalem. They had their
Synagogues and Proseuchae, and Houses of God, as they called them, in
Multitudes, and in several places of the Land, for exercise of the Morals of
their Religion, for hearing the Law and Prophets read and explained to them,
and for Prayer, and for solemnizing their Ordinary Festivals of their New Moons
and Sabbaths. If Mr. B. will call them Chapels of Ease because they were not
permitted in them the use of their more public Sacrifices, they will then more
exactly answer our Diocesan Parishes. However this will plainly show that to be
true which he thinks so strange, that the same multitudes which were united in
the Diocesan Altar, might notwithstanding be subdivided into several
Congregations under particular Priests, for their more convenient management,
tho such private Priests had not been allowed the power of Altar Discipline any
where but in the presence of their Bishop.

3. THIS One Altar at Jerusalem did Altars of Memorial in other places. There
was an Altar to be built at Mount Ebal by Moses's express Command, Deuteronomy. 27.4,
5. with the Law of Deuteronomy inscribed on it. Jos. 8.31.32.
And when it was known that the Altar of the Tribes beyond Jordan was not
designed for Sacrifices, but only for a Memorial of their Relation to their
Brethren in Palestine, no further offense was taken at it. Jos. XXII.23, 26,
27, 28, 29. This was indeed one of the most ancient designs of Altars, that
when any one had received any singular favor from God, he erected an Altar
with an Inscription in the place where he had received it, as a remaining
Monument of the Favor so received, and the shape of an Altar was best fitted
for receiving such Inscriptions. Tho therefore it should be proved, as it
cannot, that the Eucharist was celebrated only at the Bishops Altar. Yet in the
subdistinguished Charges there might have been Monuments of their Relation to
the common Altar of the Bishop.

One Altar in the public place of their Anniversary Assemblies make it utterly
unlawful, even to offer Sacrifices in other places, and on other Altars:
Holocausts and Peace Offerings were, by Moses's express command, to be offered
at the forementioned place of Mount Ebal. Nor do the Jews deny but Prophets
might, and did erect Altars, and offer Sacrifices in other places besides that
of the general Assemblies. So Samuel sacrificed at Mizpah, 1 Samuel VII.9. and in
Zuph, IX.5. and in Gilgal, XI.15, where he had also sacrificed the second time,
if Saul had not prevented him, XIII.8, 9. and at Bethlehem, XVI.5. And after
the strictest confinement of the public Worship, when the Temple was built,
yet even then Elijah sacrifices at Mount Carmel, 1 Kings XVIII.19, etc. I know
the modern Jews pretend that Prophets had a Privilege of breaking positive
Commands of this kind, and instance particularly in this of Elijah. No doubt
they might in some things for which they pretended particular extraordinary
Inspiration. But this we find they did frequently as they had occasion, without
the least scruple. And as Prophets in those times, when they had their ordinary
Schools and Colleges, were not to be looked on as extraordinary Officers, so
neither are they to be supposed to have acted extraordinarily in what they did
easily and frequently. Besides the Dissolution of their Union was in truth a
thing of greater consequence than the belief of any particular persons
pretenses to Inspiration. As therefore the Prophet himself would for that
reason alone have been judged a false Prophet, if he had endeavored to
persuade them to a Departure from their Law, so there is little reason to doubt
but that he would have been thought so too, if he had endeavored a Dissolution
of their Unity.

BUT to let the Case of these Prophets clean Males were to appear personally at
Jerusalem, there were also other Sacrifices appointed by the Law of God,
wherein the Public were also concerned. Such were those of the daily
Sacrifices, of the Sabbaths, and of the New Moons. Must we therefore think that
they who were at a distance from Jerusalem thought themselves unconcerned in
those Sacrifices? Number. 28.
It is no way probable that they did so. That question of the Shunamite's
Husband, (what she had to do with the Prophet, 2 King. 4.24.
seeing it was neither New Moon, nor Sabbath?) plainly implies, that on such
occasions it was customary for devout persons to attend the Prophets. And what
could it be for, if not to partake of their Sacrifices? Their private Devotions
required not the presence of any such person. The Reading of the Law and the
Prophets seems not to have been any part of the Synagogue-Worship, till after
the Captivity. If it had, it is hardly imaginable how the Pentateuch would have
so miscarried as it did from the time of Manasseh to Josiah. How successful
soever Manasseh might have been in suppressing it in his own Dominions, yet he
could not do it in Samaria. The Instances already produced, show that the
Prophets did ordinarily sacrifice, and yet I believe one instance cannot be
produced that ever they did so in Jerusalem. Besides, for the New Moons, it was
David's excuse to Saul for his absence, that he was invited to a public
Sacrifice for his whole Family in Bethlehem, 1 Samuel XX.5, 6, 29. It seems then
it was usual for Families to have their proper Sacrifices in their own Cities,
and that the New Moons which were otherwise appointed by God, were particularly
pitched on for that purpose. This was also usual among the Heathens. Live. Lib.
V. Valor. Max. vid. G^ther* de Jur. Pont. III.17.IV.6.
The Story is famous of Fabius Dorsuo, who, while the Galls besieged the
Capitol, ventured through them in his Cinctus Gabinus, to perform these
Solemnities of his Family in the Collis Quirinalis, and was suffered by those
Barbarians to return to the Capitol without any violence offered to him. IT is
very well known Sacrifices were offered in the high places by persons otherwise
creditable, and of good Authority; without the least reproof, whilst they kept
their due subordination to the places of their general Assemblies. And
considering that all the Flesh to be eaten by them was to be sacrificed, as a
Learned Person has very well observed, Dr. Cudworth Tru^ Not. of the Lord's
Supper.
and that it was allowed them to eat Flesh in their other Cities; it plainly
follows that they must have been allowed to sacrifice them there also. And when
ever we find the permission of these Sacrifices in the high places reprehended
as an imperfection in the good Kings; yet it is never reprehended so severely
as to deprive them of a good Character, who were guilty of no higher crimes
than this permission. And therefore certainly this offering of those Sacrifices
in other places which were not proper for the three Solemnities, but agreeable
to those times wherein they were not obliged to be Personally present in
Jerusalem, was never taken for a crime of that nature as to cut them off from
their Union with the People of God. If so, then, by this way of Reasoning,
there might also have been many Altars, under the one Altar of the Bishop
without any danger to that Catholic Unity which was derived from the One Altar.

CHAP. IV. Independence of any other Altar on their National Altar was by the
Jews condemned as inconsistent with their Unity. Proved from Instances of
Altars so condemned.
The CONTENTS.
The only thing which the Jews thought inconsistent with their Unity, as
derived from One Altar, was the erecting an Altar owning no dependence on the
National Altar, or Rivalling it in its Prerogatives as a National one. Sect. I.
Enquiry into the Particulars so condemned. That of the Tribes beyond Jordan.
Jos. XXII. Sect. II.III.IV. Those of Jeroboam. Sect. V.VI.VII.

WHAT is it then that was Jews, with their Unity as derived from one Altar? I
cannot find that any other Altar was thought to be so but such a one as
rivalled the Altar in the place of their public Assemblies, that is, that
owned no dependence on it, that challenged the peculiar Prerogatives of that
Altar, their three Anniversary Assemblies, their first Fruits, and first born,
their Tithes and Vows, and Sacrifices on such occasions as were thus
appropriated to such a particular place, on account of its being the place
appointed by God himself for his One Altar, whatsoever Altar did rival that one
Altar in these things, that was indeed reputed an Altar against that Altar,
that cut them off from their dependence on that one Altar, and did so far
disunite them from continuing to be one People.

Fact that were condemned on this account, and then show the Reasons why they
condemned those Facts from the Principles of that Age. The first Fact that was
condemned on this account was the Altar of the Reubenites and Gadites and the
half Tribe of Manasseh, Jos. XXII.
immediately upon their dismission by Joshua. This we see was looked on as a
Crime of a very high nature, and as a great affront to their received Religion,
that the other Tribes thought themselves obliged on a Religious Account, to
punish it by a War. And the best means to know what it was that was thus
severely blamed in it, will be to see how it was charged, and how it was
defended. It was charged with a design of rebelling against the Lord, Verse 16.
It is charged with a departure from the Lord, and from the Fellowship of their
Brethren. So the vulgar Latin: Tantum ut a Domino, and a nostro consortio, non
recedatis aedificato altari praeter altar Domini Dei nostri. Verse 19. Here it
is plainly charged with a dissolution of Unity, and that both of their Unity
with God, and with his People. This therefore was the Crime from which those
other Tribes were concerned to purge themselves. And how do they do it? They
deny that their Altar was intended for Burnt Offering or Sacrifice. Verse 26.
And how far that Reason went for their Purgation, and of what Sacrifices they
principally designed it, may better be gathered from their following Words,
Verse 27, But it shall be a witness between us and you, and between our
generations after us, to execute the service of the Lord before him in our
burnt offerings, and in our Sacrifices, and in our Peace Offerings, and that
your children should not say to our children in time to come, ye have no part
in the Lord, 28. Therefore said we, if so be that they should so say to us, or
to our generations in time to come, then will we Answer, Behold the fashion of
the Altar of the Lord, which our Fathers made, not for burnt offering, nor for
Sacrifice, but it is a witness between us and you. And they conclude in
detestation of the Charge: Verse 29. God forbid that we should rebel against
the Lord, and turn this day from the Lord, to build an Altar for burnt
offering, or for meat offering, or for sacrifice, save the Altar of the Lord
our God that is before his Tabernacle.

THEIR Reasoning is plainly this. Assemblies and Sacrifices before the Ark,
which was then in Shiloh. They profess that this was so far from their design
as that their meaning was only to assert their Right to that common Altar of
the Jewish Nation, that in time to come they might not be excluded from their
Sacrifices. That plainly was the meaning of those words, ye have no part in
they part in the Lord, to deny their Right of partaking in their common
Sacrifices. And of what Sacrifices could these be understood but of those which
were offered in the portions of the other Tribes, from whence it might
otherwise have been in their power to exclude them? This they asserted by
preserving among themselves a Copy of the Altar which was before the
Tabernacle. So it appears that the Altars of different Deities were of
different Shapes, and that by owning the shape of the Altar of the God of
Israel they signified that he was the God to whom their Devotions were
designed, and with whom they pretended to communicate in their Sacrifices. And
herein consisted the difficulty of doubling their Altar in the Oracle given to
the Delians. Th^^n. Smyrn. Matthew. Pl^ton. c. 1.
If they had not been confined to the same shape, they need not have consulted
Plato concerning it. So when Moses was to make his Altar, as well as the rest
of the Utensils of the Tabernacle, it seems plainly to imply, in that way of
mystical Reasoning which was designed, that by his Altar they might expect to
partake of the invisible Ideal Altar, Philo de Temulent. p. 260.
and consequently of Communion with God himself. And this I take to be the sin
of Ahaz, in taking a Copy of the Altar at Damascus, 2 Kings XVI.10, 11, etc.
That in Copying the Altar he professed an approbation and Communion with those
Syrian Idolaters. This therefore was the way taken by Onias in his Temple at
Heliopolis. That he might avoid the imputation of SCHISM he Copyed his Altar
from the Altar at Jerusalem, as we shall observe hereafter. This Copy therefore
of the Altar at Shiloh signified their challenging a Right in those Assemblies
and Sacrifices which were there to be observed. Nay, to take of all pretense of
being hindered by this new Altar from the participating in the Assemblies and
Sacrifices of Shiloh, they profess further that they intended it for no
Sacrifices at all, not even those that were offered daily, nor on their
Sabbaths, or New Moons. So far they were from pretending it for those
Anniversary Ones which required their Attendance at Shiloh. In all which
Apologies they plainly suppose that this Use of their Altar that had broken
them off from their attendance on the Altar and Tabernacle of Shiloh, had
indeed been the Case that had made them justly obnoxious to the charge, of
having an Altar praeter Altar, of having an Altar save the Altar of the Lord
their God that was before the Tabernacle, and of dividing from God and from the
Communion of their Brethren.

THAT this was the true state of reason intimated by the other Tribes whereby
they were brought into this suspicion. Notwithstanding, Verse 19.
if the land of your possession be unclean, then pass ye over unto the land of
the possession of the Lord, wherein the Lord's Tabernacle dwells, and take
possession among us: but rebel not, etc. The reason as it should seem that made
the Ten Tribes suspect that their Brethren intended this Altar for the public
Sacrifices and Assemblies on their side Jordan was, that they took the land of
their own possession to be unclean, and that their design in erecting this new
Altar was to cleanse it. In this supposition, they offer them a better
expedient as they conceived, that they should rather come over to their own
Land, which they call the Possession of the Lord, as acknowledged clean on both
sides, than take that undue way of sanctifying what they enjoyed already on the
other side of Jordan. But private Altars were not thought sufficient to
sanctify the Land. If so, that same Land of Canaan had been holy long before
it was conquered by Joshua; for Abraham and the other Patriarchs had sacrificed
there whilst it was yet possessed by the Canaanites. The Wilderness had also
been holy, where Moses sacrificed after the Victory over Amalek. It was
therefore a public Altar alone erected by the present possessors of the Land
that could properly be said to sanctify it, and for such a one they took that
of which I am at present discoursing. It was erected by the whole Body of the
Possessors of those parts before they dispersed themselves, immediately after
their return from helping their Brethren in Canaan; not by any one single
Tribe, much less for the Rites of a single Family. It was also greater than
ordinary. So the Text notes that it was a great Altar to see to: Verse 10. From
thence they might conjecture that it was designed for the extraordinary
Sacrifices of their Anniversary Assemblies, to excuse them from their
Anniversary Attendance. This very Story plainly shows that they were already
disunited in their secular Government. If they had also been made thus
independent in Religion also, this had indeed so disunited them, as that they
would not any longer have looked like one Nation.

THE next instances of Altars erected against the public Altar were those of
Jeroboam against the Altar of Jerusalem. These were plainly designed to cut off
the ten Tribes of his own Kingdom from their correspondence with Jerusalem. The
reason inducing him to it was, lest, by their frequent Journies thither on
occasion of the three Anniversaries, they should contract a dangerous
correspondence and friendship with the Kings of the Lineage of David, in whose
Dominions the public Altar was, and, for a love of their Religion, and to make
their Journey more easy, they should be tempted to revolt from him to their
former Master. 1 Kings XII.27. This appears also from the reason pretended by
him, why he did so, to the People, Verse 28. It is too much for you to go up to
Jerusalem: behold thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of
Egypt. It was plainly to discourage them from going up to Jerusalem that he
made use of this pretense of the troublesomeness of their Journeys, so far, and
so frequently. And accordingly he fits his pretended Expedients. To ease them
of the length of their Journies, he appoints them two places instead of that
one, and both of them in the opposite Frontiers of his own Kingdom, Dan in the
Northern, and Bethel in the Southern Parts, that so none might have occasion to
go out of his Kingdom, on account of their Worship in their Anniversary
Assemblies, nor yet be obliged to so long Journies within it as formerly. The
distance was less to two places, I mean to the choice of either of them, than
it would have been to any one, and yet more convenient in the Borders than in
any other situation. By that means it came to pass that none of them could come
at Jerusalem, but he must pass by one of them at a more convenient distance
from his own abode. And for avoiding the same pretended trouble of the
Anniversaries, he reduces the three to only one, like unto the Feast that was
in Judah, which makes me more inclinable to think that it ought not to be
understood of the eighth Month, as our present Copies have it, but of the
seventh, Verse 32, Ant. VIII.2. Gr. 8. Lat.
33. and particularly of the Feast of Tabernacles. So Josephus read and
understood in the Copies of his time. Why should he cut off two of their
Anniversaries, and yet pitch so punctually on the third of them for the time of
his own Assemblies, if his design had not been, as I said, particularly to cut
off their dependence on Jerusalem in this very particular point of their
Anniversary Sacrifices and Assemblies? These were his Innovations concerning
the Altar. As to the Priesthood, he changed that also from the Family of Aaron,
and the Tribe of Levi, and the Rules of the Law, by that means making them also
independent on the High Priesthood of Jerusalem.

BY this explication of his Case it Reasoning of Abijah against him. I meddle
not with those particulars of his Discourse wherein he charges him with
Idolatry, but those wherein he charges him with these Innovations also
concerning the Law. He plainly challenges the Privileges of the Segullah to his
own Kingdom, the Metropolis whereof was Jerusalem. Accordingly he tells them
that God was on their side for their Captain, and that fighting against his own
Party was fighting against the Lord God of their Fathers. And behold God
himself is with us for our Captain, and his Priests with sounding Trumpets, 2 Chronicles. XIII.12.
to cry all arm against you: O Children of Israel, fight ye not against the
Lord God of your Fathers, for ye shall not prosper. And in this reasoning he
concludes this peculiar presence of God which was proper to the Segullah from
the presence of his Priests, and the Orderlyness of their Ministration. So he
reasons, Verse 10. As for us, the Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken
him, and the Priests which minister unto the Lord are the Sons of Aaron, and
the Levites wait upon their business. V. 11. And they burn unto the Lord, etc.
for we keep the charge of the Lord our God, but ye have forsaken him. And this
charge against Jeroboam of having forsaken God he manages also on the same
Principles, Verse 9, Have ye not cast out the Priests of the Lord, the Sons of
Aaron, and the Levites, etc. So that in this way of Reasoning, keeping united
with the Priesthood, is the same with not having forsaken God, and disuniting
from them is the same with having forsaken him; and they who keep thus united
can call the Lord their own God, but they who had thus forsaken him could not
call him so. He is only said to be the God of their Fathers. This touches the
very point of the Segullah, their being God's peculiar People, and God's being
peculiarly their God rather than of any other People. If therefore this
Privilege was forfeited by their discession from God's Priesthood, by their
being disunited from God himself in such a sense as this; it plainly follows
that this Priesthood must have been taken for a Bond of their Union with God,
and each other, as they were a Sacred Society, and entitled to Sacred
Privileges.

THE like account of this design of Jeroboam is given by the Author of the
Greek Book of Tobit, tho much obscured by the Latin, I know not whether I
should call him, Paraphrast, or Epitomator. Either name will better agree to
him than that of a Translator. He calls the sin of the ten Tribes of Jeroboam's
Kingdom an Apostasy, (...), etc. Chap. 1 V. 4. And again, (...), etc. Verse 5.
Apostasy from the House of Jerusalem plainly implies a duty of subjection to
that House. The true notion of the Word is to signify a revolting. And wherein
that revolting consisted appears by what Tobit himself is said to have done,
which was not done by the Revolters. (...), Verse 6. The Privileges therefore
of the Temple consisted in the obligation that lay on the whole Nation to come
thither on the Solemn Festivals, and to bring thither their First Fruits, and
Tithes, and the First Fleeces of their Sheep. These were the (...). These
things he had been taught by his Grandmother Deborah, Verse 7. and accordingly
he reckons them as Apostates, who did not join with him in such performances.
This account we have from one of the most ancient Hellenists now extant. In
this SCHISM of Jeroboam here were Altars erected against the One Altar in
Jerusalem, and a Priesthood independent on the Priesthood in Jerusalem; but as
yet no mention of the One Priest requisite as a Constitutive of Unity as well
as of the One Altar.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Samaritan Temple and Altar and Priesthood, together
with other Temples and Altars.
The CONTENTS.
The Unity of the Priesthood first insisted on by the Jews in their Disputes
against the Samaritans. Sect. I. Our Savior himself declared himself against
the Samaritans. Sect. II, III. This Case of the Samaritans happening after the
Old Testament Scriptures, is, for that Reason, more applicable to the Times of
the Gospel. Sect. IV. The Samaritans not excluded from the Name and Privileges
of true Israelites, on account of the falsehood of their pretenses to
Israelitish Extraction. Sect. V. The true ground of those false Pretenses.
Sect. VI. Nor on account of their Idolatry. Sect. VII, VIII. The true State of
that Controversy explained from the Words of the Woman of Samaria. Sect. IX.
The History of the Occasion of that Difference. Sect. X.XI. The Right of the
One Priesthood referred, on both sides, to be decided by Succession. Sect. XII.
The Altar of Ahaz. Sect. XIII. The Altar and Temple of Onias in Heliopolis.
Sect. XIV. Not SCHISMATICALLY designed by him. Sect. XV.XVI. Nor did it prove
SCHISMATICAL in the Event. Sect. XVII. No SCHISMATICAL Succession to the High
Priesthood kept up there. Sect. XVIII. How far this instance went to the
justifying the Primitive Christians in reference to the Jews. Sect. XIX. The
other Jewish Temples mentioned by Onias Idolatrous. Sect. XX.XXI.XXII.

THE first mention I think of One as well as of One Altar, in the Disputes
concerning SCHISM, among the Jews, was I think, in that famous one of the
Samaritans. This was indeed freshest in the memories of the first Converts from
Judaism to Christianity, and therefore most probable to have been regarded in
the use of these Reasonings that were derived from Jewish Notions. Tho the
Temple of the Samaritans was destroyed by Hyrcanus within about two hundred
years after it was first built, and with it, no doubt, Josep. Ant.
their Altar, and the Succession of their Anti-Priests, which would by no means
be permitted them after they were Subjects to the Jews; yet the animosities
continue to this very day, and were particularly extremely high at the
beginning of Christianity. That the Samaritans had no Dealings with the Jews
appears from the words of the Woman of Samaria, S. Joh. IV.
and she mentions it on occasion of a very small request indeed of our Savior
from her, only that of a draught of cold Water. And another time our Savior
could get no Lodging in a Village of the Samaritan Jurisdiction, Luke IX.52, 53.
for no other provocation but that they thought him traveling toward
Jerusalem. And when the Jews tell our Savior that he was a Samaritan, and had
a Devil, we see they used it as a name of the greatest reproach with the vulgar.

ACCORDINGLY our Savior and the Apostles had occasion to declare Our Savior
himself, in his Dispute with the Woman of Samaria, tells her that Salvation was
of the Jews. S Joh. IV.22.
The Salvation there spoken of was in all likelihood that which was expected
from the Messiah, who was to be a Prince Act V 31.
and a Savior, and was therefore called Mat. I.21, 23.
Emanuel, God with us, because he was to save his People from their Sins. When
therefore he appropriates this Salvation to the Jews, his meaning was most
probably this, that whereas the Samaritans as well as the Jews, did pretend to
the privilege of being God's only People, God himself would declare it against
them. The Messiah who was promised to the true Israel of God, should not come
of the Samaritans, but of the Jews, who should also alone be partakers of that
Salvation of which he was to be Author as Messiah to a particular People. That
the Messiah, who was to be of the Stock of God's Israel, was to be a Jew by
extraction, plainly confuted the Samaritan pretense of themselves being alone
the true Israel, exclusively to the Jews. That the benefit of his Salvation,
which was at first appropriated to the Israelites till they were cast off from
being the Segullah by God himself, should be also proper to the Jews,
understood in contradistinction to the Samaritans, plainly implies that the
Samaritans were to be excluded out of the number of his People which were to be
saved by the Messiah. What is this but plainly to deny any interest they could
challenge in any relation to the Segullah, of being either the People of God,
exclusively to others, or being any part of his People, whilst they continued
in their own Faction?

SO also upon other occasions, he Samaritans with those who were no part of the
People of God. When the ten Lepers were cleansed, none returned to give him
thanks but one of them who was a Samaritan. Thereupon our Savior himself makes
this Observation: Were there not ten cleansed? Lu. XVII.17, 18.
But where are the nine? There are not found that returned to give Glory to
God, save this Stranger. The word is not (...) only, but (...), one of another
People, and Extraction, one that was a Stranger to the Covenant of Promise, as
the Apostle expresses it on another occasion, in the Language of the Jews
concerning all who were not of the Segullah. And therein indeed consists the
aggravation of the ingratitude of those who did not return, that a person who
was not of the People of the God of Israel, and who could not call that God his
in so peculiar a regard as they could, should notwithstanding be more thankful
for a benefit received from him than they who were already of his People. So in
his Parable of him who fell among Thieves, the Priest and Levite pass him by,
S. Luke X.30, 31, 32, 33, etc.
only the Samaritan takes pity on him. By the Priest and Levite he personates
those from whom that benefit might be expected on account of their common
Relation, as Fellow Members of God's People, by the Samaritan, one from whom,
on that account, it could least be expected, so that still the Samaritan is
represented as one who had the least relation to God's People. Again when he
sent out the Twelve Apostles, among the rest of his Charges to them this is
one. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, Matt. X.5.
and into any City of the Samaritans enter ye not: But go rather to the lost
Sheep of the house of Israel. Plainly he distinguishes the Samaritans as well
as the Gentiles, from the House of Israel, and distinguishes them in this very
instance, which was the Privilege of the Jews, to have the Gospel first
Preached to them. On this account it was that they are called the Children of
the Kingdom. Thence those words of S. Paul and Barnabas: It was necessary that
the Word of God should first have been spoken to you: Act. XIII.45.
but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life, lo we turn to the Gentiles. Thence the same Apostle elsewhere derives the
calling of the Gentiles from their blindness and hard heartedness as a
fulfilling of that Prophecy, that therefore God would provoke them to jealousy
by them that were no People, Romans X.19.XI.11.
etc. which he understands of the Gentiles. Therefore he makes the fall of them
to be the riches of the World, Romans XI.12, 15.
and the diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles, and the casting away
of them the reconciling of the world, because it was upon their rejecting of
the Gospel that God first gave way to the sending the Gospel to the Gentiles.
By all which it appears that till they had first rejected it, the Gospel it
self was reckoned among the Properties of the Segullah. And therefore it being
even then forbidden to the Samaritans; it thence follows, that even then the
Samaritans were not included in the peculiar People of God.

I HAVE been the rather more particular in the proof of this because this
SCHISM of the Samaritans fell out after the Historical Books of the Old
Testament. Tho it did so, and tho the Judgment of the Jews otherwise might have
been fallible after the ceasing of the Spirit of Prophecy; yet that in this
Case they were free from any actual mistake appears plainly by this approbation
afterward by them who introduced that Spirit again after it had failed for a
time. And in this regard, their Reasonings in this matter will be so far from
suffering any disadvantage because they were not first applied in that former
time of that Spirit of Prophecy, as that, for that very reason, they will be
more Argumentative under the Gospel. Had they been applied in those inspired
times, they might have been suspected to have something of the Positive Divine
Institution in them which was particularly proper to those times, and therefore
still to be passed over in Reasoning to the times of the Gospel. But being
first applied in times only of Ecclesiastical Prudence; they must therefore
have been drawn from that Analogy and Proportion only, which, as I said, is the
only proper way of Reasoning from Old Testament Precedents to the state of the
Gospel. Only in this particular Instance we have this peculiar advantage above
what we have in other Reasonings, even of the same kind, that whereas this way
of Reasoning from the proportion of things then to what ought to be now, is of
it self very liable to mistakes, according to the skill, or Prudence, or
Sagacity, of him who used it; we are yet assured that there was no actual
mistake here, from this later approbation of infallible Persons.

THIS therefore being thus premised, Samaritans were actually no part of God's
People, and that accordingly the Reasonings on which the Jews proceeded in
their particular Case were actually solid and convincing; it will now be
seasonable to proceed to an Explication of their Case, what it was, and on what
account it was so censured. But I shall first prevent some mistakes which might
otherwise misrepresent it. 1. Therefore it is no way probable that their being
thus excluded from the Holy Seed, was only grounded on the falseness of their
pretenses to be descended from the Posterity of the Patriarchs. It is very true
they do pretend to be so descended to this very day. They did pretend so in the
Age of Christ and his Apostles. The Woman of Samaria calls Jacob her Father,
and they were famous for politic Dissemblings of this kind. S. John IV.12.
Whenever the Jews were in Persecution, they owned themselves to be Cuthaeans,
as in that great and severe Persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes. Josep. Ant.
XII.7.
Whenever they were prosperous, then they pretended themselves to be Jews, as
in their address to Alexander the Great for a Release from the Tribute of their
Sabbatical Years. Josep. Ant. XI.8.
It is also very true that they were no Jews by extraction, and that therefore
their pretenses to Judaism were false, if that were the meaning of them. But
this had been no reason to exclude them from the Name and Privileges of Jews,
seeing they were Proselytes, and Proselytes of the highest kind, of Justice,
not only of the Gates. Such Proselytism as this the Rabbis themselves grant so
to incorporate men into the Jewish Nation, as to extinguish all other
Relations, Seldom.
so that they must thenceforth be reckoned of the Jewish Nation, or of none at
all. And this Proselytism was capable of being extended to whole Nations, as
well as to single persons. So the whole Nation of the Idumaeans were proselyted
by the same Hircanus who destroyed the Schismatical Temple of the Samaritans,
Josep. Ant. XIII.17.
and much about the same time. And it is well known what the Learned Casaubon
has proved against Baronius, who, Exercit.
following some of the ancient Christians, makes Herod the Great an (...), who
was of the Race of those Proselyted Idumaeans. He shows that Herod himself owns
no other Nation but that of the Jews, nor was counted otherwise by any of the
Age he lived in. And I am apt to think that it was this Right of Proselytism
incorporating into the Jewish Nation that gave the Samaritans that occasion of
prevaricating according as their Interest lay. As they were Proselytes of
Justice, so they might challenge all the Privileges of the Jewish Nation for
theirs; Now among the Privileges boasted of by the Jews, the Apostle himself
reckons this for one, that theirs were the Patriarchs. And therefore they might
challenge as good a Title in the Patriarchs, as the adopted among the Romans
had to the Stemms and Images of the Families into which they were adopted,
which yet, whilst the memory of their National Proselytism was fresh, hindered
them not from knowing that their natural Extraction was different from that to
which they were entitled by their Proselytism. And accordingly when they
renounced their Proselytism, as they must have done, in course, whenever they
relapsed into Idolatry, they must as naturally have resumed their old
Extraction, as he must among the Romans, who had lost his interest in the
Family into which he had been adopted.

INDEED this Challenge of the Patriarchs for theirs seems to have been so
ordinary for all who pretended to the name of Jews, as that even the Christians
even those who were of Gentile Extraction, and had never been circumcised,
pretend to it, on account of their mystical Israelitism. So in the Reasonings
of S. Paul, Abraham is the Father of all those who are like him in his Faith
which he had being yet uncircumcised. Nay, the Seed of his Faith are more
properly his, than the Seed of his Flesh. These, in the mystical Reasonings of
those times, are compared only to Israel who was his Seed only by the
Bondwoman; but those are they who answer Isaac, the Seed of the Freewoman,
who alone was the Heir of the Promises. The like Challenges of the Patriarchs
for their own Ancestors are frequent among the first Christians, who, in all
likelihood, had never been Jews by Extraction. So S. Clemens, Ep. I. ad
Corinth. Sect. 31.
whose very name implies his being a Roman, (...); Barnabas: Barn. Ep. Sect. 9.
Ergo and hi de Testamento sunt; quos dicit FILIOS ABRAHAE de omnibus gentibus.
S. Justin a Samaritan: Dialog. cum Tryph. p. 228, 229.
(...). Elsewhere: (...), Ib. p. 347.
Where he accordingly proves it professedly, as he had promised before, not
only concerning Abraham, but the other Patriarchs. And again, Adv. Haer. L.IV.
c. 18. Justin. Paren. p. 1, 2.
(...). Irenaeus: In regnum coelorum introducit Abraham, and semen ejus quod
est Ecclesia. Which considerations may serve to make it not seem strange if the
later Samaritans who lived more remote from the memory and practice and
privileges of Proselytism, mistake the Legal Challenges of the Patriarchs for
their Ancestors in their Predecessors for Arguments of their natural
Extraction. However, the Laws and Privileges of Legal Proselytism being allowed
for such as has been shown, this alone will suffice for my design to show that
their natural Extraction being otherwise could not have been the inducement
that could have moved Christ and his Apostles to exclude the Samaritans, as
often as they had occasion to speak of the Privileged Israel.

Holy Seed on account of their Idolatry. It is true indeed that when they first
took up the Jewish Religion they still retained their Idolatrous Customs. Each
Nation of them still retained their own Gods; the Babylonians, Succoth Benoth;
the Cuthaeans, Nergal; and the Men of Hamath; Ashima; the Avites, Nibhaz and
Tartak; and the Sepharvites burnt their Children in fire to Adrammelech and
Anammelech the Gods of the Sepharvites. They made unto themselves (as Jeroboam
had done) of the lowest of them Priests of the high places, which sacrificed
for them in the Houses of the high places. 2 King. XVII.29, 30, 31, 32. that
is, in short They feared the Lord, and served their own Gods, and their graven
Images, after the manner of the Nations. Verse 33.41. It is also true, that not
only they, but their Children, and their Children's Children continued to do so
to the time of the Writer of the Book of Kings, which is supposed to be Esdras,
Verse 41. that is to the time of Artaxerxes, either Longimanus or Mucmon, that
is, to the Birth of Jaddus, whose Brother Manasseh first engaged them in their
Ecclesiastical Schism. But this could not be taken for a Proselytism of
Justice, nor do we find that as yet themselves did ever so much as pretend to
the Privilege of Native Jews. The first time that, for certain, they did so,
was in the time of Alexander the Great. But it was a little before that time
that they had now built a Temple in imitation of that of Jerusalem, and an
Altar, and had gotten a High Priest of the Posterity of Aaron. From this time
forward it is probable they utterly gave over their Idolatrous Customs, when
they were engaged in an emulation with the Jews at Jerusalem. It had been an
unanswerable Objection against them, by the Principles of Judaism if they had
continued it. And it is not improbable that Sanballat took this way of
justifying the cause of his Son-in-Law Manasses who was excluded from his
Succession at Jerusalem only on account of his marriage with his Daughter who
was a Heathen, that by Proselyting his whole Satrapia of the Samaritans, and
among them his own Daughter, he made that Marriage lawful by an After-Act which
had been unlawful before.

Samaritans themselves, in their address to Antiochus Epiphanes, Josep. Ant.
XII.7.
make themselves Sidonians, and desire that their Temple, which had hitherto no
Title of any God, that is, to be sure, of no Heathen God, might from that time
have the Title of Jupiter Hellenicus. Why should they not insist on their true
Original from the Assyrian Dominions? why should they not rather desire the
Title of their Babylonian Idols, when Gentilism was the thing principally
designed by Antiochus, if after an hundred and sixty years discontinuance they
had not forgot their Idolatries together with the memory of their true
Extraction? Their very Idols would have disproved their pretending to be of one
Nation, much more their pretense to be Sidonians. And how was it possible that
in so short a time they could have forgotten their own Idols, if the memory of
any the least Idolatrous Worship had not been for that space perfectly
discontinued? If they had been ashamed of it, and so been willing to have
suppressed the memory of it (tho considering the time there be no reason to
think that they would have been ashamed of it) yet it is not probable the Jews
would not have upbraided them with it in that famous Dispute between them
before Ptolemaeus Philometor; Jos. Ant. XIII.6.
where they had agreed that they who were overcome should have their
Adversaries put to death; Where the Terms of the Dispute were that they were to
manage it from the Law of Moses. Could they have laid any charge of Idolatry
against the Samaritans, it is no way probable that they would ever have
admitted them to the Dispute concerning the Succession of their Priesthood. Had
the Samaritans themselves been conscious to themselves of the guilt of such a
charge, it is no way probable that they themselves would have submitted their
Cause to a decision from the Law. This was their Case before their Conquest by
Hircanus. But from that time forward, it is no way probable that they would
have been permitted in the practice of any Idolatrous Worship by the Jews their
Masters, if themselves had been otherwise inclined to it, as we have no reason
to believe they were. So that even on this account we have reason to believe
all memory of their Idolatrous Worship would have been extinguished before the
times of our Savior, and therefore could have been no cause of his excluding
them from the number of the true Israelites. What their modern Adversaries the
Rabbis charge them with, their Baptizing in the Name of a Pigeon, is so
extremely groundless as that even Mr. Seldom himself, De Diis Sir. Syntagmat.
II. cap. 3.
who is otherwise far from being too incredulous of that kind of Authors, does
yet take this for no better than a downright slander. The same he grants
concerning another charge of their worshipping an Asina, (undoubtedly for Asima
the old Idol, tho it is also very well known that the Jews themselves were
slandered by the Heathens for worshipping their Lawgiver Moses in the shape of
an Ass) and another Criticism fathered by them on the Samaritan Pentateuch,
Joseph. c. Appion.
which he and others who have seen Copies from the Samaritans themselves, can
prove false by ocular Demonstration. Nothing therefore of this kind is probable
to have been the true reason why our Savior disowned them for true Israelites.
Should one put the most favorable Construction that can be on these Charges,
and suppose them to have been Mistakes, that the worship of the Pigeon in
memory of Semiramis, which they had found ascribed to the Assyrians, was by
them particularly laid to the Cuthaeans, whom they knew to have been an
Assyrian Colony; and that their former Charges, whilst they were Gentiles, had
been also laid to them after their Proselytism to the Jewish Law; these had
been Mistakes likely enough to have been taken up by them who were so unkillful
in ancient History and Chronology as the Rabbis are known to be by them who
have skill enough to judge concerning them.

Woman of Samaria, in her Dispute with our Savior himself upon this Argument,
plainly states the Controversy as it was disputed at that time, otherwise.
Thus it was understood then: Our Fathers worshipped in this Mountain, S. John
IV.20.
and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. Observe
that first, by Worship is meant the Confinement of Worship, that is that her
Fathers so worshipped in Mount Gerizim as to condemn the worshipping at
Jerusalem, and the Jews so worshipped at Jerusalem as to condemn the worshipping
at Mount Gerizim. This was the only thing that made any difference between
them; for if either of them had so worshipped at their own place as not to
condemn the worship of others in the other, there could have been no occasion
of breach between them. Observe secondly, that this must therefore have been
understood, not of the Moral, but the Ceremonial Part of Worship. For their
Synagogue-Worship, the Jews were so far from confining it to Jerusalem, or
condemning it in Samaria, as that they allowed it in all their Gentile
Dispersions, where notwithstanding they did not count the Countries themselves
Holy, as they did all Judaea, including Samaria under it. And hence it appears
thirdly, whom she meant by those whom she calls our Fathers. She did not mean
the Fathers common to them with the Jews, as she did before where she reckoned
Jacob among them; but plainly those Fathers who so worshipped in Samaria as that
they differed therein from those who worshipped at Jerusalem, such Fathers who
differed from the Jews as much as their Posterity of that present Age. Those
were plainly they who had sacrificed in the Samaritan Temple, and owned the
Samaritan Priesthood. This worship she could truly say had been performed by
their Fathers who lived before their Temple and Altar had been ruined by
Hyrcanus. But she could not pretend it to have been performed by any in her own
Age who since that time had no Temple nor Altar to sacrifice on distinct from
that in Jerusalem. Otherwise, as they continued their SCHISM, so it is no way
probable, but that even they continued their Moral Worship distinct from the
Jews. And therefore plainly this (...) wherein they differed from the Jews was
no other than their Worship of Sacrificing, and that the same way understood,
and the same way justified, as it was practiced and justified by those
Samaritans who lived before the destruction of their Temple by Hyrcanus. This
same practice of Sacrificing in the Temple at Mount Gerizim was that by which
the Samaritans of that Age defended themselves, nothing of Idolatry, or of
their false pretenses to Jewish Extraction. And this, and this alone, must have
been the thing condemned in them by our Savior when he gave his judgment
against them in this same Dispute.

THAT we may therefore understand condemned by our Savior, we must have
recourse to the History of those times wherein that was practiced, which now
was only disputed and defended. And the first occasion of that whole Difference
was briefly this: Manasses the Brother of Jaddus the High Priest of the Jews
had married Nicaso, Josep. Ant. XI.8.
a Daughter of Sanballat, a Cuthaean by Extraction, who had been made Satrapa
of Samaria, his own Country, by Darius Codomanus. Upon this the Elders of the
Jews, in whose hands the Government was at that time ( Josephus himself
confesses it to have been Aristocratical then) oblige him to a choice either of
quitting his Wife, Ant. XX.8.
or his Priesthood. Immediately he flies to his Father-in-Law, full of
Complaints of what he had suffered from his own Countrymen for his affection to
his Daughter, and acquaints him that he had indeed a great affection for her,
yet not so great but that he preferred that greatest Honor of his Family and
Country before her. Sanballat assures him that he should be so far from losing
any Honors of his Family for his Daughter, as that, instead of his Priesthood,
which as younger Brother to Jaddus, was only of the ordinary sort, he would
make him High Priest, he would build him a Temple on Mount Gerizim, one of the
highest Mountains of Samaria, no doubt, to rival Mount Moriah, on which the
Temple of Jerusalem was built. For as their public Worship was generally in
High Places and Mountains, so the height of the place tended to advance the
Dignity of the Worship exercised in it. In allusion whereunto is that
expression of the Prophet, Mic. IV.1.
that the Mountain of the Lord should be exalted above the top of the
Mountains. This encourages Manasses, for a time, to wait till he might see how
far his Father in- Law's Interest might succeed in effecting what he had
promised, and still his Party increased by the accession of other Criminals in
the same kind with himself who daily revolted to him.

Sanballat could communicate this design to his Master Darius, he had received
his second Defeat at Issus. Sanballat hereupon takes this occasion of following
the Conqueror, whom he found at the Siege of Tire. There he acquaints him with
his Design, and tells him how much it would be for his interest, by that new
Project, to divide the powerful and rebellious Nation of the Jews. So the elder
Sanballat, contemporary to Nehemiah, had likewise represented them. And he
found it the less difficult to prevail with him, because he had been a little
before provoked by a Message returned to him, whereby they gave him to
understand that they were already engaged to Darius by their Oaths, and could
not take up Arms against him while he lived. Having therefore got his leave, he
immediately falls to his Work of Building this new Temple, Chap. 4.
which he seems also to have finished within those seven Months which were
spent in the Siege of Tire, and the two at Gaza, for within that time he dies.
From that time forward to the time of the elder Hyrcanus, this was the place of
public Worship for the Samaritans, as Jerusalem for the Jews, Sanballat
himself, and his Daughter, and his whole Province having been Proselyted to it.

HERE was again an Altar and a Temple independent on those at Jerusalem,
designed purposely to cut off their Communication in their Anniversary
Solemnities. They were henceforth so far from joining in their Anniversaries,
which, as I said, were the Prerogatives of the Temple, as that they mortally
hated each other, and refused the common Civilities of Conversation. But this
distinction of their Altar was common with the other forementioned SCHISMS. The
distinction of the One Priesthood is that which first appeared here, and was,
in truth, the thing principally mentioned in this Dispute, before Ptolemaeus
Philometor. It is there granted on both sides that the High Priesthood ought to
be but One (it is plainly the High Priesthood they dispute, Chap. 5.
so far is it from an Ordinary Priest of a single Congregation which none ever
doubted but they might be, and were many.) The Dispute is who had the Right to
it. This is the thing which they endeavor to make out from the Topic of
Succession. That was again urged by Andronicus the Advocate for the Jews:
Josep. Ant. XIII.6.
(...). From the Law no doubt his first proof was brought that the High
Priesthood ought to be but one; and concerning the Succession the proof was not
from the Law, as it is taken for the Pentateuch, but as it includes the other
Historical Books of the Old Testament. By that it appeared that a Temple had
been at Jerusalem from the time of Solomon to the time of Sanballat, abating
only the time of the seventy years Captivity. It appeared that there was a
constant Succession of High Priests in that Temple at Jerusalem, whilst as yet
there was no Temple at Samaria, Josephus himself reckons thirteen from Aaron to
Solomon's Temple, Jos. Ant. XX.8.
then under the Temple Eighteen. Then after the return from the Captivity,
Jesus the Son of Josedec, and Fifteen of his Posterity to the time of Antiochus
Eupator, etc. In all likelihood these Catalogues of the Succession of their
High Priests were first gathered and cast into these Distinctions by them who
first managed this Dispute concerning the Succession of the High Priesthood
against the Samaritans. And by these Catalogues it again appears that the One
Priesthood, so much then disputed of, was meant only of the High Priesthood,
seeing it was only of the Names of such that their Catalogues consisted.

THERE are also some other Instances Altars against Altars, and the profaness
of such Altars so erected, might possibly relate, which yet I do not think so
apposite to my present Design, because they were rather of Idolaters than
SCHISMATICS. These were of Rival Altars erected within the very Jurisdiction
of the True Altar, and with a design of slighting, and laying the use of it
aside. Such was that of Ahaz which he caused to be copied from the Altar of
Damascus. This Altar he erected in the Temple, and caused the Brazen Altar of
God to be removed for it, and gave Urijah the Priest this charge concerning
them: 2 King. XVI.15.
Upon the great Altar (so he called his own new One) burn the morning
burnt-offerings, and the evening meat offering, and the kings burnt-sacrifice,
and his meat offering, with the burnt-offering of all the people of the land,
and their meat offering, and their drink offerings, and sprinkle upon it all
the blood of the burnt-offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice: and the
brazen altar shall be for me to enquire by. Plainly this Altar was in emulation
to the true Altar. It was erected in the same Temple, nay, as it should seem,
in the same part of the Temple, for the other was removed for it. It was
designed for most of those Sacrifices which had formerly been offered on the
Altar, so that now the true Altar had no other use, but for such Sacrifices
whereby the God of Israel was to be consulted. It was plainly designed as the
principal Altar of the two; for it was called the great Altar, and the other
was removed for it, and it had much the greater part of the Temple Worship
performed at it. Possibly it was his Example that was imitated by his Grandson
Manasseh, among whose wickednesses this is also reckoned as one of the most
provoking, That he also built altars for all the host of heaven in the two
courts of the house of the Lord, 2 King. XXI.4, 5. 2 Chronicles. XXXIII.4, 5.
that is within the Jurisdiction of the true Altar. For so it is aggravated
before, that he built Altars in the house of the Lord, of which the Lord said,
in Jerusalem will I put my name. The like is also observed concerning the Altar
of Antiochus Epiphanes in the vulgar Latin (for our English from the Greek is
somewhat different) Et quinta and vicesima die mensis sacrificabant super aram
quae erat contra Altar. 1 Maccab. l. 62. Lat. 59 Engl.
Here is Ara contra Altar, almost the very Phrase of S. Cyprian, who yet I
believe borrowed his Phrase rather from the things, than any Forms of Words, as
they had been practiced in those known Disputes between the Jews and the
Samaritans.

THERE is also another instance reducible to this purpose, if we may Jews, Vide
Seldom de Succes. in Pontif. Ebraeor. II.8.
I mean the Temple of Onias in Heliopolis in Egypt. I dispute not now how ill
grounded that Fact of Onias was on the Prophecy of Isaias by him pretended for
it. I dispute not how indecorously that particular place of Heliopolis was
chosen for it, which was the Metropolis of the Egyptian Worship, which was by
the Jews condemned as Idolatrous, and abounded more than any other place of
Egypt it self with monuments of those Idolatries. This was an Observation so
very obvious, as that it was taken notice of by Ptolemy Philometor himself in
the very Rescript whereby he gave Onias leave to build it. Ap. Josep. Ant.
XIII.6.
But this Temple, as it was built with no ill design of opposition, but only as
a fulfilling of that Prophecy; so I do not find that it was ever managed so as
to cause the least animosity, much less any SCHISM, between the Egyptian and
the Palestine Jews. When it was first built, the Temple of Jerusalem seems to
have lain in its desolation by Antiochus. For the immediate occasion of the
Flight of Onias into Egypt was his own Exclusion from the Succession into the
Priesthood upon the Murder of his Father by the Practices of his Uncle
Menelaus. There was at that time an old grudge between Antiochus Epiphanes and
Ptolemeus Philometor. Immediately before his Attempts on the Temple, Antiochus
was but newly returned from Egypt from an attempt he had made on Ptolemy, being
diverted from it only by an interposition of the Romans in that famous Embassy
delivered to him by Popillius Laenas. And indeed Judaea it self had not long
before been made over to Ptolemaeus Epiphanes by Antiochus the Great, and was
newly taken from the Egyptians by Antiochus Epiphanes in that same invasion.
This was the occasion that both those Princes had Designs and Parties in
Judaea, and were very ready to hearken to any attempts that were made in favor
of their own interest. Jason was the first that undermined Onias's Father by an
application to Antiochus Epiphanes, and indeed that first invited that Prince
into the invasion of his own Country. And accordingly upon the Conquest Onias
was put by, and Jason substituted in his room by the interest of Antiochus. Yet
he himself was within three years undermined also by his Brother Menelaus. In
the time of this man's Priesthood it was that the Temple was profaned by
Antiochus. Afterward in the time of Antiochus Eupator, in the tenth year of
the Priesthood of Menelaus, he is put to death by order of the young Antiochus,
and Alcimus a person no way related to the Priestly Family substituted in his
stead, about the year one hundred and fifty of the Seleucidae precisely. This
was the time, Josep. Ant. XII.15.
and the posture of Affairs when Onias fled into Egypt.

HEREUPON he is gladly received Ptolemy, who was willing, by his means, to
revive his Interest in Judaea. Accordingly he proposes this Expedient of a new
Temple, as a means whereby he might gain the Jewish Nation on his side, that
this would make Antiochus more odious, Josep. Bell. Jud. VII.30.
and Ptolemy more acceptable to them, if whilst Antiochus was profaning their
Old Temple, Ptolemy would build them a new. Josephus does indeed charge Onias
with some resentment against his Countrymen in this Design. But against whom
was this resentment? Against Alcimus, one who had no Title to the Priesthood
but mere intrusion, whereas Onias himself was the true Heir by lawful Descent.
Against one who had himself consented to the Heathen Idolatries, and the
Prophanations of the Temple after it had been expiated by Judas. 1 Maccab.
IX.54.
What Sanctity could have been in such a Priest, tho he had been more Lawful,
and Onias more Unlawful than indeed they were? This Temple therefore was built
in such a time wherein neither the Temple, nor the Altar, nor the High Priest
of the Temple of Jerusalem were indeed worthy of any emulation. And yet when he
designed the building his new Temple, he desires leave to build it not only to
the same Deity, Josep. Ant. XIII.6.
whom he calls (...) but also (...), and (...). And Josephus adds, that he did
accordingly. These are his express words: (...). These Words should refer to
the (...) as well as the (...), that they may answer the Petition. This, as I
said before, was indeed, according to the Customs of that Age, to be understood
as a communicating with the Temple in Jerusalem, as I showed in the Case of
Ahaz, that his Copying the Altar of Damascus, was a communicating with the
Syrian Idolatries. And not only so, but it was also plainly an owning a
dependence on the Temple at Jerusalem, when that was owned as the Prototype
from whence their own was Copyed, and when withal this was designed less than
that from whence it was Copyed. This we never find to have been done by the
Samaritans, or any others who pretended to rival the Temple at Jerusalem. This
is expressly mentioned in the Petition of Onias, on which, according to the
Forms of those Times, the Rescript of the Prince was grounded, and by which it
was to be interpreted, that the same thing, and nothing else was granted but
that which had been mentioned in the Petition. And therefore I cannot but
admire at Josephus, who notwithstanding elsewhere tells us, that his Temple was
like a Tower, Jos. Bell. Jud. VII.30.
and not like that of Jerusalem, tho withal he confesses that the Altar was
exactly Copyed from the Altar of Jerusalem. I doubt Josephus never saw it. Only
this is certain, that if he had varied from what he mentioned in his Petition,
this had been alone sufficient to have invalidated the Grant of Ptolemy to him,
and might have been so interpreted by them who had been Enemies to his Design.

BUT besides this, there are also other designed no SCHISM from the Temple and
Altar of Jerusalem. Himself, in the same Petition, observes, how Diversity of
Temples, (...), had bred Animosites, not in his own Nation only, but also among
the Egyptians themselves. Would he preface his Design with such Reflections as
these, if his own design had been liable to the same Charge? Nay, he plainly
professes in the Petition it self, that his design was to unite the Jews in
Egypt thereby for Ptolemy's Service. But was it so to unite them among
themselves as to divide them from those of their own Nation in Palestine? This
had been so far from doing Ptolemy any service, as that it must have alienated
them who were capable of doing him the greatest service against Antiochus. It
would have been very doubtful, whether would have been hated most by the Jews
of Jerusalem, Antiochus for profaning their Temple, or Ptolemy for causing a
division among themselves. But Josephus tells us elsewhere that Onias hoped
hereby to draw away the multitude from Jerusalem. Bell. Jud. VII.30.
What multitude was this but those who were disaffected to the profane
Alcimus, that is, who were indeed, at that time, on the more Orthodox side? And
could he expect to prevail on them by any thing that, by the Principles of that
Age, would have been owned as SCHISMATICAL?

ON the contrary, it appears, by Heliopolitane Temple, if it united the
Egyptian Jews among themselves, did notwithstanding not disunite them from
their Brethren at Jerusalem. After this time we find as fair a correspondence,
and as great evidences of mutual and hearty affection as ever. Accordingly
among those devout persons who came from every Nation under Heaven (that is
where the Jews had Colonies) to keep the Feast of Pentecost at Jerusalem (which
was one of the three Anniversaries) we find those of Egypt, and those of the
parts of Libya about Cyrene, Act. II.10.
that is, of the Pentapolitane Libya, which had also belonged to the Ptolemyes,
till it was bequeathed to the Romans by Ptolemaeus Apion. It seems then that
the Heliopolitane temple was not designed to encroach on that Prerogative of
the Temple at Jerusalem for the Solemn Anniversaries. As soon almost as that
new Temple was built we see what loving Letters passed between the Jews of
Jerusalem and their Brethren in Alexandria in the Book of Maccabees. 2 Macc. 1.
Onias himself fell into the trouble mentioned in the Third Book of the
Maccabees after the death of Ptolemy Philometor, as Josephus much more probably
places it, than others who will have it under Ptolemy Philopater. Cont. Apion.
II. p. 1064.
Josephus one of Jerusalem does highly commend his behavior on that occasion.
When Mithridates and Antipater brought succor to Coesar in the Alexandrian War,
the first resistance that was like to have been made, was by the Jews of
Onias's Country, that is of the very place where Onias's Temple was built.
Josep. Ant. XIV.14.
But when Antipater had acquainted them that the High Priest himself Hyrcanus
was engaged in that Quarrel, they let him pass. How was it possible they could
have had that reverence for the name of the High Priest if they had themselves
been engaged in a SCHISM against him? Had it been so, no name could have been
more odious to them, and unlikely to prevail. The like may appear from their
mutual concernment for the Calamities of their Nation in both places. How
heartily was Philo interessed in the Troubles of the Palestine Jews under
Petronius in the time of Caius? Nay, Phil. Leg. ad Caj^m.
Philo is express against any Altar or Temple in opposition to that of
Jerusalem, De Monar. Lib. II. mit.
and is for all going thither at what distance soever. And on the contrary, how
much was Josephus concerned for his Brethren in Alexandria, in their Troubles
under the Praefectship of Tiberius Alexander? Jos. Bell. Jud. II.21.


High Priests continued in the Heliopolitane Temple by Onias, who during his
own time had the best Right to it in Jerusalem, and while the Temple was
profaned, and things in disorder, so that the High Priesthood was not disposed
of till the time of Jonathan; he was not capable of having a Competitor, and it
is not unlikely but that he yielded it to Jonathan, being now so engaged in his
Prince's Affairs in Egypt as that he was unwilling to remove for the High
Priesthood it self. From that time forward, it does not appear that there was
any Succession of the High Priesthood continued at Heliopolis. There was indeed
an Altar. There were also Priests and Levites endowed by Ptolemy with
maintenance for attendance on that Altar. This Succession of Priests was
continued till the time that the Temple was shut up by the command of
Vespasian. For even then Josephus tells us that Paulinus, the Successor of
Lupus who had shut it up, Bell. Jud.
extorted from the Priests an account of the Donatives which had been bestowed
upon it. But there is not the least intimation of any High Priest in it at that
time. Now such a Succession as this would only imply a use of it for ordinary
Sacrifices, so as the high places had been used before, after the confinement
of the public worship to a certain place, which tho they might be irregular,
yet were not SCHISMAT1CALL, whilst they owned a dependence on the place of
public Worship. Yet even these high places were legitimated when they were
used by a Prophet, and even the modern Jews acknowledge that the Authority of a
Prophet did extend so far as to excuse for the breach of a positive Law of such
a nature as this was. How much more such a Prophet as Isaiah? How much more in
a Writing, which was a standing Rule to their Church of Authority not inferior
to that of the Law it self? Certainly of much more Authority than that of any
present inspiration of any Prophet in his lifetime?

THIS was thought a sufficient Argument Hellenists of that time to authenticate
a thing so seemingly different from the Letter of the Law as this was, and it
was the same Argument, drawn from the like uncondemned Concessions of the
Hellenists, that was made use of by the first Christians to justify all their
seeming Deviations from the Letter of the Law, by the like Predictions of the
Prophets concerning the later days. This Observation will both let us
Christians see how strong this Reasoning is, seeing it is of the same kind with
that by which most of the Peculiarities of the Christian Religion, as different
from Judaism, were proved in those first and purest times; and will withal let
our Adversaries see how prudent and credible this Argument was, as it was
managed by the first Christians, being the same by which Prophesies and
Predictions were expounded and applied in those Ages wherein Prophesies were
most familiar in ordinary practice, and wherein the Spirit of Prophecy was
thought as necessary for expounding Prophesies already symbolically revealed to
others, as it was to those to whom the Revelations were first made.

Temples of the Jews mentioned in the forementioned Address of the same Onias,
which I do not know whether any Author besides now extant has ever mentioned.
His words are these: (...), Josep. Ant. XIII.6.
etc. That is, Having conversed with the Jews in Celo-Syria and Phaenice, and
in the Leontopolis in the Heliopolitane Nomus (to distinguish it from that
which was the Head of a Nomus by it self) and having traveled to several other
places where Colonies were planted of the same Nation, and finding most of them
engaged in Sacred Rites unlawful for them, and for that cause disaffected to
each other, etc.. But I can hardly think that these were purely SCHISMATICAL
Temples, but rather Idolatrous. If that had been his meaning, it was strange he
should forget the most famous, notorious Instance of all, that of the
Samaritans, which was then in its most flourishing condition. It is strange
that no others should mention any Temples built by the Jews in those places,
not even Josephus himself who had undertaken the History of all the Memorables
of his own Nation. I incline therefore rather to translate (...) in this place
by the name rather of Sacred Rites than of Temples, not as if the Jews had in
these places any Temples of their own, but that, according to their natural
fickleness in their own Worship, and their complaisance to the Heathens, to
whom they made themselves odious by their singularity, they yielded to the
Idolatrous Customs of the places where they lived. For showing how probable
this was I need not have recourse to their ancient frequent Relapses into
Idolatry. A very Learned Sir John Marsham Chr. Can. Sect. IX.
Gentleman conceives they were involved in this guilt in that Anniversary
Commemoration mentioned by Vit. Mos. III.
Philo, as observed by them together with the other Alexandrians, in memory of
their Law, translated there by the order of Philadelphus. This Anniversary he
conceives to have been designed by the Heathens in honor of Isis Pharia. But
there is another occasion mentioned in the History of that Translation, for the
Commemoration of the Heathens. That was the Victory at Sea gained by the Forces
of Ptolemaeus Lagi over the Fleet of Antigonus on that same day, which the King
seems purposely to have joined with the Commemoration of the Translation, that
the Commemoration of both together might be more general and solemn. Tho I deny
not but that Deity might be she to whom the Heathens returned their thanks for
that Sea-Victory. Whether the Jews joined with them in that part of their
Address is not so certain from this Passage.

IT is somewhat clearer in the Epistle of Adrian to Servianus. He there tells
Patriarch was compelled by some to worship Serapis, Ap. Vopisc. in Saturnino.
by others to worship Christ. If the name Patriarch were not an Argument, which
does not seem to have been taken up by the Christians till the time of
Montanus, nor by the Catholics for some considerable time after, yet the being
compelled to worship Christ, the same way as he was compelled to worship
Serapis, plainly imply him to have been as averse to Christianity as
Heathenism. In the same Epistle he tells us that the same God (an Idolatrous
one, no doubt, when he produces it as an Argument of the Alexandrian Levity)
was worshipped in common by the Christians, Jews and Heathens. But a clearer
instance hereof was in the worship of the Oak at Mamre. There were Idols and an
Idolatrous Altar, so scandalous as that it was taken away by Constantine.
Sozom. II.4. Eusebius. Demon. V.9. and de loc. Ebr. (...). Rit. Constantin.
III.51, 52, 53.
Yet because their Fore father Abraham was concerned in it, the Jews also are
reckoned among those who had frequented that place on a superstitious Account.

THIS therefore being a thing to Jews were so very obnoxious, as Onias had
observed by his Travels among them in their Colonies, where they were in the
most danger of being thus corrupted by their conversation with Idolaters; and
being withal a thing which must, in course, make animosities among them,
provoke against them the just zeal of their Brethren in Jerusalem, who were not
in the same danger as they were who lived among Heathens: Onias thought to
remedy these inconveniences by building the Egyptian Jews a Temple of their own
to the Supreme God, (...), which was the God worshipped by them, not the
particular Demons of Places, or Nations, or Cities, of which kind all were
that were worshipped by the Heathens in a public way, by Temples and
Sacrifices. For by having thus a Temple of their own, they were taken off from
the Temptation of frequenting the Heathen Temples and Sacrifices; by being
preserved from this they were kept righter in the good opinion of their
Brethren at Jerusalem; by being kept so, their whole Nation, both those in
Egypt, and those in Palestine, were better disposed to drive on common designs,
and with common interest, for the purposes of Ptolemy, and against that of
Antiochus. This seems plainly to have been the Intrigue aimed at by Onias in
this whole design. And this supposes that the Temples alluded to by him, were
rather the Idolatrous Temples of the Heathens of those places than any
Schismatical ones proper to the Jews themselves.

CHAP. VI. The Privilege of the Jews, as the Segullah, or Peculiar People,
consisted in having the Supreme Being appropriated to them for their God.
The CONTENTS.
The Force of this Argument as applied by the Jews to their SCHISMATICS from
Judaism. 1. The God of Israel was indeed so proper to the Israelites, as the
Gods of the Nations were to their respective Nations. Sect. 1. The Demons of
the Nations were only of limited Power and Jurisdiction, and, as they thought,
overpowered when the Nations, for whom they were concerned, were conquered.
Sect. II, III. The Privilege of the Jews, as the Segullah, consisted in this,
That whereas none but Inferior Demons were appointed for the Tutelars of other
Nations, the Supreme Being was pleased to undertake the management of them
immediately, in his own person. Sect. IV, V, VI, VII. The Advantages the Jews
had above other Nations in this regard. Sect. VIII. Wherein consisted the Sin
of worshipping those Tutelary Demons. Sect. IX, X, XI. How Angels were employed
by God in the Government of the Jews. Sect. XII. Wherein God's peculiar Care of
the Jews consisted. Sect. XIII.

THUS I think I have gone through all the Temples and Altars that Samaritans
were principally intended in those Reasonings of the Primitive Christians. I
shall now proceed to show the force of this Reasoning as it was first used by
the Jews against their SCHISMATICS from Judaism; and from thence 2. how
forcible it is as deduced and applied by the first Christians to the Case of
SCHISMATICS from Christistianity. And 3. how appositely their Reasonings fit
the Case also of our modern SCHISMATICS.

1. Then, for the Reasonings of the Jews against their SCHISMATICS, I desire
it may be remembered 1. That, the God of Israel was indeed so proper to the
Nation of the Israelites, as the Gods of the Nations were to their respective
Nations. This was indeed the Popular Notion, Tertull. Apolog. c. 24. Min. Fell
Oct. 44. Athan. or advers. Gent. p. 25.
that each Nation had a God proper to it self, as is clear from Tertullian,
Minutius, Athanasius, and the rest of the Apologists as they have occasion to
mention it; that as every Nation had a Tutelar Demon of its own, so there was
also a mutual confinement on both sides, that He should be their God, and They
should be his People, that is, that He should confine himself to the care of
that People, and them alone, and that they, and none but they, should have a
Right to worship him, and a Title to his Care, and that they should also
confine themselves to worship none but him, or by his leave. This plainly seems
employed in all those Differences and Fightings of the Gods in Homer, (like that
of Michael the Angel of the Jews fighting against the Prince of the Persians,
Dan. X.20.) not that the Gods themselves were thought to have any animosites
against each other, but that, on account of this confinement of their care to
their own Nations, it was impossible but that they must abet contrary designs,
when the good of one Nation was grounded on the calamity of the other. Then the
God who was concerned for the suffering Nation, endeavored to remove or
alleviate the Suffering; or if he could, to divert it on the Nation whose
greatness he looked on as prejudicial to his own Cure. And on the contrary, the
God that was concerned for the Conquering Nation endeavored all he was able to
reach the happiness designed for his own People, and to defeat the designs of
the Demons concerned against him. The Stoics would Allegorize all those
Differences into the natural contrariety of the Principles of the Universe, as
the strife between Scamander and Vulcan was from the contrariety between Fire
and Water. This might possibly answer the Poets design, as to the Powers by
which those contrary Demons promoted their contrary Interests, that the Power
of Vulcan consisted in his Fire, as the Power of Scamander in his Water. But
why the Power of the Fire and the Sea, Vulcan and Neptune should be concerned
against the Trojans, especially that of the Air, which is common to all, that
is, Juno. Why Apollo, that is, the Sun, should be for the Trojans, and against
the Graecians, this cannot be accounted for but by a confinement of the care of
the Deities themselves. Besides this way of Allegorizing the Gods into
Principles of Nature was lately brought into use by the Stoics, and is very
uncertain whether it was ever designed by the first contrivers of these
Mythological Stories.

strange if it be considered that these Deities themselves were not thought to
be of the Supreme, but of the inferior order of Deities. They were supposed,
even by them who worshipped them, to have limited Powers only as well as limited
Dominions, and accordingly as their Powers lay, so they were thought to be
mutually weaker and stronger than each other. Usually the first occasion of
erecting Altars to them was some Experiment of a Benefit received from them
which was mentioned either in the Title by which they afterward worshipped him,
or inscribed on the Altars so erected by them. And as they judged by the event
wherein their Powers lay, so they did also judge which of them was more
powerful. Thus the Philistines judge concerning the God of the Israel, whom
they took only for a Tutelar of Israel. Woe unto us: who shall deliver us out of
the hand of these mighty Gods? 1 Samuel IV.8.
these are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues in the
wilderness. They thought the God of the Ebrews more powerful than the Gods of
the Egyptians, because he had overthrown their People, and therefore feared
lest he might be too powerful for theirs. Thus God got him glory over the Gods
of the Egyptians in being reputed more powerful than they. Exodus XII.12.
So again when they had conquered the Ark, they place it in the Temple of their
Dagon, no doubt, as a Trophy of the Victory of their Dagon over the God of the
Ebrews, for it was the Ark that they had also been so fearful of before as a
Symbol of the presence of the God of the Ebrews. The same was the notion of the
Syrians, when being defeated by the Israelites, they concluded that the God of
the Israelites was the God of the Hills, 1 King. XX.23, 28.
but that their own Gods were Gods of the Valleys; and therefore they hoped
might prevail against the God of the Ebrews, if they might deal with his People
in the Valleys. Plainly supposing that the God of Israel, as well as their own
Gods, was a particular Tutelary Demon over the Nation of Israel; That their
own Demons were in some things inferior to him, as well as he was in other
things inferior to them; and that therefore none of them were the Supreme Being
which we call God in the appropriated Notion. So also Sennacherib, when he
boasts that none of the Gods of the Nations had delivered his Land out of the
hand of the King of Assyria, 2 King. XVIII.33.35.
and thence concludes that the God of Israel was not likely to deliver his
People from him, was not certainly so vain as to think that he a mortal
creature could be more powerful than any Demon of what rank soever, but that
his own Demon of his own Nation was more powerful than the Demon of Judaea,
as well as he had proved himself more powerful than the Demons of those other
Nations which had been subdued by his People. Accordingly when God foretells the
ruin of the Assyrian Monarchy, he does it so as to insult over their Gods, who
should neither be able to deliver their People, nor their Images, from being
carried captive with them. Is. XLVI.1.
And one of the most powerful Pleas with God to prevail with him to pass by the
Sins of his own People, is the dishonor that would otherwise redound to his own
name, the reproach of his Adversaries, who would thence conclude that he was
unable either at first to save, or after to deliver, his Captivated People.

AGREEABLY hereunto they Felicities and Infelicities of their Nations to the
conduct of their Deities. If any Design succeeded with more than ordinary
Prosperity, they resigned the whole Glory and Acknowledgment, not to their own
Prudence or Courage, but to the vigilance and power of their Tutelary Deity. To
him they paid their Vows; They crowned his Statues; They adorned his Temple;
They appointed Festivities and Solemnities, and sometimes Anniversaries, for
the commemoration of it by the Body of the People; To him they sung their
Hymns, they offered their Eucharistical Sacrifices, they devoted their
Lectisternia, their Plays and Dances, and all their Customs of expressing their
Public Joy: To him, and in his Temple they hung up their Trophies and the
Spoils of their Enemies, as if he alone had been the Author of their whole
Success* So also in their Calamities, when irremediable, they did not, in the
Nations bordering on Palestine, ascribe such, as afterward in the mythical
Times of the Heathens, either to an overruling Fate, or to an Indignation or
Desertion of their Demon. They never thought his Chastisements could extend to
Extermination, nor do they seem to have believed that the Supreme Being so far
concerned himself as a Party in the Transactions between Nations and their
Tutelary Demons, as that any thing was determined by his immediate
interposition, which disbelief of theirs destroys the very Foundation of this
most ancient Notion of Fate. These other Refuges therefore being thus
precluded, the most obvious account remaining that could be given by them of
such calamities, could not be the want of good will or care in their Demons
for their Relief, but only their want of Power, as the Fortune Tellers told
Anthony, that his Genius dreaded the Genius of Augustus. Hereupon it came to
pass that the Nations rivalled one another in the honor of their Tutelary
Demons, as indeed conceiving that Nation most favored by the Supreme Being
which had the most powerful Genius allotted to it. And indeed they judged of
the Power of their Genius by the Success and Prosperity of the Nation for which
he was concerned. Thus it is that the God of Israel himself rivals those
respective Tutelaries, when, according to their Notions concerning him, he
personates himself the part only of a Tutelary. Deuteron. XXXII.31.
Their God was not like the Gods of the Nations, their Enemies themselves being
Judges. This his Enemies were to judge from the greatness of his Deliverances
of his People by the many Signs and Wonders wrought for his People beyond any
thing that ever was pretended of that kind in behalf of any of the Gods of the
Nations. This was gathered from the Glory and Evidence of his Manifestations:
Enquire from the ancient days which were be fore thee, Deuteronomy. IV.32, 33.
from the day wherein God created man upon the earth, whether any such thing
was ever done or known, That a people heard the voice of the Lord God speaking
out of the midst of the fire, as thou have heard, and lived. This was also
gathered from the Wisdom of their Laws, for that was also taken for another
principal instance wherein the care of their Tutelar was thought to be
concerned. So he reasons elsewhere: Ib. v. 6, 7, 8.
This is your wisdom and understanding among the Peoples, that when they shall
hear of these Precepts, they shall say, This is a wise and understanding
People, a great Nation. Neither is there any other Nation which has Gods so
near them as the Lord our God is near unto us in all wherein we call upon him.
For what Nation is there that has Laws and Statutes and Judgments so righteous
as these which I set before you this day. Thus God proves the happiness of the
Jews in having him as a Tutelary, that they were by so much more secure of a
prosperous condition under his Government as he was more able to protect them
than the Demons of other Nations. And if it was counted a higher degree of
favor to have a more powerful Genius, much more it was to have an Omnipotent
One, to have the God of those Gods, the distributer and allotter of all those
Provinces to those several Genii. This was a favor, not only beyond the
enjoyment, but the expectation also, of any other Nation.

THIS Doctrine, That the Jews other Nation besides, was under the immediate
care and providence of the Supreme Being is so far from being a Paradox, as
that indeed it is the Doctrine of the Scriptures themselves, and the Foundation
of their being the Segullah, the chosen People and peculiar Property of the
Supreme God himself. Undoubtedly the Hellenists did so understand the passage
in Deuteronomy, XXXII.8. where God is said to have set the bounds of the
Nations, (...), as the LXXII read it. Accordingly as they anciently reckoned
LXXII Nations in the Greek, Genesis X. so they reckoned LXXII Angels President
over them, that is, S. Hieron. in Matthew. XXVI.
so many Chiliarchs as were in XII Roman Legions consisting of six thousand
each of them. And as the present Jews reckon but LXX Nations, so they also
allow LXX Angels. When therefore immediately after the former words, the Sacred
Writer adds, Vide Bochart. Phaleg. I.15.
For the Lords portion is his people: Jacob is the lot of his inheritance,
Verse 9. Who sees not how appositely this follows that meaning of the former
Verse in which the LXXII understood it? Whereas God had allotted Angels to the
Government of other Nations, he reserved Israel for his own lot, and when he
bounded the inheritance of the other Nations, he marked out Israel for his own
inheritance. Plainly he alludes to the way of dividing Inheritances by lot,
which as in Egypt it was necessary for distinguishing their proportions after
the inundation of Nile, so probably from thence the custom was also derived to
other Countries where there was not the like necessity. Accordingly we find the
Land of Canaan divided at first by lot, which the Apostle in the Acts calls
(...), and (...) and sors are not only used synonymously in Greek and Latin
Authors with Inheritance, but in the Language of the Old Testament also: so
David: The lot is fallen unto me in a fair ground, Ps. XVI.7.
yea I have a goodly heritage. And it is particularly the Language of the
Heathens themselves, when they speak of this distribution of Provinces among
their Gods. So they make the distribution of the Heaven, the Sea, and Hell
between their three chief Gods, Jupiter, and Neptune, and Pluto, so they also
make the distribution of the other Provinces and Jurisdictions among the other
Gods also of the inferior Orders, and call the proportion of each by the name
of (...), sors, etc. So that this is as accurately worded, as was possible, for
the sense of which I am at present discoursing. Considering therefore this
fitness of the Connection, methinks it should be no improbable conjecture, if I
should conceive that instead of (...) in the former Verse the ancient Reading
was (...), the Sons of God, as this name of Sons of God was in Genesis VI.2, 4. as
it was then understood by the Hellenists universally, and yet more confessedly
in Job I.6.II.1.XXXVIII.7. ascribed to the Angels. The forementioned
Translation of the LXXII seems to imply that they found and understood it so in
the Ebrew Copies of their Age. And the change was not difficult from (...) to
(...), which might also be mistaken for a contraction for (...). An instance of
this is commonly observed in the pretended Sanchoniathon. Or if the change be
rather deduced from a mistake of El for a final abbreviation of the word
Israel: yet there are instances of Abbreviations as harsh as this among the
Massorites, that none may wonder at this.

ACCORDINGLY after the Golden Calf, God threatens them with the condition of
other Nations, to perform his promise to them, and to drive the Nations of
Canaan from before them; but not to do it in his own person, but by the Message
of an Angel. Exodus XXXII.34. Therefore now go, lead the People unto the place
of which I have spoken unto thee: Behold, mine Angel shall go before thee.
XXXIII.2, 3. And I will send an Angel before thee, and I will drive out the
Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the
Jebusite: Unto a land flowing with milk and honey: For I will not go up in the
midst of thee. Plainly God's sending his Angel with them is opposed to his
going up with them in his own Person. This he had elsewhere threatened in case
of their disobedience. Exodus XXIII.20. And bids them beware of him, and obey
his voice, and not to provoke him: for he would not pardon their iniquities,
for his name was in him. What need was there of so many and so express Cautions
in this matter, but because they who had been used to the Personal Conduct of
God himself, might be apt to despise the Conduct of an Angel? He assures them
that in that regard their condition should be rather worse, and their
punishment more severe, in case of disobedience, that the Angel would be more
concerned for God's dishonor, than God would be for his own. And why should he
speak of the Angels punishing them, and not pardoning their Iniquities, unless
he meant it of such a Power that the Angel should have over them as over other
Nations, to punish or pardon at his own pleasure, not barely to execute the
particular Commands of God, which had not been inconsistent with the
continuation of the Theocracy. The same Angel is elsewhere called the Hornet,
Exodus XXIII.28. Deuteronomy. VII. Josh. XXIV.12.

TO return therefore thither from Exodus XXXII, XXXIII. God thereupon denies
them the name of his People: Thy people (says he to Moses) which thou
broughtest out of the land of Egypt, etc. Exodus XXXII.7. And agian, Thou, and
the people which thou have brought up out of the land of Egypt, etc. XXXIII.1.
And so Moses understood it when he removed the Tabernacle without the Camp,
afar off from the Camp, and called it the Tabernacle of the Congregation. The
Tabernacle was a Symbol of God's Presence, and the removing of it did therefore
plainly signify a removal of that special Presence which he had been pleased
to show among them; and the distance to which it was removed, as it signified
the greatness of God's displeasure against them, so it signified withal the
distance God intended hence forward to keep at from them, as far as it is
possible for God to be distant, that is, in regard of that special presence of
care and particular concernment which he had for them whilst he owned them as
his People. So Moses understood it, and prays accordingly, Verse 15, 16. If thy
presence go not with me, carry us not up hence. For wherein shall it be known
here, that I and thy people have found grace in thy sight? Is it not in that
thou go with us? So shall we be separated, I and thy people, from all the
people that are upon the face of the earth. Plainly therefore his sending the
Angel with them employed the withdrawing of his own presence from them. The
presence so withdrawn was that whereby they were known to have found grace in
his sight, that is, whereby they were known to be his peculiar Favorites; and
that whereby the People of Israel were separated from all the People that were
upon the face of the earth. That is, wherein they were preferred before all
other Nations. What is this but the very notion of their being the Segullah?
That therefore must have consisted in this peculiar Presidency of God over them.

THE same appears from the Prince of Persia mentioned in Dan. X.13. who
Watcher, and the holy One, Dan. IV.13, 23. This is the very name of these
Tutelar Demons in the Book of Enoch, from whence we may well conclude the
sense of that Age of the Hellenists, and of the Primitive Christians. The same
may also be gathered from all those other places where God is called peculiarly
the God of Israel, and they peculiarly his People and his Inheritance. I might
show that the Jews have always understood it so, not only the Moderns, who
professedly make all other Nations subject to the Angels, and to Fate, but
themselves only obnoxious to God, and mean this by their so much boasted
Privilege of being the Segullah; but their ancient Predecessors, who always
appropriate to themselves the worship of the Supreme Being, and that peculiar
Providence which results from his particular care of them, and own no Nation
interested therein but themselves. I might show that the first Christians
understood it so from the beginning, both from their Expositions of the
forementioned passage in Deuteronomy, and from the account they give generally
from the Book of Enoch, Clem. Romanus.
how the (...) which were worshipped by the Heathens, tho they were created good
by God, and so were good when they were first allotted to their several
Charges, yet afterward they fell by their pollution with Women, and their
assuming the Titles and Honors of Gods to themselves, derogating therein from
the honor of him who had entrusted them. I have rather chosen to deduce all
from the first Fountains from whence both the ancient and modern Jews and
Christians first deduced them. This I know will signify more with that sort of
Adversaries with whom I have to deal at present. Yet it being actually
understood so by all those for whose use it was designed by the Holy Ghost, and
to whose capacities his expressions were most designedly fitted; it is a great
presumption that the Holy Ghost did at first intend that it should be
understood so.

NOW tho it was their Temporal Interest Tutelar Deities, that was prayed for,
and expected, from them by their respective Nations who owned and challenged a
Right to their Tuition (for such things only their public Prayers were
generally made, and for such alone their Thanksgivings were generally returned)
and therefore it was suitably Temporal Benefits which were also to be expected
from the God of Israel in this capacity: yet even so it was a great
condescension and benefit. It was an ennobling of the Nation, that God should
undertake that for them in his own Person, which he did for others by his
Substitutes. It was an Argument of a Will more favorable, and inclined to do
Benefits for them, and an Argument to encourage them to expect Benefits from
him with greater assurance, when he was pleased to exempt them from all care
but his own. But besides the good will, the Power of such a Patron was also
extremely desirable. The Gods of other Nations were only confined to certain
Powers of doing Benefits for them; but they knew they could need no Benefit but
what was in the Power of such a God to give them. They were confined to their
Countries and Provinces; but no distance could exile them from the Power of him
who made, and preserved, and governed the whole world. They might be overcome
by other Demons, either absolutely more powerful, or, at least, more powerful
in some particular Cases. They had power over their own People, but not over
those other Nations and Demons that might hurt them. But this they were sure
of who had the Supreme Being for their Patron, that nothing could befall them
without his Permission and Design; that even the Demons of other Nations
should be controlled and countermanded for their good; that therefore nothing
could forfeit them their happiness, even in this World, but their own Demerits;
that therefore when any Calamity befell them, they might assuredly conclude it
was intended for their good; and that nothing could make it prove otherwise but
their own Perverseness; that upon their Repentance they should more easily find
acceptance as the greatest minds are most inclinable to pardon; that when the
Atonement was made, and themselves disposed to make a beneficial use of their
Restitution, no Power whatsoever should be able to hinder it. These were
Privileges, even in regard of this Life, which none could challenge but the
Worshipers of the Supreme Deity.

BUT if God had thus permitted the Nations to the Government of Angels,
Idolatry of worshipping those Angels? What Sin had it been to have desired those
things from them which God had put in their natural Power, and of which he had
made them the allowed Distributers; or to have returned them the thanks due for
favors so received upon such Addresses to them? What had it been more than to
have desired the like favors from our Fellow-Mortals, or to return them thanks
for kindnesses which cannot be denied to be in their natural Power? But this
will not hinder but that 1. It had been Idolatry, and a proper robbing the
Supreme Being of the Honor which was actually due to him if the Jews his own
People had been guilty of any such Addresses to any Angels or Creatures
whatsoever. For being assured that God himself would undertake the care of them
in his own Person, they were thereby consequently assured, that no Benefits,
how possible soever otherwise to mere Creatures, were actually to be expected
from them, and that what Benefits were actually received, did not actually come
from them. And to make Addresses to them for Benefits which not they, but the
Supreme Being alone, must give them, if they were to be given at all; and to
return thanks to them for favors not actually received from them, but from the
Supreme God, this was plainly to rob him of so much of his Honor which was
actually due to him, and to give that honor to his Creatures. This is the Case
actually complained of by God, that when He, and He alone had actually given
them Corn and Wine, Hos. II.8.
they should notwithstanding return their acknowledgments to their Idols. AND
2. For Heathens where they are blamed for their Worship in the Old Testament,
it seems rather to have been on other accounts than barely for paying their
Acknowledgments to the Prefects placed over them by God. Such were their
worshipping them by Terrestrial Images, to which they had no reason to believe
them present; their worshipping them in the general Elements of Nature which
were common to all mankind, not proper to the care of particular Nations; their
worshipping them by Rites and Ceremonies unworthy of a Deity, such were the
Cruelties of Moloch, and the Uncleanness of Succoth Benoth, etc. Or lastly,
their setting up these Lieutenants of God, in opposition to God himself; their
trusting in the Presidency of their Demons for Victories to be gained over
God's own People, and for Deliverances from Judgments to be inflicted on them
by God himself in his Peoples Cause. This the People might be, and frequently
were, guilty of, tho the Demons themselves, who were worshipped by them, had
given them no cause, on account of that common popular mistake among them,
whereby they took the God of Israel only for a Tutelar Genius of the common
rank like their own, and one that might be overpowered by others. Otherwise
where they paid their due Deference to the Supreme Being, as Nebuchadnezzar
and Cyrus, there does not appear the least intimation of blame for their
honoring their Country Demons in subordination to him. The Case of the
Cuthaeans is different, who were Inhabitants of the Country which belonged to
his particular Jurisdiction.

Demons were indeed evil ones, and were known to be so, and to be Rebels to
the Supreme Being, then, no doubt, it was unlawful for any of God's Creatures
to pay them any respect, or to have any thing to do with them. This was
undoubtedly as obliging as all Subjects are obliged to desert and resist a
Lieutenant otherwise lawfully empowered by him who had Power to constitute him,
in case of actual Rebellion against him by whom he had been constituted. And as
far as they had any reason to believe them to be evil from the Impurity of the
Worship required by them, so far they were, no doubt, obliged to detest them as
Enemies. But this was not clearly and universally discovered till the times of
the Gospel. As for the time wherein they were first deputed to this Office of
being Tutelars to the Nations, the (...) in Enoch were as yet innocent when
they were first entrusted by God. For these were not supposed to have fallen
with Lucifer before the fall of Man, but afterward when they polluted
themselves with Women. From thence forward they challenged to themselves Divine
Honor, and instituted Symbols of Cruelty and Lust (which were the principal
Vices into which they then degenerated) and intruded themselves into the
Statues and Sacrifices that were designed for purer Beings. This I may the more
confidently rely on as a true account of this matter, being it is that to which
the Primitive Apologists do constantly refer us in their accounts of the
Original of the Worship of evil Spirits, derived by them also from the
Doctrines and Traditions of the Hellenists, from whose Notions that Book of
Enoch was exactly calculated. The only prejudice against it at present is the
pure incorporeal nature of all sorts of Devils. But neither is there any
necessity, on a Philosophical Account, that this Doctrine should be true; and
it was certainly no popular received Doctrine in that Age, and therefore can be
no competent Standard for judging concerning the Orthodoxy of other Doctrines
of those times.

IT may also be objected on the other immediate Care of the Jews but that he
also made use of the ministry of Angels in managing it. And the New Testament
it self gives this account of it, and lays great stress upon it in its
Reasonings for the Preeminence of the Gospel above the Law of Moses. It is said
to be an Angel that spoke Act. VII.30, 35.
to Moses in the Bush, and the Law is said to have been Ib. v. 53.
given by the disposition of Angels; from whence it is that the Apostle Heb.
11.2, 3.
infers the Dignity of the Gospel above the Law, because our Savior by whom the
Gospel is delivered, has a Heb. 1, 4.
more honorable name given him than those Angels, not now to mention the Angel
of Abraham, Genesis XXIV.7. nor the Angel of Jacob Genesis XLVIII.16. nor the Angel
of Gods Presence, Is. LXIII.9. There is no doubt but God did then, and still
does perform many good offices for his People, by the ministry of Angels. But
there is a great difference between committing to their general care, as
Prefects of Provinces, which still leaves particular Benefits to their
Arbitrary distribution, and between a service of Satellites, where nothing is
left arbitrary, but the whole Service is determined by him who employs them
without asking their consent. The former does indeed leave some ground for
addresses and Thanks for Benefits left to their arbitrary distribution, and of
that kind the Power of the (...) and (...), as Julian the Apostate calls them,
seems to have been, Apud Cyvil. Al.
in the sense also of these Hellenistical Jews and Christians, who allowed such
Prefects over the Gentile Nations. They allowed them a Power of doing good to
their Subjects, and of punishing their contempts and neglects of Religion, and
an earnest concernment for their several respective charges. Else there had
been no reason to speak of Fightings between them, as in the Book of Daniel, or
of some being worsted and others being victorious, if each of them had been
determined in every particular act of his Office by an express command of God.
As for the Angels employed in the concernments of the Jews, and those which are
still commanded on the like Offices for the Heirs Heb. I.14.
of Salvation, they are plainly spoken of as (...), as the Angels of Isaiah
LXIII.9.
his Presence, as part of the Train Is. VI.1.
of God, like the Satellites and (...) of Princes, to whom no Addresses are
made or Thanks thought due for Services performed by them in obedience to the
particular express commands of their several Princes. This seems plainly the
Case of those Angels who deliver these messages, not in their own names, but
the Name of God, and are accordingly also styled by his incommunicable Name,
which no Creature could or durst take on its own account. I think there are
hardly any Angels mentioned as employed on that account, but the Jews
themselves, when they are either named in the Scriptures themselves, or when
they venture, from their conjectural Traditions, to determine who they were,
reckon them among the Seven which they make continual attendants on the
Majestatick Presence of their Maker. The difference of these cases is very
manifest even in the Practice of Earthly Princes. They also usually govern the
Province of their Residence in Person, yet not so but that they employ others
even there for the Servile parts of the Government. Yet the Persons so employed
are not so empowered as to cut off ordinary Addresses to their Persons, as the
Prefects of Provinces are who are at a greater distance.

YET I am not so concerned, whether Segullah were so originally designed by
God, as that he never intended any further Providence for other Nations beyond
the Provision of Provincial Angels. Whether it was by Gods Original Intention,
on their own demerits; yet it was actually so, that God did not so particularly
take care of the Temporal Government and Prosperity of any other Nation as he
did for Israel, God was not so nigh any others as he was to them, he had not
dealt so with any other Nation, neither had the heathen knowledge of his Laws;
and that this was the great Privilege wherein they gloryed on the account of
their pretensions to be the Segullah. They had particular pretensions to Gods
favor above others on account of the Promises made to their Forefathers, on
account of the particular Covenant he made with them, That He would be their
God and that they should be his People, on account of the Laws he had given
them, of the Tabernacle and Temple he had accepted as designing a more peculiar
Ordinary Residence among them, of the Succession of Prophets and Urim, and
other ways he had instituted of being consulted by them on occasional
emergencies, in regard of the Shuhinah, those ordinary manifestations of his
presence among them, the Cloud, and the Pillar of fire in the Wilderness, and
the glory that shadowed the mercy Seat during the whole time of the first
Temple, in regard of that particular care he took to raise them Deliverers, and
to give them victories in the times of their necessities, in punishing and
rewarding other Nations as they proved good or inhumane to them, and giving
other Nations for their ransom, and doing so great things for them in the
sight of the World, that in them all the Nations of the World should be
blessed, that is, that all other Nations should wish that all those to whom
they wished well, might be treated as they were (for so I understand that
primary meaning of these words) and in securing these happinesses to them, so
by his Promises and his Covenant, that nothing could possibly drive them off
them but their own Sins. If God did concern himself for other Nations in his
own Person, yet these were peculiar favors which Israel enjoyed, and could
challenge by virtue of their Covenant, and which no other Nation could
challenge but they. In these regards therefore which are very considerable and
beneficial, it cannot be denied but that the God of Israel was properly the God
of Israel as the other Gods of their respective Nations. Besides this,
Appropriation is most clearly signified in that Title of a Husband so
frequently ascribed to God in the Prophets, especially as the same Allegory is
continued by them in the Consequences of that Title. On this account his
Peoples leaving him is called Whoredom, and his receiving the Gentiles into
their Privileges is called a giving them a Bill of divorce, and a provoking
them to jealousy. How could this be if the Appropriation had not been mutual?
How had it been whoredom in them to follow other Gods if they had not been
obliged to him alone for their God as a Wife is to her Husband? How had his
receiving the Gentiles, been called a provoking them to Jealousy, if it had not
been a showing the Gentiles that favor which as a Wife, they had thought
proper to themselves.

CHAP. VII. The way of Appropriating a God (according to the Customs of those
Times) was by Sacrifices received in One Place, and from One Altar, and One
High Priest.
The CONTENTS.
2. The way of appropriating a God to a Nation was by Sacrifice. Sect. I. The
Popular Sacrifices were to be considered as Ceremonies of Covenanting and
particularly of Covenanting with their Gods as well as with one another. Sect.
II. These Sacrifices were confined to particular Nations. Sect. III. Especially
their Mysteries. Sect. IV. The most Ancient Sacrifices were generally thus
confined. Sect. V. How this was consistent with the Heathens permitting the
Worship of the Gods of other Nations besides their own. Sect. VI. The
Covenanting Symbols of Unity that were used in their Common Sacrifices. Sect.
VII, VIII. The Sacrifices were also Natural Means of promoting this Unity of
the Sacrificers with their Gods. Sect. IX. The Consequences following hereupon.
Sect. X.

3. The National Panegyres or Assemblies for participating in those National
Sacrifices confined to a certain place Sect. XI. Moses very probably alluded
herein to the Practices of the Egyptians. Sect. XII.

4. In the Panegyres so fixed, All the Sacrifices then feasted on were to be
received from One Altar. Sect. XIII. The Reason. Sect. XIV.

5. The Affairs of that One Altar always, managed by One chief Priest. Sect. XV.

2. THEREFORE it is to be observed further that the way of I am not now
concerned whether Sacrifices were introduced by Primary Institution. It
suffices for my purpose that they were taken up by God from the practices
already obtaining among the Heathens, as several of the Ancients conceive, who
deny any Prim^^y approbation of them. If they were taken up on this account,
the Argument will hold more strongly for my purpose. For if they were not taken
up for their own sake, then it plainly follows that there could be no other
design in admitting them but that they might perform the same Office to the
Israelites, as they had to other Nations which had received them before. And
therefore if the design of them before was a mutual appropriation of a God to a
Nation, and of a Nation to a God; this, and this alone, can be understood to be
the design of them as used also among the Israelites. Yet the Reasoning will
also hold on the other Hypothesis. For if they had been taken upon particular
approbation, yet considering that the main use of them consists in their
signification, the common justice of Converse will require that, being signs of
common use, they should be intended in the common notorious signification.
There was reason to presume that they would be so understood by them to whom
they were used, and there had been indeed no reason to guide them to expound
them otherwise. As therefore the justice of dealing requires that Persons
conversing do design to be rightly understood by those with whom they deal; so
the same justice, in order to the same designs, requires that what
significations of their mind shall be made use of, be understood the same way
as it is known that the Persons dealt with will, and will have reason to
understand them. These common Rules of Equity in dealing are used and appealed
to for a justification of his own dealing by God himself. It remains therefore
that I show that this was the design of Sacrifices among the Heathens, to
appropriate a Nation to the Care of a particular Demon, so that they who were
admitted to such Sacrifices might challenge an interest in the Demons Care,
and they who had no Right to be admitted to the Sacrifices should be also
supposed to have no Right to that Care and Protection of the Demon, and they
who were excluded from the Sacrifices, should also be judged excluded from that
Protection.

This appears from the most ancient use and design of Sacrifices as Ceremonies
of entering into Covenant. This appears even from Homer who constantly makes
this the way of ratifying all Leagues and Truces, and such things wherein it
was requisite that Faith should be obliged. Seldom in Marm. Arund.
And as all Covenants were with Oaths, and those Oaths with Imprecations in
case of violation, so these Sacrifices were purposely designed to signify the
devoting their own Lives like that of the Beast, if they should break their
word, and they made choice of Sacred Rites and Religious for this purpose, that
the Gods might engage for the punishment of the offender if he should, through
subtilty or might, prove too powerful for Humane Justice. This Custom therefore
of making Covenants with Sacrifice, was taken from the Practices of Men into
use in Covenanting with the Gods themselves. And tho it be certain that the
whole design of Ordinary Sacrifices was not for making new Covenants as often
as they Sacrificed, yet they were all for maintaining that Commerce and
Conversation with the Deities which were first grouned on the Covenant it self.
By the first Covenant they were united to their Gods. Accordingly the
Idolatrous Israelites are said to have joined themselves to Baal Peor, Number.
XXV.3.5. Psalm. CVI.28.
(...) is the word in the LXXII, because it was indeed in these (...) that the
Covenants were properly made, and wherein this Discipline was most strictly
observed. And from hence followed a Right to the other Sacrifices, whence it is
that the Apostle makes a partaking in the Devils Sacrifices to be a
communicating with the Devils themselves, 1 Cor. X.20. the same way as
communicating with our Eucharistical Mystical Sacrifices is communicating with
our Savior, Verse 21.

This Covenant therefore of the Gods with Nations was confined to the Nations
Covenants were made, so that no other Nation had a Right to partake in the
Sacred Privileges of others. When Hercules designed the fetching of Cerberus
out of Hell, having heard of how great efficacy the Mysteries were accounted
for passing into the other World, he applies himself to Eumolpus for his
initiation into them, Apollodor. Bibl. L.II. Sect. 12. Plutarch. These. p. 16.
Scholiast. Homer. Il. TH. V.368. Schol. Aristoph. in Plin.
but could not gain the favor till he was first adopted by Pylius. The reason
is expressly given, (...); and these Mysteries were in Attica, so that Hercules
must first be made an Athenian before he could be admitted to them, as the Jews
also received Gentiles into their Nation by Proselytism. So the Dioscuri were
also adopted by Aphydnus on the same design of initiation. Plutarch. These. ib.
Meurs. Elcusin. c. 19.


And this is the very reason insisted on by Julian the Apostate, for excusing
Diogenes from the accusation of Impiety in refusing to be initiated, that he
could not be admitted without an Adoption into the City of the Athenians. For
he was not born there, but at Sinope. This he takes to have been inconsistent
with his larger profession of being a Citizen of the whole world. Julian. Orat
VII. ad Heracl. Cynic. de Sect. Cynic. v. 441.442. Edit. Petavii.
So he: (...). That Bacchus also and Aesculapius and Hippocrates were
initiated, was by a particular favor for so highly valued Persons. That however
they intended originally to exclude all that were not of their own Nation,
appears from the form alluded to in Theon Smyrnaeus, which I am apt to think he
might have had from the (...) of the (...) himself. Theon Smyr. Math. Plat. c.
1. p. 18.
These are his words, (...) (...). Isocr. in Panegyr. Lucian* Demon.
Their forbidding Barbarians is mentioned expressly by Isocrates and Lucian, no
doubt intended by this very expression of an unknown Tongue. It is the
Character of a Barbarian in S. Paul himself, If I know not the meaning of the
voice, I shall be unto him that speaks a Barbarian, and he that speaks
shall be a Barbarian unto me, 1 Cor. XIV.11. Isocrates will have this first
introduced in opposition to the Persians in resentment of their invasion, but
it appears there was no need of any such resentment for it, when it was so
agreeable to their Original Constitutions, that even Hercules and the Dioscuri,
Bacchus and Aesculapius and Hippocrates, tho Grecians by extraction, could not
be admitted without Incorporation. If therefore this were the Original Form,
then we see it so severely interpreted as that even the difference of a Dialect
was comprehended under the (...). The difference was no greater between them
and the other Grecians. So it is also understood by Aeschylus, (...). VI.151.
who calls the Argive Army under Adrastus against Thebes, (...). This will also
give light to that expression of the Prophet where God threatens his People,
that he would provoke them with a People of another Tongue, Isaiah XXVIII.11. 1
Co. XIV.21.
that is, by admitting others to their Privileges, that were Barbarians to
them, that is, Persons of another Nation, the same thing that he had elsewhere
threatened them, Deuteron. XXXII.21. Romans X.19.
to provoke them to jealousy by a people that were no people, and by a foolish
nation. Nay so far were they from admitting persons of another Nation to their
Mysteries, as that it was Piacular and Capital for any such to be found so much
as in their Temples whilst any such Rite was performing. There is a remarkable
story in Livy to this purpose: Live. Lib. XXXII. c. 14.
Two Acarnanian Youths uninitiated came into the Temple of Ceres, ignorantly,
but at their going out discovered themselves by some impertinent Questions,
being unskilful in the worship there performed. Being discovered, they were
carried before the Priests, and were put to death for the Profanation, tho it
appeared that they came in without any ill design. And as none other Nations
might be admitted to their Sacrifices, so neither were they thought to have any
Right in their Prayers: so Philo expressly: (...) (...). He adds indeed, De
Monarch. L.II. p. 565.
that the Jewish High Priest did represent and make intercession for the whole
World. But this could not possibly be understood concerning such things as were
proper to themselves as the Segullah, such as were the Promises of the Land of
Canaan Literally, and of Heaven as mystically promised also under those
mystical Representations. But as these Prayers for other Nations seem to have
been first introduced after their dispersion into other Countries (I do not
remember the least intimation of it in any of the Psalms that were ancienter
than the Captivity, nor in any of the other ancienter Devotions which occur
occasionally in the other Historical Books of the Old Testament;) so possibly
the design of such Prayers and Sacrifices might have been for those of their
own Nation alone who were, by this time, dispersed into most Countries upon
Colonies; and this the rather because they were incorporated into most of the
Cities into which such Colonies had been deduced by the favor of the Macedonian
Founders, and the Indulgence of the Roman Conquerors, which Incorporation made
them accounted as parts of those Nations into which they had been incorporated.
Ap. Justin. Mart. in Dialog.
Thus Trypho understood the Prophecies concerning the Conversions of the
Nations. Or if they were pleased to include native Gentiles themselves, yet
they might have been those Proselytes which were daily brought over by the Jews
conversing with them to some degree of Proselytism, if not that of Justice
(which made them no longer reputed Gentiles) at least that of the Gates, which
was consistent with their Gentilism. The History of the New Testament assures
us that there were very considerable numbers of such Converts, Act. II.5.
and that from every Nation under Heaven, and these they did admit to an
inferior portion in their Prayers. Witness that part of the Temple purposely
allotted for them called the Court of the Gentiles, S. Joh. XII.20.
and their coming up to worship at the Solemn Panegyres. Or if yet further they
admitted any Prayers for Gentiles still persisting in their Gentile
Distinctives, and Gentile Religions; yet even so the reason was not for the
Gentiles themselves any further than as the Jewish Interests were so involved
with theirs as that the Jewish affairs could not be prosperous, unless those
greater Bodies, of which themselves were the less considerable parts, were
prosperous also. This is the reason given by the Prophet why they were to pray
to God for the Cities whither they should be carried Captive, for in the peace
thereof shall ye have peace. And this was the case of those who were
Inhabitants of the Colonies, Jeremiah XXIX.7.
and of all of them when Subjects to Gentile Princes. On this account, and this
alone, they sacrificed for the Persian Kings and the Roman Emperors, when they
were verily persuaded that it was God's pleasure to give them up to that
slavery, tho even so the Zealots made all the opposition they could against it.
Yet after all, considering that the God owned by themselves was the common
Creator and Governor of all other Nations as well as themselves; and that
thereupon it followed that he must have had an obligation from his own
beneficent nature as well to do them good, as he had an unalienable Right to
govern them; and that no substitution of Prefects is ever thought sufficient to
hinder the immediate interposition of a Prince, when he is pleased to command a
kindness for his Provincial Subjects: It cannot therefore be thought strange
that such favors as were not derogatory to the Properties reserved for the
Peculiar People should be desired for other Nations also, especially if those
general Terms of all mankind, and the whole world, be understood in the usual
limitation of those Phrases in that Age, so as to extend no further than the
Roman Empire. So far they were obliged to pray for them on the account now
mentioned of their own Interest. And so far they were imitated by the Primitive
Christians, who prayed for their Heathen Emperors when they were not engaged in
actual Persecution, and for a quiet world, that is for the Peace of the Roman
Empire, tho otherwise their Prayers were (as I have elsewhere shown) confined
to the visible Members of the Orthodox Communion. Separat. proved Schismatic.
However it is otherwise certain that the now mentioned passages of Philo must
not be understood so as to hinder the confinement of their ordinary Sacrifices
to their own Nation.

Mysteries, which because of their great Sacredness, and the horror they had of
innovating any thing concerning them, kept longest to their Original
Discipline. And it was from their Initia that they derived their Right of
partaking in their Sacrifices. In the instance last mentioned we see it was
Piacular for Persons uninitiated so much as to be present at their Worship. How
much less then must it have been lawful for them to partake of the Sacrifices.
We see therefore that it was agreeable to the common usages of that kind, when
the Jews counted it a profanation of their Temple, whenever the Gentiles
proceeded into the Holy Place. So they did in the Case of Antiochus and Pompey.
Joseph.
And so they did in the supposed Case of S. Paul, when they thought he had
brought Trophimus the Ephesian into it, Act. XX.28, 29.
pretending thereupon that he had polluted the holy place. As for the place
allowed to the Gentiles, the outer Court, it is commonly observed from the
employment they put it to, in trading for their Sacrifices, that they did not
acccount it holy. And indeed how could they count them holy enough to partake
of their holy things, when the strict ones among them counted it a Legal
Pollution so much as to touch them, or to converse with them in public places,
and when they would not so much as eat with them? S. Peter when the Jews came
from Jerusalem, Gal. II.12.
was fain to separate from eating with the Gentiles to preserve the good
opinion of his Countrymen. They who took it for a pollution to partake with
them in their common meals, how much more must they have thought it so, to have
admitted them to any sacred Commerce? Upon this account it cannot be thought
strange that the Jews rejected the Cuthaeans from any hand in building the
Temple with them, notwithstanding that they professed to worship the God of
Israel. They tell them, that they had nothing to do to build an House to their
God. Ezr. IV.3. What can be a clearer Argument of this Appropriation than this,
that, they were not permitted so much as to assist in building an House to
their God, without complete Proselytism? This was plainly an Appropriation of
their God, and their Altar.

FOR tho, for the reason now given, Heathens that they did Appropriate their
Mysteries to Persons of their own Nation; yet there are not wanting great
Presumptions that Originally, before Conquest, and Servile complyances, had
broken all their Rules, it was intended that their Sacrifices should be proper
also, and their Plays and all their great Festivals. Thus in the Olympicks,
none but Greeks were permitted to have any part, and in the Panionia none but
the Ionians. And this keeping to their Country Gods was so constantly kept to,
even when they went on Colonies, and accordingly the Colonies still reserved an
honorable place for those of their Mother Cities in their Sacred Rites, as
appears in the Case of Corcyra and Corinth in Thucydides; Lib. I.
and on the contrary the Metropolis also received those of their Colonies to
theirs at home as all the Grecian Colonies of Sicily and Magna Graecia in Italy
were permitted to strive in the Grecian Olympicks. Thus it was that their
Citizens, however dispersed, still kept up a memory of their affinity: and
there was no certainer Argument, those many ancient Geographers, who wrote
concerning Colonies, had to prove the Relations Cities had to each other; than
this of the Community of their Religions, and the correspondence maintained
between them in their Sacrifices, which could have been no Argument, if the
Right of their Sacrifices had not been thought proper to the respective
Nations. Hence those strict Injunctions of wisemen every where among them,
obliging all to worship their Country Gods, and in the way of their Countries.
Aur. Car. Pythag. v. 3.
This seems to be the meaning of the (...) in the Golden verses, and was
imitated, as other things of the Pythagoraeans were, by Plato. Ap. Xenoph. Mem.
IV.
So Socrates, being asked whether it was lawful to worship the Gods as they
pleased, denies it, but confines them to the Laws of their Country (...). And
it was one of the Fundamental Constitutions of the Athenians from the time of
Draco one of their most ancient Lawgivers: Ap. Porph. de Abst. L.IV. 22.
(...), Stob. Sermon. XLI. Ed. Gesner. (...) Tigur. 1453. p. 252. (...).
etc. And one of the Oaths which the Athenian youths were in obliged to take,
was (...), as we have the form of the Oath in Stobaeus. Nor was this only the
sense of their wisemen and Legislators, but even of their Gods themselves.
Apollo is quoted for it by Socrates in Xenophon, Ap. Xenophon. Mem. IV. and ap.
Ciceron. de Legib. II.
as if he always gave it as an Answer to all that consulted him how they should
serve the Gods most acceptably? that they should do it (...). And Aristotle
says that not only He, but all other Oracles, required it, Aristot. Rhetor. ad
Alexandr.
that they should (...). Accordingly it was a punishable crime not only among
the Jews, but among the Heathens also, to introduce new Religions. Among the
Athenians the Areopagites were the Court in which they were to be tried who
offended in this kind. Ap. Laert. L.II. in Socrat. Xenoph. Mem. 1 Plat. Apol.
Socr. 1 Isocr. Eucom. Busirid. Just. Martyr. Paraen.
This was the Accusation against Socrates: (...), that we may not wonder that
St. Paul also was accused before that same Judicatory in the same form, that he
was (...), because he Preached to them Jesus and the Resurrection, whom they
took for another Demon called Anastasis. At Rome also the Bacchanalia, Live.
39. c. 8, etc. Vide Guther. de Jur. Pont. 1.34. Ap. Cicer. de Leg. II.
being introduced secretly by some Greeks were suppressed by order from the
Senate. And in this regard it is very true that the receiving or excluding new
Religions was indeed the Privilege of the Senate, and the Government, and
forbidden private Persons by the Laws of the XII. Tables. Thus was the worship
of Isis excluded out of Rome by Tiberius. Thus was the worship of Christ
excluded out of Rome by order of the Senate, Josep. Ant. XVIII.4.
when Tiberius referred it to them, whether it should be received, if the Story
in Tertullian to this purpose be true. Tertul. Apolog.
And thus were the Emperors Canonized, after that Custom also grew fashionable.
Seeing therefore they were all obliged to worship the Demons of their Country;
seeing there were Laws made against Innovations in Religion; both these put
together will plainly amount to the Appropriations of Deities designed to be
proved by us.

Government, they might introduce new Religions, yet is not this any Argument
against the confinement I am speaking of. Those Gods were thought to be such,
as that many of them might have the care of the same Nation in different, or
subordinate regards. And as they supposed each of them to have his Province
allotted him by the assignation of the Supreme Being, so they also thought that
their Provinces might be changed or enlarged by consent of the Demons
themselves, or by assignation of the Supreme who was their common Superior. But
this reason did not reach the God of the Jews, who being the Supreme, and being
alone sufficient for all the necessities of his People needed no other
Coadjutor within his own charge; and it was not agreeable with the Rules of
Majesty to have a Provincial in the Jurisdiction of his own Residence; and
being the Supreme himself he could not have a co-partner joined with him
without his own consent, which, upon all occasions, he expressly refused. But
as they had other conceptions concerning their own Deities, so their Practices
in receiving them were suitable to those conceptions. Whenever they received
any, it was not of their own arbitrary pleasure, but from some pretended
Signification of the minds of the Gods themselves that it should be so. So was
the Mother of the Gods and Aesculapius received upon Oracles which were
supposed to Signify the mind of the Supreme Being himself, not of any one
particular Demon. For none else was thought to be the general disposer of
events concerning so many and so different Nations but he. Others were recived
on particular Revelations attested by such witnesses as were supposed credible,
as Romulus under the name of Quirinus, upon the Oath of Julius Proculus which
also afterward were taken in course for the Canonization of the Emperors.
Others by the Apparition of Stars, which were above the disposal of the
Provincial Demons, and could only therefore be thought to signify the mind of
him that was Supreme. So the Julium Sidus was the ground of the Canonization of
Julius Caesar. Others were with charms drawn out of the Cities whose Tutelars
they were, and invited to Rome with promises of Temples, which as it was
supposed to be with the consent of the Demons so enchanted, who of their own
free wills were supposed to accept of the profers made to them together with
the nobler office of being Tutelar to the Conquerours; so neither could it be
to the disinterest of their own Tutelars whose Power was by that means
enlarged. Macrob. Saturnal. III.9.
This seems to have been the occasion of most of those temples of strange Gods
in Rome. For it seems to have been an ancient and common Custom among them, if
we may believe Sammonicus Serenus an Author of Antoninus Caracalla's time, Ap.
Macro. ib.
who yet has it from one Furius whom he thought then very ancient. Several
Towns of Italy are there mentioned as so taken, besides Carthage and Corinth,
out of it. And as perhaps no place was more guilty than Rome in this particular
of the worship of strange Gods, so they are particularly upbraided by St.
Augustine, that very many of the Gods they worshipped were Captive ones, De Ciu.
Dei.
which again makes it very probable that this was the Original of their
worshipping of them. And this was counted a more civil way of treating those
captive Gods themselves, than if they had pretended bluntly, as the Heathens
about Palaestine, that the Deities of the Conquerors were more potent than
those of the Nations conquered by them.

AND as all Covenants were in those Sacrifice, so all Sacrifices, besides those
of the Mysteries, included also something of a Covenant. This appears from the
use of those things in ordinary Sacrifices which were then thought of the
strictest signification of union. Salt was the Emblem of the strictest Union
among them, and there was nothing counted more piacular than to prove false
after having participated in their (...), and an unalterable unviolable
Covenant is in the Scripture styled a Covenant of Salt. Numb. XVIII.19. 2 Chronicles. XIII.5.
And accordingly salt was, in their ordinary entertainments, consecrated to
their Hospital Gods, that it might be taken for an affront to them if any
breach should fall out afterward. Now this was used in all Sacrifices; every
Sacrifice was Sacrificed with the Salt. Vide Plin. N. H. XXXI.7. S. Mark IX 49.
Lev. II.13.
So the Scriptures concerning the general customs of the Sacrifices of those
Countries where the Sacred writers lived. And the same Custom was also
observed by the Greeks and Romans as appears by the (...) of the one and the
salsae fruges or mola falsa of the other.

signification it was to partake in Bread and Meat. The Sacredest bond among
Mankind was that of Marriage, and the Sacredest Marriage that of Confarreation.
Now this was the mola so constantly used in all Sacrifices as that the name of
Immolation was used for Sacrificing it self. And of this kind was the Greek
(...) and the Ebrew Meat Offering. So was it also to drink to one another and
to partake of the same Cup. And the Libatiion always went together with the
Sacrifice. So also it was to feast together, as we see in the Covenant of Jacob
and Laban Genesis XXXI.54. in which regard their partaking of the same Sacrifices
was a confederating them to one another. But it was also a confederating them
to the Deity. For this was also a custom among the ancients for superiors at
entertainments to signify their savor to their Inferiors by cutting them out
Portions of the meat that was before them. Thus it is that Agamemnon in Homer
puts the Heroes in mind of the particular respect he had showed them by the
Proportions he had carved for them at their solemn entertainments. And thus
Joseph shows his kindness to his Brethren by the messes he sent to them, and
his particular regard to Benjamin his own mothers Son by sending him a mess
five times greater than to any of the others. Genesis XLIII.34.
As therefore these panegyres of the Gods were answerable to these public
Entertainments of Princes (for all the Nations as well as the Jews, seem
originally to have pretended to a Theocracy) so the admitting their worshippers
to a participation in their Sacrifices, was according to the customs of that
Age, a sign that they admitted them into the number of their peculiar
Favorites. Accordingly it is given as a reason why Praetus and Iobates could
not themselves kill Bellerophon, Isaac Tzetz. in Lycophron. p. 5.
(...).

THUS their Sacrifices were plain significations League both with their Gods
and with one another. But according to the account of Porphyry (which was
generally followed by the Primitive Christians) it was more than so. Porph. de
Abstin. L.II. Sect. 42.
It was also a natural means of procuring that Mystical Union which was
designed between the Gods and their Sacrifices. For he supposes that the Gods
which delighted in bloody Sacrifices were corporeal Demons, and did themselves
also partake of the blood and nidor of them, as the Manes were drawn by blood
in all the Necromantick (...) mentioned by Homer and the other ancient Poets.
That accordingly those Demons themselves chose those Sacrifices which Were
most delightful to them, and suitable to the natures of their own particular
vehicles. That when such were offered to them they mixed themselves with the
whole Bodies of such Sacrificers, so that they who partook of the Sacrifices
must also consequently partake of the Deities themselves, who being
incorporated with their meat, did by that means insinuate themselves into the
Bodies of their worshippers, who were also the better disposed to receive them
by being themselves dieted by a meat so agreeable to the vehicles of the
Demons themselves. That possibly was the design of the Demons in prescribing
such singular ways of Diet to Persons desirous to be initiated to them, because
otherwise it had not been in their Power to unite their vehicles to them
without such predispositions. God undoubtedly would not suffer them to take
possession of his creatures at their pleasure, and upon the Hypothesis of their
vehicles being corporeal, it is not likely themselves would desire it without
something of pleasure and congruity to their own natures, which was to be
procured by such a Preparation of singular Diet before. And considering that
according to the grossness of their Vehicles their stations were also allotted
them by the Principles of the same Philosophy; these Tutelary Earthly Demons
must have Bodies by so much grosser than the Aerial as their place was lower.
This is the communicating with Devils mentioned by St. Paul, and was plainly
supposed by the Christians in all their reasonings against them. 1 Cor. X.20.
It is very plain that they take it for granted that the Devil had taken
possession of all them who had communicated in their Sacrifices. The very
Infant in St. Cyprian who had some of the Wine of Libation poured into her
mouth, was looked on as polluted with it. So much is employed in his words
concerning her: De L^p
In corpore atque ore violato Eucharistia permanere non potuit. Sanctificatus
in Domini sanguine potus de pollutis visceribus crupit. Much more they who
communicated in them with a design of devoting themselves to those Devils to
whom the Sacrifices were offered.

NOW on this Hypothesis the Reasoning Sacrifices were supposed to be united to
the Demons and each other, and that they who were excluded from those
Sacrifices were also excluded from that Union. The former Reasoning held,
because all who communicated in the Sacrifices were supposed to partake of the
Devil to whom the Sacrifices were offered, and to be made one Spirit with him,
and being so must also be supposed United to each other as communicating in the
same Spirit. And on the contrary these Sacrifices being both Moral means of
Covenanting for that Union, and Natural means of procuring it, they who were
excluded from them, as they must be supposed not already United, so they must
also be supposed excluded from the Ordinary means of procuring such a Union.
And further considering this whole Transaction as a Legal Act: as the admitting
to Sacrifices did not only signify, but in a Legal way effect the Union, as it
obliged the God to ratify what was done in his name by Persons sufficiently
Authorized by him; so the Exclusion of Persons from them, as transacted also in
a Legal way, did not only signify, but obliqe the God, in whose name they
Acted, to exclude Persons so Judicially excommunicated from partaking in the
Invisible Sacrifices. And therefore as the Union of the Heathens with their
Demons was interrupted by their not communicating in the same Sacrifices; so
it was reasonable to argue against the Samaritans that their Union with the God
of Israel was interrupted by their not communicating in the Sacrifices of the
God of Israel with his People Israel, because he also had taken up or allowed
the use of Sacrifices among his own People, for no other end but that they
might perform the same office with them as they had done formerly among the
Heathens. Porphyr. ubi supra.
I know very well the Philosophers stated the way of Unity with the Supreme
Being on other Principles than these. But then it was on this Supposition, that
Sacrifices were not the way to it, but only such as were Mystical, those of a
pure mind. Which plainly supposes that the Provincial Demons, which were
generally worshipped with Literal and Bloody Sacrifices were none of that
Supreme Being. So that still the Union with them might be, and was thought to
be, performed by Sacrifices, which is all for which I am concerned at present.
For from thence it will follow that where that same Supreme Being was pleased
actually to order that such Bloody Sacrifices should be used, and be used with
a design on the common received Popular Signification of them, there his
meaning was, that they should also be Signs and means of procuring this Union
as they had been formerly.

As these Unions of Nations were managed and procured by Sacrifices, so the
National Panegyres for the participating in such Sacrifices were held in one
fixed and known place. I deny not but that there were other Altars and other
Demons for the several subdivisions of such Nations. I only speak of such
Demons as were worshipped in common by the whole Nations, and in whose worship
the whole Nations were agreed and united, that those were worshipped with
National Solemnities, on known returning Festivals, in known places appointed
for the purpose; and that where this was done there the Nations were preserved
unanimous, where it was not, they were divided with Factions and Animosities.
Thus were the Panionia for the Ionians in Asia, the Panathenaea for all the
several (...) of all Attica, the Olympicks which were Panellenia, for all that
were of Greek extraction, whether in Greece or in the Greek Colonies, and the
Feriae Latinae among the Romans for the whole Latinum nomen, as the Ludi Magni
or Romani were for the Romans. And as the private Rites of Families required
the attendance of all that were of the Family, so that David gives this as a
reason to excuse him from his attendance on Saul on the New Moon, and among the
Romans this was allowed as an excuse in Cases wherein very few excuses were
allowed, as for Consuls to delay them for a while from the Service of the
Commonwealth and for Soldiers to dispense with their absence from their
vexilla; Guther. de Jur. Pont. IV.6.
so we have reason to believe that they were obliged, who could conveniently
attend, to be at these public Sacrifices of their Nation. For as among the
Jews, so among them also, these Private Rites were kept in a strict
subordination to the Public, that so the Unions and endearments of their
Families might not be confederacies, but might, upon all occasions, yield to
the more Sacred Union of their Nation. Therefore it was that these Private
Rites were not of any value, unless they were allowed and approved of by the
Pontifex Maximus, and even then were called Sacra rather than Sacrificia. So
that even among them, as well as among the Jews, the name of Sacrifices was
still appropriated to the public Altars, as among the Jews the High places
were obliged to a strict dependence on the Public Altars. And where these
Public Panegyres were not observed, there it was easy to observe the ill
effects it had on their National Correspondences, The National animosities and
rancors of the different (...) in Egypt are famous, and as notorious it is
that they were to be ascribed wholly to the difference of their Religions, not
only that every Nomos had a Deity to it self, and those such in one Nomos as
were detested, and Sacrificed in another; but because they had not for a long
time any Deities that were common, nor any Anniversary Solemnities or
Sacrifices, or Altar common to them all. And I am very apt to think this might
particularly be the reason why Moses prescribed those Festival Solemnities at
one certain place, and why he was so careful that no Private Altars, whether of
the Families, or of the Tribes, should stand in competition with the one Altar
at the constituted place of their Assemblies, because he had seen the ill
consequences of the contrary Practices in Egypt, and was withal desirous to
make Religion (which is indeed of it self the firmest bond of Union) the most
effectual remedy to prevent any dissentions among them; in pursuance to which
design it was very Prudent, and extremely well fitted to their Circumstances,
to take away all private Solemnities of worship which made the differences
among the Nomi and to ascertain times and a place for Public Assemblies of the
whole Nation which had been wanting among the Egyptians, for making Religion a
more effectual bond of Union to their whole Nation.

Circumstances of Moses at the time of his Legislation. That the Positive
Injunctions were particularly fitted to the Cases of his contemporary Idolaters
is generally confessed. Maimonides himself insists on it as a thing that would
give great light to many of those Injunctions, Mor. Neb.
if the particular customs of those Idolaters were better known, and gives
some not unlikely instances from some Arabian Books concerning the customs of
the Tabii, whom he supposes to have preserved the Succession of those customs.
And undoubtedly it was very agreeable to Moses's design to keep his People at a
distance from Idolatry to which they were then so extremly prone, and which was
likely to prove withal so mischievous to them by the calamities it was likely
to bring upon them. But it was yet much more for his purpose to use such
customs as were only designed for Union than those which were only in
opposition to their otherwise indifferent usages. And there must needs follow a
great difference in the nature of those two sorts of Constitutions. Those
Constitutions which were only designed for opposition, had no more lasting need
than the avoiding of those Customs. When they should either remove their own
dwellings to the neighborhood of Nations who had never used those customs, or
that their Neighboring Nations themselves had changed their customs in such
Particulars, there could then be no further need of such Customs as were only
designed for Opposition when they ceased to be opposite. But for such Laws as
were designed for Uniting them, tho the occasion of them were a particular Case
of that Age, yet the reason of such Constitutions holds for ever, as long as it
is requisite that their Religion should Unite them, and therefore still holds
proportionably under the Gospel, as it did during the whole state of the Jewish
Dispensation. And if any Nations were regarded by Moses in the making of his
Laws, there were none more likely to be so than the Egyptians. Their customs,
both good and bad, were freshest in his Peoples memory. And there are some Laws
which cannot be any way else so probably accounted for as by an Egyptian
Original. To them and to their Country they had the greatest inclination. In
their murmurings, they mention the Onyons and Garlic and the fleshpots of
Egypt, Number. XI.5. Number. XIV.4.
and motion the making of a Captain to return into Egypt, when they were not
yet acquainted with the customs of the Canaanites or any of their bordering
Nations; much less had entertained such favor to them, as to be in danger of
them. And it is probable that the Egyptians had even then taken up the same
Idolatries which they are known to have had afterward. That pretense of the
Israelites, Exodus VIII 26.
that if they should Sacrifice in Egypt, they should Sacrifice the abomination
of the Egyptians before their faces, implys plainly that the things Sacrificed
by the Israelites, their Sheep and Oxen were even at that time, worshipped by
the Egyptians, so that in killing them they must incur an (...) or Piaculum in
the sense of those Superstitious Zealots, which must needs exasperate them
against them. The same thing also seems employed in that a keeper of Cattle was
counted so unholy a profession, Ge. XLVI.34.
and that the Israelites themselves in the first Idolatry they were guilty of,
after their coming out of Egypt, chose rather the resemblance of a calf, than
any other for their Deity. So that at that time there seems to have been a full
occasion for this constitution of Moses.

4. Therefore, As these solemn Panegyres Tho the Multitudes Assembling on such
occasions were more than could partake of one Sacrifice; and tho the number of
Sacrifices, requisite for Feasting so great Multitudes were more than could
ordinarily be offered on one Altar, yet no more than one Altar was designed for
them, that at least their blood might be sprinkled there when it was impossible
that they could all be offered there, and that so they might be said to partake
of one Altar when yet the Sacrifices, on which they feasted, could not all of
them be offered at one Altar. This is expressly taken notice of to have been the
case of Solomon in the Dedication of his temple: The same day did the King
hallow the middle of the Court that was before the house of the Lord: 1 Kings.
VIII.64.
for there he offered burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the
Peace offerings: because the brazen Altar that was before the Lord, was too
little to receive the burnt offerings, and meat offerings, and the fat of the
Peace offerings. The number then offered of Twenty two thousand Oxen and one
hundred and twenty thousand Sheep was indeed no greater than what might often
be expected at the Anniversaries of the Nation, V.63.
and the Provision therefore was not extraordinary, but such as it was intended
should be constantly made use of on such occasions as often as they returned.
So that consecration made a Perpetual Right that Sacrifices might for ever be
burnt in that place, whenever they should again prove so numerous as that the
Altar could not receive them. Yet did he not think fit to erect any more Altars
but that brazen one. Why not but because he found it not agreeable to the
customs and significations of those times to receive their Sacrifices on such
solemn occasions from any more than one Altar, tho they were more than could be
received by one Altar? And I believe there cannot be given an Example
wherever one Temple had more than one Altar dedicated to the same Deity, how
numerous soever the Sacrificers or Sacrifices were that might, on such public
Occasions, be expected to partake of it. Which also makes it very probable that
their partaking at one Altar was indeed designed as an Emblem, and an
Obligation of them all to Unity. And this might possibly be the reason why,
when it was lawful to worship the same Deity in distant places, they
notwithstanding copyed out the principal Altar. Perhaps it was mystically to
signify that it was still the same Altar that they still intended to partake
of, that when the distance of the place hindered their real participation with
it, they yet intended to communicate with it in effigy, that is, as really as
it was possible for them to communicate with it at a distance. For as the
external Participation at a visible Altar was not taken, in this Mystical way
of Communion, for a multiplying an Altar distinct from the distinct Archetypal
Altar by which their invisible Communion was to be maintained with their Deity,
but rather as a means of partaking of the invisible Altar from whence the
visible Altar was supposed to be Copyed; so neither, for the same reason, could
a distant Communion with an Altar copyed from that which was Archetypal of all
visible ones, be taken for a distinct Communion with a distinct Altar, but
rather as a means of communicating with that original visible Altar from which
that is also supposed to have been Copyed.

AND perhaps the reason of this Sacred Rites are the clearest Footsteps of
ancient Customs) of entertainments, that persons of great Quality treated their
Guests, tho sitting at other Tables with Portions sent to them from their own.
So it is plain in the case of Joseph's Brethren, that they were not at the same
Table with Joseph. It is expressly said, that his Servants did set on Bread for
him by himself, and for his Brethren by themselves, and for the Egyptians which
did eat with him by themselves: Genesis XLIII.32. Yet the Messes that were sent
them, were sent them by his particular Order, and from his own Table. For it
should seem that it was not the custom at first to set down any thing but Bread
on the other Tables of the Guests, and that the meat was left to the disposal
of him who treated them, according to the respect he was pleased to show them.
Accordingly these Panegyres of the Gods were public Entertainments of their
Worshipers, and the Altars were answerable to the Tables whereon the Gods
themselves were served in their own Persons. And as it was a piece of state,
that how many Tables soever any great person had for his Guests, yet he never
had any more than one for himself, so it was consequently proper that the
Worshipers should all be treated with Portions from the same Altar. Besides, it
seems to be the praegustation (if I may so call it) of the Gods, by which
indeed the meat was thought to be consecrated, so that till the Gods had their
Portions first, it was not fit to be feasted on by the rest as a Sacrifice.
This was therefore the sin of Ely's Sons, that they would have their Portions
before the fat was burnt to God. 1 Samuel II.15, 16. And perhaps this civility of
Praegustation, and the honor done them by receiving what himself had first
tasted, and immediately from his own hand, might have been the reason why, in
those secular Entertainments, the Guests were to receive their meat from their
Patron's Table. But considering the Sacrifices as the Solemnities of a
Covenant, and that between the Gods themselves and their Worshipers; so it was
proper that both Parties that covenanted should partake in the same
Entertainment. Otherwise their Feasting together could not have been a Symbol
of their Unity. But where multitude of Sacrifices were offered (as there were
always great multitudes offered on the occasions I am speaking of) there was no
possibility that all should partake of one and the same Sacrifice. But it was
reputed as one when all of them came from the same Table, and for that reason,
and that alone, all were judged to communicate with their God when they
communicated from the same Altar with him.

As these public Sacrifices were received from the same Altar, so the Affairs
of that one Altar were always managed by one Chief Priest. Tho matters of
Council have indeed been administered in many places by Polyarchical
Governments, yet generally, even there where they were so, matters of Action
have been thought best manageable by single Presidents. But however they were
managed in secular Causes, yet the reason has been always thought so peculiar
in Sacred Ones, as that I believe there can hardly be given an instance where
the administration of these public Panegyres was not committed to a single
Priest, who presided over the rest. If the Jews had their High Priests besides
their ordinary Priests and Levites, so also the Heathens had those who were
answerable to them. The Romans had their Pontifex Maximus, besides their
ordinary Pontifices, and Aeditui: Ap. Scal. Fragm. Gr. Eusebius. Chr. p. 6. Astro.
the Greeks their (...) and (...). Manetho himself writes himself an (...). And
these three Orders in their Sacred Rites were so extremely usual, that the name
of Tertia Sacra in Manilius is used for the Office of an Aedituus or (...).
Accordingly Synesius describes the three Offices which they were to exercise in
passing through those three degrees: Dion. p. 52. B. c.
(...) (...). And I am apt to think that the Sacrifices could hardly have been
otherwise performed rightly. For this presiding Priest seems to have personated
the God in whose Worship he was employed. He was (...), as the Apostle
expresses it. Heb. V.1.
And therefore as the God was one, so must also his Representative. Alluding to
the similitude of Entertainments, he was the Symposiarcha who was to administer
all the management of them. And being thus a Representative of the Deity, they
could not have received their Portions from the Deity, but by receiving them
from the hands of the Priest, and therefore whoever received not from the
Priest could not be said to communicate at the Altar where he officiated. On
which account it plainly appears that this Unity of the Priesthood was as well
necessary for this mystical Unity of the Communicants, as the Unity of his
Altar.

CHAP. VIII. The Jewish Sacrifices, as Mysteries, caused a Mystical Union and
Communion with God, dependent on their External Communion with their High
Priest.
The CONTENTS.
The Jews, before our Savior's coming, had taken up this way of mysticizing
their Law. Sect. I. The Jewish Sacrifices were most properly Mysteries. Sect.
II. How these Mystical Sacrifices promoted a Union with the Deity by a Union
with the Priesthood. 1. The admitting Persons to the Mysteries was the peculiar
Office of the High Priesthood. Sect. III. 2. In this Office the High Priests
represented a more Sacred Person than their own. Sect. IV. The Demon
peculiarly concerned in this affair of restoring Souls was the Demiurgus. Sect.
V. It was thought impious for any Creature to intermeddle in it as a Creature.
Sect. VI. The Jews understood their own Worship to perform the Office of
Mysteries. Sect. VII., The (...) was the Demiurgus peculiarly concerned in
Revealing the Heavenly Mysteries. Sect. VIII. The Jewish High Priest
represented the (...) herein. Sect. IX.X. None but the High Priest did so.
Sect. XI. 3. The High Priest represented the (...) particularly in relation to
the Benefits of the Mystical (...) and (...).

1. Union and Communion with the Father was to be procured by Union and
Communion with the (...). Sect. XII. A mystical (...) owned in the
Hellenistical Philosophy of those Times. Sect. XIII. How appropriated to the
(...) by the Principles of the same Philosophy. Sect. XIV. The same (...) the
Principle of Union both to the Sensible World. Sect. XV. And to the
Intellectual. Sect. XVI.

2. Union and Communion with the (...) was supposed to depend on external
Communion with the High Priest as one who particularly represented the (...) in
this Office of mystically signifying and causing this External Unity. Sect.
XVII.

THUS it was in the ordinary Popular Sacrifices. But in the Mysteries the thing
went higher, which it will be necessary to explain, in order to the clearing
the Argument, as it was used by the Jews against the Samaritans, and by the
Christians against their contemporary SCHISMATICS. In order whereunto, it is
to be remembered 1. What I have elsewhere proved more particularly, that the
Jews had, long long before the beginnings of Christianity, Sep. proved
Schismatic.
taken up this custom of expounding their Law mystically. Even this same
Ptolemy Philometor, who sat as Judge of the forementioned Dispute between the
Jews and the Samaritans, had a Book of Allegorical Expositions of the Law
dedicated to him by Aristobulus the Peripatetick. And it seems to have been
very ancient among them that they grounded their Allegorical Expositions on
that received sense of the Command to Moses, Exodus XXV.40. Heb. VIII.5.
of making all things according to the fashion showed him in the Mount, which
is also applied this way by the Apostle himself in his Epistle to the Ebrews.
And indeed most of the Reasonings of that Epistle proceed on this Hypothesis,
that all those external Institutions of the Law were only Shadows and
Resemblances copyed out from the invisible Patterns and Prototypes; That the
real Benefit was received from the Prototypes, and that these Shadows were of
no further use than as mystical means of communicating with the Prototypes;
That the Gospel exhibited the Prototypes themselves in a way more immediate and
certain and becoming the Divine Designs, and that accordingly the state of the
Gospel was only the state of the Mystical, that is, indeed, of the more
Beneficial Israelitism, and the fulfilling of those mystical Senses of those
Legal Writings which were the Senses principally designed by the Holy Ghost.

Mysteries were most proper to be made use of and applied on this occasion. The
Mysteries were most allowed of by those who approved not of other bloody
Sacrifices. Porphyry himself, and those of the Pythagorean way, did not only
approve of those, but even on a Philosophical Account were ambitious of
initiation into all the famous received Mysteries. And particularly Mysteries
were thought to be peculiarly useful for the procuring Spiritual Benefits, and
such as peculiarly related to the other world. The popular Sacrifices seemed to
aim no higher than the transacting for wordly Benefits; and the covenanting
with their Gods for their worldly Protection, and the flourishing of their
Commonwealths; but the Mysteries were principally designed for a Purgation of
the Soul, and bringing them to a more familiar and nearer conversation with
their Deities, and bettering their passage into the other Life, which
Considerations will make them more proper for the Jewish Institution, which in
this very same Case exceeded the Popular Sacrifices of the Heathens, that they
were particularly designed for the Benefits of the Souls of the Communicants,
and with regard to the future state. And indeed the Benefits of the mystical
(...) and (...), which are the main things which are fundamentally supposed in
the Reasonings concerning which I am at present discoursing, were more properly
to be expected from their Mysteries than their popular Sacrifices. And that
which yet brings this consideration nearer to our present design is that, the
Popular Sacrifices were only proper for that inferior sort of Tutelary Demons
who, as I said, had Vehicles gross enough to be sensibly affected by them; but
mystical Sacrifices alone were thought agreeable to the dignity of the Worship
of the Supreme Deity. De Abstin.
This is the plain sense of Porphyry in that excellent and elaborate Work of
his so often mentioned. Seeing therefore that the Jews pretended to worship the
Supreme Numen by their Sacrifices, it was requisite, pursuant to these
Principles, that their Sacrifices should not only be Sacrifices, but Mysteries
also. For plainly they intended to receive all that benefit from their
Sacrifices alone, which the Heathens expected from both their Sacrifices and
their Mysteries. And thus certainly the Hellenistical Jews did actually
understand the design of the Sacrifices. They designed their visible Altar as a
means of communicating with that which was Mystical and Invisible. They also
allowed of a Mystical Invisible Priesthood of the (...) with whom they were to
communicate by maintaining a Communion with their visible Priesthood.

Union with the Priesthood was a means of maintaining their Union with the
Deity, I shall consider the Jewish Sacrifices as Mysteries, and so show what
Reasoning would have been counted solid in those Ages, proceeding on the
Popular received Notions concerning Mysteries. 1. Therefore the admitting
persons to initiation in the Mysteries was the peculiar Privilege of the
Supreme Priest, and not communicated to the ordinary inferior Priests without
his leave. Thus it was with the Athenians in their Eleusinian Mysteries. They
were at the disposal of the Hierophantae, who had therefore the Title of
Mystagogues from leading those that were initiated, who were called Mystae,
Meurs. Eleusin. c. 13.
into the (...), and showing them the Image of the Deity. So it was also in the
Egyptian Mysteries of Isis. Tho the other Priests might by the appointment of
the Goddess be employed in the Service, yet it was to the Primarius Sacerdos
that Apuleius made his Address that he might be admitted, Apuleius Metam. XI.
and that the admission might be hastened.

2. ACCORDING to this Rule Mysteries the Chief Priests represented, in this
particular Ministry, a greater and more sacred Person than their own. In the
Olympic Games dedicated to Jupiter Olympicus, the Alytarcha, or Chief Priest,
who presided over them, represented the person of Jupiter himself, to whom
those Games were devoted. That was the fancy of Dioclesiaen, who when he had so
represented the person of Jupiter would no longer bear that of the Emperor.
These are the words of Johannes Antiochenus concerning him as they are quoted
from the M. S. (...), L.XII. in Not. ad Marmor. Oxon. p. 112, 113.
etc. In the Eleusinian Mysteries the High Priest had the Name and Person of
the Demiurgus, Meurs. ib. Eleusin. c. 14.
the Daduchus of the Sun, the (...), or he that officiated at the Altar, in
sacrificing, of the Moon, or the (...) (or he that spoke to the People what was
ordered to be spoken on those occasions, plainly answering the (...) employed
on the like Services of assembling or dismissing the People by the Kings in
Homer) that of Mercury who performed the same Office to Jupiter that he was to
do, on these Solemnities, to the Demiurgus. By the answerableness of these
other Offices, and Changes of Names in them, it plainly appears, that by the
name of Demiurgus they did not allude to the notion of it for a secular
Magistracy; but to that wherein it was used by the Philosophers, and from
thence derived from them by the Gnostics, for the Maker of the World. It was
to this Demiurgus that the Sun and Moon, the two Craters of (...) and (...),
according to Plato's Timaeus, were supposed to have that relation in framing
the Souls of the inferior World. And accordingly as this Deity was (...), so
was the Priest who officiated herein unlawful to be named by his Mysta
initiated by him to whom he had performed the Office of the Demiurgus. So
Eunapius concerning him by whom himself had been initiated: Eunap. in Maxim.
Sophist.
(...). This does sufficiently imply, that tho the pretense of the institution
of these Mysteries were only the Worship of Ceres and Proserpine, and the
Commemoration of the Rape of Proserpine by Pluto; yet the design was higher,
even the restoring lapsed Souls to their primitive happy condition. This was
indeed the benefit they expected by them in (...), the invisible state,
comprehending both estates of Happiness and Misery. This was the clearing them
out of the (...) in which uninitiated Souls were supposed to stick. And
possibly the whole Fable of the Rape of Proserpine by Pluto, might indeed
signify nothing else but this degenerate state of lapsed Souls, their fall
from Heaven, and their being imprisoned by Bodies, and by that means confined
and captivated in these lower Regions under the Moon, which Bodies and which
Places were supposed obnoxious to the Jurisdiction of the (...) whom they
called Pluto. So that the Purgation here expected might be the clearing the
Soul of this Clog, and pollution of the Body, and the restoring it to its
native Purity, which would in consequence cause the (...) which would enable it
to mount beyond the Regions of its Exile, beyond the Moon where the
Jurisdiction of this Corporeal Demon was supposed to determine.

This (...), as (...) signifies return from Banishment, was that which was
pretended as the great design of Philosophy, and of the Mysteries, which (as
they were explained by those who defended them against the Atheists and
Epicureans) were indeed intended for nothing else but a mystical sort of
Philosophy. And for this purpose it was very proper for them to expect this
benefit from those Demons who were to have an influence in performing this
deliverance, and who had therefore the best reason both to know and to covenant
for the means of this deliverance, as having it alone in their power to perform
such Covenants when made. For so these Mysteries were always understood, not as
bare Representations only, but also as obligations to perform what was
signified by such Representations, only the best way of knowing what was
promised was to consider what was represented, and by whom the Representation
was instituted, whether it were by such a Being to whom the performance did
properly belong. When they understood what this was, they had then as much
reason to expect performance, on condition of performance of Conditions on
their own parts, as they had to believe their Gods veracious. Now the
significations here represented, were very proper for representing this
deliverance of the Soul from these lower Regions. The binding Souls into bodies
was properly the work of the Demiurgus, and therefore the loosing them was also
most properly to be expected from him; the Sun and the Moon were the two
Craters; the one of (...), the other of (...), by which the Mind was bound in
the Body, the which being also the Moon, to which the Jurisdiction of this
Terrestrial Demon was supposed to extend, was therefore conceived to put it
into his power, to fasten or loosen these bonds. As for the Representation of
Mercury it is well known that one of the Employments of that God was to conduct
the Souls to Hades, and that his Caduceus had a particular influence over the
Spirits of that place, and his Petasus or Orcus peculiarly fitted his
employment in those invisible Regions, and that he had an acknowledged Power of
bettering the passage of the Souls committed to his Charge. So was also the
unclean Representation of Banbo an Emblem of the Genesis. So that by the whole
contrivance of these Representations the design seems to be the signifying, and
therefore the effecting this delivery of the Soul from this inferior World.
These were the Powers proper for that purpose in the general sense of the
Philosophy of that Age that were orthodox in the point of the Deity. They were
very agreeable to the Hypotheses of the Pythagoreans, the Chaldee Oracles, the
Writings under (...) name of Mercury, the Cyrenaic Philosophy in the Hymns of
Synesius, and the Writings of Porphyry and Macrobius. And it is very easy to
observe what multitudes of the Notions of the Gnostics were hence derived, if
it were requisite in order to the showing how universally these Notions were
received in those later times of Judaism, and Primitive Times of Christianity.

AND as it was thus proper for the Demiurgus to preside in this design of
restoring Souls to their native Purity and Freedom; so it was indeed thought
improper for any Creature to mediate in it as a Creature, which seems to be the
true reason why the Hierophanta in this Employment was to personate the
Demiurgus. For the reduction of Souls was to be by an (...), a Light that was
to let them into the Secrets of their God, and to awaken them from the dullness
and forgetfulness of their mortal bodies, and to remind them of their nobler
Original. But it was a most Piacular Crime for any Creature to intrude into the
Secrets of their Gods without their leave. This was shadowed to the People in
the Fictions of Actaeon and Diana, and other like stories of the Mythical Age,
as of Pro^^^heus stealing Fire from the Chariot of the Sun, etc. Indeed as to
the intellectual World and the Secrets of it, they did not think that any but a
God could discover them. However they thought it most decorous that none but a
God should lead them into the Divine Secrets. Thence so many Expressions of
Manilius to this purpose, which Scaliger does not seem to understand: Inque
Deum Deus ipse tulit --

Manil. A^ to ^om. I. p. 2. v. 29. Ib. L.II. p. 33. v. 6,7. Ib. L.IV. p. 108.
v. 7, 8, etc.
And again: Quis Coelum possit, nisi Coeli munera nosset,
Et reperire Deum, nisi qui pars ipse Deorum est?


And again: Atqui adeo faciem Coeli non invidet orbi
Ipse Deus, vultusque suos, corpusque recludit
Semper volvendo, seque ipsum inculcat and offert,
Ut been cognosci possit, doceatque videndo,
Qualis eat, doceatque suas attendere Leges.
Ipse vocat nostros animos ad sidera mundus:
Nec patitur, quia non condit, sua jura latere.
Quis putat esse nefas nosci, quod cernere fas est?
This therefore we see he makes to be the only way of excusing the Piaculum,
that the God himself was pleased to make the discovery. So Philo also from the
same Egyptian and Stoical Hypothesis, which had been observed by Manilius:
(...). Allegor. L.I. p 32. med.
And as this was supposed true in the more spiritual Transactions between God
and the Soul of the initiated Person; so it was very suitably represented in
this way of transacting the external part of the Mystery, that the secret
sights of the Adytum, from seeing which they were called Epoptae, should be
shown them by one who should personate the Demiurgus himself, and bear his name
in that particular performance.

TO apply this therefore to the Reasonings Hellenistical Jews against the
Samaritans; they also challenged to themselves this power of restoring Souls to
their Celestial Original by means of God's own appointment. This is very clear
in Philo, and in such of them as lived after the time that the future state was
more fully and clearly discovered than it had been before, which was the nearer
they came to the time of publishing the Gospel. And undoubtedly they had, even
by the Principles of the Philosophers themselves, a better Title to it than the
Heathens, in regard that their whole external Worship was paid to this same
Demiurgus to whom this Office was supposed properly to belong. They also
thought themselves to have the best Right to the Secrets and Mysteries of their
God. The Secrets of the Law were with them that feared him; Ps. XXV.14.
and from the same notions in all likelihood it was that our Savior ascribes
the Right of knowing Mysteries to them whom he owns for the Children of the
Kingdom. S. Matthew. XIII.11. S. Mark, IV.11. S. Luke, VIII.10.
And the High Priest's going into the Sanctum Sanctorum was indeed nothing but
a most sacred (...). The Mysteries of the Heathens were in the Adyta, so was
this. They were under a Veil, so was this, whence Christ is said as a
Melchizedechian High Priest, to have passed within the Veil. Accordingly the
tearing of the Veil at our Savior's Death signified the Revelation and
Discovery of the Mystery which had been hidden from Ages and Generations, so
much alluded to in the New Testament. There was an (...) of a Light, and the
Image of their God, and he was also an (...) of the Shechinah, the Light and
Glory that shadowed the Mercy-Seat. The Demiurgus also worshipped in the
Mysteries was not to be named. So were the Jews supposed to worship the (...),
Philo Leg. ad Caium. p. 1041. B. Josep. Ant.
and accordingly Josephus in the mission of Moses dares not let the Greeks know
the name by which God was pleased to discover himself to Moses. The Heathen
Mysteries as expounded by the Stoics and the later Philosophers, shadowed the
Systeme of the World. So is the Ark and the several Coverings of it expounded
by Josephus (which is a fit reason why it should be called a (...) by the
Apostle, Ant. III.9. Philo L.III. de vi^. Mos. p. 667.
not only as a Worldly Temple, but as a Temple also representing the World) and
so is the Mercabah in Ezekiel alluded to in the Ornaments of the Temple, Mor.
Neb.
mysticized even by the Modern Jews, as may appear from the intimations of
Maimonides.

Hellenistical Hypothesis, the Spiritual and Invisible (...) was of the Ideal
Archetypes of things. These were the first (...), and the speculation of them
was the (...) and (...) and (...). The Harmony of these was called (...), and
they who had the Right to know them were said to be (...) in the Mystical
Language of S. John. But it was in the (...) that these Ideal Archetypes of
things were supposed to be, not in the (...), to which they would not allow
even such a Multiplicity. And it is therefore very suitable to this what the
Apostle speaks when he grants that in him were hidden all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge. At least the manifestation of them to others was taken
for the peculiar Office of the (...). For this is always taken for granted in
the Reasonings of the Hellenists, that the Father never appeared, nor was
(...), capable of being reached (not thoroughly comprehended only) by human
senses; but that the (...) was (...), not thoroughly comprehended, but reached
by the sense (for so the word was meant against the Pyrrhonians who denied any
thing to be (...)) and therefore thus it was that the Hellenists proved that
there was indeed a subsistent (...) distinct from the Supreme Being, whom they
call (...), because there was a Being called God which had oftentimes appeared
to Men in visible Resemblances. And thus S. Justin Martyr proves it against
Tryphon, by which time the Jews it seems, out of inveteracy to the Christian
Religion, had forgot, or endeavored to obliterate the memory of their own
Reasonings before, when they found them urged with such success and service to
the Christian Religion. So that when we find the like Expressions in the New
Testament, concerning God the Father, That he dwells in that Light which no man
can approach unto, 1 Timothy VI.16.1 S. John IV.12. John I.18. S. Mat. XI.27. S.
Luke X.22. S. John VI.46.
whom no man has seen, or can see; And, That no man has seen God at any time;
And again, That no man has seen God at any time: but that the only begotten
Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him; And, That none
knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, etc.
These are exactly fitted to the Hypothesis I am speaking of, and accordingly
prove it not only commonly received by the Hellenistical Jews of that Age, but
true in it self, because it is confirmed by the New Testament Revelation.

Mystical Language relating to this discovery of Mysteries) were proper to the
(...). And accordingly he must be the Invisible or Spiritual Hierophanta and
Priest, performing invisibly all that was visibly transacted by the High Priest
in this visible Ministry. He was to assist at the Invisible Ideal Altar, and to
offer up Mystical Sacrifices, as the High Priest did visible ones on the
visible Altar. And by the same Reasoning this was indeed so very requisite that
the visible Priesthood and its whole Ministry, was of no farther force and
benefit than as it applied the efficacy of those invisible performances as well
as it signified and represented them. The Title of (...), is accordingly given
to the (...). Philo de Migr. Abrahami p. 404. A.
And the High Priest in going into the Holy of Holies personated the entrance
of the (...) into Heaven, according to the Reasoning of the Author to the
Ebrews. The High Priest therefore, in this Ministry, must have personated the
(...) himself the same way as the Eleusinian Hierophanta was conceived to
personate the Demiurgus; and that to the same effects and purposes of
Reasoning, that this was an instituted means of partaking of the Invisible
Priesthood by communication with the Visible, as it was to partake of the
beneficial influences of the Demiurgus by partaking with the Hierophanta; and,
on the contrary, that the want of this visible Priesthood and Sacrifices must
also consequentially deprive the person who wanted them (especially who were
deprived of them, by them who had the Power of them) of the means of attaining
these invisible influences also of the invisible Priesthood.

represented by the High Priesthood appears by that passage of Philo, which it
will not be amiss to transcribe, because, tho it allude to Christian Phrases
and Notions, yet commonly Christians have neither been sensible how much their
Notions were received by those Hellenistical Jews, nor how they were and must
have been understood in the Originals from whence they were first derived. His
words are these: (...)^ Philo vit: Mos. Lib. III. p. 673. C.
Here he owns him who was represented by the High Priest to be the Son, to be
the Paraclete, to be the Intercessor for Forgiveness of Sins, and for the
bestowing (...), whether by the word (...) be understood the plenty of those
good things, which is an ordinary notion of the word; or which I rather incline
to believe, the liberality by which they are given, without grudging, for that
is also a notion of (...), and in that sense it is commonly reasoned in the
Hypothesis of that Age, that the (...) was not (...), but gave freely its good
gifts without any mean or mercenary consideration. These are the very Terms of
the New Testament. That he also calls him the World was exactly agreeable to
the Egyptian Hypothesis of that Age. The best account of that we have in the
Writings ascribed to Hermes. And he is most express in this particular. He
makes two Images of God, the World, Paemand. Asclep.
and the Archetypal Man, the (...). He allows them the name of Sons, and makes
them (...) with the Father. This Doctrine is also elsewhere owned by Philo
himself. And in all likelihood it is the meaning of Manilius, who took what he
had from Egyptian Authors, where he makes the World it self to be its own
Hierophanta in the place already produced. That is the Archetypal Intellectual
World was supposed to be the discoverer of its own Ideas, and of the sensible
World, in which regard none but the (...) could be understood by this name of
the World. Consequently hereunto they made the World it self to be the
Archetypal Temple of which the (...) was the Priest, as the Reasonable Soul
answers it in the notion of a Temple in an inferior sense in which the (...) is
the Priest, of which he makes the visible High Priest the immediate
Resemblance. (...). Philo de Somniis. p. 597. C.
De Monar. L.II. init.
And he elsewhere prosecutes this Analogy of the World to a Temple in the
several Requisites of a Temple, That Heaven is the Sanctum Sanctorum, that the
Stars are the (...) answering the Donaries of ordinary Temples; that the
Priests are the Angels, etc. This was a Notion very much introduced by the
Stoics, Lips. Physiolog. Stoic. L.II. Dissert. 7.
with a very prudent design of making men every where behave themselves
Religiously as they would in Temples, on this consideration, that all places
were the Temples of God. And thus it appears how man by being a little World
was thought to resemble the great World, and by resembling it was to partake of
its influences; and how aptly the High Priest herein personated the (...), that
as his Vestments represented the visible World, so Himself represented the
intellectual World by which the visible was governed, which was no other, as I
said, than the (...). Philo de Opif. Mun. p. 5. C.
This is also the express Doctrine of Philo.

BUT withal as this was true of the Priest, so it was true of no other of them
High Priest. It is of his Garments peculiarly that the Observation was made
that the World was represented by them. And that peculiar and most Sacred, and
most Mystical Part of the Priesthood was performed by him alone. He alone had
the Privilege of entering into the Sanctum Sanctorum, which was the proper (...)
and (...), which as I said, was the peculiar Prerogative of the (...). As for
the other Priests, it is not the (...), but the Angels, the (...), the (...) of
the (...), that Philo himself makes to answer them in the Mystical Temple of
the Intellectual World, in the places now mentioned de Monarchia. So that there
is no reason to think that they were either meant, or included in this way of
Reasoning. And then as they who were excluded from their Sacrifices as under an
(...), were supposed to be under the Power of evil Demons, till they were
expiated; So much more they who were not, by the Mysteries, rescued by the
(...) from the Power of the Demon (...), were still supposed to be detained by
him in their Vehicles, which would confine them to those Regions below the Moon
which were the Jurisdiction of that Demon, who was no other than he whom in
the Language of Christianity we call the Devil. By which Principles the
Mischief will appear which must befall them who either were not in Communion
with the High Priest, or had separated themselves from him, or were excluded by
just Censures. As by their being divided from him they were cut off from this
Communication with the (...), so they must consequently be deprived of all the
benefits of that Communication. They must want the benefit of his (...), his
Intercession; they must want the benefit of his Mystical Sacrifice, of
Expiation of their Sins; and of procuring Spiritual Blessings. They must also
be supposed to be left destitute in the condition wherein they were before, to
be detained in those Vehicles which would hinder them from mounting above the
Moon, and would confine them within the reach of their Enemy and most
implacable Tormentor. These were Consequences very natural and clear from the
Principles and Reasonings of those Ages, as I have now explained them.

AND further 3. As the High Priest Mystical (...) and (...), so that as by the
(...) they were invisibly united to the Father, and communicated in the
Benefits following that Union, so it was by a visible Union to the High
Priesthood that they were to be united to the (...), and to expect the Benefits
of that Union and Communion. The full proof of this will appear in these
particulars: That the Union and Communion with the Father was to be procured by
Union and Communion with the (...), whose Office it properly was to procure and
promote this Union; That Union and Communion with the (...) was to be procured
by external Communion with the High Priest, as one who particularly represented
the (...) in this Office of mystically signifying and causing this internal
Unity. These things are to be made out from the received Principles of those
Ages, which will both explain and prove the Solidity of the Reasonings which
were grounded on them. 1. Then Union and Communion with the Father was to be
procured by Union and Communion with the (...). The Mystical (...) was indeed
grounded on the (...), the Commerce and Communication of Mystical Benefits did
necessarily suppose a Union with those from whom the Benefits were expected, as
the Communication in vital influences supposes a vital Union of Members in the
natural Body. Whence the Reasoning will follow both ways, That they who are
united will have a Title to the (...), as Living Members must needs partake of
the influences of the Head; and negatively, That they who are, by any means
whatsoever cut off from Union must also be cut off from Communion with the
Father, as whatever Member is cut off from the Body natural cannot any longer
lay any claim to the influences of the Head.

PLAINLY the notion of (...) Sacrifices. For thus the Apostle reasons from
Notions and Principles which must have been received among the Heathens,
because in truth the aggravation of the Sin he disputes against, must have been
derived from their sense and understanding of the Fact he speaks of, especially
considering that he does professedly deny any intrinsic evil in the Fact
abstracting from the Opinions of others, and the scandal taken from their
interpretation of it, Romans XIV.14. According therefore to those received
opinions, they who did eat the Sacrifices of the Altar, are said to be (...)
with the Altar, 1 Cor. X.18. And they who did eat of the things offered to
Devils were (...) (...), Verse 20. From hence in the way of Mystical
Interpretation, the mystical (...) will be a participation in the Mystical
Sacrifice offered by the (...) as High Priest to the Father. For so the Father
being the Deity to whom those Mystical Sacrifices were immediately designed and
addressed, the communicating in those Sacrifices must be interpreted to be a
Communion with the Father, as communicating in the external Sacrifices was
communicating both with the Father and the Son, because both of them were
worshipped in those external Sacrifices. From thence results a further notion of
(...) usual in the Philosophy of that Age, as (...) is taken for a
participation in a Society, for an Interessedness in the Welfare of it, and a
Right to the Privileges, and the other Benefits consequential to it. And thus I
have shown that the Popular Sacrifices were designed for the confederation of
Nations, and a consequent intitling to the Deity of those Nations, and the
Protection and Favor expected from him. Answerably hereunto the Invisible
Mystical Sacrifices were also supposed to confederate a (...) of the Heavenly
Jerusalem under a Mystical Priesthood of the (...), and the Government and
Protection of the Supreme Being. And as the Rights of a Nation did most appear
in a Right in their Panegyres, a Right of partaking in their Suffrages and
their Sacrifices; so there were also supposed the General Assemblies of the
First born, who were (with God, Heb. XII.23. (...) is the word there used.
the Judge of all) to judge the Earth, in allusion to the like Judicatories of
the Cities of that Age which were generally Democratical, where every free born
Citizen had a Vote in their General Assemblies, as among the Romans they had in
their Comitia Centuriata and Tributa, and it was counted one of the Rights of
Citizenship to admit them to it, and a Diminutio Capitis, an Infringement of
the same Right of Citizenship to deprive them of it, in the same sense as the
Capite censi are they whose Estates would not reach to any of the Classes, and
who were therefore only polled as free Citizens, and as the Fees paid on this
account of admitting into the City are called (...), Act. XXII.28. Thus (...)
is used as a known Term of Mystical Privilege in the Egyptian Philosophy
entitled to Hermes, Hermes ap. Stob. Eclo. Phys.
from whence the Hellenists borrowed most of their Notions, and in a sense very
agreeable to that of the Apostle where he speaks of a (...) with the Father and
the Son. 1 John I.3. The Passage is remarkable, and not (that I know of) taken
notice of to this purpose, and therefore worthy the more particular
Observation: Mercur. (...) ap. Stob. Eclog. Phys. L.I. p. 89. Edit. Aurel.
Allobrog. 1609.
(...) (...). And afterward: (...).

WHETHERSOEVER of these Mystical (...), as antecedent to it. If it be taken for
a participation of the Mystical Sacrifice, and the great Mystery; then it will
plainly depend on the (...) as the High Priest who was to offer that Sacrifice,
and as the Hierophanta who was to preside in this Mystery. There could be no
communicating at this invisible Altar without the permission of the High
Priest, nor any access to this (...) without the discovery of the Hierophanta.
Nor indeed could any have any Right to them, unless he was first united to the
(...). The (...) could not (...), so as to bring the Parties to any agreement
without a Union to each of them. Without this it was impossible that he could
unite them to each other, as it is impossible that any Glue can unite two
Bodies that is not it self united to both of them. He could have no Right to
the Sacrifice unless he be one of that Society to whom the Sacrifices did
belong, nor could he be judged one of the Assembly who owned no Union with the
President of the Assembly. Nor could he have a Right to the (...) of the Chief
God without a Union with the Hierophanta as the Representative God. Consider it
also as a participation in a privileged Society, and so he can have no Title to
the Privileges of a Society who is not supposed to be a Member of it; nor can
he be supposed to be a Member of it who does not partake in those Bonds of
Union on which the Unity of the Society it self does depend. But the Government
of the Mystical Jerusalem, and consequently the presiding in Legal Assemblies,
for the Exercise of the Government, did wholly belong to him. He was supposed
to be the Pastor, as David and Cyrus are called Pastors. He was supposed to be
the Mystical David who was always to have a Lamp in this Jerusalem. And
therefore still, by the consequence of all these Reasonings, it appears that
Union is still supposed to Communion, and that therefore the (...), as the
Principle of this Mystical Union, must needs have it in his Power to dispose
also of the Right to Mystical Communion.

IT remains therefore that I show, from the same Principles, that the Author of
this Mystical Union. This appears from the Title given the (...) in that
Philosophy. As they call the Father the (...) and the (...) and the (...), so
they call the (...) the (...), as being the first Unity. And by the Principles
of that same Philosophy, the first in every kind is supposed to be, not only
the Copy, but the Cause, of all other Beings of the same kind. They supposed it
to be but one, but yet to multiply it self in Representations, as the Seal does
in Wax by diversity of Impressions. And therefore as all other Impressions
received from the Seal, are not the Seal it self, but only likenesses and
resemblances; so they made the Archetypal Beings only to be the True Beings,
and all Derivatives to be only Resemblances of the True. This they expressed by
an artificial way of speaking received among them. When they expressed the
Archetypal Beings, they used the composition of (...), as (...), etc. But when
the Derivatives, they use the Termination of (...), as (...), etc. As therefore
they make the (...) the Principle from whence all the (...) receive their
Goodness; so, by the same Analogy of Speech and Reasoning, they must make the
(...) the Principle from whence all the (...), all that indeed are one by
participation do derive their Unity. And as they make all Bodies one by the
consonancy of their Motions, and their Subserviency to the Universe; so they do
with much more reason make the Intellectual World, (which, as I showed, was
with them the (...)) one. The very Unity and Harmony of the Corporeal World was
thought to be derived from him. He was thought (...) and (...) to contain the
parts together. He was thought (...), to suit and proportion their Motions so
to each other that they should prove harmonious. He was thought to govern the
whole World in the time when it was best governed, that is, in the time of the
Golden Age, Plato Polit.
and all ill Government was ascribed to his leaving the Helm. He was thought
(...) to give all inferior Beings their Essence, by imprinting the Ideas, nay,
to be the very (...) it self, (...). For tho they called the (...) the (...)
and the (...), yet withal they called him (...), because he did not (...). And
what can be more intimate to Beings than their Essence? The very Phrases of the
Apostle that of him, and through him, Procl. Theol. Plat.
and by him are all things, are the Language of that same Philosophy. But they
are particularly careful of using that form of Speech, that all things are in
him, rather than he in all things, lest they should seem to make him any where
as in a place. Otherwise, as he was thought to be the Intellectual Archetypal
World, so they deny not but that he is in all things.

THUS far they proceeded in advancing his power of uniting, even the sensible
But they went further as to the Intellectual World, and as to the Union of
Intellectual Beings. First as he was peculiarly the (...), so the (...) of all
other (...) did particularly belong to him, not only on that general account
whereby all Ideas were thought impressed by him, but by a particular Right as a
derivation of his own Property. For tho the Father were also a (...), yet the
Propagation of (...) was by the Platonists supposed to be from the (...), which
was at the disposal of the (...). At least the Hellenists, of whose Reasonings
against their SCHISMATICS I am now discoursing, gathered it from those
Expressions of Genesis, where Man is said to be made (...) and (...), according
to the Image and Likeness of God, understanding the (...), or Image of the
(...), or Word. So Philo: De Mund. Opif. p. 31.
(...), etc. For it pleased him to make use of no other Copy of those inferior
Beings for the making of them, but only his own WORD. Accordingly he calls the
man breathed into the face of Adam the Image and Resemblance of God. And
elsewhere more expressly: (...). Allegoriar: L.II.29.
The Image is the Pattern of the other things, as he [Moses] implies in the
very beginning of the Law, when he says, And God made Man after the Image of
God, As if the Image indeed were Copyed from God, but man was only made
according to that Image which received the Power of its Copy. They further made
this Unity of Intellectual Beings to be by an (...) or Conversion of the
inferior Intellects to the (...) or Ideas, Procl. Theol. Platon.
which because they were supposed to be in the (...), the (...) caused by them
must be supposed to be to him also. And this indeed was the proper way of
restoring and uniting lapsed Intellects, of which I am now discoursing. Thus
therefore the procuring and effecting all this Mystical Union and Communion was
supposed to depend on the (...).

IT remains now that I show further, Union and Communion with the (...), was
supposed to depend on External Communion with the High Priest, as one who
particularly represented the (...) in this Office of Mystically signifying and
causing this external Unity. It was to depend on the external Communion on the
same account as the benefit of all Mysteries was supposed to depend on their
external Representations, being every where understood to effect what they
represented, as indeed all Covenanting Symbols were constantly supposed to do.
The partaking therefore at the visible Altar, as it signified, so it conferred
a Right to Communion with that which was invisible; as it signified their
belonging to the Community confederated by the External Sacrifices, so it also
conferred a Right to that invisible Society which was confederated by those
Mystical Sacrifices, to which they could have no Right but by their Right to
the Society confederated by them. Their communicating with the High Priest who
was the (...) in effigy, employed and gave a Real Right to Communion with the
(...) himself, especially considering it as a Symbol used by the consent and
Institution of the (...) himself in a Covenant wherein himself was a Party and
a Mediator. The High Priest in this Office personated more than a Human Nature.
De Monarch. L.II. p. 828. Ed. Graeco-Lat. Paris. 1640.
So Philo: (...) (...). For the Law will have him to partake of a more than
Human Nature, approaching near to that of God, because he was to be (if we may
say it with reverence) a common bound of both, that both men may by a Mediator
appease the Deity, and God may use him as a Minister in reaching out, and
communicating his Graces unto men. What this more than Human Nature was appears
from what he elsewhere tells us in the same Discourse, that the High Priest in
his Vestments bore the Image of the Universe, (...). P. 829.
And that the Universe or World here spoken of included also the Intellectual
World (which with him is the (...)) is also manifest from what follows
concerning the Intercession wherein he conceives that World to join with the
High Priest, which cannot be understood of any but the (...). So he gives the
reason why his Vestments were to represent the whole World, Ibid.
(...). That the whole World might assist him in the performance of his Sacred
Offices. It being indeed most becoming that he who was himself consecrated to
the Father of the World, should also come accompanied with the Son to the
Worship of him who had begotten him. This Son of God can be no other than that
same (...) whom the Christians also called the Son of God, and to whom they
also ascribed the same Office of Mediating with the Father, which is here
ascribed to him by Philo. And this is the way by which Iamblichus endeavors to
account for those Imperative Forms so frequently made use of by the Priests in
their Mystical Commerce with Beings so much more excellent than themselves, De
Myster. Sect. IV. c. 2.
that they herein personated a Being to whom the Duty was indeed due which they
challenged in his name. The High Priest therefore, in this Action, being
designed to represent the (...) as a Principle of external Unity, must, by the
same Reasoning, give a Right to that Internal Mystical Union, which none but
the (...) himself can give, but yet he must be supposed obliged to give, having
given already a Right to it by this Legal way of Covenanting for it. And indeed
in this particular matter concerning Unity, none could pretend so fairly for
the Unitive Office of the (...) as the High Priest. For considering, as I said,
that all that the visible Priesthood can contribute to the Mystical Union, is
by the Obligation his Act may lay upon the (...) in whose immediate Power it
was conceived to be; and considering that the Obligation was to be gathered
from the signification of the Symbols instituted by him, that what was
signified by those Symbols, that he was understood to have obliged himself to
perform, and therefore having instituted Symbols of Unity, he was understood to
have obliged himself to perform that Unity Mystically which he had shadowed
externally; it thence follows that this external signification was (as to us)
the ground from whence we could conclude the Obligation. And therefore if the
signification of the (...) as a Principle of Unity was most proper to the
Office of the High Priest, it will follow that the effecting the Mystical
Unity, answerable to the visible Unity by which it was represented, must have
been most proper to him also. And that this was so, will appear, if we consider
whence it was that this Unity was derived according to the Hellenistical
Hypothesis. And the Apostle who seems frequently to allude to it, Ephesians. V.23. 1
Cor. XI.3.
makes it to consist in the Unity of a Head. Thus Marriage makes a Mystical
Union because the Head of the Woman is the Man; and Christ and the Soul are
One, because the Head of every Man is Christ; and Christ and God are One,
because the Head of Christ is God; and Christ and the Church are One, because
he is the Head of the Church; and accordingly he is said (...), because he is
the Head of all Intellectual, as well as Sensible Beings. But in this Office of
being a Head, no Priesthood can pretend to represent him but the High
Priesthood. And therefore none can (in this way of Reasoning) pretend so
properly as that, to be a Principle of this Mystical Unity.

CHAP. IX. The Christian Bishops were answerable to the Jewish High Priests.
The CONTENTS.
The Solidity of this same way of Reasoning as urged by the Primitive
Christians against their contemporary SCHISMATICS. The general Principles on
which they proceeded were granted by the Generality of that Age. Sect. I. The
way of Reasoning from Sacrifices admitted also under the Gospel. Sect. II. The
Reasoning from Mystical Sacrifices indeed most proper to the State of the
Gospel. Sect. III. The Primitive Bishops designed in imitation of the Jewish
High Priesthood. Hence the custom of their wearing Frontlets. Sect. IV. And
that of their confining the Succession in Churches to the Family of their first
Bishops. Sect. V. This Design very agreeable to the Change intended by our
Savior. Sect. VI. An Account why, for a while, the Christians might defer the
committing that eminency of Power into the Bishops hands with which they were
entrusted afterward. Sect. VII, VIII. Hence also the Absoluteness of
particular Bishops in S. Cyprian's time. Sect. IX. However this same Reasoning
will oblige all to a strict dependence who live within the same Jurisdiction.
Sect. X. The same way of Reasoning from Jewish Precedents will include whole
Cities within the same Jurisdiction. Sect. XI. How inclinable the Christians
were to take up these Arts of Uniting Citizens. Sect. XII. The Solemn
Anniversaries of the Jews being continued among the Christians were to be
understood as Obligatory in the Times of Christianity; and their being observed
in particular Cities employed that the Bishops of those Cities were answerable
to the High Priests. Sect. XIII.

THUS far I have explained the Prudence Solidity of this Argument as insisted
on by the Jews against the Samaritans, proceeding on the Popular Hypothesis
received not only among the Philosophical Heathens, but the Jews themselves,
especially the Hellenists, and alluded to in all the remaining Disputes in the
like case in the New Testament. I now proceed further to show the like Prudence
and Solidity of the same Argument as applied to the Case of Christian
SCHISMATICS under the New Testament. And some things have already been taken
notice of that will considerably prepare the way. It has already been observed
that Christianity is nothing but a Mystical Judaism, and that this Assertion
that it was so is the main thing endeavored to be proved in the Discourses,
and the Supposition that it was so is the main Foundation supposed in the
Reasonings of the New Testament. It has been observed further that this
Hypothesis is so confessed in the New Testament, as that Reasonings are allowed
from Jewish Precedents to show what ought to be under Christianity, and that
most of the Reasonings in the New Testament for introducing now, things proper
to the Christian Religion, are indeed of that kind. So far were they then from
decrying this as a Legal Way of Reasoning, as our Brethren do now. It has
likewise been observed that this agreeableness between Judaism and
Christianity, or between the Literal and Mystical Judaism, held also in these
very Particulars, that both of them were supposed to have a Priesthood and an
Altar, I mean visible, as well as invisible; and that these Priesthood and
Altar were to perform the same Offices with Christians, as they had done among
the Jews, and accordingly that Reasonings were also allowed from the Priesthood
and Altar among the Jews, to the Mystical Priesthood and Altar which were still
kept up among the Christians, so that the Fathers in Reasoning thus did no more
than what they could justify by allowable Precedents in the New Testament.
This Reasoning will especially hold, where the Design aimed at is common to
Judaism with Christianity, that there the Means of prosecuting that same Design
should be also proportionably the same. And therefore seeing that the Church is
still a Society, and that a visible one under a visible Government proper to it
self, as the Jews were; and seeing that external Peace and Unity are not by any
one pretended to be antiquated parts of Judaism, but are still as seasonable,
and as necessary for the subsistence of such Societies as they were then; and
that this way of keeping to the external Communion of the visible Priesthood
and Altar of our Christian Churches are as conducive to the maintenance of
Peace and Unity now as they were then: It plainly follows, that they ought
actually to contribute to the same Design as they did then, That our Mystical
Priesthood and Altar ought as firmly to be adhered to in order to the
preserving our interest in the Segullah now as the Jews thought themselves
obliged to adhere to theirs, for claiming the like Privileges of the Segullah
then.

BESIDES these things, it appears likewise how many of the Principles Gospel.
The Jews made the Privilege of the Segullah to consist in the immediate Worship
and Patronage of the Supreme Beings, and his acceptance of that Appropriation.
The Christians succeed the Jews in this very Privilege of worshipping the
Supreme Being, and as succeeding them in the Privilege of being the Segullah,
they must succeed them also in the Right of having the Patronage of the Supreme
Being appropriated to him, so that none but Christians now can pretend to it,
not even the Jews themselves, but upon a condition, common to them with any
other Nations, that of turning Christians. Their way of appropriating this
Worship and Patronage to themselves was by their Sacrifices and their Altar.
All the whole Nation of the Jews had a Right to partake of those Sacrifices,
and by consequence to that Patronage; and none of any other Nation, whilst they
kept their National Distinctions, had any Right to partake with them at their
Sacrifices, tho they otherwise pretended to worship the same Supreme Being, and
in the same way as they did. This was the Case of the Samaritans, Ezr. IV.2.
who yet were told that they had nothing to do with them, Verse 3. In excluding
them from their Sacrifices they must needs deny their Title to the Mystical
Invisible Sacrifices, and to that special Patronage of the Supreme Being, they
denied them any portion in the Holy One. And we also have an Altar, of which
the Jews themselves, Heb. XIII.10.
as well as the Heathens, have no Right to partake, but on the condition of
Proselytism, who therefore, by the same Reasoning, can have no Right to the
Invisible Sacrifices, and our God. Their High Priest also was a Principle of
Unity as he presided over their solemn Panegyres, and the Sacrifices then
celebrated on that occasion, not as a Head of their Proseuchae or Synagogues,
or of those Assemblies wherein they met for the celebration of their ordinary
Offices. And, by the same Reasoning, our Bishops ought to be Principles of
Unity, not as presiding over Parishes and such subdivisions appointed for
Ordinary Assemblies, but as presiding in those Assemblies which were common to
whole Churches of one denomination, that is, as I have elsewhere shown, of such
as were Diocesans.

BUT that which is peculiar in our Sacrifices is that they are rather Mysteries
Sacrifices. The Jewish Sacrifices did indeed partake of both Offices. As
Popular Sacrifices they appropriated a particular God to a particular People in
order to National and Temporal Benefits expected from him, as protection of
their secular Government, Victory over their Enemies, etc. For these were the
things principally designed and expected by the Popular Sacrifices among the
Nations. But as Mysteries they related peculiarly to the Mystical Invisible
Sacrifice of the (...), to the Benefits of Souls, and Privileges in the
Invisible Intellectual World. And these were the peculiar and principal designs
of our Savior. His Kingdom was not to be of this World. As Man he was not to
come in a Royal State of Magnificence here, but was to expect it after his
death. As Messiah he was to be Prince of the World to come. As (...) his
Dominion was peculiarly in the World of Spirits, and his Designs were
principally for rescuing captivated Spirits from the Dominion of their Bodies,
and the Confinement of the lower World, which were also the principal designs
of the Mysteries. And therefore here the Reasoning from the Jewish Sacrifices
and Priesthood and Altar will peculiarly hold, if we consider them as
Mysteries, ours being indeed no other than Mystical Sacrifices. Christianity it
self being really nothing but Mystical Judaism, all the Mystical Reasonings
concerning Jewish Matters will more properly relate to Christianity, and
proceed more strongly concerning it, than they can concerning Judaism it self.
Besides the Notions of Mystical Union and Communion, on which these Reasonings
against SCHISM are grounded, do peculiarly concern our Mystical Sacrifices as
they are Mystical. Now Christianity, in the Reasonings of the New Testament, is
still represented as the Mystery kept hidden from Ages and Generations, that
was first revealed in the Gospel, that is, as the Mystery that had formerly
been shadowed by the most sacred of the Jewish Mysteries, in which regard it
was very properly called the Great Mystery, as that Term was also used by the
Hellenists. And in this regard the Revelation of such a Mystery as this was
most proper for the (...) himself. Philo Allegor. Leg. L.II. p. 79. D.
By the Laws of Mysteries the (...) of such a Mystery as this, without his
Authority, had been extremely Piacular for any Creature. Whence it will follow
further both that this proper way of Reasoning in Mysteries is indeed most
proper and natural and cogent in a Religion so made up of Mysteries, especially
in the Sacraments, which are yet further the most Sacred Mysteries of this most
Mysterious Religion; and withal that the Benefits of Mysteries (which,
according to the received Notions of that Age, would have been expected from
Mysteries, wherein undoubtedly the Holy Ghost would not fail their
expectations, especially such as were so prudently and naturally grounded)
might be expected here, where the (...) himself, the great Author of Mysteries,
and the proper performer of what was Covenanted for by Mysterious
Representations, was so nearly and immediately concerned. And therefore if upon
the Union of the High Priest with the (...), as represented by him, they were
cut off from the Internal Unitive Power of the (...) who were cut off from the
visible Communion of the High Priest; then much more we have reason to expect
that they should lose their Union with the (...) now under the Gospel who are
separated from the Communion of the Bishop, who now holds the same place, and
performs the same Office as the High Priest did then; but withal does it in a
Constitution of which the (...) is more professedly, and designedly, the
principal Author, and the Person represented.

Precedent of the Law, as it was intended by the Ancients. As I have shown that
no other Priests but the High Priests were concerned in this Privilege of being
the Principle of Unity; so, under the Gospel, none but the Bishop could pretend
to answer the Office of the High Priest: As the High Priest was a Principle of
Unity as representing the (...) in the Notion of a Head over the other Priests;
so the Bishop alone answered both the (...), and the High Priesthood too, in
being a visible Head over his Brethren of the Presbytery. And that the
Primitive Christians understood their Bishop to answer the Office of the High
Priest, appears in that, in the most ancient times, and in the best Records of
those Churches which were most certainly planted in the Apostolical Times (if
not by the Apostles themselves, in their own Persons) the Bishops were said to
have worn the Sacerdotal Frontlet which was proper to the High Priest among the
Jews, from whom in all likelihood they borrowed it. So Polycrates in his
Epistle concerning the Paschal Controversy, concerning S. John, (...), etc.
Who was a Priest, Ap. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. V.24.III.31.
and wore the Frontlet. He could not pretend to the (...) on account of an
Ordinary Priesthood among the Jews, and there is no pretense of his being High
Priest. And therefore, in all likelihood, his pretense to it was on account of
the Office in the Christian Church, which he thought equivalent to the High
Priesthood among the Jews. Besides what he had done, by virtue of any Office
among the Jews, must have been agreeable to the Constitutions of the Priesthood
of the Literal Judaism, which would not have recommended his Example as so
argumentative in Christianity for the keeping of Easter, whose Arguments from
Jewish Precedents were not for the same things, but for things answerable to
them in the same proportion. The same thing is delivered concerning S. James
the first Bishop Jerusalem by Epiphanius. Epiphan. Haer. LXXVIII. Nazar. Vales.
in loc. Eusebius. H.E. V.24.
A like passage there is concerning S. Mark produced out of an ancient
Manuscript of his Passion by Valesius, tho, it is very true, the Author
understands it of his Priesthood among the Jews. His Words are these: Quem
quidem B. Marcum juxta ritum carnalis Sacrificii Pontificalis apicis petalum in
populo gestasse Judaeorum, illustrium virorum Syngraphae declarant. Ex quo
manifest datur intelligi, de stirpe eum Levitica, immo Pontificis Aaron,
sacrae successionis originem habuisse. But we may easily distinguish between
the bare matter of Fact, and the Author's conjecture concerning the occasion of
it. As for the later, we have no more reason to receive it than we have to
value the Judgment and Reason of the Author. But for the matter of Fact it self
he gives us more competent Testimonies than his own, the Syngraphae Virorum
Illustrium. Nor can it be thought strange, that what was really done by S. Mark
as a Christian Bishop in those first times, this Author, because he found it
used by no Bishop in his own time, might ascribe it to a Jewish Priesthood. But
Valesius himself is of another opinion, and conceives it to have been used
ordinarily by the Bishops of those first times as equivalent to the High
Priests of the Jews.

AND probably it is to this same Christian Episcopacy was then thought
answerable to the High Priesthood of the Jews, that we may most prudently
ascribe that most ancient custom of choosing their first Bishops of the same
Family with the first who had possessed the Chair at the time of their first
Conversion. And among the Jews themselves the Person was elective, tho the
Election was indeed confined to the Family of Aaron. That the most ancient
Christians, who lived nearest to the Apostles, did observe this way, we have
reason to believe from the most ancient Monuments we have of Ecclesiastical
History. In the Church of Jerusalem, where our Savior was himself in person
the principal Converter, the first Bishops were chosen of our Savior's Family.
First S. James Vide Hegesip. ap. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. II.23.
the Just, who because of his Relation, is in a general sense called The
Brother of our Lord. Then Simeon Hegesip. ap. Eus. Eccl. Hist. III.11. (...).
The Words of Hegesippus ap. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. IV.22. That is, After James the
Just had suffered Martyrdom, as also our Lord himself had suffered on the same
Account, the Son of his Uncle, Simeon of Cleophas was made Bishop, to whom all
gave their Suffrages the rather because he was the second Cousin of the Lord.
Epiphan. Haer. LXXVIII.7.14.
Cleophae the Cousin German of our Savior, for Cleophas was the Brother of
Joseph, if we may believe the Tradition of Hegesippus. And in this later
Election it is particularly observed Eusebius, Ibid.
that the Apostles had a particular regard to the Counsel and Assistance of the
surviving Kinsmen of our Savior. Among the Brethren of our Lord, Judas is
reckoned for one. And his Posterity, Hegesippus says, presided over the whole
Church as Witnesses and Kinsmen of our Lord: His Words are very full: (...).
Hegesip. ap. Eusebius. Eccli Hist. III.32. etc. 20.
It seems then they were thought to have a Right to preside over the whole
Church, on account of their being Kinsmen to him by whom the Church was first
constituted. The same thing he has also elsewhere, only there he says they did
(...), and for the same Reasons as before. Possibly Eusebius understood it of
their being Bishops, but he is there to be explained by the Words of Hegesippus
which were as I have now transcribed them. Nor was it only so in our Savior's
Case, who had a Right over the whole Church. There is reason to believe that
the same Rule was also observed in other particular Churches besides that of
Jerusalem. The forementioned Polycrates derives his Tradition for their way of
observing of Easter from his own Kinsmen, of whom seven had been Bishops before
him, and himself the eighth. In all likelihood he means that they were his
Predecessors in the same See, and accordingly he mentions only some of them
with whom he had conversed, tho he was sixty five years old at the writing of
the Epistle. The Succession of those seven Bishops before him in the same See
might very probably come near the time of the Apostles. And considering that he
insists on their Testimony as an Argument for proving an Apostolical Tradition,
it must needs have been that the first of them lived in fresh memory of the
Apostles. This way of Reasoning alone is agreeable to the Practice of the
Churches of that Age in proving the Doctrine and Consent of the Apostles
against their contemporary Heretics. They prove them indeed by the Testimony
of Ecclesiastical Tradition. But then they insist on no Testimony of any Church
as competent for this purpose, but of those alone which had at first received
their Traditions immediately from the Apostles themselves in person, and insist
on no Succession of Bishops as competent for deducing such a Testimony to their
own Times, but only such Successions whereof the first were contemporary with
the Apostles themselves, that such Bishops might receive their Traditions
immediately from the Apostles as well as their Churches, lest otherwise their
Adversaries might have had any plausible color to except against the
competency of their first Information. Thus that Argument is managed by S.
Irenaeus and Tertullian, the best present Monuments we have of the way of
Reasoning of those times. So that this custom also of deriving the Succession
in a Family seems also to have been derived from the times of the Apostles. And
this way of imputing it to a Jewish Original, as an imitation of their way of
deriving the High Priesthood, seems to be the most probable way of giving an
account of it.

AND indeed this Reasoning whereby Christian Episcopacy was made answerable to
the High Priesthood of the Jews, is no more than what is very agreeable to the
Change our Savior intended to make, as we have an account of his Design in his
own Discourse with the Woman of Samaria. He there tells her that the time was
coming, when they should neither in that mountain of Gerizim, nor yet in
Jerusalem, S. Joh. IV.21.
worship the Father. How so? That it should be unlawful to worship God at Mount
Gerizim, or at Jerusalem? No, but that, according to the agreement of both
Parties in that Dispute, that the public solemn Worship under the personal
Management of the High Priest was confined as the Samaritans thought to Mount
Gerizim, as the Jews thought to Jerusalem; the very Foundation of that Dispute
should be quite taken away, that Worship of the High Priesthood should be no
more confined, neither to Mount Gerizim, nor yet to Jerusalem. Plainly he must
still be supposed to mean the thing he discourses of, in the meaning of the
Parties concerned in that Dispute, allowing only the liberty of Mysticizing it
so far as the Gospel it self required that it should be mystically understood.
The Question therefore, between the Jews and the Samaritans, being concerning
the Confinement of the High Priesthood, our Savior's Answer must be understood
to deny the Confinement of that which should be answerable to the High
Priesthood under the Gospel. This must be the meaning of the Reason drawn from
the Spiritual Nature of God, and the spiritual way of worshipping him. Not as
our Enthusiasts are apt to understand it, that there should be no need of
Priests nor Sacrifices (that were to overthrow his own Constitutions under the
Gospel it self elsewhere) but supposing the continuance of the High Priesthood
and such mystical Sacrifices as the Gospel allows of, to let them know however,
that they should henceforth be so spiritual, as that all who did communicate in
the same spirit, how distant soever their Residences were, might
notwithstanding communicate in them, which they could not do before. And still
it is to be understood, not of single Congregations, but of the Congregations,
at least, of whole Cities (for those public Sacrifices, wherein the High
Priests were concerned, were never designed for less than the whole Cities, how
great and populous soever, where they were performed) that every City should
have the same Privilege as Sichem and Jerusalem, to have Mystical Sacrifices
and High Priests of their own, with whom they might communicate without such
tedious Journies as they of the Dispersion were fain to make at the return of
their solemn Anniversaries at Jerusalem. And tho then the Samaritans were
guilty of SCHISM for erecting a new Temple and Altar and High Priest in a
distinct City, and at a distance from Jerusalem; yet henceforward the like
Charge should not hold. Distant Cities might have their particular High Priests
and Sacrifices without any such breach of Unity and Peace between them. All
this while this Dispute was between Cities, not single Congregations. And the
liberty of having particular High Priests must therefore be understood at least
of whole Cities, in which nothing bore such a natural resemblance to the Jewish
High Priest as their Bishops.

Apostles, they did for a while forbear the setting any Bishop up in any
considerable Superiority over his Brethren. Tho by the most creditable accounts
of the later times of the Apostles, we have reason to believe that it was done
by the last surviving Apostles; yet we have here a prudent Reason, why, for
some time, it should be forborne. If this Superiority of the Bishop were a
substituting him in the place of the High Priest, and the multiplying such
Superiors in several Cities were the multiplying High Priests in the several
Cities; it plainly appears how this must have been interpreted by those who
were Jewishly affected, from the Principles already mentioned. They must have
looked on such persons as, not only violaters of their Law, but as Breakers of
their Mystical Union, and consequently obnoxious to the same Curses and
Execrations which on the same account had been thundered against the
Samaritans. And therefore as in other Cases we find them very cautious of
giving any Offense to the 1 Cor. X.32.
Jews, tho otherwise justifiable by their own Principles, till they found the
Generality prepared for them, or they were forced upon them by some Exigencies
of their Circumstances; so we have reason to believe that they proceeded with
the measures of calm Prudence. Whilst they could, they kept in the Communion of
the Jewish Church, they worshipped in the Temple, and attended their Anniversary
Assemblies, till the Jews themselves seem to have driven them from them, which
it should seem they did not till the later end of the Apostles times. Whilst
they kept this correspondence with them there was no reason to expect that they
would raise up the jealousy of the Jewish High Priest by setting up a Rival
against him. Nay, by S. Paul's behavior to him whilst he was on the Tribunal
judging him, and provoking him by unbecoming and unequal behavior, it appears
what a deference the Christians themselves paid to the Jewish High Priesthood
of those times, Acts* XXIII.5.
besides the express Command our Savior himself gave to observe and do what
should be required from them by those who sat on Moses seat. S. Matthew.
XXIII.2, 3.


Government at all, but acted by the Principles then allowed in favor of
Zealots and Prophets. And it is observable how low that Passage concerning S.
Paul reaches into the Apostles Times. When they did find it requisite for their
own sakes to set up an Ecclesiastical Government, yet still they did it by
Principles allowable by the Jews. Among the Jews themselves the Synagogue-Way
of Worship was allowed in all places, at whatsoever distance from Jerusalem,
and among them they had their Rulers in common, and some, as it should seem,
over the rest, whom they called their Archisynagogue, which none understood to
be done with the least design of emulation against the High Priest. This
therefore the Christians might imitate without offense, without pretending any
design of making themselves a distinct Body. And this liberty they seem to have
taken, allowing their first Presbyters no more pre-eminence than what was
allowed to the Archisynagogus. Afterward when the Old Testament Texts were
thoroughly understood which were applied by them to the Eucharist, by which it
appeared to be, not only a Commemoration of our Savior's Death, but also a
Mystical Sacrifice, the Sacrifice indeed that was prefigured and typified by
the Jewish Sacrifices, and which was to succeed, and supersede them in the
State of Mystical Israelitism, and to take them off from all Obligations of
attending and communicating in their bloody Sacrifices; then it appeared to
tend to a breach from those who still maintained the Obligation of the
Levitical Sacrifices. And when the Jewish Sacrifices and High Priesthood were
taken away, and past all hopes of restitution; then the Jews themselves who had
been proselyted to the Christian Religion upon those other Principles that were
not condemnable by Judaism it self, would now undoubtedly be more favorable and
willing to receive Conviction by what their Brethren had to say for the
continuance of the Mystical High Priesthood as well as their Mystical
Sacrifices. For this must have extremely conduced to the comforting them for
the Ruin of their Temple and Priesthood, when they might yet enjoy their
Sacrifices and Priesthood (which had been the greatest endearment of Jerusalem
to them) every where else more fully and effectually than they did at
Jerusalem. Nay, so far would it be from being scandalous now, that more than
formerly, must, on these very accounts, be favorably affected to Christianity.
And upon this account it was seasonable to advance the pre-eminence of the
Bishop, when he was to succeed in the Office of High Priesthood by the true
Principles of Christianity, as we have all the reason we can desire from the
footsteps of those times, to believe that it was indeed, about this time,
considerably advanced.

AND this seems also very agreeable absoluteness of Episcopacy so much insisted
on by S. Cyprian, who most of all insists on this Argument we are discoursing
of against the SCHISMATICS of his time. He makes all Bishops equal, to have
the whole Power in solidum; to be absolute Judges of their own Acts, and to be
accountable to none but God, and that there was but one Episcopacy among them
all, which notwithstanding was possessed by each of them not in parcels, but
entirely. It is easy to observe how inconsistent this is with that Supremacy
which is challenged by the Pope over all the other Bishops of the World. Had
the Case been so, the Pope alone had been the only Successor into the High
Priesthood, and there had been no other change under the Gospel but that of the
Seat of the High Priesthood, that it had been translated from Jerusalem to
Rome. Still the confinement had been continued, whereas, on the contrary, it is
the principal design of our Savior's Discourse to overthrow the Perpetuity of
that Confinement, as well on the Jews side, as on that of the Samaritans, as
well to Jerusalem as to Mount Gerizim, and consequently as well to Rome, as to
Jerusalem: And in order hereunto he shows, in his Discourse with the Woman of
Samaria, that henceforward all other places like Samaria and Jerusalem, that
is, all Cities, should have equal Privileges with those which were, at that
time, actually challenged by them, which was of being the Supreme Metropolis of
Religion, which is, by no means consistent with that Superiority which is
challenged by the Roman Church over other Churches. The most ancient
Metropolitan Rights pretended to by the Primitive Christians were not of any
real Jurisdiction, but only of Rank and Order. Now this Absoluteness of
particular Bishops so much insisted on by S. Cyprian, as it is inconsistent
with these pretenses of the Bishop of Rome; so it is withal very consequent to
the Notion I am speaking of, that the Bishop succeeded into the Office of the
High Priesthood. For as the High Priesthood was so supreme as to have no sacred
Power on Earth above it; so also must the Christian Episcopacy, if it succeeded
the High Priesthood in the plenitude of Power. And as the Reason insisted on
for the One Altar of the Jews, was that one only God was worshipped by it, and
that One only Mystical Altar and Sacrifice of the (...) was represented by it,
and so proportionably the Reason requiring the Unity of the High Priesthood,
must also be because the (...). represented by him was only One; these are
reasons also concerning Christianity, and explain the Unity of the Catholic
Church now as well as then. For neither do we now pretend to any more than One
Mystical Sacrifice performed by Christ, tho represented in our several
Eucharists, nor to any more than One Invisible Bishop Christ himself as
represented by all our Bishops. So that this is a way to understand how all the
true Churches in the World do, notwithstanding, make no more than One Church,
as all the Altars are only One Altar, and all the Bishops only One Bishop. Even
the Jews themselves did not so insist on the Personal Unity of the High Priest
as upon the Uniformity of their Solemn Assemblies. It was by accident that the
President of their visible Assemblies was but One, because their public
Assemblies were confined to one place. Otherwise, even in that one place, there
might be more High Priests than One if they acted uniformly and with consent,
that is, so that the same public Assemblies were owned by them, and managed so
that One single Person presided in each of them. So did Zadoc and Abiathar: so
did the first and second High Priest: 2 Kings, XXV.18. So seem Annas and
Caiaphas to have enjoyed that same Office at the same time. And the Rabbis
tell us that the High Priests had in course their Segen, who was to officiate
for him in case of pollution, or any such unexpected Incapacity in him whose
principal Duty it was. And in the same way neither did the Primitive Christians
scruple the having several Bishops in the same Cities. So were Narcissus and
Alexander at the same time Bishops of Jerusalem, and S. Augustine and his
Predecessor Valerius at the same times Bishops of Hippo, and it was proffered
by the Catholic Bishops to the Donatists as an Expedient for Catholic Unity,
Collat. Carthag.
that, during life, both the Catholic and Donatist Bishops should both enjoy
the Honor and Style of Bishops where there were two already made in the same
Sees, on condition that both parties might own the Surviver. No Evid. for
Dioces. Churches, etc. in the the Primitive Times.
And of this kind indeed are all the uncensured Instances produced by a late
Author who has collected all the Instances he could think of, of many Bishops
in One City. This therefore being supposed, it easily appears how the
Christians multiplying their High Priests in several places was justifiable
from SCHISM by the very Reasonings of the Jews against the Samaritans. It had
not been more repugnant to Unity for the Samaritans to have had a distinct High
Priest from the Jews (if the High Priests Office might lawfully have been
performed among the Samaritans) than it was for the Jews to have two at once at
Jerusalem. So that the whole charge of SCHISM on both sides, was grounded on
that supposition, which was also granted on both sides, that those Assemblies
in which the High Priest was to preside, could not be lawful in any more than
one place. And therefore this was also the only scruple those first Judaizing
Christians could have against the Christians multiplying their High Priests in
several Cities. When it once appeared that this Worship of God in Panegyres
with Solemn Mystical Sacrifices was lawful in all other Cities as well as
Jerusalem, by the Rules of Mystical Israelitism; it would also appear that such
multiplying their High Priests were no more a violation of Unity, or
prejudicial to their representing the (...) as a Principle of Unity, than it
was that the same Face should be represented in different Glasses, or the same
Effigies taken off from the same Seal in different Impressions. And therefore
as those two Priests in Jerusalem were, notwithstanding, unprejudicial to their
Unity whilst they acted by consent, and without prejudice to the Right of
presiding in the common Assemblies; so neither could they charge the multitude
of Bishops in several Cities, with being injurious to the Unity of Christian
Communion.

Reasoning from the Legal Precedent of the Unity of the High Priesthood did not
charge the difference or mutual independency of Christian High-Priesthoods in
different Cities with SCHISM; yet it does not thence follow but that it may
hold as the Fathers of the first Centuries managed it, against several or
independent Presidents of the same Cities and Jurisdictions. It is very true,
where the Multitudes are not obliged to meet in common Assemblies, or not to
maintain visible Communion in their own Persons; there the same invisible (...)
may be represented by several visible Bishops. But it is withal as true, and as
true by the Consequent of this same Reasoning, that where persons are obliged
to the same common Assemblies, there it must cut off from the Mystical Unity
with the (...) to disown their dependence on the same visible Representation of
the (...) as the Head of their visible Assemblies. For here the same Reasoning
holds exactly. The Argument of the Jews against the Samaritans was plainly to
prove their Obligation to the external Priesthood at Jerusalem, and from their
disunion from him, to infer their disunion from the (...) also, their invisible
High Priest. The Principles they proceeded on were, as we have seen, that the
external Communion was the only ordinary means of attaining the internal
Communion, the external Altar of the Mystical Altar, the external Priesthood of
the Mystical Priesthood, and that therefore they who were cut off from the
external Communion with the external Altar, and the external Priesthood, must
also be cut off from the internal Communion with the Mystical Altar and
Priesthood. Tho therefore it was not against Unity for the (...) to have
different persons to represent him; yet it was supposed to be against Unity for
any one to presume to represent the (...) who did not derive his Power of
Representation from them to whom the (...) had in an external way committed the
Power of deriving it, or against the Rules by which the (...) had given them
warrant to expect it, as there could be no giving it whilst the place of the
High Priesthood was full, without the consent of the High Priest, or his
removal by them who had Power to remove him; nor, even so, was there any reason
to expect it any where but at Jerusalem after God himself had been pleased to
confine the Office to that place. What was so pretended to must therefore have
been against Unity, because it could not be expected by the first Constitutions
for Succession in that Office, and for excluding false Pretenders, and for
Preservation of Unity. And was not this whole Reasoning as cogent in the case
of Christian SCHISMATICS? Did God provide greater Obligations to secure a
dependence on the Priesthood of the Law than that of the Gospel? Is it credible
that the Spiritual Benefits gained by that dependence were greater, or the
Spiritual Loss incurred by denying that dependence more tolerable, than those
which are the Rewards and Punishments of the like Cases now? Can our Altar and
Priesthood be Mysteries to them as shadowed by their Altar and Priesthood? And
must they not therefore have a nearer Relation to the Original Heavenly
Mysteries? Have not we a nearer and more immediate Interest in the (...), and
his Sacrifice, and Intercession, and Heavenly Ministration? And have we yet
less efficacy in the conveyance of his Invisible and Heavenly Influences? Or is
it probable that God should less confine his Mystical Favors to his external
Ordinances now than under the Law? If God did not confine them then, why must
the Samaritans lose them for losing their Union to the Levitical Priesthood? If
he does also now, how can SCHISMATICS come by them now who are divided from
the Priesthood of the Gospel? I am sure the Apostle in his Reasoning in the
Epistle to the Ebrews makes both the Benefits and losses greater which are
gained and incurred by a Reverence or Contempt of Gospel Ordinances. Heb. II.3.
And how suitable his Reasoning is to the Principles from whence he reasons,
let even our Adversaries themselves judge, tho they should have less Reverence,
than I believe they will, for his Authority.

I DO not see how they can avoid the force of this Reasoning in such Cases
where God has confined Us to certain Assemblies as he did all them to the
Assemblies at Jerusalem. But how, will they say, does it appear that God has
obliged all the Believers of a City and it is Jurisdiction to partake in the
Assemblies of the Bishop? By the very same way of Reasoning from the Levitical
Precedents. For this is also one Rule of this way of Reasoning, that the Legal
Precedent must still oblige where there is not some other express Testimony, or
Reason of the thing, to oppose against it. So the Law of Literal Sacrifices
they opposed with those express Texts, Psalm. L. 8.13, 14. L I.16, 17. Is. I.
11, 12, 13, 14.
where God expressed his dislike of their Literal Sacrifices, and his
approbation of the Mystical. And so concerning the Sabbath, our Savior himself
pleads the Reason of Necessity, and the approbation of this Reason by the Law
it self, by whose Prescriptions the Priests themselves broke the Law of the
Sabbath in the Temple, S. Matthew. XII 5.
and were blameless. But never is it any where pretended by the Apostles, or
Apostolical Writers, as our Brethren usually pretend, that any thing is
therefore not obligatory because it had no other Obligation besides that of the
Old Law. Nay, by this Topic of Reasoning it is generally supposed that in all
other Cases the Legal Precedent is still obligatory. And therefore this Law
also of confining People to Public Assemblies must still hold where no
particular inconvenience does hinder it, and our Saviors Relaxation of it must
only hold in those other Cases wherein there are such particular inconveniences
as may be judged inconveniences by the Principles of the Gospel. Thus it was
indeed an inconvenience that where all Nations were counted equal, and had an
equal Title to be admitted to the Privileges of the Gospel, without any
obligation further to leave either their Countries or their Customs, that yet
the Public Worship should be confined to one place, which therefore all other
distant places of the whole World (which was now designed to be converted) must
want for no other reason but their distance. For this looked like an owning
that Principle which it is the principal design of the Gospel to overthrow, of
the confinement of the Segullah to a particular Nation. And it was but
agreeable to this Evangelical Disowning that (...), that as all Nations were in
their own Countries, equally capable of being admitted to the Segullah; so they
should enjoy equal Privileges, the Privileges of the Jews Temple-Worship, as
well as those of the Synagogue-Worship, and of the two rather those of the
Temple-Worship, which were of God's express Institution, than those of the
Synagogue-Worship, which seem to have been taken up by Human Prudence. The
Communication of these Peculiarities of God's Institution would rather signify
that God did not intend, henceforward, any such Confinement of his favor to a
particular Nation, but that all should share alike in his Evangelical Favors.
The inconvenience therefore following on this was that all other Nations and
Cities, who could not ordinarily meet in those Assemblies, must ordinarily want
the Benefit of such Assemblies, and constantly, if they did not take more
painful Journies for the sake of their Religion than they were obliged to on
account of their Worldly Concernments.

Reason, nor this Inconvenience, hold in the Case of particular Cities. The
Obligation to the City Assemblies did not signify such a Confinement of Favor
to particular Nations or Countries because this same Obligation was supposed
common to all Cities of all Countries and Nations. Nor were they obliged to any
greater diligence for communicating with those City-Assemblies for Religion,
than they were to the like Secular Assemblies for their Worldly Concernments.
All that lived within the Precincts and Jurisdictions, how populous soever,
were obliged to a dependence on the City-Assemblies for their secular
Government; and they are no more than these that, by our Principles, are
obliged to depend on the same Ecclesiastical Assemblies for their
Ecclesiastical Government. And if it was thought necessary that the same
multitude should by all Arts be endeared and linked together in one Body for
the better management of their Secular Interests: it is no way likely that the
Primitive Christians would break them into several Bodies mutually independent
on each other, or on any third acknowledged Superior. It is very well known how
famous they were for their Love, and how particularly remarked by their Heathen
Adversaries themselves. Tertull. Apol.
And it is also well known how eagerly they took up and continued any Customs
that had been introduced by the Heathens, of that kind, for the more endearing
promotion of Love and Unity. Such were their Heteriae, their Jus Hospitii,
their Love Feasts and Kisses of Love. And therefore, tho the Legal Precedent
had left them free; yet they would not have thought themselves at liberty to
neglect this way of binding Citizens together, on account of the very Law of
Charity. They would rather be for introducing new Endearments and Dependencies,
than for dissolving any of those which they had found before. Nor was this
Communication of the Public Assemblies so unpracticable in the most Populous
Cities as our Brethren would make it now. Had Preaching been the whole Work of
those Assemblies, then indeed no more could partake in them than could make up
an Auditory. But when I derive their Obligation to the Public Assemblies from
their Obligation to partake in the Public Sacrifices; what difficulty can
there be to conceive how the same numbers that communicated in their Popular
Heathen Sacrifices might not as easily communicate in the Mystical Sacrifices
of Christians? How much easier was it to distribute so small Proportions of
Bread and Wine as came to the share of each, than such vast proportions of
Flesh and Wine as were requisite to feast so great a multitude as usually
assembled at their Panegyres? And yet it was not necessary that they should
receive their Proportions exactly from the same Land, or in the same place.
Whosoever received it within the same Jurisdiction, or from any person employed
by the Presidents of those Assemblies was thereby judged to communicate with
the Presidents themselves. That must have been the Case of them who carried the
Sacrificed Flesh home, or sold it in the Shambles, and of them who obtruded it
on the Christians before the Secular Judicatories. And therefore, by this way
of Interpretation, all that communicated in the Eucharistical Bread which was
carried home (as that was allowed in those times) all that communicated in that
which was sent to the Absents, and all that communicated with any of the
Bishops Presbyters in any other place within his Jurisdiction appointed by the
Bishop, were, in the Interpretation of these common Laws and Usages concerning
Sacrifices, judged to communicate with the Bishop. And then what difficulty was
there then more than now why whole Cities might not communicate with the
Bishops?

Anniversary Feasts derived by the most ancient Christians from the Jews. That
the Feasts of the Passover and the Pentecost were so derived, every one knows
who is any thing acquainted with Antiquity. And that the Feast of Tabernacles
was so also is very probable from that very ancient custom of their bringing
their First Fruits and Offerings to be blessed by the Bishop. For if they still
thought the Legal Precept concerning those Festivals obligatory as to this
particular Instance of consecrating the Fruits of their Labors; the Reason will
as well hold for the consecrating the second Harvest in the seventh Month, or
the end of the Year according to the Rustic Calendar, or the old Account
before their coming out of Egypt, as for the first ripe Fruits in Easter, or
the first ripe Harvest in Pentecost. And it is certain that the Fast of the
seventh Month was observed among the Christians of the fifth Century, tho it is
hard to say that it was then first taken up by them. The Jewish Original would
make one think it rather more ancient. The very celebrating these Feasts with
their Mystical Sacrifices in other Cities signified the equalling them with
Jerusalem in this very same particular which had before been the Prerogative of
Jerusalem. It signified their accounting the City Bishops answerable to the
Jewish High Priests, because these Festivals, could not, among the Jews, be
solemnized any where but in the Seat of their High Priest. And certainly the
design of observing these Festivals in Cities, must have been not for private,
but public Assemblies. By the Rule of Proportion, all the whole Cities must
have been, in Reason, as much concerned in these, as the whole Nation of the
Jews were in the same Festivals as they were celebrated at Jerusalem. The very
introducing therefore of these into other Cities employed their intending to
unite these Cities into entire Bodies as they had before united the Jewish
Nation. And considering how very early that Paschal Controversy was, and how
much higher the Practice was derived on both sides, both in the Eastern and
Western Parts of the Roman Empire; considering withal how very early those
Imitations of the Jews must have been, for that very Reason because they were
imitations of them, whom Christians were less disposed to imitate after the
destruction of their Temple, and the Dispersion of their Nation, and the
National Animosities which from that time forward alienated both sides from
each other, when the Jews besides their unwearied Persecutions, cursed the
Christians in their Synagogues, as they did in the time of Tryphon, Just. Mart.
Dial. cum Tryphone.
and the Temptations to yield in hopes of a Restitution of the Jews to their
former Greatness were utterly taken away by the Subversion of the Jewish
Nation; and considering withal how very probably they might be continued in
consequence of the Reasoning I am speaking of* that nothing was to be laid
aside of the Jewish Establishments, but what had been foretold to be of a
Temporary Nature, and unsuitable to the State of Mystical Judaism under the
Gospel, nor any thing any further than it was so unsuitable: I say, these
things being considered, it will be very probable that these things were rather
continued from the days of the Apostles to their times, than introduced
afterward. And if so, then it must by the same Reasoning appear, that this
uniting the whole Cities in the same common Solemnities was likewise deduced
from the same times of the Apostles.

CHAP. X. The City Jurisdictions were Answerable to the Jurisdiction of the
High Priest.
The CONTENTS.
Tho Christians of the same City had been left to their Liberty whether they
would unite, or not, yet, supposing them united, Subjects must have been
obliged to their actual Terms of Union. Sect. I. 1. In that Case, it must have
been indifferent, and therefore Lawful, for them to unite so. Sect. II. 2. This
way of Union being once agreed on, tho the Agreement had been only Human, yet
the Obligation to Subjects and Posterity would have been Divine. Sect. III. 3.
Tho the particular Instance had not, yet the Power by which even that Instance
had been determined, had been from God. Sect. IV. 4. Chapter 10.
The Determination of the Limits of Jurisdiction was a thing absolutely
necessary for preserving Unanimity among themselves in propagating their common
Christianity. Sect. V. 5. The most equal way of determining these Limits, among
Equals, is that of Occupation. Sect. VI, VII. This way of determining them will
not oblige us to a Recourse to express Scripture. Sect. VIII. All Church
Members were obliged, by the ancient Canons, to a Personal Attendance at the
Bishops Altar at some solemn Times. Sect. IX. The Ground of that Custom in the
Jewish Precedent. Sect. X.

otherwise, and the Christians of the same City had been left to their Liberty,
whether they would unite under any common Government or not, as to any general
Establishment which God had made concerning it; yet where a Model was laid, and
a Church was already begun, it could not be without breach of Unity that any
could resist it, or revolt from it, and therefore were for the future obliged
to submit to it. Now that this was actually the Case that all the Christians of
the Cities did unite themselves into a Body, is not only clear from the
Practice of those times wherein our Adversaries themselves, who are skilled in
Antiquity, acknowledge Episcopacy to have obtained, as in the time of S.
Cyprian, but also of the times of the Apostles themselves. I mention nothing
more to prove it at present but what has elsewhere been mentioned, the
Convertibleness of Churches and Cities in the Apostles times. This therefore
being supposed to have been their actual Case, whether they were obliged to it
or not; I say, their Sucessors could not infringe this Unity so agreed on
without the Sin of SCHISM. I mean such Successors as should attempt it without
the consent of their Ecclesiastical Governors for the time being. Such were
they against whom S. Cyprian reasoned, which is the Case for which I am
concerned at present.

FOR 1. If no Divine Right did oblige unite into one Body, it is withal as
certain that no Divine Constitution made it unlawful for them to do so. And in
that Case it must have been indifferent, and therefore in their own Power to
settle what extent of their Union themselves pleased, which when it was settled
might for the future oblige, not only themselves, but their Posterity, at least
such a Posterity of their Subjects as I am speaking of. This they might have
done by that Right of Human Power which is inseparable from all multitudes that
are sui juris, and which must particularly be acknowledged Lawful in Cases
undetermined either way by any Divine Interposition. Every single person is
acknowledged to have a Power to bind himself and his Heirs, which therefore
cannot be denied to Multitudes. I shall not now digress so far as to debate the
Reasonableness and Equity of it, because it is indeed a Subject more proper for
another place. I shall now suppose it as a Principle Fundamental to all
Societies. This is the only common Principle of Equity, not the less, but the
more obliging because not written, as the Laws of Nature and Nations are much
more obliging than any Positive Local Statutes, on which the Perpetuity of
Societies once established does subsist, by virtue of which the Legislative
Power and the particular Laws made by them, do not extinguish with the
Legislators Persons; by virtue of which all Leagues and Covenants made by
Predecessors are still reckoned as obliging to Posterity; without any new
Ratification; by virtue of which the particular consent of every new born
Child, and every Stranger is not thought necessary even in those Governments,
which did, at first, confessedly arise from the consent of the People. And
being Principles of Equity grounded on the common Right of Societies in
general, they cannot be denied to Ecclesiastical Societies more than others,
tho they also had been at first confederated by the particular Suffrages of the
Laity as well as the Clergy. And

2. THIS being once agreed upon, tho the agreement it self had been only human,
and the Obligation to Posterity human too; yet the Obligation is Divine. The
Sin of Theft is not the less against a Divine Law because the determination of
Property depends on Human Constitutions, and is accordingly different in
several places. So that as that is Property in one place, which is not so by
the Laws of another, it accordingly falls out that what is Justice in that
place where it is a Property is Theft in that place where the Property belongs
to another. Accordingly tho the determination of the extent of the Union of
that Society which we call a Church had been derived only from the agreement of
those who at first planted Christianity in a plate, yet the Obligation to
preserve the Unity, when once established, may be Divine. None doubts but
Parents are as fallible in requiring instances of Obedience from their Children
as the Church is. Yet who doubts also but the Sin of Disobedience (in a matter
of its own nature undetermined by the Law of God) is a breach of a Divine Law,
tho the Parents were mistaken in the Prudence of the thing required by them as
an instance of Obedience; and so that it be not unlawful? Yet such Mistakes
plainly show that the determining the instance of Obedience is from an
Authority only Human and Fallible, nay actually mistaken. But whilst the
determination extends no farther than their just Parental Power, to things not
unlawful, however imprudent, that does not hinder but that the complex Act of
Obedience, even in that particular human Instance, is obligatory by the Law of
God. Accordingly, supposing the Obligation to external Ecclesiastical Unity to
be Divine, and to have been indeed the principal Design of the Positive
Establishments of God under the Gospel; it will also follow, that the
Obligation to that same Unity in the extent to which the Human Ecclesiastical
Authority had determined it, must also be Divine, supposing that the Human
Ecclesiastical Authority had proceeded no further than what was lawful for a
Human Authority. Which Reasoning will the rather hold if we consider

3. THAT indeed, tho the particular Instance be not expressly determined by God,
yet the Power, by which even that Instance had been determined, had been from
God. For it was God only that could make them sui Juris, and give them the
Power of disposing of themselves, and settling Rules for obliging themselves
and their Posterity, if the Power had been derived from the consent of the
particular Suffrages. But much more it was so, supposing, on our Principles,
that the Power of the Church, results from the Power of Sealing Covenants in
God's name, and of intitling Persons to the Privileged Society, and to the
Privileges of that Society. These were Powers that could come from none but
God, and consequently all the Authority resulting from them, must be given
together with them. And therefore, let our Adversaries state the ground of this
determining the Extent of the Unity of Christian Churches as they please; yet
they cannot state it so as to make the Power of determining the extent of it
purely Human. If they call that Power purely Human which is seated in Persons
pretending to no more than a human Nature, so the Authority of the Apostles
themselves was purely Human, which notwithstanding themselves will not deny to
have been also Divine, so that all Affronts and Disobediences to it were
resented by God as committed against Him rather than the Persons of the
Apostles. So were also Moses and Aaron purely Men, and yet the Murmurings of
the Children of Israel are said to have been rather against God than them. So
was also the (...) to which the Apostle requires the Christians of those times
to pay obedience, telling them that They who resisted them resisted the
Ordinance of God. If by Human Determination be meant the Determination of
Purely Human Prudence, Roman. XIII.1, 2.
excluding all pretenses to any extraordinary Assistances of Divine Revelation;
then such are the forementioned instances of particular Acts of Disobedience
required by natural Parents, which yet hinders not but that the concrete Act of
Disobedience redounds to God, who, supposing the Parents no otherwise assisted,
has notwithstanding obliged Children to Duty to them. If therefore by a purely
Human Power be understood a Power wholly due to purely human Combinations, or
to which God has not expressly required submission; then it is plain that this
Power of the Church is not purely Human. The Power is, as I said, derived from
God, and God has expressly required our Duty to them who are over us in the
Lord, and who must give an account for our Souls. And yet this is the only
sense they can mean, who make the Determination in such Cases, so purely human
as that Men may plead Divine Authority against it, as if the Divine Authority
were no way concerned in the Disobedience. Otherwise none thinks it an
allowable pretense for Disobedience to an inferior Governor, because the
particulars required are not immediately determined by the Prince himself. None
thinks it a sufficient Plea in such a Case to pretend that it is not the
Prince, but the inferior Governor, that requires such a particular Instance of
Obedience; and that therefore the Disobedience, in such a Case, is not to the
Prince, but him; and that Prosecutions from him would be but causless
Persecutions of the Princes Loyal Subjects. The Sentiments of disinterested
Mankind in such a Case are clearly otherwise. While the Authority is owned to
be from the Prince; while it is foreseen that there will be Prudential Cases
necessary to be determined which cannot, and ought not to be provided for by
General Rules; whilst it is known that the Instance determined is no other than
what is necessary for the Practicableness of the principal Ends of Government,
and determined only by that Prudential Power which it is presumed the Prince
intended to allow him when himself had not limited him by any Positive
Prescriptions of his own; none doubts but Rebellion against such a
Determination of an inferior Governor is a Rebellion against the Prince
himself, and all Legal Judicatories appointed for such Matters, judge it so.
And therefore supposing the first Determinations of this Extent of Churches had
been only by the Prudence of the first Ecclesiastical Governors; yet that will
not hinder but that the Obligation might have been Divine. Which will be the
rather credible, if we consider

4. THAT this Determination of For if it might have been in the Liberty of
succeeding Itinerants to draw Persons, not only from Paganism but from the
Churches already planted, whether on account of personal Emulations, or
particular Covenants of Persons proselyted by them, what confusion would this
have introduced among them! How would it have exposed them to the common
Enemies of their Profession? How would it have scandalized and hardened them
against all Conviction? What Bitternesses and Emulations would it have caused
among themselves? What Divisions into considerable Fractions? What Slanders and
Reproaches and mutual Recriminations? What Weakenings of the common Interest by
the inconsiderableness of the single Parties? These are the natural Fruits our
Independent Brethren constantly meet with whenever they practice consequently
to their Principles. The Persons, I doubt not, have many of them meant well.
But whoever will observe the success of their well-meant Endeavors, will find
them more successful at destroying than planting, at dividing Christians than
Proselyting new Disciples to that Sacred Name. And if any among them have
bestowed pains that way, yet they have had little assistance from their
Brethren, which is not so much imputable to the want of Zeal in the Persons, as
to their want of Unanimity and Correspondence for acting in a common Body,
which has utterly been destroyed among them by those destructive Principles by
which themselves had shaken off the Yoke of their own Superiors. Undoubtedly
had the Apostles labored under the same Difficulties, they could never have
made that progress in converting the World to Christianity, as we see they did.
It was therefore absolutely necessary that every one should know his Bounds,
and that when they were once settled, all others might be obliged to observe
them too, that (as the Apostles expression is) none might invade another Line.
And therefore if there had been no general Rule agreed upon for it by Christ or
his Apostles, it must have been permitted to the Prudence of the first
Church-Converters. And because their Authority in this particular matter was so
fundamental to the success of all their other generous undertakings; therefore
it was necessary that this very particular of their Power should have been from
God that so it might lay an Obligation on all others to observe it, who had
otherwise been their Equals.

AND 5. The most equal and acknowledged This is confessed to make a Right and
Property in Cases wherein otherwise, before the Case of Occupation, others had
equal Right with the Occupant. Even in the Case of the State of Nature wherein
all men had equal Right to every thing, and wherein no Property had been
distinguished by Positive Laws, yet Occupation is granted to make a Property.
And in things which are yet left common, Occupation does appropriate. The Water
in the Fountain is common for any, yet when any has taken a proportion for
himself, none has right to that which he has taken but He. And this is also
granted to hold true in Jurisdictions, as well as in Possessions. All have an
equal Right to uninhabited Countries. Yet when any one has taken Possession,
then none has any Right to them but He. So tho, in the propagation of the
Christian Religion, none had more Right than others to challenge any particular
Precinct for his own Jurisdiction; yet when a Government had once been set up
in a particular place, and a Precinct designed for the Jurisdiction, none can
then pretend any Right to the People to be converted within that Precinct but
the Government so established. And this Right of Occupation does so appropriate
as that all endeavors to deprive of the Right so appropriated are injurious,
tho from persons who had otherwise as much Right to it as the Occupant. When a
Prince has once seized and possessed an uninhabited Country, no other Prince
has thence-forward any Right to it, and the War would be unjust on that Princes
side who should endeavor to deprive him of it. And therefore by the same
Reason, supposing the Church to have settled a Jurisdiction. Whoever else
should invade the Jurisdiction so appropriated, must act unjustly in meddling
with that to which he has no Right after the Jurisdiction is once appropriated
by Occupation, so that the Sin must lie at the doors of such an Invader. And
this Title by Occupation does then especially hold when no more is challenged
than what is really occupied, that is, when the Means of Management are
suitable to the Charge that is undertaken.

SHOULD the King of Spain, America, have laid claim to that whole, and as yet
undiscovered Continent, that had been more than could be occupied by him and
his Europaean Dominions, and the same Case it would be in the State of Nature,
if any single Person from his Title to particular Dishes of Water, should
challenge the whole Fountain: That would be more than himself could use, and
therefore could not deprive them of their common Right upon any pretense of
Occupation. So it had been, in the Case of propagating Christianity, if a
single Person had challenged a District too great for him and his Assistants to
manage. But so it it was not in the Case of Diocesan Jurisdiction. A Bishop and
his Clergy, whom he might multiply as occasion required it, have oftentimes
attempted and succeeded in the Conversion and Government of a Jurisdiction
larger than any of our present Diocesses. And therefore in this claim they
challenge no more than what is in their Power really to occupy. And it still
adds to the Equity of the Title by Occupation, if no more be challenged by it
than what is usually challenged by the generality of equally dealing Occupants.
What is challenged so, as it cannot be thought partial, when it has the
approbation of so many reputed impartial Dealers; so it is for the common
Interest of the whole multitude that the Justice of so many Titles be owned as
unquestionable. And tho private Interest be indeed a corrupt Rule of Judging,
yet common interest is that Utile, which as the Stoics say, is so inseparable
from Honestum, that we may thence conclude any thing to be indeed Honest, if it
be in this sense profitable, and is indeed the Principle on which all
Reasonings of this kind are grounded. In deducing the Unwritten Laws of Nature
or of Nations, that is judged Lawful, which is for the Interest of Mankind, or
of Nations. And therefore the Bishop's Title to a Diocese, that is, a City with
its District, was therefore just, because it was agreeable to the general
practice of that Age. His Brethren generally as they challenged Jurisdictions,
so they had no other Title to their Jurisdictions but this of Occupation, nor
narrower Limits of their Jurisdictions than those of a Diocese so explained;
and therefore were in common interest concerned to own this Plea for him as
they would expect that he and all others should ratify their own. This is
perfectly agreeable with our Savior's own Rule of Justice of dealing with
others as they designed to be dealt with themselves.

THIS Title of Occupation is the more proper to be insisted on in this matter,
deciding Titles in Case of equal Right, and where there are no written Laws to
determine them; so it will not oblige any to a direct Recourse to the
Scriptures. For it is not necessary, nor reasonable, that we should expect that
from Scripture which may otherwise be known, and known certainly, and known by
the vulgar of them who are concerned in the Practice of it. As God does not
work Miracles; but in Cases exceeding Human Power; so neither have we any
reason to expect that he should make any Miraculous Discoveries but in Cases
exceeding the Discovery of Human Reason. Now what necessity is there that our
Adversaries can pretend why God should be obliged to decide such Controversies
as these in the Scriptures? Is it the moment of the thing? But the greatest and
most Piacular Sins that are, are those against the Law of Nature, which yet are
supposed known and acknowledged antecedently to Revelation, and therefore do as
much concern those who never knew of any Supernatural Revelation as those who
have received it. If therefore these greater Sins which are indeed more
Criminal than any which are committed against express Revelation, (and which
accordingly do more concern the Goodness of the Divine Providence that his
Creatures be sufficiently secured from them) do notwithstanding not require
Revelation when, they, may be sufficiently known otherwise; there can, on this
account, be no need that the now described Principles of natural Equity should
be particularly accounted for in the Scripture. Do they therefore expect them
there because, tho they might indeed be known sufficiently, yet they could not
be known so certainly without express Revelation? But neither will this oblige
God to reveal what may otherwise be known sufficiently without Revelation (he
satisfies the Obligations of his natural Goodness in providing means
sufficient, tho it were possible that other means might be thought of which
would be more certain) nor is it indeed true that Truths of this nature could
receive any Additional Certainty by being revealed. Revelation it self, as it
must be made appear to Us (and it can no otherwise oblige Us than as it can be
made so to appear) must be resolved into some Propositions neither more
certain, nor more evident, than those are, and therefore can add nothing to
them unless it be possible to conceive that Conclusions may be more certain or
evident than their Premises. Besides that Revelations themselves, when found
contrary to such natural Evidence, are either disowned for Genuine, or, (which
turns to the same account) disowned at least in the Literal Sense, and
expounded mystically. Why should this be if evidence of this kind were not, on
all hands, owned for greater than can be expected for any positive Revelation?
If they pretend any particular design God had to inform us of things of this
nature in the Scriptures, let them produce their evidence of any such design.
But that is a task which, I believe, themselves will be willing to be excused
from.

Bishops answered the High Priests in this very particular, That all within his
Jurisdiction, that is, all who, upon other occasions, did ordinarily meet in
General Assemblies, were thought obliged to a dependence on those Assemblies in
which the Bishop did preside, as the whole Nation of the Jews, wherever
dispersed, were to those of Jerusalem as the fixed residence of the High
Priest. This was ordinarily shown in receiving from the hands of those who were
appointed by him in any part of his Jurisdiction, as the whole City of
Jerusalem was also holy, and holy in relation to this purpose of Feasting on
their Anniversary Sacrifices, wherein I have shown that our Savior intended
that other Jurisdictions should equal it under the Gospel. Yet there were
withal some Customs continued in the Church in favor of a personal Communion
with the Bishop as far as was possible that so they might yet keep nearer to
the Precedent of the High Priest to whom the Jewish Males were obliged to come
from all parts for a personal participation in his Sacrifices. This appeared in
the Eulogiae sent from the Mother Churches to the Churches depending on them,
especially in those Canons obliging some of each to a personal attendance on
the Bishops Altar, as has already been observed by a Learned Friend, Answer to
Mr. Baxter's Chur: Hist. chapter 1. p. 35.
if those Customs were from the beginning, which cannot easily be disproved. In
this they exactly answered this Jewish Original, that they were the chief
public Anniversaries that were particularly designed for them, which were the
only Times wherein the Jews themselves were obliged to that attendance. If
these Customs were not from the beginning, I am apt to think the reason was not
because they were indifferent as to their deference to the Bishops Altar, but
because the need of them was supplied in a way as convenient for communicating
multitudes from the same individual Altar, that was by sending Portions to the
Absents, for which we have the express Testimony of S. Justin Martyr, as I have
elsewhere observed. Even by the Jewish Precedent, their Paschal Lambs, tho they
were to be sacrificed in the Temple, yet they were properly to be eaten in
their private Houses, which therefore obliged them to no more attendance than
to see them sacrificed and brought home. On this account, there seems, for a
long while, to have been no need of private Ministrations, unless perhaps with
the sick, or the Martyrs and Confessors in Prison, if we may believe some
ancient Monuments of that kind. Yet I am withal apt to think that the ordinary
way of communicating even such, was, at first, rather of Species already
consecrated, than by a distinct and particular Consecration. So it was in the
Case of Serapion. Eusebius. Hist. VI.44.
The Presbyter sent the Bread ready consecrated to him, only he ordered the
Messenger by whom he sent it, to moisten it before he gave it, probably that
the Wine which had been dried in it, when it was to be kept, according to the
practice of the (...) still continued in the Greek Church, might be thus
revived, that so both Species might be received, whereas the consecrated Wine
it self was not so capable of preservation. If this were constant, then the
Oblation and Consecration were still performed at none but the Bishop's Altar,
which was sufficient to make all Communicants with that Individual Altar of the
Bishop at what distance soever they were when they so received it.

NOT to repeat what I have elsewhere Reasoning from Levitical Presidents might
justly make them scrupulous in this matter, when the other Altars, tho
subordinate to the chief Altar, were rather connived at, than approved of,
under the old Dispensation. Otherwise it is not probable that they would so
early have found out such shifts for preserving the Elements for the use of
those who desired to receive more frequently than the ordinary returns of their
Synaxes. And this does withal the more confirm me in it that the Deacons were
principally confined to the attendance on the Bishop, and not so usually
employed in the service of the Presbytery. Hence it is that they were called
the Oculi Episcopi; that even in great Cities where the Presbyters were very
numerous, the number of Deacons was very small, generally not exceeding the
number of seven, according to the Canon of Neocaesarea, a number small enough
for this attendance on the Bishop alone, but very much too small and
disproportionable for the Service of the Presbytery; that, accordingly in Rome
they vyed with the Presbyters themselves, which they could have had no pretense
for if their Office had obliged them ordinarily to any Service to the
Presbyters. But in the ancient Offices of the Church, especially the
Eucharistical, the Deacons bore a considerable part, which were therefore not
fitted for the use of the Presbyters alone, which makes it probable that it was
intended that Presbyters should use the Office of Consecration when they were
not with the Bishops. And herein also they answered the Levites, in the Old
Law, who had their Offices in the Sacrifices of the Temple so that they could
not be performed without them. This Reasoning I take for very agreeable to the
Notions of those Times.

CHAP. XI. The Primitive Christians did, and, by the received Principles of
those Times were obliged to own their Eucharist for a Mystical Sacrifice.
The CONTENTS.
The Sacrifices and High Priesthood of the Gospel are Mystical. Sect. I. Such a
Sacrifice necessary under the Gospel as may answer the Public Sacrifices under
the Law. Sect. II. This Mystical Evangelical Sacrifice must be expected from
some Positive Institution of the Gospel. Sect. III. Eucharistical Sacrifices
most suitable to the State of the Gospel. Sect. IV. Hence probably the very
name of Eucharist. Sect. V. Christ's Priesthood being the Priesthood of
Melchizedech, his Sacrifice ought also to be the Sacrifice of Melchizedech,
that of Bread. Sect. VI. Not only this Reasoning, but the Inference deduced
from it, were granted and used by the Ancients, Sect. VII. Suppoposing the
Notions of those Times, they must needs have taken the Eucharist for a Mystical
Sacrifice. Sect. VIII. On account of it is being a Mystical Sacrifice it had,
according to the Principles of those Ages, a juster Title to the Name of a
Sacrifice. Sect. IX, X, XI. And to the Thing. Sect. XII* XIII.

Reasoning is that these Sacrifices and this High Priesthood of the Gospel were
Mystical, and so Mystical as not only to signify, but also to perform, what
was, according to the sense of those times, to be expected from Mysteries. Upon
the proof of this depended the whole esticacy of these Principles, in reference
to the Mystical Unity, which is indeed the only Unity that is beneficial, and
consequently in reference to the Sin and Mischief of SCHISM, which can be no
otherwise formidable than as it is a dissolution of this Mystical Unity. And
this also they did believe, and had not reason to believe themselves mistaken
in believing so, that the Eucharist was the Mystical Sacrifice performing the
same thing under the Gospel as the External Bloody Sacrifices under the Law,
and that their Bishops were the Mystical High Priests exactly answering them in
that very particular Office of uniting with the (...); when these things are
made appear, I know not what can be desired further to show how prudently, and
withal how solidly, they proceeded in this way of managing this Dispute.

SUPPOSING therefore, that this was the way of stating the Controversy
Primitive Christians and the Jews, that the Christians did not pretend to
oppose the Jewish with a new Religion, but only to oppose the Literal Judaism
with a Mystical one; the consequence of this would naturally be this, that as
they did not deny, but mysticize, the Religion, so neither would they deny, but
mysticize all those things which the Jews of those times insisted on, and
gloryed in, as the greatest Privileges and Advantages of their Religion. I
might give Examples in other matters if I were not unwilling to digress. But to
confine my self more particularly to my present Subject, one of the things the
Literal Jews boasted of as Privileges of their Profession was the (...), Romans
IX.4. meaning thereby the whole Service of the Temple, but especially that of
Sacrifice. Accordingly the Christians challenged their (...), their Mystical
Service. So I rather understand it than as it is commonly translated Reasonable
Service. So (...) is Mystical Milk, opposed to Milk in a Literal Sense. And
that by (...) the Apostle himself understood the Sacrifices, ^ppears from his
application, when he makes the (...) to consist in presenting their bodies a
living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God. Romans XII.1. But this kind of
Sacrifice was not sufficient to supersede the public bloody Sacrifices, for it
was as obliging under the times of Judaism, when notwithstanding those public
Sacrifices were thought and granted to have been obliging also. The Sacrifice
therefore that must, in this way of Reasoning, at least equal the Mystical with
the Literal Judaism, and withal disoblige the Mystical Jew from the use of
those public Sacrifices, must be such as would perform all for which those
public Sacrifices were intended, to as beneficial, tho greater, purposes. And
therefore the public Sacrifices being, as has been shown, designed as
Ceremonies of Admission to a League and Covenant, and intimate Union with God;
such a kind of Sacrifice was requisite to be asserted to our Mystical
Israelitism, as might engage God in Covenant with Us, and admit us to a
Mystical Union with him.

THIS therefore being granted, it Mystical Sacrifice was to be expected by
positive Prescription of God himself, and therefore must be found among the
positive Prescriptions of the Gospel. For no external Rites could either oblige
God, or unite the Worshipers to him by any natural efficacy of the things
themselves, and therefore what efficacy soever they were conceived to have must
wholly be derived from the Divine Pleasure and Appointment, which it is withal
impossible for us to know without positive and express Revelation. Whatever
might be said concerning the natural virtue of these Rites for conciliating the
good will of the ordinary Demons who were thought corporeal, and to have
Vehicles capable of being naturally affected by Bodies suitable to their
nature; yet the Supreme Being was expressly exempted from all such natural
influences by that very same Philosophy which made the others obnoxious to such
influences. So we are assured by Synesius, than whom none better understood the
whole Hypothesis of that Philosophy which was generally received in the
Primitive Times of Christianity. (...). Ep. 67. ad Theoph. For the Mysteries of
the Christians are not so understood, as if the Deity were under any necessity
of following the Materials or Words made use of in the Mystical Rites on
account of any natural attractive Power in them, which may indeed be the Case
of the Mundane Spirit; but so as that God is present at them from an
inclination free from passion, and proper, and becoming a Deity. This Synesius
had from the Oracles, especially the Chaldee ones collected first in Verse by
Julian surnamed (...), a Chaldaean, Suid. and after commented on by Porphyry in
his (...). Passages to this purpose may be seen in the Oracles as extant at
present, and in other Fragments of Oracles of Porphyries Collection mentioned
by Eusebius. Pr. Eu. IV.9.V.8, alluded to by Synesius himself de Insomn. and
Niceporus Gregoras upon him. And this Notion of the Exemption of the Deity from
all influence of Corporeal Beings is, at large, insisted on by Iamblichus in
his excellent Work de Myster. Egypt. So that the Supreme Being (which was that
which both Parties, the Literal and Mystical Jews, appropriated to themselves
as the Segullah) was on all hands owned free from all Obligations but those of
his own arbitray pleasure and appointment, which cannot, as I said, appear to
us but by his express Promise and Revelation. And yet even among those inferior
Demons, as no Sacrifices were effectual but those which were suitable, and
accordingly each Demon had his peculiar Sacrifices, and upon extraordinary
occasions of expiating the displeasure of some unknown Demon, some
appointments yet more singular; so the knowledge of the Sacrifices which were
peculiar, was reserved to the Demon himself, and it was thought piacular for
any mortal to obtrude himself into the Secrets of such a Demon without his
leave and his discovery, and they were accordingly accounted Divine Persons who
first acquainted mortals with Discoveries of this nature. So that if it were
needful we might take the Proposition for universally granted in those Ages,
That no Sacrifices could oblige the Deity without Positive Revelation either of
their natural influence, or that it was his actual pleasure to be obliged by
them. And therefore these Mystical Sacrifices can only be expected from the
Positive Institutions of the Gospel.

IF therefore we can only expect these Mystical Evangelical Sacrifices among
the positive Institutions of the Gospel, the enquiry then cannot be difficult.
There are but two Institutions of this kind pretended, and whether of these was
more probably intended to supply the Office of Sacrifices will easily be known
by the Analogy they bear to the Sacrifices then received. That which came
nearest them was, in all likelihood intended by God himself to supply their use
in this new Institution. And this will then be best known if we first remember
what kind of Sacrifices were granted by the Christians to be really useful, and
therefore of eternal Obligation, even under the state of Mystical Israelitism.
Chapter 10.
It is certain they thought some Sacrifices designed by God himself as
temporary, and what they thought so, they could not think themselves obliged to
continue. Now what they thought so will best appear by these Reasonings against
the Jews on this very Subject concerning Sacrifices. Therein they show, that it
was impossible that the blood of Bulls and Goats could be available for the
expiation of Sin, Ebr. X.4.
which Reasoning does indeed proceed against Expiatory Sacrifices, such of them
especially as were to be of the Blood of Brutes, and needed Repetition, which
the Apostle makes an Argument of the imperfection, not only of such Sacrifices
themselves, but of the Dispensation also which was provided of no better
Sacrifices, and for that reason concludes them not agreeable to the Dignity of
the Gospel. But in Eucharistical Sacrifices, no Expiation was pretended to be
made, but only a return of acknowledgments for favors received, and among them
there was the Liba, the Meat Offering and the Drink Offering, which indeed
seems to have been most proper to such Sacrifices, almost exactly answering our
Eucharist. These are the Sacrifices which are there approved where the other
Sacrifices are rejected, Chapter 11.
the (...) in Psalm. L.14. In these no Sins were commemorated, and therefore
they must needs have been thought most agreeable with a state of perfect
expiation. These are common to a perfect as well as an imperfect condition, and
therefore more likely to be of eternal use, and not antiquated with the
temporary shadows of the Law. And, which comes more exactly home to my design,
these were, according to the Customs of all Nations who admitted any
Sacrifices, used on such occasions when good News were brought them, they did
(...), and therefore extremely suitable to the very Title of the Gospel as an
(...), Psalm. LXVII.12. or LXVIII.11. Is. XL.9.LII.2. Nah. I.15. Romans X.15.
the very word taken up by the Christians from the Hellenistical Version of the
Old Testament, and thence derived by the Apostle himself in the Epistle to the
Romans. Nay, according to the sense of the Heathen Philosophers themselves who
undertook the defense of Religion against the Epicureans (and who very much
influenced the Hellenists, as those did also the Primitive Christians) these
were most agreeable to the primitive design of Sacrifices, I mean not only as
they were Eucharistical, but as they were confined to the Liba without Blood,
and were withal owned as most suitable to the Dignity of the Supreme Deity. So
the far litabo in Persius, the thure pio and saliente mica in Horace, the
Oracle concerning Hermioneus in the Notes of Hierocles on the Golden Verses.
Both these things are not only granted, but also proved by one of the greatest
Enemies of the Christian Religion in a just Discourse upon that Subject.
Porphyr. de Abstin.
And upon this Supposition, it was very natural for the Primitive Christians to
take it up, not only as they challenged to themselves that Right of the
Segullah only, of worshipping the Supreme Deity, but also as they insisted on
that, among other particulars, in their Reasonings against the common
imputation of Novelty, that they reduced all things to their first Originals,
and those Originals more ancient than the Mosaic Law which was urged against
them. Thus our Savior in the Case of Divorces. Thus S. Paul in that of
Abraham's Justification by Faith before he was circumcised, to name no more at
present.

ACCORDINGLY I am very Original of the name of Eucharist as applied by the
Primitive Christians to this very Sacrament, that they intended thereby to
signify that this was, among them, to perform the Office of a Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving. The very name was thus commonly applied to the Bread it self in
the time of S. Justin Martyr. So he tells us expressly: (...). Apoll. II. p. 97.
And this is indeed a more natural account than that which is there alluded to
by that blessed person, as if it were called so from the (...), the
Thanksgiving and Blessing that was used over it in the Office of Consecration.
This giving of Thanks was no more than what was generally used by the
Christians of those times in their common Meals, which yet were never therefore
called Eucharists. Nor is it to be thought strange that the word thus used in
the Abstract should be thus applied. The ordinary form used concerning the
other sort of Sacrifices which were expiatory is to call them (...), or (...),
etc. Yet the very Abstract name of (...) is also used concerning them. So the
Priests are said to eat the Sins of the People: Hos. IV.8. because they did
indeed eat their shares of those Sacrifices which were offered for the Sins of
the People. This expression exactly answers our present Case.

THUS far the Christians might Eucharist as the proper Evangelical Sacrifice,
even from the popular received Notions of the Hellenists concerning Sacrifices.
But yet, in this Reasoning from the Old Testament Prefigurations even of
Evangelical Sacrifices, they might yet justify a further Change from the
common usages as designed by God himself in that Sacrifice which he intended
should last for ever. Thus having shown that Christ's Priesthood was not after
the order of Aaron, but a new Order, that of Melchizedec, to which perpetuity
was expressly appropriated by the Psalmist; the same Reasoning would then hold
for an alteration in the Sacrifice which is used expressly by the Apostle
himself to prove an alteration of the Covenant. If there be any difference, it
would rather be here that the Reasoning proceeds more strongly in the former
Case. For the Notion of Sacrifice is more intrinsecally involved in the very
Notion of a Priest, who has no other Relation to a Covenant than that of a
Mediator, nor mediates any otherwise than as the Covenant it self was entered
into by such Sacrifices wherein it was his Office to preside. As therefore his
concernment in Sacrifice is fundamental to his concernment in the Covenant, so
also the change of the Covenant must necessarily suppose a change in the
Sacrifice as antecedent to it. And this would bring the Reasoning yet more
close to the Materials of our Christian Sacrifice as consisting of the very
Elements of Bread and Wine. For if our Savior's Priesthood was to be of the
Order of Melchizedec, then his Sacrifice must also be of the same kind as those
of Melchizedec. And if we may again reason concerning the Sacrifice of
Melchizedec from what is mentioned concerning it in the Story, as the Apostle
concludes his being without Father or Mother, or Genealogy, or beginning of
Days, or end of Life: because the History of Genesis mentions neither his
Father, nor Mother, nor Genealogy, etc. Then for the same reason we may
conclude that he had no other Sacrifice but that of Bread and Wine because no
other is mentioned in that place. Which Inference will the rather hold because
of the Connection of that Action with the mention of his Priesthood. So it is in
the Text, Melchizedec king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: Genesis XIV.18.
and he was the priest of the most high God. The Vulgar reads it, Erat enim,
with a Causal Particle. And unless some such thing be understood, it will not
be easy to give any tolerable account of the pertinency and connection of the
former part of the Verse with the later. For what relation could his bringing
forth Bread and Wine have with his Priesthood, if not as the proper Sacrifice
which concerned him as a Priest? Why should this Mystical Priesthood be
mentioned as a Precedent of a future Priesthood (as it was supposed to be by
those who used this Reasoning) unless it were also known what Sacrifice was to
be proper to him, seeing that, in the same Reasoning, it was also granted that
every Priest ought to have something to offer? And what was so proper for
Melchizedec as a Priest as to meet Abraham with congratulatory (...),
Sacrifices for his Victory, and to entertain him and his Army with a Feast upon
those Sacrifices? And why should Abraham return his thanks in a way becoming
him as a Priest by giving him the Tithes and (...) of his Spoils, the usual way
of expressing their thankfulness to their Gods for Victories, according to the
customs of those times, and which the Apostle understands to have concerned him
as a Priest, when he thence concludes the preference of the Priesthood of
Melchizedec to that of Levi who paid Tithes to him in Abraham; unless himself
had been first treated by him as a Priest in that entertainment of him?
Whatever may be thought of the Reasoning it self as abstracting from
Inspiration; yet certainly considering the Opinions and Circumstances of that
Age, there can be little reason to doubt but that this would have been the
actual Reasoning of persons so circumstantiated, and so persuaded. And then
considering them as persons for whom Providence was so peculiarly concerned as
not to leave them to their own Reasonings in matters of great consequence, but
only in such cases where their Reasonings, how fallible soever in themselves,
were yet secure from actual error; it plainly follows that if they were left to
them here, they must here also be secure from actual error. But then especially
this Argument will hold when the whole Reasoning is grounded on such
Principles, as are otherwise allowed and supposed by such persons, whom all
grant to have been assisted, in those very Discourses wherein they are
supposed, by a Supernatural and Divine Inspiration.

IT hence appears how naturally this Reasoning, so agreeable to the Principles
then granted by the Christians, does proceed on this Supposition, that the
Eucharist was their Mystical Sacrifice. I might now proceed to show that not
only the Reasoning, but the Conclusion it self, was also owned by them, that
they did own the continuance of Sacrifices under the times of Christianity, and
particularly that they took the Eucharist for the Sacrifice proper to those
times, if this had not been a common place usually debated between Us and the
Romanists, where our Writers and our Church too, do usually grant as much as I
am concerned for, that it is indeed an Eucharistical Sacrifice, and that this
is the true sense of those passages of Antiquity which are produced for this
purpose. And I have shown that their Principles of Reasoning were against the
repetition of Propitiatory Sacrifices, which is that which is denied by our
Writers. I am unwilling to enlarge on things already commonly observed,
especially when what I am concerned for is already granted me on all hands, as
it is here. I only observe now that this particular Reasoning is the Reasoning
of S. Cyprian: Item in Sacerdote Melchizedec Sacrificii Dominici Sacramentum
praefiguratum videmus, secundum quod Scriptura Divina testatur and dicit; and
Melchizedec Rex Salem protulit panem and vinum. Fuit autem Sacerdos Dei summi,
and benedixit Abraham. Quod autem Melchizedec typum Christi portaret, declarat
in Psalmis Sp. S. ex persona Patris ad Filium, dicens; Ante Luciferum genui te:
tu es Sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchizedec. Qui ordo utique hic
est de Sacrificio illo veniens and inde descendens, quod Melchizedec Sacerdos
Dei summi fuit, quod panem and vinum obtulit, quod Abraham benedixit. Nam quis
magis Sacerdos Dei summi quam Dominus noster Jesus Christus? qui sacrisicium
Deo Patri obtulit, and obtulit hoc idem quod Melchizedec obtulerat, id est,
panem and vinum, suum scilicet corpus and sanguinem. Ep. LXIII. Panel. I
mention this the more particularly, because S. Cyprian is our principal Author
in the whole Argument from One Priesthood and One Altar, that the Reader may
see how accurately, what is said concerning it, is agreeable to his mind. Now
these things being put together, That this whole Reasoning, both Premises and
Conclusion too, were owned by them, and that they were withal taken up from
such Originals as could not fail them, it plainly follows that the whole
Reasoning was solid as urged against the Ancient SCHISMATICS, at least as to
this Particular, That the Eucharist is a Mystical Sacrifice.

BUT that I may as little urge them with Authorities as is possible, who, I
Human, let me entreat our Adversaries to remember, how the Hellenists
themselves conceived the Sacrifices available for procuring the Benefits
expected by them, and then let themselves judge whether the Eucharist may not
reasonably be allowed to perform the Office of a Mystical Sacrifice. In the
Reasonings of the Hellenists the Archetypal High Priest was the (...), the
Adytum was Heaven, the Sacrifice that which was there spiritually offered to
the Father. This Sacrifice was indeed acknowledged alone for the true Sacrifice
as the Platonists used the term of Truth only concerning the Archetypals, and
the external Sacrifices themselves were no further thought to deserve the name
of Sacrifices than as they represented and transacted and applied the Benefits
of that invisible Sacrifice. Which being supposed, it will plainly follow that,
if the Christian Eucharist do perform the same Office of representing, and
transacting, and applying that invisible Sacrifice, this will have as just a
claim to the name of a Sacrifice as those visible Slaughters of Beasts had. Now
to bring this home to the Eucharist, what is there that could be doubted of by
any who lived in those times? that can be doubted of even by our Brethren
themselves? Is it that Christ is the (...) who was supposed by the High Priest
who offered the invisible Sacrifice? Is it that his invisible Sacrifice is most
efficaciously represented and applied by his external Oblation of himself upon
the Cross, so that even those External Legal Sacrifices could no otherwise
represent and apply the Virtue of this invisible Sacrifice than as they
primarily represented this bloody Evangelical Sacrifice on the Cross, and
therefore hence derived immediately their very Title to the Name of Sacrifices?
Is it that this Blessed Sacrament was designed purposely for this end, to
represent that Sacrifice of our Blessed Lord upon the Cross, and more
immediately so designed than those Legal Sacrifices themselves? I suppose our
Adversaries themselves will not doubt but that the Eucharist was designed, at
least, to represent this Prototypical Sacrifice upon the Cross. But can they
indeed think that Representation was all, and that Application was not designed
also? Was there no Application in those Representations under the Law? Wherein
then consisted the material Benefit of those Representations? Was this indeed
the glorious Privilege of the Segullah to have great things only represented to
them? Or are the Evangelical Representations less efficacious than the Legal?
What some of our dividing Adversaries may deny I know not; But I cannot foresee
any thing in this Reasoning that would be doubtful either by the Reasonings of
the New Testament, or the Sentiments of the most Ancient Times of Christianity.

THUS they must unavoidably Eucharist for, at least, a Mystical Sacrifice. Nor
let any one think it a diminishing expression to call it Mystical. Whatever
People may think of it who judge of ancient things and opinions by present
Notions and significations of Terms much changed from their ancient Design: yet
whoever would judge truly concerning them, what either the Ancients would have
thought reasonable, or what himself would have thought so if he had lived in
the advantageous Circumstances of the Ancients for deriving things from their
first and purest Originals, must reason from the Notions of Terms as then
understood if he would infer Consequences agreeably to their minds that used
them, or know what was really solid reasoning then. And if we consider the
Notion of a Mystical Sacrifice as understood then, it will be far from
diminishing either the propriety of the signification, or the efficacy of the
thing. As to the propriety of the signification, it has appeared that the prime
signification of Terms was, according to the Platonists (from whom these
Notions were first derived, tho afterward further confirmed by Revelation)
principally applied to the Archetypal Incorporeal Beings, which are therefore
called (...) and (...), so that all Corporeal Beings have the same name
communicated to them only by extrinsecal Denomination (to use the Language of
the Modern Schools) from them, as not truly worthy of the name any further than
as they were related to them. This very Language is imitated by the Sacred
Writers themselves. Thus the true Tabernacle is the Incorporeal Idaeal
Tabernacle, which the Lord pitched and not man. Heb. VIII.2. The true Riches
are the invisible enjoyments of Heaven. S. Luke XVI.11. Christ is the true
Light, not the sensible but the intellectual Light, which inlighteneth every
man that comes into the world. S. John I.9. His Flesh is meat indeed, and his
Blood is drink indeed. S. John VI.55. Neither the Subject nor the Predicate are
here to be understood corporeally. So Christ is not entered into the holy
places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into Heaven it
self. Heb. IX.24. By the emphatical connection of Heaven it self immediately
with the mention of the true holy place it plainly appears that the Apostle
understood them as synonymous. According therefore to this Mystical Way of
speaking the Heavenly Invisible Sacrifice offered by the (...) in Heaven will
be the true Sacrifice from whence all Corporeal Sacrifices must derive their
claim that would pretend to the name of Sacrifices.

BUT then there seems indeed to Notions of the Christians, and the Hellenists,
in this matter. The Hellenists who knew nothing of the Incarnation of the
(...), nor consequently the Sacrifice of his human Body, did notwithstanding
conceive him to officiate in Heaven as a Priest, and there to offer Invisible
Sacrifices. What could those Sacrifices be but the Sacrifices of the Brutes
performed here below by the Priest, only represented in a more spiritual
manner? But there the whole Benefit was to be ascribed to the invisible
Sacrifice, not only on that general Principle received among them, that all
Corporeal Beings were derived from their Incorporeal Ideas, so that the
spiritual Representation was not derived from the Corporeal Sacrifice, but on
the contrary; but also because the external Sacrifice of Brutes was indeed
unsuitable to the Benefit expected from it, of expiating Sin, even upon a
Corporeal Account. On the contrary our Savior's External Sacrifice was
suitable, and therefore if it any way depended on the invisible Representation,
it must only be on this general account, as this Corporeal Body (as I may speak
properly according to this Hypothesis) was derived from the Incorporeal, as the
Body offered on the Cross was derived from the Body prepared for him before
time in the Divine Decree. However it had certainly this advantage above all
other Corporeal Sacrifices, that the virtue of this was derived immediately
from the Incorporeal, the virtue of all other Sacrifices only mediately as they
were Representations of this. And this was accordingly their Doctrine, that the
virtue of all the Jewish Sacrifices was to be derived immediately, even from
this Corporeal Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, as the virtue of an
unsuitable Corporeal Sacrifice was to be resolved into that of a suitable one,
tho Corporeal also. This therefore being so, it plainly followed, that this
Corporeal Sacrifice of our Savior on the Cross had the same relation to all
other Corporeal ones as the Incorporeal Sacrifice had to Corporeal ones in
general, and therefore on the same account deserved the name of the true
Sacrifice among Corporeal ones, as the Incorporeal did simply.

Consequence admitted by them who reasoned on this Hypothesis. The Manna which
came down from Heaven was, without doubt, Corporeal, and yet it is called the
true Bread as descending from Heaven, S. John VI.31, 32. as more immediately
Copyed from the Incorporeal Ideal Manna which these Mystical Discourses took to
be the food of Angels. Thus all the Legal Ceremonies are said to be figures of
the true, Heb. IX.24. because all things befell them in a Figure (as the Vulgar
has it) and were written for our Admonition, upon whom the ends of the world
are come, 1 Cor. X.6, 11. And this I take to be the true Reason, why the
Gospel, in opposition to the Law, is called the Truth. The Law was given by
Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ: John I.17. and in the whole
Reasonings of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and those of S. John. Because the
whole external State of the Law was indeed a Representation of the whole
external State of the Gospel as that which was indeed more suitable, in the
whole contrivance of it, for the real exhibition of those things which were
only shadowed in the Law. And this was agreeable to the practice of the
Platonists, from whom the Christians received it, to give the names of
Originals to inferior Beings in comparison of other Beings inferior to
themselves. Thus they make the Son a (...) in respect of the Father, but a
(...) in respect of Man, as also Man a (...) in respect of inferior Beings, but
a (...) in respect of the Son. So they make the Son only an (...) in respect of
the Father, but an Original in respect of all others, whence the name of (...),
etc. And even the (...), tho it be a Divinity in regard of other inferior
Beings, yet is made an (...) only in respect of the Son, and an (...) in
respect of the Father. Accordingly the Externals of the Gospel may be only
(...) in respect of the Heavenly Originals, and yet (...) as Archetypal to all
other Externals even of Divine Institution. To make application therefore of my
present Subject, and withal to speak suitably to the now described Principles,
the first Archetypal Sacrifice of all visible ones will be that of our Savior
on the Cross, and of all others each will have the better Title to the name of
a Sacrifice, as it comes nearer to that. If therefore the Eucharist be the
immediate (...) Copyed out from that, as the Christians then supposed all the
Externals of the Gospel to be more immediate; then it will follow that the
Legal Sacrifices themselves cannot otherwise challenge the name of Sacrifices
than as they are Copyed from the Eucharist as that which was immediately
shadowed by them. And in this way of Reasoning, as the Eucharist, on account of
its being the Copy which was imitated in the ancient Popular Sacrifices, will
have a better Title to the Name of Truth, as being that of which the ancient
Sacrifices were indeed Resemblances; so it will have a juster claim to the very
name of a Sacrifice, on account of its being a Mystical One.

AND as to the name, so also to the thing. In truth all Title to the Name ought
to be grounded on the nature of the thing. That will best deserve the name of a
Sacrifice which best performs the Office, and confers the Benefits designed in
the use of a Sacrifice. This is agreeable to the reason of the thing, and was
so also to the sentiments of those Ancients who used this way of Reasoning.
They therefore ascribed the Truth to these Archetypal Beings, because they
thought them really to perform the Office signified by the name. Nay more, they
did not think the sensible Beings to have any real influence in performing it,
but that whatever efficacy they had was to be wholly ascribed to the Relation
they had to these Originals. In which way of Reasoning the greatest Mysteries
must be most effectual, and by how much the more Mystical any thing is, that
is, by how much nearer any thing approaches the first Archetypal Beings of all,
by so much the more efficacious it must be proportionably. And thus the
Eucharist coming nearer the first Archetypal visible Sacrifice, that of our
Savior upon the Cross, must therefore have more efficacy, even as a Sacrifice,
than those which represented it only at a distance, as the Jewish Sacrifices
did. So the Apostle seems to reason in a like Case, That because the Tabernacle
was only a Figure for the time then present, Heb. IX.9.
therefore the Gifts and Sacrifices that were offered in it could not make him
who did the service perfect. And again, That the Law having a shadow of good
things to come, Heb. X.I.
and not the very Image of the things, (...), could never with those
Sacrifices, which they offered year by year continually, make the comers
thereunto perfect. It could not have been his design, because it was not for
his Interest, to deny the efficacy of the Institutions of the Law in order to
the Benefits designed by it. That had been to have reflected on the Divine
Institutions, even for the Seasons for which they were appointed. His design
therefore must have been so to grant the efficacy of those appointments to them
who lived under that Dispensation, as notwithstanding to oblige them to receive
the Gospel when it should be revealed and proposed to them. And that he does
very sufficiently by showing that whatever efficacy they had, even in their
season, was notwithstanding not derived from themselves, but from their
Evangelical Originals which were represented by them. This did indeed oblige
them to receive the Evangelical Originals for their own sake, when they had
already received the Legal Representations only for their Relation to them,
that is, to receive that Power immediately from themselves which, on this
supposition, they could not have received from those Legal Representations any
otherwise than as influenced by them.

NOW this he proves from this Hellenistical Platonists, that the Archetypal
Beings were the Causes of all particulars, the (...) of all particular (...),
the (...) of all particular (...) received, and that the Ectypal Beings had no
other influence in producing others of the same kind, than what was received
from the Archetypal. Supposing therefore that the Institutions of Moses were
not Originals, but Copies, (which they proved from that command to Moses that
he should make all things according to the Pattern showed him in the Mount)
supposing also that the Institutions of the Gospel were indeed those Originals
from whence those Legal ones were Copyed, which was the main thing aimed at in
all those Mystical Reasonings of the Primitive Christians; these two
Consequences plainly followed, Both that the Legal Institutions did not perform
what they were designed for by any Native Virtue of their own, and that
whatever was performed by them, was no otherwise performed by them than as the
influences of the Evangelical Originals were derived by such instituted
Representations. And it was very agreeably hereunto that the Evangelical
Originals are usually called everlasting, the Legal Representations only
Temporary. Thus the Gospel was called the Everlasting Gospel, Rev. XIV.6. Heb.
XIII 20 Dan. IX.24. Heb. IX.12.V.15.
the Evangelical Covenant, the Everlasting Covenant, the Righteousness of the
Gospel, an Everlasting Righteousness, and the Redemption of the Gospel
answering that of the Jews out of Egypt (is called an eternal Redemption, and
the Evangelical Inheritance (answering the Jewish Canaan) is an eternal
Inheritance, and the Legal Tabernacle a Figure for the time then present. The
very same attribute of (...) was by the Platonists ascribed to their Ideae, and
the same Temporariness to their Ectypal Beings. Nor was this Notion of (...)
understood only as it might signify (...), or what we call Eternity a part
post, as the Institutions of the Gospel were to last to the (...), whereas
those of the Law were, at first, designed no further than the later days. Act.
XV.18.
It was also understood as it signified (...), or what we call Eternity a part
ante, which is the same with that Phrase of the New Testament, (...), so often
used to express the Antiquity of Evangelical Institutions, Heb. I.2.
as the (...) is the same thing with the making of the (...). This was also a
thing insisted on by the Primitive Christians for vindicating their Religion
from the aspersion of Novelty with which it was upbraided by Adversaries of
both sorts, both Jews and Heathens. This they proved by showing that the
Institutions of the Gospel were prefigured, and so predicted before the Law of
Moses; that even in the Law, these were they which were designed by those Legal
Shadows, and from which the Legal Rites themselves derived their Influences. By
all which it appears how solidly the Primitive Christians proceeded in
grounding their Discourses against SCHISM on this supposition, that the
Christian Eucharist was the Christian Sacrifice, and to all material intents
and purposes the more properly and more effectually, for being a Mystical One.

CHAP. XII. The same Christians did, and, by the same Principles, were obliged
to, own their Bishops for Mystical High Priests.
The CONTENTS.
The Bishops were thought to represent a Divine Person. The seven Angels of the
Divine Presence had their Office in the restoring of Souls. Sect. I. To these
S. John accommodated his precise number of seven Churches in Asia. Sect. II.
Sometimes the Bishops represented the Person of Christ himself, and then his
seven Angels are represented by the seven Deacons. Sect. III. How fitly this
agreed to the Circumstances of the first Beginnings of Christianity. Sect. IV.
The name Bishop seems originally designed to imply a Mystical Representative of
a Divine Person. Sect. V. The Comparisons of the Bishops in Ignatius to God,
and Christ, etc. accounted for. Sect. VI. The Mystical Representations of
Ecclesiastical Officers in the Revelations. Sect. VII. There could be no
Mistake in taking their Church Officers for Mystical Representatives. Sect.
VIII. The force of the Inference relating to Union with Christian Bishops.
Sect. IX. Tertullian's Futuri Judicii Praejudicium explained. Sect. X. How
consequently the Primitive Christians reasoned hence for proving those who were
disunited from their Bishops to be also deprived of the Mystical Invisible
Union with Christ himself. Sect. XI. And of the Benefits of that Invisible
Union. Sect. XII, XIII, XIV.

AND as they thus took the Eucharist Mystical Sacrifice, so they also took
their Bishops for Mystical High Priests. I have already shown that they
conceived their Bishops to be answerable to the Levitical High Priesthood. I
now proceed to show that they understood them answerable in a Mystical Sense. I
observed that the Hierophanta in the Mysteries represented a Divine Person. The
same, in all probability, were the thoughts of the Primitive Christians
concerning their Bishops. This I take to be the true design of that Description
of the Majestatick Presence in the Revelations, to represent the Divine
Presence and Assistance in the Church in as lively a way as was possible
according to the ways of Mystical Representation received in those times. In
the Utensils of the Tabernacle there were to be seven Lamps. De Vit. Mos.
L.III. p. 455, 456. Ed. Turneb.
Exodus XXV.37. These Philo understands to represent the seven Planets, and
indeed very suitably to the Notions of the Egyptian Philosophy then received.
The seven Spheres belonging to them made up the Harmonia through which they
thought the Soul was to pass in its (...), its Ascent to its Heavenly Original.
And as they thought that the confinement of the Soul to these inferior Regions
depended on the Grossness of the Vehicles to which it was nailed ((...), if I
mistake not, is their word) by their passions; so they thought that at the
passage of each of these it was to leave some Vehicle and some Passion behind
it, what was to be left at each is particularly accounted for in the Poemander
of Hermes. Poemand. c. 1.
But then, as in all the sensible World they made something answerable in the
Intellectual which was to preside in managing that whole design for which those
sensible parts were intended by God, so here also they placed seven Spirits, or
Demons, or Angels, for that purpose of admitting and purging the Soul from
those things which were thought to hinder the Soul in its Ascent. These I take
to be the seven Angels so usually received by, not only the Modern Jews, but
those also who lived in the first Beginnings of Christianity (still alluded to
as the peculiar Satellites of the Divine Presence, and employed only on Affairs
of the greatest consequence) and that even in the Sacred Writings themselves.
And because they were so concerned in transacting the Soul's passage to Heaven,
therefore the several Speeches of the Souls to them are transcribed from the
ancient Heretics (who took occasion for most of their Heresies from some
misapplication of that Philosophy) in Origin. Contr. Cells. L.VI. p. 296. Ed.
Cantabrig.
Therefore the (...) or Petasus, in allusion to that of Mercury in the Poets,
which Sophia was to put on her Seed, to make them invisible to those Angels in
the Doctrine of the Valentinians, that I may not instance in other fancies of
the Heretics of those times alluding to these Notions as commonly received.
Therefore it is that the Orders of Angels are said to be (...) and (...) of
those below them in reference to the initiating them in these great Mysteries,
alluding to the (...) used in the ordinary Mysteries, as Fire and Light in the
Ebrew Idiom signify the same thing, and accordingly Prometheus's stealing Fire
from the Chariot of the Sun is nothing else but his (...) of these Mysteries.
And as this is granted concerning all Superior Orders in reference to their
Inferiors; so, on this Hypothesis, it appears how particularly it was
applicable to these seven Angels in relation to the initiating of human Souls.

Mysteries were principally designed for the Benefit of Souls, their (...), or
return from their Exile from Heaven; so from hence it appears how proper it was
in these Prophetic Visions, which were generally conducted by Mystical
Representations, to personate God as particularly attended by these seven
Angels rather than any of the rest of his train. Accordingly S. John's Design
being particularly to affect the Churches he writes to, those of the Lydian or
Proconsular Asia, with a very feeling sense of the Divine Presence among them
(which might add the greater authority to his several Exhortations
respectively) he represents our Savior in a human visible shape; and that the
rest of the Scene might be suitable (that is, sensible also as well as himself)
he personates the Angels by their Visible Bishops, that so Christ might be
apprehended as present with the Bishops as God was supposed to be where ever
these seven Spirits were which were peculiarly deputed to represent the
Majestatick Presence. This I take to be the reason why he confines his number,
not that by any Geographical Distinction those seven Cities were incorporated
into a Body more than others of that Province, but that he had a particular
regard to that number of those Angels of the Presence. Therefore he makes seven
Candlesticks, alluding, as I said, to the like number of those in the
Tabernacle as Emblems of these seven Churches, Verse. 13. Therefore seven Stars,
alluding to the number of the Planets, and the Angels who presided over them,
as Emblems of the Bishops of those Churches. Therefore those Stars are in his
Right Hand, to signify his care and concernment for their Protection, and to
conciliate a greater reverence for their Authority. Thus it appears plainly
that the Bishops are here represented in a Mystical Way; and how particularly
suitable it was, in this way, to personate them by the name of Angels. They
were indeed to perform the same Office under Christ as a visible human person,
which the Angels were under him as the (...), in reference to the Restitution
of Souls to their Original Dignity. The pretended Areopagite, than whom perhaps
none better understood the Mystical Language of the Hellenistical Philosophy of
that Age, uses the same Expressions concerning them as concerning those Angels,
that these are also (...) and (...) and (...). And so also does Clemens
Alexandrinus. In one place he calls the three Orders of the Church, Bishops,
Priests and Deacons, (...), Strom. VI. p. 283. Ed. Sylburg
Imitations of the Angelical Glory. And he elsewhere gives his Explication
wherein that Imitation consisted, Strom. VII. init. p. 297.35.
(...) (...). In the Church the Presbyters bear the resemblance of the
bettering Office, as the Deacons do of that of Service. The Angels perform both
these Services to God in the Administration of the Terrestrial World. No doubt
the Bishops, in this Dichotomy are comprehended under the common name of
Presbyters, and comparing this later place with the former it must needs have
been so. But of this I have elsewhere given an account.

THIS was the properest way, I think, that could have been thought of Christ as
the Invisible Bishop presiding among the Bishops. But because even his human
nature, tho visible in it self, is yet invisible to Us, therefore another way
was thought of for copying out that Heavenly (...), even in the ordinary
external visible Government of the Church. And here the Bishop was to personate
Christ himself as the High Priest had formerly represented the (...). The seven
Deacons were to represent the seven Mystical Angels, as I am very apt to think
they were designed from the very Original. I cannot think it casual that the
number first pitched on was exactly seven. Act. VI.3.
But that which more confirms me in this opinion is the real suitableness of
the Office of the Deacons to the Bishop as representing the (...) in a visible
way, with that of those Angels to the same (...) as he was invisible. The
Office of the Angels in general is thus described by the Author to the Ebrews,
that they are (...). These are exactly the very terms by which the Church would
have expressed the Office of these Deacons, if she had been to have described
the same Office as vested in mortal men. And I know not whether that expression
concerning the (...) do not allude to this, that even the Holy Ghost himself,
in distributing his Gifts, did exercise the Office of one of those ordinary
(...). And indeed the Office of those inferior Demons was proportionably the
same according to the Notions of the Hellenistical Philosophy. As the first
Institution of the Office of Deaconship was for the distributing the Treasures
of the Church, so it was also taken for the Office of those Angels to convey
the spiritual Treasures (those Gifts and Largesses which Christ bestowed on Men
upon his Ascension in allusion to the Congiaria bestowed by the Roman Emperors
in their Triumphal Ascent to the Capitol) to Men, as well as to offer and
present the Sacrifices and Prayers of Men to God. Tob. XII.15. Lat.
They were to stand before the Presence of God, in a posture of readiness to be
sent on Messages by him, and so were the Deacons to stand before the Bishop, to
be sent by him on his Messages. They were the eyes of the Lord which run to and
fro through the whole earth. Zach. III.9.IV.10. So also the Deacons are, in the
Language of the ancient Church, called the Oculi Episcopi, for the same reason.
They were to present the Prayers of the Faithful before God. Tob. XII.15. Gr.
Rev. VIII.3. And the same Office of presenting the Prayers was peculiarly the
Deacons in the Primitive Church. But of all Offices that of being sent on
Errands seems to have been the most intrinsic to the notion of a Deacon in the
notions of those times. Thus it was synonymous with the name of Apostle. (...)
are exegetical of each other in the forementioned passage of the Epistle to the
Hebrews. Judas's Apostleship is called his (...), Act. I.17. and not only so
but his (...), Verse 20. as the very Episcopal Office was to be a (...) in
reference to Christ in the comparison now described. The Apostles themselves
were to give themselves to the (...), Act. VI.4. even after the institution of
Deacons. And S. Paul calls his Apostleship his (...), Act. XX.24 RomansXI.13.
Archippus's Bishopric is his (...), Col. IV.17. So is that of S. Timothy, 1 Timothy I.12.
2 Timothy IV.5. So is that of the Angel of the Church of Thyatira, Rev. II.19.
That now we may not wonder why the Bishops are called Angels in the
forementioned Mystical immediate Relation to our Savior himself the chief
Bishop of our Souls: 1 S. Pet. XI.25. Because indeed in regard of him they bear
no higher Office than that of Deacon. And this same Office of being sent on
Errands was indeed the principal employment of these Angels of the Presence,
especially in Affairs of so great importance and honor as this was of the
Gospel.

ACCORDINGLY the Primitive were extremely rigorous in insisting on this very
number of their Deacons in all places, as I have elsewhere showed. Let. II. to
Mr. Baxter. Sect. 57.
The Council of Neocaesarea imposed it as a Universal Rule, how great soever
the Church were to which the Deacons were to serve. Certainly they would not
have ventured a Change of that Consequence in the Government in a Canon (which,
tho it were at first designed only for their own Province of Cappadocia, was
notwithstanding afterward extended first to the Eastern Empire by being taken
into the Eastern Code composed between the times of the Councils of C.P. and
Ephesus, and quoted as a commonly received Authority in the Council of
Chalcedon, and afterward to the Western Empire when it was also taken into the
Roman Code by Dionysius Exiguus) but by conforming the fewer Deviations to a
Rule already more generally received. And therefore even then it is much more
probable that this number was already received in more Churches than otherwise.
But in the Reasoning now insisted on, as most generally used in those Times, of
keeping close to Jewish Precedents, excepting only such Instances whereof they
could give an account of the Change, from the Old Testament it self, I cannot
think of any Reason so probable why the numbers of the Christian Deacons was so
limited, whereas the Jewish Levites were so unrestrained, as this of their
being designed in imitation of the attendant Angels. And on this supposition,
the account which may be given will be this. When the Levites were first
instituted there was as yet no knowledge of any particular number of Angels
allotted to this purpose, and therefore the number of the Levites might well be
indefinite, because, by the Revelations then made, the number of the Angels
might have been so also. But the same Analogy of Reasoning required that the
number of the Christian Levites should answer the number of these Angels of the
Presence as then received in the time of the Gospel Institution, especially
such as were so received on account of Old Testament Revelations, tho later
than the times of Moses, yet ancienter than the Gospel, and so actually
understood then by the generality even of the Jews themselves. This does
therefore also most probably suppose that the Deacons were thought mystically
to represent that number of the Seven Angels on the account now mentioned. It
may be the same thing also was alluded to in other the like Establishments in
those Eastern Parts. This very number was exactly observed in a Supreme Council
of State among the Persians, as appears not only from the famous Story of the
Seven who conspired against the Magi, who were all equal by the places which
they already possessed, the reason why they pitched upon that way of the
Neighing of their Horses for choosing an Heir to the Crown, but also from the
Book of Esther. There they are called the Wise Men who knew the times, Esth
I.13, 14.
the seven Princes of Persia and Media, who saw the King's Face, an expression
exactly answering that concerning those Angels, S. Matthew. XVIII.10. and in the
Fragments of Orpheus; (...), etc. and their Title of being Angels of the
Presence. And the same was the number of the Governors of the Jewish Cities, if
we may believe Josephus, tho I know we are told other things by the Talmudical
Jews.

AND this I take also to be the true Athenian (...) were Itinerant Officers
sent to oversee the Affairs of the Cities subject to their Jurisdiction, Suid.
(...).
answerable to the Lacedaemonian (...). Something of the like nature was that
Episcopatus of the Seacoast of Campania, which Tully says was committed to
himself by Pompey. It was no other than a care of guarding that Seacoast, not
fixed to any one certain place, but obliging him to a readiness to defend all.
That which comes nearest to the Case of the Christian Episcopacy is that of
Philopoemen, who, as Appian tells us, In Mithridatic.
was made (...) by Mithridates. Here seems to have been a particular Bishop of
a City and the Jurisdiction of it, to inspect the behavior of the Citizens in
relation to Mithridates. But none of all these were Sacred, but only Civil
Officers. None of them seem to have been received in all Cities, but only in
subject ones, nor in all those neither, but such only as had a Magistracy and
Government of their own, and a Power of the Sword within themselves, and then
especially even in those, when their Superiors had some particular ground of
Jealousy concerning them. Much less was any of them so universally received in
the Sacred Administration; either of the Jewish Synagogues or the Heathen
Temples at the times of the first beginnings of Christianity, as to be any
likely occasion why this name should have been universally imitated in the new
Establishments of the Christian Church. I therefore rather take it to have been
a design of Mystically representing the Presence of God in the Government of
his Church, in the Person of his Bishop. For thus as the name of (...) properly
signifies an Overseer, so the Providence of God is expressed by his inspecting
things below. Thus the Eyes of the Lord are over the Righteous, and an Eye was
the Symbol of Providence in the Egyptian Hieroglyphics. By which it appears
how suitably those Spirits which are made to be the Eyes of the Lord in Zachary
are made the Symbols of the Bishops in the Revelations. And as all the Heathen
Deities, especially the Supreme are, (as Macrobius has observed, no doubt, from
the Stoics) reduced to the Sun; Saturnal.
so it is the Character of the Sun, (...). And in the Language of that Age the
Tutelar Demon was the (...), and the Supreme Being is (...) in the Sibylline
Oracles. The Gods of the Pagi are called (...) in Halicarnassaeus, Arist. Him.
in Jov. p. 1.
and the Nymphs are (...) in Aristides. And to show that this Title is indeed
derived from God, even when it is applied to Men; therefore it is oftentimes
applied to God himself, and the whole obligation to reverence it even in Men,
is derived from the concernment of God for them as his Representatives. So our
Savior himself is called the Bishop of our Souls. And Polycarp, in Ignatius,
is said to be not so much (...), Ep. ad Polyc. in Tit.
but (...), implying God to be the Bishop to whom the Irreverences would, by
Interpretation, redound, which were offered to Polycarp himself. A strange
thing that Blondel should understand this as a reflection on Polycarp, which
was indeed designed to render his Authority more awful. As for Ignatius, he
elsewhere uses it, and uses this same notion for the same design, not as a curb
upon the Bishop, but upon his Subjects, that they might not presume upon him.
Damas Bishop of the Magnesians, was a young man. This might make his Clergy and
People too bold with him. But he warns them to have a care of abusing his Age,
but rather to show him all respect as other holy Presbyters had done, Ep. ad
Magnes. Sect. 3.
(...). Accordingly he adds that, for the honor of him who had required this at
their hands, they ought to pay their duty without dissimulation. If they should
do otherwise, he shows who would resent and punish it; (...). The reasoning is
no other than what I have elsewhere shown was ordinarily used, in that Age,
Sep. prove. Schism. chapter 14.
on the like occasions. The deceit used by Ananias and Sapphira to the
Apostles, in not bringing the whole price of the Land they pretended to sell
for charitable uses, Act. V.3.
is called a lying to the Holy Ghost, nay, even as to the negative expression
of Ignatius, a lying not unto men but unto God. Verse 4^
As the like expression had been also used in the case of the Israelites
murmuring against Moses and Aaron. Thus therefore it appears that the Bishop
was understood and designed to represent a Sacred Person after the custom of
the Mysteries received in those times.

AND now the Comparisons of the Bishops in Ignatius cannot seem so strange,
these things being considered, as they did to Blondell who had considered none
of them. They are generally designed to express the Sacredness and excellency
of the Persons which the Clergy bore in these Mystical Performances. Nor is
there any thing in them that is really affected or strained, much less
blasphemous, no nor any extravagant flights of fancy, as they who have read
them without a kindness for them, and much more who have read them without this
Clew, have hitherto conceived them. When he was to express the correspondence
between the Celestial and Ecclesiastical Hierarchy (as I have shown that the
virtue of all Mystical Performances was to be derived from this correspondence)
it was very proper sometimes to make the comparison sometimes with the
Invisible Originals, as I have shown that the Jewish Sacrifices did not only
answer the Invisible Sacrifice offered by the (...) in Heaven, but also the
visible one offered by the same (...) as incarnate on the Cross, and that the
virtue of those visible Sacrifices was to be judged by the nearness of their
approach, not only to that invisible one, but also to that first of those which
were visible. If he was to compare them with the first invisible Archetypes of
Unity (as that is indeed his great design in those Epistles in opposition to
the SCHISMS then rising) then it was very proper for him to take notice only of
the two Orders which were then immediately concerned in the Office of
Ministration, and then to compare them with God the Father, and the (...),
because as this Unity consists in the Unity of the Head, and the Scripture
tells us that the Head of every Man is Christ: so also the same Scripture tells
us that the Head of Christ is God. Besides that the Title of (...) is
oftentimes ascribed to the (...) in reference to the (...) in the Hypothesis of
that Age, not with any design of signifying any Inferiority of Nature, but only
of Office and Subordination. If therefore, by his Office he was a (...) who
could be more fit than he to personate the Archetypal (...), who was here
Archetypal to that of the seven Angels themselves already mentioned? And who
fitter than the Father to represent the (...) to such a (...) as this? Nor can
it be thought strange that there should be several gradual intellectual
Archetypes as there were among those which were sensible. But when his design
is to compare the Ecclesiastical Judicatory to the first which was sensible,
Deacons were not as yet instituted; and therefore the only comparison remaining
was between Christ and his Apostles, and the Bishops with their Presbyteries.
And then who sees not how aptly the Bishops will answer Christ himself, as
presiding over their own Presbyteries the same way as Christ did over his
Apostles? In each of these comparisons one Order is omitted, the Deacons in the
later, and the Presbyters in the former. Why the Deacons are omitted, the
Reason is already given. Why the Presbyters are, the reason may be that they
are sometimes reckoned as one Order with the Bishop, by those who never thought
of any Parity therein, that is, by such who do as expressly reckon three Orders
upon other occasions. Thus many of the most ancient Fathers, as their
Testimonies are produced by Blondell himself. And thus Philo before them
sometimes reckons the High Priest in the same Order with the common Priests,
Vid. Disser. Cypr. ad Ep. Cypr. XXXIII.
sometimes he makes him a distinct Order by himself. So that notwithstanding
the Bishops being of the same Order with Presbyters, he might however have as
great a pre-eminence above them on account of his place as the High Priest had
above the Ordinary Priests, which is as much as they do or need desire. However
in the same Order the Bishop only as a Head is concerned as a Representative of
the Mystical Unity which is the main thing designed in these Comparisons. Which
is a reason not agreeing to the common Presbyter.

HOWEVER because, on other distinct Orders, therefore there are not wanting
such Mystical Representations of the Heavenly Hierarchy as make it exactly
answerable to the Ecclesiastical, even in this paricular also. Thus S. John in
the Sixth Chapter of his Revelations represents him who sat upon the Throne,
the very expression used concerning the Bishops, even in those Primitive Times.
Then, as the Presbyters used to sit; and to sit on Seats ordered in a Hemicycle
about the Bishop within the Chancel, or (...), or (...), so here are
represented twenty four Elders sitting likewise on Thrones about the the Throne
of the Lamb. That they were designed for Priests appears from the circumstances
of their Representation. They are clothed in White Raiment, answering the
Linen Ephod among the Jews, Verse 4. They have also Vials full of Odors, which
are interpreted to be the Prayers of the Saints, and Harps to sing the Hymns
which were usually joined with the Sacrifices, Chap. V.8. What is this else but
exactly the Office of ordinary Priests in those Times? That therefore they had
also Crowns, Chap. IV.4. etc. is only to intimate their being a Royal
Priesthood, which was one of the Glories pretended to by the Literal Israel,
and therefore, by the Reasoning then used, more justly claimable by that which
was mystically so. And it is thus expounded by those Elders themselves, Chap.
V.10. that the Lamb had made them Kings and Priests to their God. That the
number is exactly twenty four, was, in all probability derived from some Jewish
Precedent. If we might trust the Rabbis, this was the number of the Elders in
ordinary Cities, answerably whereunto the Great Sanhedrim at Jerusalem
consisting of three such as those had seventy two. And then this would very
aptly fit the Christian Presbyteries which were ordinarily multiplied by them
according to the number of Cities. But because Josephus, who knew better than
any of these Rabbis, owns but seven, and because those City Presbyters seem to
have been rather for the Civil Government than the Ecclesiastical of those
Cities; therefore as it will be more agreeable to the Interest of our Cause, so
I believe it will be also to that of Truth, to derive it rather from an
Ecclesiastical Council of the High Priest. And this might very probably be
twenty four, exactly one out of each of the (...) into which the Body of the
Jewish Priesthood was divided. As for the Rabbis they are all too late to give
us any certain Information of matters of Fact in that Age, and I cannot foresee
any better Testimonies of that Age why this might not have been the precise
number. Nor will it the less fit our Hypothesis concerning the Christian
Presbyteries, if it be remembered, what I have proved, that Christian Episcopacy
is only a multiplication of the Jewish High Priesthood. Whence it will also
follow that the Christian Presbyteries ought to be understood as answerable to
that Sanhedrim which immediately related to the High Priest himself. Clemens
Alexandrinus conceives the number of twenty four, to be the number of the
Apostles doubled, to show the interest that the Gentiles, Strom. VI. p. 283.
Ed. Sylburg.
as well as the Jews, were henceforth to have in the Apostles. Thus the
Christian Presbyteries were mystically represented in the Vision of S. John. As
for the Deacons, they are also represented as formerly, by the same Vision, by
the seven Lamps, which were the seven Spirits of God; Chap. IV.5. and his seven
Eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent forth into all the Earth. Chap.
V.6. According to the Exposition which follows from what has been already
proved.

THUS I have shown that the Office Episcopacy was actually understood as a
Mystical Institution. Nor yet have I descended so low as the pretended
Areopagite or the Times of Constantine. What I have insisted on has been partly
from the Apostles themselves, partly from the freshest memory of them. So that
there can be no pretending that, tho indeed they understood it so, yet they
might have been mistaken in so understanding it. I have prevented this Answer
by insisting only on such things as, by the Principles of Christianity, are not
obnoxious to it. I have shown that these Notions prevailed in the Apostles
Times, nay, among the Apostles themselves, S. John for Example. I have shown
that, in all probability, they were thought of by them who either gave or first
assumed the name of Bishops. And let our Brethren consider how it is possible
to charge them with a mistake of this kind without involving the Apostles
themselves. I have shown that nearer the Apostles Times they were more received
than afterward; that proceeding on that way of Reasoning which must have been
their only Guide, and that a very secure one, in all matters for which they had
not an express Revelation; that Reasoning on the Apostles Authority; that
Reasoning on those very Principles on account of which most of them had
received their very Christianity, and which are indeed fundamentally supposed
to most of the Reasonings of the New Testament, they could hardly avoid these
things as just and certain Consequences by a clear and evident Deduction. And
if after all, we cannot yet be secure, that this was the meaning designed by
God himself; it will be hard to show how we can be secure, even of the
Scriptures themselves, or of any Revealed Religion, or even of any matter of
Fact whatsoever that is to be deduced at a distance.

Reasoning is applicable also here which was made use of concerning the
Eucharist as a Mystical Sacrifice, That, as this Gospel Priesthood comes nearer
the Original Priesthood of the (...), and nearer even the first visible
Priesthood of the (...) as Incarnate, by so much the more it must derive of the
influence of the Invisible Priesthood. Whence it will follow that if Union with
the Legal Priesthood was an Ordinary Means of procuring an Union with the
(...), and Disunion from that was like also to disunite from the (...), and
consequently from the Father; then much more these same Consequences must
likewise follow from the like Union or Disunion from the Christian Episcopacy.
The Consequence will hold both as to the greater Certainty of the Inference it
self, and as to the greater moment of the things so inferred. The Inference
must be more certain, because indeed all the force of this Reasoning as applied
to the Case of the Jewish Priesthood was, in the Principles of those persons,
entirely due to its being a Type of our Christian Episcopacy, and therefore it
must hold more certainly concerning our Episcopacy it self as the Certainty of
all Premises is still greater than that of the Inferences deduced from them. It
will also hold as to the greater moment of the things inferred. For our
Covenant being established on better Promises, and more Explicit Revelations
of the Rewards and Punishments of a future State; it will follow that the
Rewards of Obedience, and the Punishments of Disobedience to our Bishops, and
the benefits of Union and the Mischiefs of Disunion with them, must be greater
than those relating to the Jewish High Priesthood, and that particularly in
regard of the Soul, that being the chief design of Mysteries, and our future
Interests being those on which our Evangelical Covenant is principally
grounded, and the (...) in the (...) being that which principally concerned our
Savior as he was to be the Messiah the Prince. And accordingly this greater
Moment is expressly owned in the Reasoning of the New Testament, especially by
S. Paul in his Epistle to the Ebrews, as he has already been observed.

Chapter 11.
NOR will it now be difficult to Tertullian concerning Censures passed by the
Bishops upon Criminals. He tells the Heathens that the Christians themselves
were certain De Dei Conspectu, Apol. 39.
and that it was Summum futuri Judicii Prejudicium, if any one should so offend
as to be excluded from their Prayers and Assemblies, and all Holy Commerce.
They might well be certain of it, upon the Hypothesis now described, if the
Ecclesiastical Judicatories were Representatives of that Celestial Judicatory
by which all must be judged at the last day; if God himself, or the Son to
(whom the Father has committed all Judgment) was represented by the Bishops,
and the Apostles, (who are then to sit on twelve Thrones judging the twelve
Tribes of Israel) were represented by the Ecclesiastical Presbyteries, as
Ignatius says they are; and if the Angels (who with their Voice and Trumpet
were to gather the Elect from the Four Corners of the Earth, plainly alluding
to the Office of the (...), who were to call and dismiss Sacred Assemblies with
their Voices and Trumpets) were represented by the Christian Deacons; and
withal so represented, Chapter 12.
not as one Person is represented by another in a Theater, who is not concerned
in the Representation, but as a Client, is in Law, represented by his Proxy,
who is thereupon thought obliged himself to ratify whatever is done in his
Person by such a Representative; and if this Mystical Representation was by the
appointment of God himself, as the Legal Proxies were made by the Clients
represented by them, and the Mystical Representation was designed, not for an
entertainment of fancy, but purposely to constitute a Legal Person, and with a
design of concerning himself consequentially in all the slights which may be
put upon the Ecclesiastical Judicatories, as the nature of these Mystical
Representations were every where understood as Obligations to the Gods
themselves to ratify what was done in their name and persons by such appointed
Representatives, and as Christ himself has expressly promised to resent and
punish affronts offered to such Representatives, and to look on them as
interpretatively designed against himself. These things being thus understood,
there was no part of the future Judicatory which was not represented in the
Ecclesiastical, and being so, they might be sure that the future Judicatory was
obliged by the Act of the Church, as we are sure every person is obliged by
what his Proxy acts in his name in open Court. He might well call it Futuri
Judicii Praejudicium, when, upon these Supposals, the same Judicatory who are
to judge all things at the last day, must be supposed already to have judged
such Cases which were decided in the Ecclesiastical Judicatories. God grant our
Brethren may lay this seriously to heart.

Fathers in their Disputes against their contemporary Heretics and
SCHISMATICS, all the Inferences thence deduced against them will follow
naturally and undenyably, and withal so evidently, as that the Inferences could
not be disowned by any who owned the Premises, and therefore must have been as
much the sense of the whole Church of their Age as the Premises. It will follow
that Disunion from the Bishop was a Disunion from Christ and the Father, and
from all the Invisible Heavenly Priesthood and Sacrifice and Intercession. It
will follow that Disunion from any one Ordinary must consequently be a Disunion
from the whole Catholic Church, seeing it is impossible for any to continue a
Member of Christ's Mystical Body, who is disunited from the Mystical Head of
it. It will follow that Visible Disunion from the external Sacraments of the
Bishop is, in the Consequence, a Disunion from the Bishop, and from the whole
Catholic Church in Communion with him, who ought to ratify each others
Censures, under pain of SCHISM, if they do not. For this visible Communion in
Sacraments is, proceeding on these Principles, the only Means and Title to that
Communion which was invisible, and whoever received him to external Communion
who had been thus validly disunited from the invisible Communion by the act of
any one in whose Power it was validly to do it, must thereby, in effect,
disunite themselves from that invisible Communion, by professing themselves one
with him who had been validly disunited from it. At least this Act would be,
interpretatively, a Profession of Disunion, which is also in consequence a
Disunion, seeing none can have this Union but by professing it. Thus it appears
how consequently they reasoned in proving such Persons disunited in all regards
both of Visible and Invisible Communion.

deprived also of the Benefits of this Union. For it was impossible that they
should have the Benefits of Union who wanted the Union it self from which those
Benefits were to result. They deny them to have any pardon of their Sins. And
how could they have it who had no portion in the Heavenly Sacrifice which
Christ as the (...) was supposed to offer in Heaven, by which their Sins were
to be attoned? or in his Intercession by which his Father's Displeasure was to
be appeased, and which was grounded on that Sacrifice? And this they must want
who were cut off from the Mystical Representation and Transaction of that
Sacrifice in the Eucharist. They denied them a Portion in their own Prayers.
And how could they do otherwise when they thought them to have no Interest in
the Prayers and Intercession of Christ himself? They could not expect to be
heard but in such Prayers as were agreeable to his will. For indeed the whole
hope of having their own Prayers heard, was, 1 S. John V.14.
in this way of Reasoning, grounded on this, that their own Prayers in Earth
were Mystical Representations of what the (...) was supposed at the same time
to be Praying for in Heaven. And therefore such Prayers as were disagreeable to
his mind could lay no claim to the Divine Acceptance, because they could not
truly pretend to be such Representations. For indeed how could the (...) be
supposed to be offering Covenant-Sacrifices for them who were no Members of
that Covenant which was maintained by those Sacrifices? I mean for the
obtaining those special favors which were promised on God's part on his part of
the Covenant. Such are pardon of Sins, the Holy Ghost, Eternal Life, etc. which
peculiarly related to the Spiritual Kingdom or the (...). As for other more
general temporal Benefits which were not confined to the Covenant, the (...)
was supposed to pray for them for the whole World as being indeed himself the
King and Governor of it in that general sense. And accordingly the High Priest
himself is said to represent the whole World in Philo by the Mystical
Signification of his Vestments. And so the Temple, relating to the Sacrifices
offered by the High Priest, represented also the Great Temple of the World, as
not he only, but Josephus also, collects from the Hellenistical Interpretations
of its Coverings. And thus the Christian Eucharistical Sacrifices were also
offered for all Mankind, as appears not only from the several remaining Forms
of the ancient Liturgies, but also in the yet more ancient Offices which were
used in the time of Tertullian. And yet even as to this inferior sort of
Prayers, they have undoubtedly a worse Right, who, by their Misdemeanors, are
judged, by their Superiors, to have forfeited their Right in the other sort,
than they who never had any.

Holy Ghost. And this they might also do very solidly and consequently on the
received Doctrines concerning Sacrifices. For if the Holy Ghost took the same
way to insinuate himself by the Christian Sacrifices as the ill Spirit was
supposed to do; then they, who would have him, ought to make use of those
Sacrifices as the Ordinary Means whereby they were to receive him, and they who
did not communicate in the Sacrifices must, for that Reason, be supposed to
have no part in the Holy Ghost which was communicated by them. Nor did this
Reasoning hold only concerning the first reception of him, but proceeded
altogether as strongly for the continuance of him by the same means. For by all
the similitudes, by which the Holy Ghost is expressed in the Scripture, it
appears that he is so given, as to need a continuance, and so to need such a
continuance as that he must immediately cease to be where that continuance is
interrupted. He is likened to Springs of Water, and Water must immediately fail
in the Rivulet whenever they are cut off from the Fountain. He is likened to a
Light shining in a dark place, and neither can that continue when it is broken
from the Luminary. Nor is the way of Reasoning from Similitudes to be rejected
in a Subject of this nature, because they are indeed the proper
Scripture Language in such matters, and God has therefore peculiarly fitted
them to express the nature of things so spoken of. As therefore this is employed
to be the nature of the Spirit that it immediately ceases to be where the
Channels of its conveyance are interrupted; so its influences are confined to
one Body. The external Society of the Church is called the Mystical Body of
Christ, is called a Vine, etc. And the Consequence is allowed in that very
particular, that as the Branches of a Vine can no longer bear fruit than they
are incorporated in the Vine to which they belong, so neither can Christians
partake of the common influences of Christianity any longer than they continue
in the common Body of Christians. And the Holy Spirit is called the Bond of
this Unity, because, as he makes them all one whom he inspires, so neither does
he inspire any but such as own and belong to that Unity. Therefore it is that
Unity is so recommended as a Qualification for receiving these Influences of
the uniting Spirit. Our disagreeing hinders our Prayers. Therefore married
Persons are obliged to avoid mutual Provocations, that their Prayers might not
be hindered. If they do pray in this condition, yet such Prayers have no Promise
nor Encouragement that they shall find acceptance. Christ's Promise of hearing
even two or three when gathered in his name is only on condition that they
agree in the things they desire from him. Otherwise they are not capable of the
Intercession of the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication. And if this hold, even
in private Animosities when obstinately persevered in, much more in Case of
Division from the Church. If Animosities, as they are tendencies to Division,
hinder the Influences of the Spirit, it will but be proportionable Reasoning,
that actual Division from the Body should cut off all Title to the Influences
of the Spirit.

AND as this holds in other Prayers, sort of Prayer which is joined with
Sacrifice. Our Savior does sufficiently imply that even Sacrifices themselves
are not acceptable without Unity. We are to leave our Gift at the Altar in Case
of any Animosity, and first to be reconciled to him before we have any
encouragement to offer it with any hopes of acceptance. This comes exactly home
to the Case of the Lord's Supper, as our Christian Eucharistical Sacrifice,
That this is absolutely necessary to keep us actually joined to that Unity,
which is a qualification without which it is as impossible for us to have the
Spirit, as it is impossible that any Branch of a Tree can enjoy the Vegetative
Life if divided from the Trunk, or that any Member of our natural Bodies can
partake in the Animal Life when separated from our Bodies, or that any Light
should remain either in the Object or the Air when cut off from the Luminary
from whence it proceeds. I do not mean that none can have the Spirit, or be
actually united, any longer than he actually communicates, nor did any think so
concerning the Popular Sacrifices. The Unity was always supposed to continue as
long as the Right, that the person might communicate and be admitted if he
pleased. But then the question concerning this Right was to be decided, like
other questions of the like nature, by the sentence of the competent Judge. In
other Cases of Right relating to Possessions, the sentence of a competent Judge
proceeding on the Rules and Evidences which are allowed by Law) tho after all
it be fallible with how much integrity soever it be pronounced) is
notwithstanding thought sufficient, even in Equity and Justice, to cut off all
contrary Pleas of Right in opposition to it; and every one would be sensible
that the opposing unaccountable Pleas of Right to the satisfaction of the
competent Judges, would make Controversies endless, and dissolve the whole
Societies where such Pleas should be admitted. And our Brethren will never be
able to explain why the same Reason should not hold concerning the Decision of
Spiritual Rights as well as Temporals, if God himself have been pleased to
erect a Spiritual Judicatory, tho that be also acknowledged fallible. Thus it
appears how prudent and solid, and how little fancyful, the Reasoning is from
these similitudes, as applied by S. Cyprian. Nor does this hinder but that God
may consider the mollifying Circumstances which are allowable in the Cases of
such persons as have indeed no claim to Legal Right. But it is for the just
Interest of Government in general, that the Decision of Legal Rights do
peremptorily depend on the Sentence of competent Judges; and that recourse to
extraordinary (...) be rarely and very difficultly admitted, so as that still
the Generality of Mankind be obliged to depend on such ordinary Decisions, for
the satisfaction of their own Consciences concerning even such Rights
themselves.

CHAP. XIII. The forementioned Reasoning applied to the present Case of our
Modern SCHISMATICS.
The CONTENTS.
The Applicableness of this same Reasoning to the Case of our Modern
SCHISMATICS. Gospel-Constitutions designed Perpetual. Sect. I. Unity designed
perpetual. Sect. II. Even that of this Life. Sect. III. Christ designed and
instituted Means sufficient for perpetuating this External Unity. The same
Means of erecting the Church into a Body-Politick as conducive to the
perpetuating an External Unity Now (as Then) and for Ever. Sect. IV. The Means
of confining the Benefits of the Covenant to the Solemnities of it by Sacrifice
as conducive to the same purpose of erecting a Body Politic now also, and for
Ever. Sect. V. Our Christian Sacrifice of the Eucharist is of a perpetual Use.
Sect. VI. And perpetually useful for the same purposes as in the Apostles Time.
Sect. VII. And therefore perpetually useful in order to the partaking in the
Invisible Heavenly Sacrifice. Sect. VIII. No communicating with the Father and
the Son but by Communion with the Bishop. Sect. IX. This same Reasoning, if it
was good in S. Cyprian's time, is still as good as it was then, and will be so
for ever. Sect. X. These Symbolical Representations are not otherwise to be
interpreted Now than they were in the Primitive Times. Sect. XI. Our
Adversaries, in their separate condition, can lay no claim to the One Altar.
Sect. XII. Nor to the One Priesthood. Sect. XIII. The sad condition of
SCHISMATICS. Sect. XIV. How little Friends they are to Souls who are for
prejudging persons against our Reasons by Popular Arts of raising Odium against
our Cause, or our Persons. Sect. XV.XVI.

AND if this Reasoning was good Ancient Christians to the Case of their
contemporary SCHISMATICS, what can our Adversaries pretend why it should not
be as good and solid still? Is it possible that the nature of things can be
changed? Can Truth cease to be Truth, or SCHISM to be SCHISM? Can SCHISM become
less Criminal in our Age than it was formerly? Or have they any assurance of
being more indulgently dealt with, if they should prove equally criminal? These
things, alas! to say no more, are too ticklish for them to venture their
immortal Souls on, and I doubt not but the more considerable among them will
not so much as pretend them. What is it then that may be trusted that they can
pretend? Is it that tho the nature of SCHISM be eternally and equally criminal,
yet it may change in its imputation, that the matter of Fact may be chargeable
with SCHISM in one Age, as the Samaritans were guilty of SCHISM for separating
from the Jewish High Priest, which yet the Apostles were not, tho they were
likewise chargeable with the same Separation? But does it follow that because
such Changes were allowable from the Positive Institutions of Moses, therefore
the like Change is also now allowable under the Gospel? And have I not proved
that the ancient Christians used this same Reasoning, and used it solidly, even
under the Gospel! That the Law had any Temporary Constitutions they concluded
from the Praedictions of the Law it self which foretold a Change in the later
times. But can they pretend the like Change under the Gospel? Does the Gospel
foretell any further later Days wherein its own Constitutions shall be
antiquated also? Nay, do not the same persons style the Gospel the Everlasting
Gospel, in opposition to the Temporariness of many of those Legal
Constitutions? Why so, if its Constitutions were also Temporary?

BUT tho I should not take this general Perpetuity of the Gospel Constitutions,
what is there that our Brethren can pretend to be Temporary to excuse
themselves, in the particulars of our present Dispute, tho we had no other
direction to judge by than the nature of the Things themselves? Can they think
Unity it self a Temporary thing, especially that Unity which is invisible? This
I am confident they will not pretend; and if they should, I am yet more
confident they could not produce any plausible ground, of such pretense from
any Words or Principles of the New Testament. As the Mystical (...) was thought
to be the proper Office of the (...) in the Hellenistical Philosophy, so the
main design of our Savior's coming is as plainly said in the New Testament to
be that he might make all one. And can they think that Temporary which is the
main Office of our Savior as the (...), and the main design of his
Incarnation, and which is then likely to be most perfect when all Temporary
Things are antiquated in Heaven?

Unity in this World at least a Temporary Design? Was it not one of the (...)
sung by the Angels at his Birth, that he was to bring Peace on Earth? Was this
Blessing designed only for a while? He is the Prince of Peace, and his Kingdom
may as well be made Temporary as his Designs of Peace. The Prophecies
concerning his Kingdom are, that it should bring abundance of Peace so long as
the Sun and Moon endures. And can this be any other than a secular Peace that
was here spoken of? And indeed if we will keep consonant to Principles, there
could be no Office more suitable to the (...) incarnate than to transact that
visibly on Earth which he is supposed to perform invisibly in Heaven. This was
it alone which, on the Principles already described, could make his proceedings
on Earth available. The Power of them must be derived from their being true
Representations of the invisible Transactions in Heaven. This will make his
Sacrifice on the Cross a true Sacrifice, if it represented the Invisible
Heavenly Sacrifice offered by the (...). This will make the Man Jesus a true
Priest, if he personated the Lord from Heaven. And this would argue him indeed
to be the (...) Incarnate, if all he did on Earth was in correspondence with
the same designs which the (...) was driving on in Heaven. And if so, then (as
the (...) in Heaven was driving on Designs of Invisible Unity) a Visible Unity
must also have been the principal Design of the Incarnate (...) as visible. And
as the Unity designed in Heaven was perpetual, and designed that it should be
so; so also the Visible External Unity aimed at by our Savior on Earth could
have been no other than a Perpetual one, as it was designed by him.

WELL then. If this Unity thus designed was both an external and a perpetual
Peace, where can they yet suspect whether themselves be unconcerned in the
Consequence of those Discourses against those ancient Violaters of this
external peace of the Christian Church? Can they think that Christ made no
Provision for the Preservation of this External Peace so designed by him? Or
can they think that his Provisions were designed but Temporary for an End which
he designed should be perpetual? They cannot have so mean thoughts of the
Prudence of our Blessed Lord. Or if they should, these very Discourses of those
earliest Christians are sufficient to convince them, whose very Age must
qualify them for knowing what Provision was actually made. And not to urge
them again too closely with the Prudence of our Savior's Institution, what is
there that they can think temporary in that whole Constitution on which those
Ancient Christians did proceed? I may now confidently take it for granted, that
the Constitution so alluded to was indeed suitable to the Circumstances of
those Ages, because I have already proved the Prudence and Solidity of their
Reasonings upon it. What is therefore in that whole Scheme that for the same
Reason that made it seasonable then, will not be seasonable still, and for
ever? Was it then thought expedient in order to the preservation of this
External Unity to confederate them into a Body Politic? And is not such a
Constitution as naturally conducive still to the maintenance of an external
Unity, as it was then, and will it not be so for ever? Will not all their
little Latitudinarian Objections proceed as effectually against the Prudence
and Justice and Expedience for Unity of such a Provision in the Primitive
Church as they do now against the same in ours? Can they in earnest think that
the same Principles they insist on for justifying their present contempt of the
Ecclesiastical Government and their present Separation, would not have obliged
themselves to separate, if they had lived in those times, or would not have
excused and justified those who did then separate? I speak not of the
particular Laws and Constitutions which are changeable with the change of
Circumstances, but of the Obligation of the Government it self, and the
Legislative Power which, of their own nature, are coeternal with the Societies
to which they belong respectively. And it is too great an Argument of their
consciousness of Guilt in this particular, that they are so forward to
undertake the Patronage of those Ancient SCHISMATICS. Their late Church
Historian is very kind to the Memory of the Novatians and Donatists. Why so,
but that he seems sensible that his own Principles would have made him do as
they did, if he had lived in those Circumstances? On the contrary, there is
nothing in those Reasonings which obliged persons to Submission to Government
of the Church, in those ancient times, which will not do so still, and for
ever; and we have no reason to believe but that they, who, upon those Reasons
thought themselves obliged to Submission to their Ecclesiastical Governors,
under pain of SCHISM, then, would, for the same Reasons, have thought
themselves obliged to it now, under the same pain of SCHISM, if they had
refused it.

AS therefore an external Government still as naturally conducive as ever for
the preservation of External Unity; so also the Means then used are still as
efficacious both for erecting a Society, and supporting the Government of if
when once erected, and fitting it to the end of maintaining a Mystical Unity.
The Means we have seen then designed was the confining the Benefits of the
Covenant to the Solemnities of the Covenant, and transacting the Solemnities by
Sacrifice, and confining the Power of Sacrificing to a certain Order of
Persons; so that none could partake of those Sacrifices but from them, and
obliging every Individual to the Public Panegyres, that none might think
himself secure without a participation in those Sacrifices, and extending those
Panegyres to whole Cities, and confining the management of those Panegyres to a
single Person. Now what is there in all this that our Brethren can think
temporary* or not as conducive as ever to the obliging all to a dependence on a
City Monarch? Is it not still as reasonable as ever, that the Benefits for
which the Stipulation is made, should be confined to those who are interessed
in the Covenant? If not, what Obligation will remain for any to enter into the
Covenant, if they may enjoy the Benefits without it? Or is it not still as
reasonable to confine the Covenant to the Solemnities of it, that the
Obligation may be solid in form of Law, and that there may be a notorious way
of distinguishing truly interessed persons from false pretenders? And is not
this distinction as necessary as ever for the External Administration of
things, and the preservation of an external Unity?

way of maintaining this external Unity, of transacting these external
Solemnities of the Covenant by the Blessed Sacrament? What can they say why
this should not be a way as seasonable to the Circumstances of the present Age
as it was in those of the Primitive Christians? Is not the Sacrament it self of
a perpetual Use, and as seasonable now as formerly? If it be (as I think none
of our Adversaries will deny, except the Socinians and our lately Socinianiz'd
Enthusiasts) does it not perform the same Office as it did then? This is indeed
the only thing that can make it (in this way of Reasoning from the Reason of
the thing it self) perpetual, that the same Ends are perpetual, and that no
other Means but this are appointed, or are ever to be expected for the future,
for the attaining of those Ends. And undoubtedly, in the way of Reasoning on
which the Primitive Christians took up the Use of this Sacrament, they could
not choose but think, that it must be perpetual. For so I have shown that, in
their Mystical Reasonings from the Old Testament, as they took the New
Testament Institutions to be Archetypal to those of the Old, so in allusion to
the Platonic Notions then received that made all Archetypal Beings eternal,
they use the same form of speaking concerning the Gospel it self, and
concerning all its Institutions that were taken up as typified in the Law. And
if the Eucharist were taken up as typified by the Bread of Melchizedec, then it
must by the consequence of that particular way of Reasoning, be an Everlasting
Sacrifice, because it answered an Everlasting Priesthood, that of Christ, in
opposition to the Levitical Priesthood, as typified in the Priesthood of
Melchizedeck. But yet there is no need, in this matter, to insist much on
Notions so little observed. Those which are commonly received are sufficient to
my purpose. The Sacraments cannot be antiquated on that general account, which
is commonly taken for granted, of antiquating the whole Old Testament, because
indeed neither of them, tho taken up as some conceive in imitation of some
unwritten Traditionary Observances, were yet grounded on any express Old
Testament Institution. If therefore they will otherwise, by Reasoning, prove
them antiquated, they must either prove them such discretionary things as are
included in the general power of those who are by God appointed to judge of
Circumstances, or they must prove it from the New Testament by the same way of
Reasoning by which the Primitive Christians undertook to prove the antiquating
of those Rites of Judaism discontinued by themselves from the very design of
the Old Testament. The former way they can hardly venture on, if they would be
pleased particularly to consider the nature and design of the Eucharist. If
they consider it as a Mystery, that is, as a Representation of the Heavenly
Eucharist, or of what is there transacted by the (...) in his own Person, so
none but the (...) himself is competent for determining any thing concerning
it, because none but he can know the Original Mystery to which these Copies are
to correspond; and without knowing that, it is impossible to know when it does
indeed correspond, and when it ceases to do so, especially for any Creature to
do so without Actual Revelation, which is not here pretended without the
Scriptures. If they consider it as the Great Seal of Heaven, so tho it be
communicable to such Subjects whose Office it is to use it, yet either totally
to lay it by, or to frame a New Broad Seal without express Authority from the
Prince whose Seal it is, is counted Treason even in those very Subjects who are
otherwise entrusted with the Power of administering it. But considering it
further as a Bond of Union, so there can be less pretense to this Power of
antiquating it in any Office that is purely Ecclesiastical. For this Union of
the Multitude of Believers as grounded on the external Administration of these
Symbols, as confined to a certain Order of Men is, in Truth, the Foundation of
Ecclesiastical Authority in those Persons who are entrusted with the Power of
administering them. Because it is by this means put in their Power to admit to,
or exclude from, this Society, therefore it also consequently follows that it
must be also in their Power to impose what Terms they please of such Admission.
And therefore there being no human Authority imaginable but what is thus built
on it, the Authority thus consequent to it, cannot extend to what is antecedent
to it self, cannot subvert its own Foundations.

IT remains therefore that they prove antiquated from the design of the New
Testament it self. But yet neither will they, I believe, pretend to this when
they thoroughly consider it. For will they, can they, think that there is any
future Dispensation to be expected to succeed the Gospel, and to which the
Gospel must give way; or that any such Dispensation is in the least foretold by
the Gospel it self, as the Primitive Christians proved that the Gospel was
predicted by the Law it self, as that by which it should in course be
antiquated and abolished? Can they show that the Institutions of the Gospel are
Shadows and Resemblances of the Institutions of any such future Dispensation,
that so they may, in reason, be obliged to yield to the Substance represented
by them when that shall appear, as the Christians proved this true concerning
the Legal Ceremonies from the Letter of the Law it self? Can they prove in
particular that there is, or ever shall be, any nearer Draught of that
Archetypal Visible Sacrifice of our Savior upon the Cross than this of the
Eucharist, as the Primitive Christians did prove that their Eucharist was a
nearer draught of that same Sacrifice on the Cross than the Sacrifices of the
Mosaic Law? When they can prove any of these things, they will indeed say
something. But if they can prove none of them, how can they pretend to prove
the antiquating of this Sacrament? How much less can they pretend to do it by
any Parity of Reasoning with those of the Primitive Christians? Thus it appears
how little reason we have, even at present, to depend on any Courtesy of our
Adversaries in this particular.

IF therefore the Blessed Sacrament perpetual use and perpetually useful, for
the same designs as formerly; it will then follow that it must be a Symbol of
Unity. And then it must still be understood not only as a Ceremony of Admission
into the Society of the Church, but as a Title to the Privileges of the Society
into which men are so admitted. By partaking of this visible Sacrifice they
must be entitled to an Interest in the Invisible Sacrifice of the (...) in
Heaven, and by consequence to all the Benefits obtained* and all the Evils
expiated in that Sacrifice. And on the contrary Exclusion from it must be a
Forfeiture of all the Benefits so obtained, and an exposing of the Person
defenseless to all those Evils of which that Heavenly Sacrifice is an
Expiation. And if it still must have the same efficacy it ever has had in its
Mystical Capacity, it must not only unite or disunite to the Sacrifice, but to
all the Company which have here a Right of Communicating, and not only to the
Visible Company, but to those Invisible Societies in Heaven represented by
those in Earth. By this Reasoning the partaking of this visible Sacrifice will
unite us to all that do, or may, partake with us in it here on Earth, that is,
to the whole Visible Church by an Act of External Communion, because all who
are by the Governors of any Communion taken to belong to the Catholic Church,
in what part soever of the World, are for that reason granted to have a Right
to their own Communion, if they had been present, and desired it. And by the
same Mystical Reasoning it must also unite us to the Invisible Society of
Saints and Angels in Heaven, not only as these are also confessed to make up
that Mystical Body of which Christ is the Head, who is the Head of Angels and
Principalities and Powers and of every Creature, but also as they make up the
Invisible Church communicating in the Invisible Archetypal Sacrifice in Heaven.
For as, in this Mystical way of Interpretation our communicating at the Visible
Altar which represents the Invisible Altar is accounted a Communion with the
Invisible Altar so represented by it; so by the same Rule of Interpretation our
Communicating with the Visible Assistants at this Visible Altar must be
accounted a communicating with those Invisible Communicants in Heaven, who are
also represented by our Visible Communicants on Earth. Besides the same thing
will also follow from the other Supposition, that our communicating with the
Visible Altar is accounted as a communicating with that which is Invisible. For
if, by this means, we and they are accounted as Communicants at the same
Invisible Altar, we must, on that account, be the same way made One with them
in Heaven, as all who communicate at the same Visible Altar are made One on
Earth.

BUT S. John makes communicating Church to be a communicating with the Father
and the Son. But this particular cannot be understood, in this Mystical Way of
understanding things, so conveniently of any thing as of Communion with the
Bishop. I have shown how, in the Mysteries, the Hierophanta was to personate
the God who was concerned in those Mysteries, and that it was, on account of
this Personation, that he who communicated with the Hierophanta, was accounted
to communicate with the Deity represented by him. I have shown that the Bishop
alone answered the Hierophanta as the Supreme of all those Officers that were
concerned in the Mysteries; nay, that he answered him in this very particular
of personating the Father and the Son, as the Comparisons were then made by
those earliest Christians. If therefore Communion with the Archetype was to be
maintained by Communion with the Ectypal Representative; then Communion with
the Bishop must be the only Means of maintaining a Communion with the Father
and the Son, because he only represents them. And that he only could represent
them as Principles of Unity appears from the Foundation of this Unity, because
it is grounded on Headship. Christ is a Principle of Unity to Mankind, because
he is the Head of the Man, and God is a Principle of Unity even to Christ
himself because he is the Head of Christ. And because none that has Interest in
the visible Government of the Church can represent God and Christ in this
particular regard of Headship but the Bishop, therefore none but he can
represent them as Principles of Unity. And therefore in this Mystical Way of
Reasoning from Representations to Things, none but the Bishop can unite us to
the Father and the Son. Whence it will further follow that whoever are
disunited from the Visible Communion of the Church on Earth, and particularly
from that Visible Communion of the Bishop, must consequently be disunited from
the whole visible Catholic Church on Earth, and not only so, but from the
Invisible Communion of the Holy Angels and Saints in Heaven, and which is yet
more from Christ and God himself, and all the Benefits consequent to all these
Unities, whether Visible or Invisible, which cannot in reason be thought
communicable to him who is disunited from the Original from whence they flow.

THIS was good Reasoning in S. Cyprian's time. And what can our Adversaries
pretend why it should not still be allowed for good Reasoning now and for ever?
Were these Instituted Representations understood then as Covenants on God's
part obliging him to ratify the things so Represented by his own Appointment,
and were they understood so by the most solid ways of judging that those Ages
were capable of; and can they yet think it possible that those very Ancients,
to whose Capacities these Institutions were originally fitted, could be
mistaken concerning God's mind when they used the most likely means for finding
it that they were capable of? Or if they cannot deny but it was solid then,
what can they say why it should not be so still? Is not the Bishop as apt as
ever to signify a Principle of Unity, and to represent God and Christ under
the Notion of a Head? Nay, does not his Monarchical Presidency over his
Brethren of the Clergy peculiarly fit him for such a Signification? And does he
not the more naturally represent God and Christ in the Notion of a Head by how
much he is more like in their Monarchy, I mean over that particular Body over
which Bishops were at at first placed by Divine Institution? Or do they think
them less of Divine Institution now than formerly? This would indeed weaken the
Obligation on God's part. For even in the use of Covenanting Symbols none is
obliged by them but he that uses them, and therefore neither would God be
obliged to ratify what is here represented in his name, if the Representation
had not been of his own Appointment. He would not then be obliged to make them
partakers of the Invisible Unity who are united to the Bishop, nor to exclude
them from that same Invisible Unity, who are disunited from him. But what can
be requisite for deriving this appointment at a distance but an uninterrupted
Succession from them who had it immediately? What more had those earlyer Ages
themselves to pretend for it? What more can our Adversaries themselves pretend,
at least, what more can they rationally account for, without Enthusiastic
Pretenses to new Revelation? And do not our Bishops plead the same Argument of
Succession? Nor is it any matter in Law for weakening the Claim, at what
distance this Succession be deduced, so that it be still deduced through
unquestionable hands. No matter how long the Chain be, so the Links be entire
and equal to the burden supported by it.

IF those Symbolical Representations Divine Institution, and were withal to be
interpreted according to the way of Interpretation of that Age, I cannot see
how they can avoid but that God will be obliged to ratify a Union or Disunion
with the Bishop on Earth by the like Union or Disunion in Heaven. Will they
therefore to avoid it, say, that we are not now to follow that way of
Interpretation in expounding it, particularly that we are not now to regard
what were the received Notions concerning Mysteries in those Ages, nor what
Interpretations were inevitably consequent from these Notions, and must
therefore have been infallibly thought just and solid with them among whom
these Notions were so received, but that God intended the Scriptures
intelligible in all Ages, and therefore could not make the true sense of such
Scriptures to depend on Notions antiquated so long agone, and so little
observed and known in our Modern Ages, this may indeed seem more plausible at
the first prospect, than it will be found solid on a thorough and impartial
Examination. For can they indeed think that all those several and contradictory
senses which may easily be raised of the several Terms and Expressions from the
Usages of different times both of Words and Things and Notions to which those
Words have relation, could ever have been designed by God? Could they think
that the Sacred Writers themselves could possibly mean them in senses unknown
to them, and with Relation to Things and Notions not as yet in being? Was not
Providence, at least, as much concerned for Them as for Us? And was it not as
necessary that they should understand those Writings which were primarily
designed for their Use as that we should understand them? And was it not as
harsh that they should be remitted to Senses and Notions not yet existent, as
that we should be obliged, in order to the same design of understanding them,
to have recourse to those Senses and Notions then used and notoriously alluded
to, however since discontinued and antiquated in the many Changes and
Revolutions that were in course to be expected in such a distance? If so great
a Variety of Senses be allowed of as may be gathered from the same Letter
understood according to the Sentiments of different Ages, it cannot be avoided
but that every new Age, may, under pretense of New Expositions, introduce a
whole new Scheme of Christian Doctrines. If, to avoid this, all must be
confined to one certain Sense and way of expounding the Scriptures; there can
be nothing thought on more convenient than that this one Sense be that Sense in
which it was understood by the Primitive Christians to whose Capacities it was
peculiarly fitted by the Holy Ghost, and the way of expounding the Scriptures
be the very same which was, and must have been, made use of by the Inspired
Writers themselves in expounding their own Prophesies which were not expounded
to them by a Second Revelation. Our Brethren themselves will easily grant that
the Scripture was always clear in matters necessary to Salvation. And certainly
all Duties, and Duties of so great importance as these of preserving Peace and
Government, and so universal Use in all Ages of the Church, must be necessary,
if any thing. And therefore those Senses of the Scriptures relating to such
matters must have been clear to them then, however they may seem to our
Brethren now, either because the Monuments, to which they then notoriously
alluded, are lost, or because our Brethren take the wrong way to understand
them, whilst they neglect a prudent recourse to those remaining Monuments by
which they might have been informed.

THUS impossible it is for our Adversaries Title to the One Priesthood and One
Altar, if the same Scriptures be still to be expounded the same way as formerly
in matters of Duty which still remain, and are like to do so for ever, the same
as formerly. And as impossible it will be to make good any challenge of Benefit
from Sacraments so administered in their separate Condition, whether we consider
their Altar, or their Priesthood. If we consider their Altar. They cannot
pretend to represent the Invisible Altar in Heaven, at least not so to
represent it as Legal Symbols which may infer a Legal Obligation. We see the
way of making the Jewish Altar such a resemblance was first, by fashioning it
after the Archetypal Altar in Heaven revealed by God himself to Moses in the
Mount. Then by framing all other Sensible Altars after the resemblance of that
which was first Copyed from the Heavenly Original. What was the meaning of this
but to oblige all other Altars to as strict a dependence on the first
Archetypal of Sensibles as that had on the Heavenly Archetype it self. But this
our separating Brethren cannot pretend to. Their Sacrifices do not so much as
unite them to one another, according to the Latitudinarians. Much less do they
unite them to that Archetypal Sensible Altar of the Bishop, with which they
were at first united, and from which they have since departed. How can they
then pretend to represent and apply the Sacrifice of the Heavenly Altar, when
withal they do not so much as pretend to any new Revelation like that to Moses,
by which they might Copy it immediately from the Heavenly Archetype? What
portion then can they pretend to in the Heavenly Altar and Sacrifice which are
only designed for an United People on Earth, and united in a Visible Altar and
Sacrifice, and united with the first of those that are Visible? How can they
hope such Altars can apply the Benefits of the Heavenly Altar when they cannot
so much as pretend to represent it, being neither Copyed from it, nor from any
others that were so? How can they be taken for Sealing Representations that may
oblige God to convey those Benefits, when they are neither appointed by him
immediately, nor by any Succession of Men empowered to act in his Name?

AND as little Comfort can they Priesthood in the State of Separation, on this
very account that it is not an One Priesthood. I do not only mean that it is
not the One Priesthood which alone had the lawful Original Right to that Title
of the One Priesthood. None of our Adversaries have any that can so much as
pretend, however injuriously, to such a Title as was requisite on this
occasion. I have shown that the One Priest was not to answer the Jewish
Ordinary Priests, whom none ever pretended to be Principles of Unity, nor was
it ever disputed with the Samaritans whether there ought to be any more than
one of such, nor could any such pretend to be a Head to his Brethren, which, as
has been shown, was the only way of making them fit Representatives of God and
Christ as the Principles of the Mystical Unity. The High Priest was he alone
who could challenge these things to himself, and when all were agreed that he
ought to be only One. And therefore our Brethren ought to show some single
person answerable to him, if they will, by these Principles so much as pretend
to any Principle of Unity. This none of our Modern Sects, except the
Presbyterians, can so much as offer at. None of them have any single Minister,
who, by their Principles, can pretend to Superiority over his Brethren. And all
that they can pretend is a Moderator over their Classes, either for a certain
time, or, at the utmost for Term of Life. Yet even that is not sufficient for a
Principle of Unity. Seeing the Sacrifices are they which are the Cement of this
Unity, it must be a Presidency, not in their Assemblies only, but their
Sacrifices, which can entitle to a Principle of it. But there is no one person
of their Classes that pretends to any Interest more than others in their
Eucharistical Sacrifices, none to whom the Union is principally designed that
is made to them all in common. Hence it will follow, by the tenor of our
present Argument, that they can pretend to no Signification of God and Christ,
in their Sacraments, as Principles of Unity, and consequently to no Stipulation
in God's part, for a share in the Invisible Celestial Unity, nor indeed to any
of that Union, whereby Christians on account of their being so, are supposed
united to Chirst, who have no other way of procuring such a Union but by their
Sacraments, so that still they must be supposed as much disunited from Christ,
as the best of those are who have not yet undertaken the Profession of
Christianity. And then for all the consequential Benefits which plainly suppose
a Union, they must needs have as weak and ill grounded a Title as they have to
the Unity it self to which they are consequential.

WHAT a sad consideration must Human Souls, to think what Multitudes, of those
immortal Beings whom the Son of God has been pleased to ransom with his dearest
Blood, are notwithstanding so sadly and so deeply concerned in the consequence
of this Discourse? That still they are Aliens from God and Christ, and
Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, and the Commonwealth of Israel. It is one
of the most dreadful aggravations of the condition of the damned that they are
banished from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power. The
same is their condition also who are disunited from Christ by being disunited
from his Visible Representative. Whatever Enthusiastic Raptures they may feel,
which are oftentimes the effects of an Enthusiastic Temper influenced by false
Principles of a deluded Conscience; yet, by these Principles, they must
certainly be deprived of all those real Enjoyments and holy Relishes which
devout Souls experience even in this Life in the Communion with their best
beloved. They can have no true solid Comfort of Conscience who stand on these
Terms with their Judge, who is withal the Lord of their Consciences. None of
that Peace which passes all understanding who are no Subjects of the Prince of
Peace, no Members of his Kingdom. No Visitations of the Heavenly Spirit who are
divided from that Body of which the Spirit is the Bond and Cement. And, which
is the saddest consideration of all, this condition cuts them off from those
future hopes which are the only supports and alleviations of good men in this
Life under their severest Sufferings. They who are disunited from Christ here
have no hopes of recovering a Union with him hereafter. It is certain that
whatsoever condition they die in they must abide in it to all Eternity. And it
is extremely uncertain, and, at least, infinitely hazardous, that they can have
any Right to the Invisible Unity who have none to the Visible by which it is
conveyed and promised in a Legal Way, that they shall ever share in the
uncovenanted Mercies of God who can make out no claim to the Divine Promises
and Covenant. How disconsolate must such a condition seem to every truly
Gracious Soul, that it must want the Comforts of Religion here, and lose the
hopes of enjoying them hereafter? What Terms of indifferent Impositions can it
think less tolerable than the being reduced to such a desperate condition!

AND is it not, in the mean time, Zealots for Souls who use all the endeavors
they can to keep them secure and careless in a state of so great, and so
imminent, a danger? They will neither let them receive Conviction, nor so much
as fairly to examine that which might possibly convince them if it were equally
examined. Instead of answering our Arguments, they first endeavor to make our
Cause, and then our persons odious, and then make use of their little Arts and
Popular Talents of Declamation to raise the Passions of their Auditors and
Readers. And then they must avoid our Persons and our Books, or come to them
with minds possessed with Prejudice, and incapable not only of Conviction, but
also of all equal Information. What other Art could the Enemy of Souls use for
securing his Prey, than to make them senseless of their danger? And can they
notwithstanding insist on this very particular as an Argument of their Love of
Souls, which the implacable Enemy of Souls takes for the greatest kindness to
his own Interest? We can hardly find any one sort of persons against whom more
dreadful Judgments are denounced in the Prophetic Writings of the Old
Testament than seducing Prophets, and hardly any one Practice of that sort of
Persons than this one of hardening the Wicked in a state of Impenitency, a
speaking peace where there is no peace, a strengthening their hands with
flattering Misrepresentations, a sowing cushions to their Arms on which they
may securely solace themselves in (God knows!) an extremely unsecure condition.
This the Scripture calls hunting of Souls, and making them to fly, and
destroying them. And must we take them for Friends of Souls who are guilty of
it? Human Frailty and the Weakness of our Understandings may possibly go far in
excusing Errors, tho otherwise of no inconsiderable consequence, where the will
is not ingredient in the occasion of them. But besides that the very nature of
these things is such that they must prove proportionably momentous if they
should prove at all erroneous; the Scripture it self does every where insist on
this as one of the most aggravating Circumstances of imputation to the person,
as that which must render him most inexcusable, and most incapable of an
Apology. This is the condemnation that men love darkness, and hate the light,
when they hate God's Discipline, and refuse to receive Instruction, when they
put God far from them, and the evil day, and refuse the knowledge of his ways.
When they will not receive the Truth in the Love of it, then God gives them
over to strong delusions, to a reprobate Sense, and a seared Conscience. And as
the New Testament is in many places very plain in asserting the Limitedness of
the Day of Grace; so there is hardly any thing more spoken of as an ill omen
that more fatally prognosticates its being near an expiration, than that men
are come to this desperate pass of avoiding or resisting sufficient conviction,
of loving their Flatterers, and being averse to unpleasing Truths, and angry at
their faithful Monitors. And what can be indeed more formidable to truly
conscientious persons?

positive in a Charge of so high a nature, if they would, at least, give our
Reasons an equal hearing, tho, after all, they should prove mistaken in judging
concerning them. But they who deny us even this, how can they answer it to God,
how can they to their own Consciences, how can they to the World in that
dreadful day when all their Secrets must be revealed? What will they say for
themselves, or to clear themselves from the destruction of their Followers and
Disciples, when God shall require their Blood at their Hands who have
undertaken to be their Shepherds? Can they plead Ignorance, when Evidence is
offered, and rejected by them? Can they pretend the Evidence insufficient when
they have never examined it so far as to be able to say on their own knowledge,
that it was insufficient? Can they say they were not aware of their Duty even
of examining it? But what greater warning could they expect than the great
moment of the thing? And what can be, if this be not, momentous? Nor is the
condition of those who are misled much more secure than that of their
Misguiders. The following as well as the leading blind do both of them fall
into the ditch. He that is not warned by the Watchman is overtaken by the
Sword; and then what comfort can it be to him that his blood shall be required
at the Watchman's hand? The great Lover of Souls who has already done so great
things for their good, discover their duty to them in this particular also. He
alone can open their Eyes, and captivate their Wills, and subdue their
Affections and worldly Interests, and whatever other Prejudices do sway them,
and make them partial in these great Affairs of his Glory and their own
Salvation. Good Jesus do it, and give us all to know and follow and embrace the
things which belong to our Peace before they be hid from our Eyes.

FINIS.
I have been advised by a Worthy Friend to translate the Greek Quotations for
the benefit of those who do not understand that Tongue. Accordingly I did it in
that part which was not yet wrought off when the Advice was given. In that Part
which was, himself was pleased to undertake the Drudgery. And they are as
follow.
Page 19. Future Age.

P. 39. In honor therefore of him whose will and pleasure it was to call us, it
becomes us to be obedient without all Hypocrisy, because he who does
otherwise, does not deceive this Visible Bishop, but imposes on him who is
Invisible. But in this matter, the dealing is not with Flesh and Blood, but
with God who knows the Secrets.

Ib. Let no man be mistaken. If any Man be not within the Altar, he falls short
of the Bread of God.

But let not any Altar, or Temple be in any other City; for God is One, and the
Stock of the Hebrews is One.

Page 63. Tobit 1.4, 5, 6. All the Tribe of Nephthali my Father fell from the
House of Jerusalem, which was chosen out of all the Tribes of Israel, that all
the Tribes should sacrifice there. Now all the Tribes which together revolted,
and the House of my Father Nephthali sacrificed unto the Heifer Baal.

But I alone went often to Jerusalem at the Feasts, as it was ordained unto all
the people of Israel by an everlasting Decree* having the first Fruits and
Tenths of Increase, with that which was first shorn.

Page 75. A Stranger.

P. 77. Clement. Why was our Father Abraham pronounced blessed?

Ibid. Justin. For the true Israelitick Stock and Spiritual, the Stock of
Judah, Jacob, Isaac and Abraham, commended by God for his faith in
Uncircumcision, and blessed, and styled the Father of many Nations, are we, who
by this crucified Christ are brought home to God, as shall be shown in the
process of our Discourse.

Id. Ibid. Being the Children of Abraham on account of the Faith which we have
common with him.

Ib. Idem. Which not only our Ancestors according to God, the Prophets and
Lawgivers do proclaim.

Page 90. From the Law, and from the Catalogues of Succession of the High
Priests, how every one succeeded his Father in the honor of presiding over the
Temple.

Page 97. The greatest or supreme God.

Ibid. According to the likeness of that in Jerusalem, and with the same
measures.

Ibid. Onias therefore upon that place built a Temple and an Altar like to that
at Jerusalem, but lesser and poorer.

Page 98. More than is fit.

Page 121. According to the number of the Angels of God.

Page 128. Watchers.

Page 136, 137. Demons Governors of Nations and Cities.

Page 137. Ministering Spirits.

Ibid. Yeomen of the Guard.

Page 146, 147. Initiated Initiations.

Page 147. It was not lawful then for Strangers to be initiated.

Page 148. Understanding that he that was to be initiated, must first be
enrolled as a Freeman of Athens, if not by Nature, yet at least by Law, this
was that which he avoided, not initiation, esteeming himself a Citizen of the
whole World.

Page 148. Proclamation. Crier.

Page 148, 149. For all that will may not partake of the Mysteries: but there
are some who are forewarned to exclude themselves, as they who have hands not
clean from blood, and they that speak Outlandish Tongues.

Page 149. An Army of an unknown Tongue.

Page 150, 151. The Priests of other Nations are wont to offer up their Prayers
and Sacrifices for those of their own Nation only, and for Friends and
Fellow-Citizens.

Page 158. Offering the Sacrifices appointed by the Laws.

Ibid. There are Laws by which this ought to be done.

Ibid. It is a perpetual and standing Law for those within the Province of
Athens to worship their Country Gods and Heroes in common, pursuant to the Laws
of the place.

Ibid. I will truly observe the Religious Rites of my Country.

Page 159. Sacrifice according to the custom of the place.

Ibid. Socrates ought to suffer, because he esteems them to be no Gods whom the
City takes for such, but he brings in other new Gods.

Ibid. A setter forth of strange Gods.

Page 166. According to ancient custom, that they who had eaten together should
not die by the hands of one another, unless it were by some unlucky accident
against their will.

Page 183. For men must first put off their Rusticity, and partake of the
smaller Mysteries before the greater, and dance before they bear the Torch, and
bear the Torch before they can act as High Priests.

Page 184. Ordained for men in things pertaining to God.

Page 189. Union. Communion.

Page 192. The same Dioclesian having been Alytarches in Antioch, and having
put off his Emperor's Robes after he had performed the Olympicks, he refused
the Style of Emperor, saying, I have laid aside earthly Majesty, and worn the
Garb of the immortal Jupiter.

Page 193. (...). Not to be named.

Ibid. As for the name of him that officiated as Hierophanta at that time, it
is not lawful for me to mention it, since he it was that initiated this Author,
and adopted him into the Eumolpide.

Page 195. (...). Mire.

Ibid. Demon of Matter.

Ibid. Winging of the Soul.

Page 199. Philo. For how could the Soul have any notion of God, unless he had
inspired, and as much as possible united himself to it? For the mind of man
durst nor have presumed to have mounted up so high, as to meddle with God's
Nature, if God himself had not drawn it to himself (as the mind of man can be
known) and had stamped some impressions of truth upon its Faculties.

Page 206. For it is necessary, that he that sacrifices to the Father of the
World, should use the mediation of the Son, perfect in all kinds of Virtue,
both for the remission of Sins, and for the obtaining of all good things: and
therefore it may be, it is, that he teaches the worshiper of God beforehand,
if not to fathom the power of the Creator* yet however always to endeavor to
resemble this orderly frame of things, represented by the High Priest, who for
that very reason is obliged to bear this pattern always in his mind: he ought
in some respects to be transformed from a man into the nature of this orderly
frame, and if I may speak the truth (which certainly becomes me) to be himself
a little World.

Page 207. Essential man.

Page 208. For there as it should seem, two Temples of God, the one this world,
in which the first-begotten, the Divine Word is the High Priest: the other is
the rational Soul, whose High Priest is the real man, who is sensibly
represented by him that ordinarily performs the National Prayers and
Sacrifices, who is described as clothed with the aforesaid Garment in
imitation of the whole Heaven, that both the World may cooperate with Man, and
Man with the World.

Page 2^6. But there is a Communion of Souls, for those of the Gods communicate
with those of Men, and those of Men with those of Brutes. Now the better take
care of the worse, the Gods of Men, and Men of Brutes, and the Supreme God of
all. By this it appears that the world is subject to the Supreme God, Man to
the World, Brutes to Man, and the Supreme God is both above and about all. And
the Operations of this Supreme God are as it were his Beams, the Beams, as I
may say, or influences of the World are the natures of things, and those of man
are Arts and Sciences. Now these Influences operate by the World, and upon Man
by the natural Beams of the World, and the natures of things by the Elements,
and Men by Arts and Sciences. Now this Disposition of the whole Frame depends
upon the nature of one, and is ordered by one mind. And it is this mind that is
that Divine and Operative and Uniting Principle, that unites Men to the Gods,
and the Gods to Men. All things are by these two, the World and Man, but all
are under One.

Page 336. lin. 8. Ministering Spirits sent forth to minister. Lin. 16.
Ministration of the Spirit.

Page 341. l. 16. The Laborious Angels stand before thy fiery Throne.

Page 344. l. penult. But not unto him, but to the Father of Jesus Christ the
Bishop of all.

Page 345. l. 5. Not that any one who does so, deceives this Bishop who is
Visible, but the Cheat is put on him who is Invisible. Now in this matter, the
dealing is not with Flesh [and Blood] but with God who knows the Secrets.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 6. l. 8. r. Personal. p. 8. marg. l. 3. r. Sect* 47. p. 9. marg. l. 5. r.
Sect. 30. l. 14. r. Text with, p. 15. l. 11. r. Communion. p. 18. l. 21. post
use add of. p. 36. l. 7. after Israel a Colon stop. p. 46. l after Altar a
Semicolon. p. 52. l. 11. r. Altar. Whatsoever. p. 54. l. ult. dele in the Part.
p. 55. l. 24. after Tabernacle, add, after the Pattern showed him in the Mount.
p. 63. l. 27. r. (...). p. 64. l. 7. r. (...). p. 77. the marginal quotations
of Justin and Irenaeus at the bottom of the page transposed. p. ib. l. penult.
r. (...). p. 82. l. 9. r. Hyrcanus. p. 97. l. penult. r. designed. l. 9. r.
(...). p. 101. marg. l. ult. r. init. p. 105. l. 4. r. (...). p. 108. marg. l.
8. r, vit. Constable. p. 123. l. 7. r. (...). p. 125. l. 23. r. again. p. 139. l.
5. r. or. l. ult. r. Shechinah. p. 147. marg. l. ult. r. Plut. p. 148. marg. l.
3. r. Eleusin. 10. p. 149. l. 1. r. (...). p, 155. r. ita. p. 158. marg. l. 18.
r. (...) Text. l. 23. r. (...). p. 161. l. penult. r. received. p. 164. l. 17.
r falsa. p. 174. l. 25. r. Zabii. p. 180. l. 3. dele distinct. p. 184. l. 9. r.
(...). p. 189. l. 5. r. wordly. p. 192. l. 12. r. (...). p. 196. l. 27. r.
Baubo. p. 201. l. 22. r. here. p. 216. l. 19. r. (...). p. 217. l. 3. r. (...).
p. 219. l. 9. r. (...). p. 221. r. (...). p. 235. l. 17. r. Diocesan. p. 258.
l. 28. r. Consequence. p. 267. l. 7. r. hand. p. 276. l. 16. and r. yet. p.
284. l. 27. a Comma at the end of the line. p. 346. l. 20. after comparison add
with the Visible Types.

A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and sold by Benjamin Took at the Ship
in S. Paul's Churchyard.
Folio.
HErodoti Halicarnassaei Historia grec.

Francisci Suarez de Legibus ac Deo Legislatore.

M. T. Ciceronis opera omnia cum Annotationibus Jani Gulielmi and Jani Gruteri.
Adjungitur item Frobenii Penu Tullianum december Indicibus juxta Exemplar
Hamburgense.

Skinneri Etymologicon Linguae Anglicanae.

Caussin's Holy Court.

Walsh's History and Vindication of the Irish Remonstrance.

A Collection of all the Statutes now in force in Ireland.

Baker's Chronicle of the Kings of England.

Bishop Sanderson's Sermons, to which is added his Life.

Winche's Book of Entries, containing Declarations, Informations, and other
select and approved Pleadings: with special Verdicts and Demurrers in most
Actions real, personal and mixed, with faithful References to the most
authentic Printed Law Books. Together with a copious and useful Table.

Doctor Littleton's Sermons.

Heylin's Cosmography of the whole World.

The Parallel: or the new specious Association an old Rebellious Covenant.

A gentle Reflection on the modest Account, and a Vindication of the Loyal
Abhorrers from the Calumnies of a Factious Pen by the Author of the Parallel.

These Books following writ by Mr. Henry Dodwell.
Separation of Churches from Episcopal Government, as practiced by the present
Nonconformists proved Schismatical, from such Principles as are least
controverted, and do withal most popularly explain the sinfulness and mischief
of Schism. In this Treatise the Sin against the Holy Ghost, the Sin unto death,
and other difficult Scriptures are occasionally discoursed of. Quarto.

J. Stearne de Obstinatione. Praefixa sunt Prolegomena Apologetica de usu
dogmatum Philosophicorum, praecipue Stoicorum Theologiae. Hen. Dodwell. Octavo.

Two Letters of Advice. 1. For Susception of Holy Orders. 2. For Studies
Theological, especially such as are rational. At the end of the former is
inserted a Catalogue of the Christian Writers, and their Genuine Works of the
first three Centuries. Octavo.

A Discourse concerning Sanchoniathon's Phaenician History. Octavo.

Some Considerations of present Concernment, how far the Romanists may be
trusted by Princes of another Persuasion. Octavo.

Two short Discourses against the Romanists. Twelves.

A Reply to Mr. Baxter's pretended Confutation of a Book entitled Separation of
the Churches from Episcopal Government, etc. To which are added three Letters
written to him in 1673, concerning the possibility of Discipline under a
Diocesan Government. Octavo.

FINIS.

