Non-Conformists, PROVED SCHISMATICAL From such Principles as are least
controverted, and do withal most popularly explain The Sinfulness and Mischief
OF SCHISM. In this Treatise The Sin against the Holy Ghost, the Sin unto Death,
and other difficult Scriptures are occasionally discoursed of, and some useful
Rules are given for EXPLICATION of SCRIPTVRE.

By HENRY DODWELL, M.A. and sometimes Fellow of Trinity-College near Dublin in
Ireland.

(...).

Ign. Ep. ad Ephesians. p. 20. Edit. Voss. (...).

Clem. Ep. ad Corinth.. 30. LONDON: Printed for Benjamin Took, at the Ship in
S. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXIX.

THE PREFACE.
THE interests of those many parties which, at present, keep up the Divisions
of Christendom, are so highly concerned in the consequences of my present
undertaking; And the generality of men are so visibly partial in disputes
wherein interest is concerned, so much more inclinable to resent the severity
of a conclusion that charges them with dangerous mistakes, than to think how
much indeed it is their interest rather to beware of errors that may prove
dangerous than to stand out in the defense of what they have once undertaken to
defend, and how much it is therefore their interest to examine the premises
with all possible accurateness and candor, from whence such conclusions are
deduced; as that I cannot but expect some indications of the resentment of
concerned Persons, though I have endeavored that the way of management might
be as unoffensive as was possible. Though my design be Peace, yet that it self
is enough to alarm the Spirits of many in the contentious Age we live in, who,
when they are spoken to of peace will make them ready to battle. And therefore
I cannot but think my self concerned to foresee and prevent such prejudices as
may hinder such who most need the informations given in the present Work,
either from reading them, or from benefiting by them.

I MUST therefore warn my Reader in the first place that when he finds the
Title promise him a Discourse concerning SCHISM, he do not understand it in the
same sense as it has been considered in so many modern discourses upon that
Subject between us and the Romanists. SCHISM not here considered as between
Churches, but as between particular Members and their own Churches.
I do not here consider the question of Schism between Churches, but between
Subjects separating from particular Churches and the Churches from which they
separate. This is all for which my present design does concern me, and if my
reasons prove, that Subjects separating from their own particular Churches for
unsinful Impositions are Schismatics, I shall perform what I intended. But the
same reasons will not prove a Church Schismatical for refusing impositions,
though unsinful, from another Church. For I suppose all Churches originally
equal, and that they have since submitted to prudential compacts, which though
they may oblige them as long as the reason of those compacts last, and as far
as the equity of those compacts may hold as to the true design of those that
made them, and as far as those compacts have meddled only with the alienable
rights of particular Churches; yet where any of these conditions fail there the
particular Churches are at liberty to resume their ancient rights. And I
suppose the power of judging when these condititions fail to be an unalienable
right of particular Churches, and not only to judge with the judgment of private
discretion, but such a judgment as may be an authentic measure of her own
practice.

prove that these things are so in this discourse. I only mention them that the
Reader may understand on how different Principles these two questions are to be
stated; The Romanists can make no advantage of the Principles of this discourse
to charge our Church with SCHISM.
and therefore how far it is from following, that if the Non-Conformists be
Schismatics for separating from the Church of England, therefore the Church of
England must be Schismatical for refusing Communion with the Church of Rome;
and how far the reasons which I have here used for proving the Non-Conformists
Schismatical, are from being applicable to such a case of the Church of
England. I do not now insist upon those reasons which might have been produced
to prove that the impositions of the Church of Rome are not unsinful, no nor
innocent of so high a degree of sin as might be greater than that of a
particular Church's refusing correspondence with another. The things which I
have suggested plainly show that the case will prove extremely different,
though we consider them barely as impositions, not as sinful impositions. And
to let our Romish Adversaries know that I have already foreseen the use they
would be likely to make of a discourse of this nature, and how wary I have
therefore been of using any reasons that might prove more than I intended, or
might hinder us from Principles sufficient for our own defense against them; I
shall desire them to consult my two short Discourses published with a design to
prepare the way for this Work. There they will find such principles of defense
of our Church against them, which will not clash with any thing said here,
which I verily believe true, and which being supposed true, I also conceive
very sufficient to vindicate our Church from their imputation of SCHISM for our
not communicating with them. And I know not what they can desire more who will
desire no more than what is equal.

mischief of SCHISM insisted on in this discourse, the Nullity of Orders and
Sacraments in the Persons guilty of separation, and the consequent Sacriledg of
those who shall presume in such a case to administer the Sacraments without
sufficient Authority: That they cannot charge us with, even by their own
Principles, purely on the account of the separation. They cannot deny but that
Bishops, even according to the design and practice of their own Church when we
began our Reformation, had all that power given them by them who made them
Bishops, which was requisite, not only for mainteining a Church at present, but
also for mainteining a Succession in it through all succeeding generations.
They had the power, not only of making other Priests who might administer the
Sacraments during their own lives, but also of making other Bishops who might
convey this power to others. Whoever they were that nominated the Persons,
whether the People, or the Clergy, or the Prince, or the Pope; yet still they
were the Bishops who performed the office of Consecration, which was that which
was then thought immediately to confer the power. It was then also believed
that the Orders given, and the Sacraments administered out of the Church by
Persons duly Authorized by such as had power to authorize them, were valid as
to the substance of the things, though uncanonical as to the Persons who
performed them. This plainly appeared in their dealings with the Greeks, and
with all such established Churches. They did not think it necessary to reordein
their Clergy when they came over to them. They cannot therefore for the same
reason deny but that our first Bishops who were consecrated in their own Church
had all that power given them at their Consecration, which was requisite for
the Succession since continued from them. As for the pretended uncanonicalness
of what they have done for mainteining this Succession, besides what might have
been said to show the unobligingness of Canons in their case; besides what
might have been said to show that they were performed canonically, even by the
then established Canons of their own Church; besides, that that is a pretense
wherein they are too much parties to be our competent Judges: However if all
they said to this purpose were as true as they pretend it to be, yet they can
show no such Canonical defect as themselves can, by their own Principles, judge
sufficient to invalidate the whole performance.

Argument that God never intended to oblige particular Churches to as great a
dependence on other Churches as that is wherein he has obliged Subjects to
depend on their own Churches, because by his contrivance of things it does not
follow that separating Churches must be left as destitute of the ordinary means
of salvation upon their separation from other Churches, as it has appeared,
from our Principles, that particular Subjects are, upon their separation from
their own Churches. It rather appears, that abating what obligations they have
brought upon themselves by their own compacts, God has made them equal, when he
has contrived no obligation in interest to make one yield rather than the
other. There is no way of judging who is in the right but by the intrinsic
merit of the cause, nor is there any presumption in favor of a particular
Church to presume the cause right because it is hers. So that there remains no
way of deciding such differences but that which is necessary and very proper
for those who are exactly equal. And for my part I do really believe that the
true original design of those compacts whereby particular Churches have
voluntarily submitted to restrictions of their original power, was only that
every particular Church might have her censures confirmed in all other Churches
in reference to those who were originally her own Subjects; not to gain a power
over any other Subjects but her own; nor to submit to any other power any
farther than was requisite to oblige her to observe the same equity to them,
which, whatever it may do in that Community of Churches which may be enabled,
by such compacts, to maintein a mutual correspondence; yet cannot in any equity
be so expounded as to make her absolutely subject to any particular Church of
that Community.

SCHISM in the sense now explained, I have indeed insisted on such Principles
which may seem something strange and surprising to the Age we live in, but
certainly much more likely to give light to the Subject than any I know of
promoted by any other, The advantages of the particular way of management of
this discourse.
and withal much more consonant to the sentiments of Catholic Antiquity. To
show that they are more agreeable to the sense of Catholic Antiquity is to be
the Subject of my Second Historical Part. That they are peculiarly fitted to
give light to this Subject above any other Hypothesis hitherto promoted, I have
shown in the last Chapter of this, whither the Reader may have recourse who
desires before his reading of the whole, to have a short account of the
peculiar advantages of these Principles. Besides to facilitate his
understanding of what is there said, and withal to let him understand in short
a Summary of the whole design, and the accurateness of the way by which I have
endeavored to manage it; I have prefixed a short account of it digested into
the several Propositions whereof it consists, and ranked in the natural order
wherein they follow each other with references also to the Chapters where they
are particularly proved. And if any desire to know in short what Topics are
insisted on for their proofs, those he may also find in the Contents of those
Chapters immediately subjoined. This way of ordering them will be of great use
both for him who has not yet read the whole Discourse to know what he is to
expect in it; and for him who has to recollect what influence every particular
discourse has upon the whole design. Besides it will be a great ease to the
Readers of different Principles. Each of them does grant things which others
deny. But by these references every one may know where to find that particular
Proposition discoursed which he particularly doubts of. This may serve for
those who are by all means willing to shorten their pains. Otherwise I should
rather entreat him who would be willing to bestow pains on a Subject of so
great importance to him, and so worthy of his pains, rather to read the whole,
which will best qualify him to judge of the particulars by reason of their
connection. The reason will appear more solid and convincing, when it is found
to hold good in all the train of consequences, than when it is applied only to
one particular.

greater importance than it is commonly conceived to be. The great Consequence
of the present controversy.
And this is but very necessary for that multitude of well-meaning Persons
among us who go indifferently to the Church or Conventicle, according as they
are affected to the Minister that officiates in either place. I will not
undertake to judge how far their good meaning may go to excuse them before God,
whilst they are inquisitive and desirous of conviction and cannot find it, but
it is certain it cannot alter the nature of the thing. If the thing they do be
a great sin, it is never the less so, because it is done with a good meaning,
though it may indeed be less imputed, whilst they sincerely seek for
information. The Crucifixion of our Savior was a great sin to the Jews, though
they did it ignorantly, and St. Paul calls himself the chief of sinners for
having persecuted the Church, though he was conscious of having done it out of
a Principle of zeal. Now if there be such a sin as SCHISM possible to be
committed, I do not see how the breach on both sides can be excused from it.
Either we must be guilty of it for exercising our Authority over them, if we
have no just title to such Authority, or they must be guilty of it for refusing
their obedience if we have. And if either side prove guilty, these men take the
infallible way to make themselves accessory to the guilt, whilst they
communicate with both. If our Communion be unlawful, it is certain that no
personal gifts, or goodness of a particular Minister among us can excuse them
for communicating with him in what they think to be unlawful. If our Communion
be lawful, it will then highly concern them to think how they can excuse
themselves for separating themselves from them whom they must all acknowledge to
have been once their lawful Ecclesiastical Governors, when the Schisms first
began; nay, for joining in opposite Communions with the professed Adversaries
of such Governors, and for refusing passive as well as active obedience.

sin of SCHISM be so piacular and mischievous as it must be if our Principles
should prove true, then certainly it will oblige them to a care of avoiding it
proportionable to the danger, What will follow from it.
not only of the sin it self, if they should prove guilty of it, but of our
discourses and reasonings, lest they may prove true. Where a great danger is
likely to befall men a little probability is thought sufficient to oblige them
to great caution. Though the proof should not be necessary, though it may prove
very possible that the thing may be otherwise, yet if it cannot be
satisfactorily answered, if it cannot be disproved, if there be not great
assurance of its falsehood, men think themselves, in all prudence, obliged to
keep on the securer side. The danger of the sin will oblige them to yield in
all things which are confessedly not dangerous, nay, in all things that are,
where the danger is not as great or as probable, though it were of sin, as
this. It is no sin but prudence to fall into a less sin for to avoid a greater
where both are really unavoidable. Not to say that a greater danger though on
less proof is rather to be avoided than a lesser danger or greater proof, where
the difference between the dangers is very considerable. And the danger lest
our proofs should hold will oblige them not to venture on a thing which, if
they should hold, must appear so very dangerous, but upon very good assurance
that they do not conclude the thing for which they are produced.

hold, how sad must their condition be who prove guilty of the sin of SCHISM
here described? The mischief of the condition of Schismatics, if our
Principles should prove true.
They must be guilty of disobedience to the Divine Government, which by the
Principles of Government is always counted greater than the violation of any
particular Laws. None of them, how momentous soever, can be of greater moment
than the Legislative power it self from whence they all derive their
obligation. They must be guilty of giving or abetting a Divine Authority in men
to whom God has never given such Authority; nay, in opposition to all the
Authority he has really established among men. They must be guilty of forging
Covenants in the name of God himself, and of counterfeiting the great Seals of
Heaven for the ratification of such Covenants. And what can be more Treasonable
by all Principles of Government? What is more provoking and more difficultly
pardonable than sins of so high presumption as these are? They must be guilty
of sinning against the Holy Ghost, and unto Death, and of the sins described in
the passages of the Epistle to the Hebrews, with which none do terrify the
consciences of ignorant unskilful Persons more frequently than they do. They
must be guilty of such sins which, as they need pardon more than any others, so
they do in the nature of the things themselves more effectually cut off the
offender from all hopes of pardon in an ordinary way. By being disunited from
the Church he loses his Union with Christ and all the Mystical benefits
consequent to that Union. He has thenceforward no title to the sufferings or
merits or intercessions of Christ, or any of those other blessings which were
purchased by those merits, or which may be expected from those Intercessions.
He has no title to pardon of sin, to the gifts or assistances of the blessed
Spirit, or to any promises of future rewards, though he should perform all
others parts of his duty besides this of reuniting himself again to Christ's
Mystical Body in a visible Communion. Till then there are no promises of
acceptance of any Prayers, which either he may offer for himself, or others may
offer for him. And how disconsolate must the condition be of such a Person? Who
would not think himself obliged to use all diligence, and to yield all possible
condescensions, rather than to fall into such a condition, or to continue in it?

kindly than be angry for being warned of a course so mischievous to themselves
as well as to the public, What will follow from hence.
so dangerous upon spiritual as well as worldly considerations. If they should
not be warned, their little apprehensions of danger would not make it less, but
it would make it less remediable. They are not likely to have a better title to
forgiveness of sins, or any other benefit of the Evangelical Covenant, but they
are less likely to qualify themselves for a title to them. And why should they
take it ill to be warned of their danger; when upon warning they may so easily
avoid it, only by returning to Catholic Unity? Why should they censure us as
uncharitable who force our selves on so unwelcome an office wherein we must
expect such censures, for thinking so hardly of their present condition, rather
than examine our reasons whether they have not reason to think as hardly of
themselves? If it should prove so, it were well they would consider that they
are the Persons principally concerned in the consequences of such discourses,
and then the truth will be more their interest than it is ours, and we cannot
show our Charity to them better than by warning them of such truths wherein
their greatest interests are so greatly concerned. If a Patient in a bodily
distemper should take the Physician for his enemy for thinking him distempered,
and should thereupon not only reject his Medicaments, but divert himself from
all reflections on his condition, how would they think it possible that such a
Patient should be cured of his distemper? I could heartily wish they would
consider how exactly this agrees with their own case.

hardly of so great Multitudes as are concerned in the consequences of the
present Discourse, I confess I should think so too, The Objection concerning
the multitudes concerned in the consequence of this Discourse. Answered.
if our hard thoughts had the least influence on the hardness of their
condition. I should think it cruelty to think hardly of any one, so far I
should be from excusing any hard thoughts concerning a Multitude. But if the
knowledge of their danger be the most likely means to secure them from it; if
more of them will come to understand their danger when they are warned of it by
others, than would if they were left to the ingenuity and sagacity of their own
reflections: It must be then the greatest cruelty to conceal our apprehensions
of their danger as it would be in the other case to reveal them. And the
greater the multitude is of them that are endangered, the more pitiable is
their case, and the more obliging a tender, compassionate, truly Christian
Spirit, to endeavor all he can for their relief. How can such a one who has
learned the true value of Souls from what his Lord has done and suffered to
save them, endure to see his Lords designs so frustrated, and such numbers of
Souls fall short of those favors which were designed for them by what he had
done and suffered for their Salvation? Could the danger of his Fathers Life
extort words from the dumb Son of Croesus? And can any Lover of the Father of
Spirits keep silence, when thousands of those Spirits are in danger of
perishing for want of seasonable information? To think that there are such
multitudes of those who unfeignedly believe the truth of the Christian Religion
who yet are destitute of the ordinary means of Salvation, required by that
Religion; to think how many more are like to be engaged on the same dangerous
courses in all those future generations wherein these SCHISMS may last, if they
be not timely obviated; to think how many of these poor Souls neither think of
any danger in the state of SCHISM, nor are sensible of the true stating of
those disputes which might in all likelihood convince them how nearly they are
concerned in that danger, who if they were but rightly informed and made
sensible of their danger would in all likelihood receive conviction and escape
the danger, at least would be more inquisitive, if they knew their present
course to be indeed so dangerous, if they should prove mistaken: To think I
say, on these things seriously must sure raise the zeal of him who has any zeal
of God in him, or any bowels of compassion for Souls, that is indeed, who has
any thing of the Spirit of Christianity. So that hitherto the multitude of them
who are concerned ought rather to be an inducement than a dissuasive to a
compassionate soul to let them see their danger.

multitude of those who are concerned in the consequences of this discourse,
for a charge against our modesty for dissenting from so great a multitude, in
thinking their condition so dangerous when they think it so secure, in
pretending to any thing new that such a multitude have not discovered before
us; though I know how little such an Objection becomes the Person of those who
are most of all concerned to make it, who make no scruple to practice and avow
this liberty of dissenting from greater multitudes than themselves, yet many
other considerations may be pleaded for our defense, even in this particular
also. First, the multitude though they may seem many when we confine our
thoughts to the narrow extents of our own Dominions, yet are really
inconsiderable in comparison of the whole Church, I do not say, only, of former
Ages, but even of this also wherein we live. And what immodesty can it be to
dissent from a multitude when we have so much greater a multitude to confront
against them? Next, this multitude it self are so disunited among themselves as
that no particular party will make a multitude in comparison of the whole. And
if they be united in this conclusion that their condition is not dangerous, it
is not from any common principles, but purely from common interest that they
are so united. It is plain that the different parties do state the question of
SCHISM, and their own defense from the charge of it very differently, and are
obliged to do so by the different interests of their causes. So that no one set
of Principles can pretend even to the patronage of a multitude. And sure a
Union in Negative conclusions without any Union in Principles to prove those
conclusions, a Union not of unprejudiced Judgment, but plainly suspicious of
common interest, a Union of innovaters against the concurrent sense and
Principles too of all Antiquity, cannot have any thing very venerable in it for
the recommendation of its Authority, though a higher deference were due to
Authority than can be allowed by the common Principles of the Reformation.

multitude of those whose Authority is really considerable in this case, I mean
that of Catholic Antiquity, I hope hereafter to make it appear in my Second
Part, that I have said nothing as to my general charge but upon their common
Suffrages and Principles too. And why should we presume a multitude of
innovaters better acquainted with the principles and practices of the Apostles
than they who had so much better advantages of knowing them by living so much
nearer to their times? I do not prejudg against their actual knowing some
things better than the ancients. But if there can be no general presumption in
favor of them, but the enquiry, in what particulars they do so, be resolved
into particular information; that is enough to overthrow their Authority as a
presumption against us in point of modesty, which is all for which I am
concerned at present. Besides that this acknowledgment that Persons of less
advantages for finding the truth in general, and therefore of less Authority,
may yet be so happy as to light upon better information in some particulars, is
that which might be a very satisfactory plea, (and by them against whom we
plead it undeniable,) for our dissent from them in these particulars, though we
had been more destitute otherwise of Authority for our dissent than indeed were
are. And to know when the case may prove so that Persons more unlikely may
discover some particular truths which have escaped the observation of others
who were otherwise much more able to have made the discovery, a better rule can
hardly be given in general, than that this may be then expected when either
some false Principle was taken up unwarily at first by them who, (though they
were themselves as subject to humane frailties as others, yet by their being
the first) had the Authority with their Successors as to recommend them as
Principles to posterity, so that all their future enquiries were only into
their consequences, not into the truth of such Principles themselves; or when
some other means of information were made use of, which either were not known,
or not made use of, by those more able Persons. Thus it is very justly
pleadable against the Romanists, that whilst they made unwritten traditions of
equal Authority with the written word of God, and the present sense of their
Occidental Church the standard of Tradition without recourse to the monuments
of the Primitive times, and admitted withal so many incompetent ways of
bringing in new opinions, as new pretended revelations attested by
justly-suspicious miracles, not to mention the Authority of the Pope, whereby
it came to be in the power of a few to impose upon the whole; it could not be
admired that the further they pursued the consequences of these Principles, the
more they should prove mistaken, and that meaner Persons who had the happiness
to examine things by more certain Principles should discover many things which
they had overseen. And as to the means of information, that those Ages of
Popery wherein their errors were introduced, wanted many such means with which
God had blessed the World at the beginning of the Reformation. Such were the
edition of many of the unquestionable Records of the Primitive times, the study
of the tongues wherein the Scriptures and those Primitive Monuments were
written, the exacter skill in Ecclesiastical Antiquity by which they were
better enabled to distinguish counterfeit from genuine Writers. With these
assistances it could not be admired if meaner Persons made greater discoveries
than great multitudes of others who were otherwise more sagacious, if they
wanted them.

Principles and as to the means of information. As to Principles, that one
great Principle by them opposed to the other extreme of the Romanists, That the
Scripture alone is the adaequate Digest of all Ecclesiastical Practices as well
as of matters of belief, was by rational consequence like to lead them into
multitudes of errors, into a contempt of Authority, into a rejection of
Ecclesiastical Constitutions prudently fitted to circumstances of present
practice, into an impossibility of Ecclesiastical Peace, till all sorts of
Persons, Laics as well as Clergymen, may be agreed on which side the Scripture
is clear in many things whereof (if this Principle should prove false) no
account at all is to be expected in the Scripture. Now the mistake of these men
is not in any thing that concerns their abilities, but merely in their
infelicity in lighting on such a very fallacious principle. They judge of the
consequences, and judge rightly, and I am so far of their mind that these and
the like things are indeed just consequences from that Principle. But the
Principle it self they take up as a Principle, that is precariously, either
without any reason at all, or upon such reasons as could signify nothing with
any but such as are already possessed with a great favor to it. They do not
ordinarily dispute it without some indignation at the supposed impiety of him
who questions it, and, by their whole behavior, clearly show that it is rather
their affection and the insensible prejudices of education that has engaged
them in defense of it than any show of reason either that it is true, or that
it is impious to question it. And can we think it any reflection on the
abilities of such, to be insensibly carried away into a belief of such
Principles, when they make so little use of their abilities in judging
concerning them?

means of information, that our Adversaries generally use such means of
understanding the Scripture, as must necessarily leave them ignorant of many
things which yet might certainly have been designed by the sacred Writers, and
by the Holy Ghost who inspired them. Which is one general way of their making
disputes endless, by requiring a resolution in such cases wherein their own
unwary stating of things have made them incapable of a resolution. They are for
expounding the Scriptures only by themselves, especially in matters doctrinal;
without allusion to the sense of those times in terms of Art which were plainly
suited to the capacities of them who used those terms; without allusion to the
Notions and Doctrines of those times which were either confirmed or confuted by
the sacred Writers; without allusion to the whole Systemes of Principles then
maintained, though they are very forward to expound difficult obscure passages
by their modern Systemes, without so much as offering to show that any then
maintained them, which yet they call expounding it by the Analogy of Faith;
without allusion to the Systemes of the immediately succeeding Ages of the
Church, who certainly took up their Systeme from what they understood of the
Apostles minds from their Writings, and Preachings and Conversations, to whose
capacities the Sacred Writings themselves were more immediately accommodated
than they were to ours. Upon these and the like Principles most of those things
are grounded which may look like Paradoxes in my Expositions of the Scripture.
And I shall say no more at present in defense of them, because something has
been suggested to that purpose in several parts of this discourse, but
principally and professedly in my Prolegomena to my Tutors Book de
Obstinatione, whither I must again by all means refer my Reader who shall be
curious to know what I have to say in favor of these seeming Novelties. All
that I shall at present remark to my present purpose is, that by either not
thinking on these things, or by utterly neglecting them if they did think of
them, they must have deprived themselves of all possibility of understanding
those Scriptures which were not intelligible without them. And then what wonder
is it that many things may be cleared by these assistances which they had never
thought on? nay, that they should be cleared by one who had been incomparably
less able to clear them, if he, as well as they, had wanted these assistances?

give them all they can, with any show of reason, desire, Suppose I were as
much mistaken, as it the interest of their cause to wish I should be; suppose
their condition were not indeed so dangerous as I conceive it to be: Yet why
should they take it ill to be warned of a danger which I thought to be a
danger, though I were mistaken in thinking so? Can I do otherwise if I would
let them see my hearty well-wishes for their welfare? Can I do it more fairly
or with less suspicion of imposing on them than by tendering my reasons why I
think their condition dangerous, to their impartial consideration? And what
hurt is done them, if my reasons should prove less convincing? Must it not be a
great satisfaction to themselves to be assured that those reasons are not
convincing which make others think their condition dangerous? Must it not be
much more satisfactory even to themselves to know the uttermost of those
reasons, than only to be left to indefinite suspicions, which usually, in
matters wherein men's fears are concerned, make men apt to think they may be
more solid than they appear to be upon enquiry? No doubt they would think so
who were as serious and sincere for their spiritual security as they are for
their temporal. And would it not become their Charity, and their concernment
for the public peace, to satisfy us that our fears are groundless, and that
we may join with them on easier terms to which themselves may be more willing
to condescend? These are so useful and excellent designs as that no good Spirit
could think his pains and diligence ill bestowed in knowing and examining what
we have to say upon this Subject, how weak or fallacious soever it might prove
upon examination.

odium of those who are otherwise minded, I confess I am likely to be the less
solicitous on my own account by how much I am the less conscious of having
deserved it. I know our Savior himself had the like return of his well-meant
endeavors. I know it has always been the fate of Peacemakers and faithful
Monitors. And I hope I shall always be heartily willing to suffer more than
this is like to signify to me, in so good a cause. The best is, I cannot
foresee any occasion of such a trial from truly pious and ingenuous Persons who
will understand before they censure, and who will reflect on the considerations
now mentioned. For others I cannot think them so competent Judges, nor do I see
any reason to reverence their censures.

defense of a Sermon preached on this Subject before the Lord Mayor. Mr. John
Sharp on Romans xiv.19.
But having made some entrance on it, I did not think it so convenient to be
confined to another method in delivering my own sentiments, nor to concern any
particular Author in the Controversy, but rather to undertake the whole
Subject in a method most natural to my own conceptions of it. And the rather
so, because most of the Answerers Objections would have no place on my way of
stating the Controversy, and I could not think it worth the while to spend
time on such things as were grounded on misunderstandings. I speak not this
with the least design of disparaging the performance of the Adversary, for the
misunderstandings are no other than such as are common to him with the
generality of the dissenting parties. Otherwise his management is more accurate
for the destructive part, (which is the Talent of those Persons) than usual,
and with better temper to his Adversary. However these considerations being
approved by several of my worthy Friends to whom I communicated them, and among
others by the Author of that excellent Sermon, I easily obtained his leave to
proceed in my own way. Yet I thought it convenient withal to give this warning
of it, that the Answerer, whoever he be, may know that his Objections have been
allowed for in my Hypothesis, though they be not expressly mentioned, and that
he may not look on the silence of his Adversary as an Argument of any neglect
of him.

Reply, I shall humbly desire* That he would keep to the cause, avoiding all
personal reflections as far as the cause will permit; Requests to him who shall
think of a Reply.
That he will not take any advantage against the propriety of particular
expressions, in which it is as usual for Adversaries to be mistaken in
misunderstanding the expressions, as for the Author who has used them; That he
would rather judge concerning my particular expressions by the exigency of my
Cause and Principles, which will be the surest way, not only to assure himself
of my meaning, but to make his Arguments against such expressions conclusive
against my cause it self; That he would be pleased to remember how easy it is
to object against any thing Arguments more plausibl^ than those are on which
the vulgar believe the truth it self; and therefore that he would object
nothing but what a serious impartial enquirer after the truth, would think fit
to be urged as an Objection; nothing but what he thinks true; nothing but he
thinks he has reason to think so; nothing but what he is willing to stand by
the consequences of, if it should be retorted against him; no inconvenience of
the thing which he opposes but such as may be greater than the conveniences of
it; no reasons but such as may have greater evidence of their truth than those
have which are produced for the thing which he opposes; that he would oblige
the world with another Scheme of Principles suited to his own cause, (which may
not only solve the Phenomenon accounted for by ours, but may also not be liable
to those Objections which he conceives incapable of a solution by our
Hypothesis) rather than only content himself with the Person of an Objector;
and that all may be managed with those commendable presumptions which all
disinterested Persons do commend for the securest guides where the reasonings
are less evident, a hearty love of truth, of peace, and of Government, and such
a love of these as may be prudent, as may secure the practicableness of what
they pretend to love, without which it is in vain to love, or to pretend to
love them.

advantages to the common cause, which methinks may prevail with any who wishes
well to it, not to be difficult in suffering himself to be persuaded to observe
them. We shall avoid many things which the Reader, who is only concerned for
the cause, and for his own conscience, will certainly think impertinent. We
shall on both sides be better qualified for finding the truth, and leave the
way more open for mutual ingenuity. We shall neither prejudice our Readers nor
our selves to judge otherwise than the merit of the cause, and our own
convictions of it shall oblige us. We shall intermingle nothing unbecoming the
seriousness wherewith matters of this nature ought to be handled. We shall thus
be surest to improve the common stock of knowledge with which the world has been
hitherto acquainted in this matter. I have endeavored what I was able to
observe these things my self in the following Discourse, and shall be willing
to be corrected, if I have failed in any of them. The things themselves are so
intrinsecally reasonable, as that I cannot doubt but they who are reasonable
will readily accept of these conditions, and will withal be so grateful to the
unengaged Reader as that even he who were less solicitous for truth, should yet
think himself concerned, even to rival me in the glory of observing them. Not
to mention that it is indeed more glorious to be overcome by truth than to
obtein the cause we contend for.

The general Proposition to be proved in this Work.
obliged to submit to all unsinful conditions of the Episcopal Communion where
they live, if imposed by the Ecclesiastical Governors thereof; separate
themselves, or suffer themselves to be excluded from Communion by such
Governors for such a refusal of submission, guilty of the sin of SCHISM.

Here are two Parts.

I. That all are obliged to submit to all unsinful conditions of the Episcopal
Communion where they live, a
if imposed by the Ecclesiastical Government thereof.

This proved by these two Degrees:

1. That the supposition, of their being less secure of Salvation out of this
Episcopal Communion than in it, is sufficient to prove them obliged to submit
to all terms, not directly sinful, however unexpedient, rather than separate
themselves, or suffer themselves to be excluded, from this Communion. Chapter I..
7, 8, 9, 10.

2. That there is indeed less security of salvation to be had even on
performance of the moral conditions. of Salvation, out of this Episcopal
Communion than in it.

This proved from two things:

(1.) That they cannot be so well assured of their salvation in the use of
extraordinary as of ordinary means; nay, that they being left to
extraordinaries is a condition either very hazardous, or, at least very
uncomfortable at present, whatever it may prove hereafter. Chapter II.

(2.) That these ordinary means of Salvation, are, in respect of every
particular Person, confined to the Episcopal Communion of the place he lives
in, as long as he lives in it.

This proved from two things.

(I.) That these ordinary means of Salvation are confined to the external
Communion of the visible Church.

This proved from four things.

1. We cannot be assured that God will do for us what is necessary for our
Salvation on his part, otherwise than by his express Promises that he will do
it. Chapter III.. 1, 2.

2. The ordinary means how we may assure our selves of our interest in his
Promises is by our interest in his Covenant, by which they are conveyed to us.
Chapter III. from. 5. to the end.

3. The only ordinary means, by which we may assure our selves of our interest
in this Covenant with him, is by our partaking in these external Solemnities by
which this Covenant is transacted and maintained. Chapter VI, V, VI, VII.

4. The participation in these external Solemnities with any Legal Validity is
only to be had in the external Communion of the visible Church. Chapter VIII.

(II.) That this visible Church, to whose external Communion these ordinary
means of Salvation are confined, is no other than the Episcopal Communion of
the place where any one lives, whilst he lives there.

This proved in both parts.

(1.) That the visible Church to whose external Communion these ordinary means
of salvation are confined is the Episcopal Communion.

This proved by these Degrees.

I. That Salvation is not ordinarily to be expected without an external
participation of the Sacraments.

1. Negatively, Not by those other popular means which ordinary Persons are apt
to trust in to the neglect of the Sacraments, that is, 1. Not by hearing the
Word Preached. Chapter IX. 2. Not by private Prayer, nor ind^ed by any, out of the
Communion of the Church. Chapter X.XI, XII, XIII, XIV.


2. Positively, That Salvation is ordinarily to be expected only by this
external participation of the Sacraments.

1. Proved concerning Baptism. Chapter XV. 2. Concerning the Lords Supper. Chapter XVI,
XVII.
II. That the validity of the Sacraments depends on the Authority of the
persons by whom they are administered. Chapter XVIII.

III. No other Ministers have the Authority of administering the Sacraments but
only they who receive their Orders in the Episcopal Communion.

This proved by four Degrees.

1. That the Authority of administering the Sacraments must be derived from God.
Chapter XIX.

2. That though it be derived from God, yet it is not so derived without the
mediation of those men to whom it was, at first, committed. Chapter XX.

3. That it cannot be so derived from those men to whom it was, at first,
committed without a continued succession of Persons orderly receiving Authority
from those who had Authority to give it them from those first times of the
Apostles to ours at present. Chapter XXI.

4. That this Authority is not now to be expected any where but in the
Episcopal Communion. Chapter XXII, XXIII, XXIV, XXV.

(2.) That the Episcopal Communion to which every particular Person is obliged
to join himself, as he would enjoy the ordinary means of his own particular
salvation, is the Episcopal Communion of the place wherein he lives, whilst he
lives in it. Chapter XXVI.

II. That the nature of this Obligation to unsinful conditions of their
Episcopal Communion is such as will make them guilty of the sin of SCHISM, b
who, rather than they will submit to such conditions, either separate
themselves, or suffer themselves to be excluded from Communion by their
respective Diocesan Ordinaries. Chapter XXVII.

INTRODUCTION.
THE CONTENTS.
The concurrent sense of all, Irreligious as well as Religious, concerning the
present necessity of our Ecclesiastical peace, and the great mischief of our
Ecclesiastical Divisions.. 1. The management of Religious Controversies with a
design of peace, will best answer the qualifications of an useful
Controvertist.. 2. It is most agreeable with the most prudent Rules of managing
Controversies either for finding the truth it self, or, where humane frailty
might fail of that, for making the error innocent and excusable.. 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. What influence this design of peace would have particularly in those
Controversies which are debated between us and our Nonconforming Brethren. How
far the unpeaceableness of a Position of this kind may be urged as an Argument
of its falsehood, and on the contrary.. 8 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. That our present undertaking is not
unsuitable to the Office of a peacemaker.. 30, 31, 32. How much the peace of
the Church is concerned in this Controversy concerning SCHISM. How differently
the Notion of SCHISM must be stated by them who make the Church a Body
Politic, and by them who make it not so. Our Adversaries Notions of SCHISM,
and of the duty of a peacemaker, exactly fitted to the supposition of the
Churches being no Body Politic, and indeed very rational on that supposition.
What is to be thought of the Independent ^enet of placing all Ecclesiastical
Authority originally in the people, and how far that will clear their practices
from the charge of SCHISM.. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. How the Notion of
SCHISM must be stated on supposition of the Church's being a Body Politic..
41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51. An account of the Division of this
Work into the Rational and Historical parts. Some intimations concerning the
usefulness and design of the Historical.. 52. page 1. CHAP. I. 1. That for
proving our Obligation to enter into the Communion of the visible Church it is
not requisite to prove that we must otherwise be excluded from all hopes of
Salvation, but it is abundantly sufficient to make it appear, that we cannot be
so well assured of it. This proved as to both parts: 1. As to the Negative,
That it is not requisite for this purpose to prove that we must otherwise be
excluded from all hopes of Salvation.. I, II, III, IV, V VI. 2. As to the
positive part, That, for proving this Obligation to enter into the external
Communion of the visible Church, it is sufficient to show that, without such an
external Communion with it, we cannot so well be assured of our Salvation; and
that this supposition, of our less security without it, is sufficient to prove
us obliged to submit to all terms not directly sinful, however inexpedient, in
order to the procuring this external Communion.. VII, VIII, IX, X. An
Application of what has been said in this Chapter to the Adversaries.. XI, XII.
p. 55. CHAP. II. The second Head, That for proving this want of so solid
assurance of the welfare of particular Persons out of Ecclesiastical Communion
as may be had in it, it will be sufficient to show that, however God may
provide for the Salvation of particular Persons, in an extraordinary way,
without this external Communion, yet, that this is a case indeed rare and
extraordinary, and not easily to be expected, and therefore not to be trusted
with any confidence; and that, at least, the ordinary means of Salvation are
confined to the external Communion of the visible Church. The difference
betwixt the ordinary and extraordinary means of Salvation.. I, II, III, IV. The
former Head proved in both particulars. 1. That we cannot be so well assured of
our Salvation in the use of extraordinary, as of ordinary means. The
extraordinary means whereby we may be assured of our Salvation are conjectures
concerning the Divine Uncovenanted goodness. Concerning these it is proved. 1.
That the assurance grounded on these conjectures is not such as can afford any
solid comfort to the Person concerned. The extreme difficulty of making
application of what might be concluded from this Divine Uncovenanted goodness
to particular cases.. V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X. The particulars necessary for
assurance in this case are such as God is not obliged to by his Uncovenanted
goodness.. XI, XII, XIII, XIV, XV, XVI.XVII. 2. The comfort that might
otherwise have been expected from these conjectures is not comparable to that
which may be had from those general ordinary means which God has provided for
by express Revelation. This proved by three Degrees.. XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI,
XXII. 3. These expectations from extraordinaries not seasonable in our
Adversaries case who might obtein the ordinary means by concessions not
sinful.. XXIII. 4. The relief by extraordinary pretenses to Gods Uncovenanted
goodness must needs be rendered more difficult since the establishment of
ordinaries.. XXIV, XXV, XXVI, XXVII. p. 66. CHAP. III. The ordinary means
whereby we may be assured of Salvation must be promises conveyed to us in a
Legal way by the Solemnities of a Covenant.. I, II. 2. The ordinary means of
Salvation, at least, whereby we may be satisfied of it, and receive any comfort
from it, are confined to the external Communion of the visible Church; and that
the Episcopal Church under whose Jurisdiction any one lives is that visible
Church out of which these ordinary means of Salvation are not to be bad by any
whilst he lives under that Jurisdiction. This to be proved in two Parts: 1.
That these ordinary means of Salvation are confined to the external Communion
of the visible Church.. III, IV. This proved by three Degrees: 1. The ordinary
means whereby we may assure our selves that we in particular have any interest
in the Divine Promises is by assuring our selves that we in particular are in
Covenant with God.. V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, XIV, XV, XVI, XVII,
XVIII, XIX. p. 89. CHAP. IV. 2. The only ordinary means whereby we may assure
our selves of our interest in this Covenant is by our partaking in the external
Solemnities whereby this Covenant is transacted and maintained. This cleared in
two particulars: 1. That the partaking of these external Solemnities of
initiation into, and maintenance of, this Evangelical Covenant is the only
ordinary means of procuring and mainteining a Legal interest in it.. I, II. An
Objection urged and Answered. The Assertion proved from Gods actual
establishment.. III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI. The same proved from the
reason of the thing. 1. God is concerned to take care that these external
Solemnities be punctually observed as he is a Covenanter.. XII, XIII, XIV, XV,
XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII, XXIV, XXV, XVI. p. 109. CHAP. V.
2. God is also concerned to see the same external Solemnities observed as he is
a Governor. 1. He is as a Governor concerned to confederate us into a Body
Politic. 1. That he may thus se^ure the performance of his own will. The great
usefulness of the distinction betwixt God as a Governor and as a Covenanter..
I, II, III. The forementioned point proved.. IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X. 2.
That it may thus appear, even to men, that his will is performed by us because
it is his will. How necessary this is for Government. How necessary a visible
Society is for making this appear to others.. XI, XII, XIII, XIV, XV. 2. He is,
as a Governor, concerned to oblige us to the performance of our Duty by such
means as may prove most likely to prevail with us for its actual performance..
XVI, XVII, XVIII. p. 131. CHAP. VI. Both the ends now mentioned concerning God
as a Governor are more likely to be atteined by admitting us to the benefits
of the Covenant by the external Solemnities of it than otherwise.. I. 1. That
of confederating us into a Body Politic. A short account of the usefulness of
the whole Hypothesis promoted in this discourse for this purpose.. II, III, IV,
V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, XIII, XIV, XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX,
XXI, XXII, XXIII, XXIV, XXV. 2. That of securing our performance of Duty..
XXVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXIX, XXX, XXXI, XXXII, XXXIII. p. 138, CHAP. VII. 2.
That, at least, our partaking in the external Solemnities of this Evangelical
Covenant is the only ordinary means whereby we may be satisfied of our title to
the Covenant it self.. I, II. This proved by three Degrees: 1. That, for our
satisfaction, it is requisite that we have positive Arguments for us, as well
as that there appear no positive Arguments against us.. III, IV, V, VI, VII. 2.
That no Arguments can comfort but such as may externally appear, and so be
capable of being judged of by the Persons concerned.. VIII. 3. Our partaking of
the external Solemnities of the Covenant, is, at least the only Argument
appearing to us whereby we can be assured of any Legal title to the benefits of
it.. IX, X, XI, XII. A further presumption for proving the same thing.. XIII.
p. 156. CHAP. VIII. 3. The participation in these external Solemnities, with
any legal validity, is only to be had in the external Communion of the visible
Church.. I. The Church as taken for the body of the Elect incapable of being
communicated with externally.. II, III. That all things here contrived are
exactly fitted for a visible Church, and no other.. IV, V. p. 163. CHAP. IX. 2.
That, in reference to the duty of particular Persons, the visible Church,
wherein they may expect to find these ordinary means, is the Episcopal in
opposition to all other Societies not Episcopally governed; and particularly
that Episcopal Communion under whose Jurisdiction the Persons are supposed to
live.. I. 1. The Episcopal Communion in opposition to all other Societies not
Episcopally governed is that visible Church to whose external Communion these
ordinary means of grace are confined. This proved by several degrees.. II. 1.
The ordinary means of grace are now confined to the Sacraments. Two things
premised. The former.. III, IV. The later.. V. The thing to be proved.. VI.
Proved two ways: 1. Exclusively, of other means of gaining that Grace which is
necessary to Salvation besides the Sacrament.. VII, VIII. 1. Of the Word
Preached. Some things premised.. IX, X, XI, XII. 1. Much of the Grace conveyed
by the Word Preached in the Primitive times was undoubtedly proper to those
times, and not fit to be expected now.. XIII, XIV, XV. 2. There were reasons
proper to those times why such Grace might be expected then, which will not
hold now, for the conviction of the Persons who then received the Spirit.. XVI.
3. There were also other proper reasons necessary for the conviction of those
with whom they had to deal.. XVII. 4. That Grace which might otherwise have
been expected in attending on the Word Preached, is yet not so probably to be
expected in the Preaching of Persons unauthorized; especially if they Preach in
opposition to those who are Legally invested with Spiritual Authority.. XVIII,
XIX. 5. It is yet further doubtful whether the Grace, which which may now be
ordinarily expected at any Preaching whatsoever, be so great as to be able to
supply the want of Sacraments, at least so great, as to secure the Salvation of
those who enjoy this Ordinance whilst they want the Sacraments?. XX XXI. 6. It
is also very doubtful, whether all the Grace which is supposed to accompany the
Word Preached be any more than what is necessary to dispose the Auditors to
receive and believe the truth of the Doctrines Preached to them? or whether
there be any the least ground to believe that they shall there receive that
further Assistance which is necessary to help them to practice what they have
thus received and believed?. XXII, XXIII, XXIV. 7. This first Grace of
persuasion, if we suppose it alone to accompany the Word Preached, will fully
answer the design of the Word Preached. XXV. 8. The Grace here received seems
to be only some actual influences of the Spirit (which wicked men may receive
whilst they continue so, and which therefore cannot alone be thought
sufficient for Salvation) not the Person of the Divine Spirit himself.. XXVI.
p. 166. CHAP. X. The exclusive Part proved. 2. as to Prayer, That neither this
alone, nor the Grace which may be expected in the use of it, are sufficient for
Salvation without the Sacraments. The Objection proposed,. I, II. The Answer.
1. That no Prayers can expect acceptance with God but such as suppose the use
of the ordinary means, and consequently of the Sacraments if they should prove
such.. III. 2. No Prayers can expect acceptance which are offered by a sinner,
continuing in the state of sin, even at the same time when he offers them.. IV.
3. It is more to be considered what is the ordinary means appointed by God,
than what is ordinarily observed by the best and wisest men.. V. 4. It is no
way safe for us to venture on our own Judgments, concerning the design of God
in instituting the Sacraments, to neglect them. This proved by several degre^^.
It is hard to know the true design of the Sacraments. VI. They are not sure
that raising Devotion by the sensible representations was the principal design
of these Sacraments.. VII. They cannot assure themselves that this use of the
sensible representations was the only, or the principal end of the Sacraments..
VIII. Though they were sure of these things, yet they have no reason whereby to
be assured that God will be pleased with their taking upon them to judge of his
designs, and by that means allowing themselves the liberty of paying their
obedience at their own discretion.. IX. 5. Another design of the Sacraments has
been proved, the confederating Subjects into a Body Politic, and the obliging
Subjects in it to a dependence on their Governors. It is no way convenient
that any should be excused from these establishments upon pretenses to
perfection. They who were really perfect would not make this use of such
pretenses for their own sake.. X. They would not do it for the sake of the
public.. XI, XII, XIII. They would not do it on account of the Divine actual
establishment, and the Divine assistances conveyed by the Sacraments, which are
necessary for perfection of the Person.. XIV. And of his Prayer.. XV. 6. The
Scripture no where allows such a degree of Perfection atteinable in this life,
as can in reason excuse from the reason of the Obligation to Ecclesiastical
Assemblies. All Members of the Church need the gifts of each other.. XVI. They
need particularly those gifts which belong to Government.. XVII. All the other
Members need the Head, which cannot be understood of Christ, but of Persons
eminently gifted.. XVIII. This Head not a Head of Dignity only, but also of
influence, and Authority.. XIX. Though they needed not the gifts of others, yet
they are obliged to join themselves in Ecclesiastical Societies, in regard of
the good they may do to others. They are obliged to this as Platonists, and as
Christians.. XX. p. 191. CHAP. XI. 7. The Scripture gives us no encouragement
to believe that any Prayers shall be heard which are made out of the Communion
of the Church, or even in the behalf of those that are so, excepting those
which are made for their Conversion. This proved from St. John who was the only
Apostle who lived to see the case of separation.. I. St. Joh. xvii.9.. II.
Where by being given to Christ is meant a being given by external Profession.
III. By the World all they are meant who were out of the visible Society of the
Professors of the Christian Doctrine.. IV, V. They are said to be in the World
purely for this reason, because they did not keep to the Society of the
Church.. VI. The same thing proved from 1 St. Joh. v. concerning the sin unto
Death. The Argument according to the Alexandrian MS.. VII. According to the
vulgar reading. The sin unto Death is leaving the Orthodox Party. VIII, IX, X,
XI. The same thing proved from 2 St. Joh. 10, 11.. XII. Pardon possible for
Persons out of the Church's Communion upon their admission into it, according
to the Doctrine of those times, but much more difficult for Relapsers than
others. The later part proved from 2 Pet. ii.21.. XIII. And from Heb x.25, 26,
27.. XIV, XV. And from Heb. xii.15, 17. 1 John v.16.. XVI. And from other
Arguments.. XVII, XVIII. The actual practice of the Primitive Church not to
pray for spiritual benefits for those who were not actual Members of the
Church's Communion.. XIX, XX. An Application of what has been said.. XXI. Obj.
That these things are spoken of a total relapse from Christianity, not from one
party of Christians to another.. XXII. That Life was properly ascribed to the
true Christ as the Messiah according to the Notions of the ordinary Jews..
XXIII and according to the sense of the generality of the first Converts to
Christianity. That the (...) was thought to be the proper Principle of Life..
XXIV. That the Messiah as Messiah was to be the (...) also.. XXV. Answ. 1. It
were well our Brethren would allow the same candor in expounding other Texts
produced by them as they do in these produced against them.. XXVI. 2. It is not
likely that the Antichrists of those times did generally deny the true Christ
to be so.. XXVII, XXVIII, XXIX. 3. Whatever the occasion was, yet the reasoning
used in those disputes is to prove their being separated from Christ from their
being separated from the external Communion of the visible Church.. XXX. p.
212. CHAP. XII. 8. This very pretense of absteining from the external
Ordinances under the pretense of Perfection seems to have been taken up, even
in those Primitive Ages. The Philosophical N^tions of those Ages concerning the
worship of the Supreme Deity.. I. How this Hypothesis was received first into
the Elective Philosophy, thence taken up by the Hellenistical Jews and from
them to the first Converts to Christianity.. II. The several reasonings of the
Primitive Christians that might make them, in interest, favorable to this
Hypothesis.. III. Particularly their pretending to a Mystical Priesthood might
make them less solicitous for their dependence on the Levitical external
Priesthood.. IV. Instances of several like mistakes of those times in reasoning
from Mystical titles.. V. How the Genius of this Philosophy has inclined men to
this way of reasoning, wherever it has prevailed, even among our modern
Enthusiasts.. VI. Inference 1. That what the Apostles did resolve in this
particular, they did resolve with a particular design upon our Adversaries
case.. VII. That the prudential establishments of the Apostles are sufficiently
secure.. VIII. Inf. 2. Hence may appear the insecurity of this way of arguing
in general, from Mystical Titles to the neglect of external Observances.. IX,
X, Inf. 3. It plainly appears to have been against the design of the Legislator
in the very case of the Jews from whom the Christians borrowed it.. XI. Inf. 4.
That the whole contrivance of things by the Apostles plainly supposes that they
did also not allow of this plea for excusing any from the public ordinances..
XII. Inf. 5. The Philosophers themselves never intended this plea for their
exemption from the Mysteries and external Rites of Initiation then used, to
which the Sacraments are answerable among Christians.. XIII, XIV. Inf. 6. The
great design of this way of arguing was to excuse themselves from paying any
external worship to the supreme being, and so destructive to the very
foundation of the Christian Religion.. XV. And this very rationally on the
Hypothesis then received.. XVI. But the reason of this Argument does not hold
against those exteritors which are observed by the Christian institution..
XVII. It is very probable that our Adversaries case is particularly spoken to
in Heb. x.22, 23.. XVIII. p. 247. CHAP. XIII. Lastly, This sin of withdrawing
from the public Assemblies, on any pretense whatsoever, is highly condemned in
the Scriptures, and the condition of Persons guilty of it is described as
extremely dangerous.. I. This proved from Heb. vi. The design of the sacred
Authors in those kinds of discourses is to warn the Persons with whom they had
to deal, against Lap^^s, not, from a good Life, but, from the true Communion..
II.III. This proved particularly to be the design of this place. Illumination
put for Baptism, both because of the interest Baptism gave them in Christ who
was the true Light.. IV. And in regard of the visible Glory which then seems to
have accompanied Baptism, in which regard this title was more likely to have
been taken up in the Apostles Age than afterward.. V. How properly this title
was given it as a lesser Purgative Mystery. Fire the most Purgative Element,.
VI. And that by which the Purgativeness of our Saviors Baptism had been before
particularly described.. VII. The other Expressions of this Text applied to
Baptism.. VIII. That separating from the visible Communion of the Church was a
breach of their Baptismal Obligations proved from the design of the Baptisms of
those times. Baptism a solemnity of admission into their Schools, and an
obligation to adhere to the Master.. IX. And not only to the first Masters, but
to the lawful Successors to their Chairs.. X. The dishonor to Christ by
falling away mentioned in the Text to be understood only interpretatively. How
this was proper to the Case of Desertors in those times.. XI, XII. How it is
applicable to our present Adversaries.. XIII. The punishment of this crime
mentioned in the Text.. XIV. The Application of this also to our present
Adversaries.. XV. What it is to baptize in the name of the Spirit.. XVI, XVII.
What is meant by the impossibility to r^new the Lapsers here spoken of.. XVIII.
An Objection.. XIX. Answered.. XX. Application to our present Adversaries..
XXI, XXII. p. 267. CHAP. XIV. The danger of the sin of separation and the
difficulty of its pardonableness are very prudent and lawful reasons for
bearing with a lesser sin that is more easily pardonable.. I, II. What is meant
by grieving Gods Spirit, and how it comes to be unpardonable.. III, IV. Two
influences of the Spirit resisted by the Israelites.. V. This applied to the
state of the Gospel. How the Christians were likely to understand these things
according to the Mystical way of expounding the Old Testament which prevailed
among them.. VI. Our Savior used herein a way of speaking notorious to the
Jews.. VII. Grieving the Spirit the same with grieving of Christ.. VIII. 1. As
to the testimony which the Spirit gave him by miracles.. IX. How our Saviors
threatening was fulfilled.. X. The sin against the Holy Ghost a resisting of the
Gospel Dispensation.. XI. 2. Murdering of the Prophets a sin against the Holy
Ghost as he is particularly a Spirit of Prophecy.. XII. This particularly
applied to our Savior and the state of the Gospel.. XIII. 3. Resisting the
influences of the Holy Ghost in us. Applied to the Jews.. XIV. to the
Christians.. XV. According to the Hellenistical Philosophy.. XVI, XVII, XVIII.
4. Resisting the Government of the Church which was then ordered by the
Spirit.. XIX. Separation from the Canonical Assemblies of the Church a sin
against the Holy Ghost.. XX. Concerning the punishment of this sin against the
Holy Ghost, and the way of arguing used by the Writers of the New Testament
from Old Testament precedents.. XXI, XXII. p. 294. CHAP. XV. 2. Directly, That
Salvation is not ordinarily to be expected without Sacraments.. I. This proved,
1. concerning Baptism. 1. By those Texts which imply the dependence of our
Salvation on Baptism. 1. Such as speak of the Graces of Baptism.. II. 1. The
Spirit of God is said to be given in Baptism, and so given as that he who is
not baptized cannot be supposed to have it.. III. The Spirit it self is
absolutely necessary to Salvation, as to his actual influences.. IV. as to his
constant presence as a living and abiding Principle.. V. That the Spirit is
first given in Baptism. This proved from our new Birth's being ascribed to our
Baptism.. VI. It is safe to argue from Metaphorical expressions in a matter of
this nature. St. Joh. iii.5. considered.. VII. Water to be understood in this
place Literally.. VIII. These words might relate to our Saviors Baptism.. IX.
The Objection concerning the supposed parallel place of baptizing with the Holy
Ghost and with fire.. X. The fire here spoken of a material fire, and
contradistinct to the Holy Ghost.. XI. Our Saviors baptizing with the Holy
Ghost and with fire as well applicable to our Saviors ordinary baptism as to
that of the Apostles at Pentecost. XII. The true reason why this descent of the
Holy Ghost in Pentecost, is called a Baptism, was because it was a consummation
of their former Baptism by Water.. XIII. The reason why this part of their
Baptism was deferred so long.. XIV. Other instances wherein the Holy Ghost was
given distinctly from the Baptism by Water.. XV, XVI, XVII. Our Savior alluded
herein to the Jewish Notions concerning Baptismal Regeneration.. XVIII. What
the Rabbinical Notions are.. XIX. How agreeable to the Doctrine of the
New Testament.. XX. The Notions of the Hellenistical Jews, and of the
Philosophers.. XXI, XXII, XXIII. How imitated by our Savior.. XXIV. An
Objection.. XXV. Answered.. XXVI, XXVII. 2. Grace of Baptism, forgiveness of
sins.. XXVIII, XXIX, XXX. That unbaptized Persons cannot be supposed to have
received the benefits of the washing of the blood of Christ, or of the Mystical
Baptism, proved from two things: 1. That all who would be Christians are
obliged to receive even the Baptism by Water.. XXXI. 2. That every one who
comes to Baptism is supposed to continue till then under the guilt of his
sins.. XXXII, XXXIII, XXXIV, XXXV. 2. The same dependence of Salvation on
Baptism proved from those Texts which speak of the Privileges of Baptism..
XXXVI. The same thing proved 2. from those Texts which expressly ascribe our
Salvation to our Baptism.. XXXVII. A sum of the Argument from 1 Pet. iii.21..
XXXVIII. from other Texts.. XXXIX. The Application,. XL. p. 321. CHAP. XVI.
Things to be premised.. I. 1. That this dependence on the Episcopal Communion
for a valid Baptism will alone suffice, so far, for my purpose, as to
discourage the perpetuating any opposite Communion.. II, III, IV. Inference 1.
That, if this were granted, even the absteining of pious Persons from the
lawful Communion would be very rare.. V. Inf. 2. That, even those few pious
Persons who, after all diligence used to inform themselves, and all lawful
condescensions, could not submit to the terms of the lawful Communion, would
yet never perpetuate so much as their Non-Communion.. VI, VII. 2. Premisal,
That it cannot be expected that this Sacrament of the Lords Supper should be as
necessary as that of Baptism.. VIII. The necessity of the Lords Supper to
Salvation proved from the Mystical style by which this whole matter is
expressed in the Scripture. And that by these degrees: 1. The Life of
particular Members of the Mystical Body of Christ is in the Scripture supposed
to depend on a constant repetition of vital influences from the common vital
Principle, as the Life of particular Members in the Natural Body does.. X. 2.
The Scripture also supposes the Life of particular Members to depend as much on
their conjunction with the whole Mystical Body, in order to their receiving
these repeated influences, as the Life of particular Members in the natural
Body depends on their conjunction with the whole natural Body.. X. 3. The
Church with which it was supposed so necessary for particular Members to be
united in order to their participation of this Spiritual Life is plainly
supposed to be the Church in this World, and that visible Society of them which
joined in the same public exercises of Religion in that Age when these things
were written.. XI, XII. 4. The Reasons used by the Sacred Writers for this
purpose are such as concern the Church as a Church, and so as suitable to the
later Ages of the Church as those earlier ones wherein they were used first..
XIII. 5. In order to this Mystical Union with the Church it is absolutely
necessary as far as an ordinary means can be so, that we partake of the Lords
Supper. This proved from 1 Cor. x.17.. XIV. The same thing proved from the true
design of the Eucharist rightly explained. This done by these degrees. 1. The
design of our Savior seems to have been the Mystical (...) so much spoken of
in the Philosophy then received as the peculiar Office of the (...). 2. In this
Union the reason of our being in Christ is his being in us. 3. Two things,
according to the Scripture, to be distinguished in Christ, his Flesh and
Spirit, and in both regards we are concerned that he be united to us.. XV. 4.
There are very material reasons why our Savior should require this bodily
Union in contradistinction to the Spiritual, viz. the benefits which our Bodies
in contradistinction to our Spirits may receive by it: 1. That by this Corporal
Union with Christ we may be made sensible of the interest he has in our Bodies,
and of our Obligation to serve him with our Bodies, and to abstein from those
sins which are seated in the Body. The great necessity of this in that Age..
XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX. 2. That by this means they might be assured of the
Resurrection of their Bodies.. XXI. 5. Therefore, according to the Practices
and Conceptions then prevailing, the Eucharist was the most proper means
whereby this Bodily Union with Christ could have been contrived, whether it be
considered, 1. as a Sacrifice, and that either as an ordinary Sacrifice.. XXII,
XXIII, XXIV. Or as a Federal Sacrifice.. XXV. Or, 2. as a Mystery, and this of
the greatest sort. The likeness between the Heathen Mysteries and the Blessed
Sacrament. The Mysteries were Commemorative, and that generally of the
sufferings of their Gods.. XXVI. They were performed by external Symbols.
Particularly Bread was a Sacred Symbol of Unity. Observed in the Rites of
Mithras, among the Pythagoraeans.. XXVII, XXVIII. In the ancient way of
marriage by Confarreation, and in Truces.. XXIX. And among the Jews.. XXX. The
Mysteries designed particularly for the good of the Soul, and that in the state
of Separation.. XXXI. In the Mysteries they were obliged to Confession of sins,
and to undertake new Rules of living well.. XXXII. In the Mysteries it was
usual to change the Names of the things used in them without any thoughts of a
change of Nature.. XXXIII. 6. Upon these Principles, and according to the
nature of these Mystical contrivances* this Bodily Union may very well be
supposed to be made by our Saviors changing the Name of Bread into that of his
own Body.. XXXIV, XXXV, XXXVI. p.352. CHAP. XVII. It is probable that our
Savior spoke the words in St. Joh. vi. with relation to the Sacrament which he
was to institute.. I. It is probable that St. John also understood and designed
them so.. II. Being so understood they agree very well with the account of the
design of this Sacrament already given.. III. The meaning of the signs expected
from Prophets.. IV. Manna the sign of Moses, which our Savior designed to
imitate in giving the Bread here spoken of.. V. An account from the
Hellenistical Philophy of those times how the Bread given by our Savior is
called the true Bread.. VI, VII. Mystical Manna understood by Philo of the
LOGOS. VIII. The Bread given by our Savior Bodily as well as Mystical.. IX.
The way of reasoning in the New Testament from Mystical Expositions of the
Old.. X. The prudence of this way of reasoning.. XI. The course this way of
reasoning obliged them to in proving the Christian Sacraments.. XII, XIII. The
Ideal Manna communicated to us by the Eucharistical Bread.. XIV. The consequent
danger of wanting this Eucharistical Bread.. XV. The usefulness of the method
here proposed for understanding this, and many other like places in the
New Testament. Submission to Superiors.. XVI. p. 389. CHAP. XVIII. 2. The
validity of the Sacraments depends on the Authority of the Persons by whom they
are administered. This Assertion explained.. I, II, III, IV. Proved by these
degrees. 1. The Spiritual advantages of the Sacraments are not immediately
conveyed in the external Participation of them.. V, VI. 2. The reason of this
holds not only in acts of Authority, that no Authority can be derived from God
unless the Persons pretending in his Name to give it be Authorized by him to
give it, but also in deeds of gi^t.. VII. 3. There is much less reason to
expect that God should perform what is done in his Name by such Unauthorized
Persons than to expect it from ordinary Governors.. VIII. 4. The case we are
now speaking of is such as where it does not oblige him to performance, will
oblige God to punish such Usurpers of his Authority.. IX. It will oblige him as
a private Person. X. It will oblige him as a Governor.. XI. The heinousness of
sins against Authority.. II. An inference by way of Application.. XIII. 5. All
these Reasons will particularly hold in those places where these Usurpations
are in danger of proving injurious to the rights, even of subordinate
Governors, that is in a place already possessed.. XIV. How God as Supreme
Governor is concerned for the honor of the Supreme visible Governors.. XV,
XVI. This honor due to inferior Governors impossible to be preserved if
Subjects be allowed the liberty of setting up opposite Societies as often as
they are of another mind, and of perpetuating such disorders by the validity of
what they do in such their Usurpations.. XVII, XVIII. It is inconsistent with
Government that Subjects should be allowed to r^fuse their duty in case of
inevidence against a presumptive title. This proved in two particulars:. XIX.
1. It is necessary for the security of visible Government, as such, that a
presumptive title be not rejected, but on very evident proofs to the contrary..
XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII* XX* V, XXV. 2. The failures of this presumptive title in
those who were at present possessed of the Government cannot justify the like
Usurpation in them who should discover it.. XXVI. It cannot secure their doings
from a Nullity.. XXVII. It cannot secure their Persons from a crime which may
oblige God to take the uttermost advantage which the Legal invalidity of their
proceedings might afford him.. XXVIII. The case proposed concerning the
assuming an Authority to administer the Sacraments in a desolate Island. How
impertinent this is to our Adversaries case, and therefore how little
temptation we have to be partial in answering it.. XXIX. Answer.. XXX. Their
Persons could not be excused from presumption.. XXXI. Their proceedings could
not be secured from Nullity.. XXXII. p. 404. CHAP. XIX. 3. No other Ministers
have this Authority of administering the Sacraments but only they who receive
their Orders in the Episcopal Communion. This proved by several degrees.. I. 1.
he Authority of administering the Sacraments must be derived from God.
Explained.. II. The importance of this Proposition.. III. Though this were not
proved, yet our Adversaries practices are unjustifiable by the Principles of
Government in general.. IV. As they were at first unjustifiable by the
Principles of Government, so they can plead nothing which may make that
justifiable now which was then unjustifiable. They cannot plead a lawful
prescription.. V. If they could, yet this Proposition will cut them off from
pleading it against God.. VI, VII, VIII. The Proposition proved, 1. From the
reason of the thing.. IX. This performed by two degrees: 1. It is God alone
that has the right of disposing the Spiritual benefits here conveyed. X, XI,
XII. The reason of the Adversaries mistakes.. XIII. 2. It is none but he that
can give Possession of them.. XIV. 2. From the actual establishment of God. No
such Authority actually conferred upon the people.. XV, XVI, XVII. The weakness
of the Argument from bare Primitive precedent for proving a right conferred
shew^ from the many condescensions of those times, and the prudence of the
reasons that required them.. XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII* XXIV, XXV. The
unreasonableness of this way of arguing*. XXVI. There were then circumstances
proper to that Age which required particular condescension.. XXVII. Though the
Negative Argument be not good, yet the Positive is, that the actual claim of
Governors then is a good Presumption that they had a right to the Power so
claimed by them.. XXVIII. Persons extraordinarily gifted at length made subject
to the ordinary Governors of the Church.. XXIX, XXX, XXXI. This derivation of
Power rather from Governors than from the People agreeable to those Precedents
whom the Primitive Christians were m^st likely to imitate.. XXXII* XXXIII,
XXXIV, XXXV. A way proposed for accommodating the several interests concerned
in Ordinations according to the practice of those times.. XXXVI, XXXVII. The
Apostles unlikely to confer this right of Government on the People, if left by
God to their own Liberty, according to the Notions which then prevailed among
the Christians.. XXXVIII. Remarks tending to the satisfaction of the lovers of
Truth and Peace: 1. This way of arguing from the actual establishments of God,
as it is much more modest, so it is also more secure for finding out the right
of Government, than any conjectures we can make from the reason of the thing..
XXXIX, XL. 2. Though the People had this inherent right of Government
originally, yet it cannot exclude a right of God who may, when be pleases,
resume this right into his own hands.. XLI. 3. If the people ever had such a
right originally, yet all that has been done since for alienating that right
which could be done.. XLII. p. 423. CHAP. XX. 2. This Authority of administering
the Sacraments must be derived from God by the Mediation of those men to whom
it was at first committed by him. The Negative to be proved, That none can be
presumed to have a call from God without, at least, an approbation from the
Supreme visible Governors.. I. 1. It is, in reason, and by the Principles of
visible Government, requisite that this Negative be granted for the Conviction
of false Pretenders to a Power received from God. 1. It is necessary that
Pretenders should be discovered.. II, III, IV. 2. It is also requisite that the
means of discovering Pretenders be notorious to all, even to ordinary
capacities.. V, VI. 3. These notorious means for discovering Pretenders must be
common to all Ages of the Church, not proper only to that of the Apostles..
VII. 4. Hence it follows that God left them to the same ordinary means of
judging concerning the right of Spiritual Governors as had been used in
judging concerning the right of their temporal Superiors.. VIII, IX. 5. By this
Rule of judging concerning Spiritual right the same way as we judge concerning
temporal, none can be presumed to have this Power, but they who have received
it from them to whom it was at first committed.. X, XI. 6. This Inference will
especially hold when access to the Supreme is most difficult.. XII, XIII. This
is the case of Ecclesiastical Government.. XIV. Application to the Principles
of a Modern Writer.. XV, XVI. 2. Our Brethren must be obliged, in equity, to
grant this way, because they cannot pitch on a more certain way for the trial
of Pretenders.. XVII. 1. They cannot do it by deriving their Authority from God
immediately.. XVIII, XIX, XX. 2. They cannot do it by pretending to receive
their Authority immediately from the Scriptures independently on the Act of
their ordinary Superiors.. XXI. An Objection answered.. XXII. p. 438. CHAP.
XXI. 3. This Ecclesiastical Authority cannot be derived from those men to whom
it was at first committed, to the Age we live in, without a continued
Succession of Persons orderly receiving Authority from th^se who had Authority
to give it them.. I. 1. This Authority could not be derived from the Apostles
themselves to any beyond their own times: Neither by their own Persons, nor by
their deed of Gift, nor by their Writings.. II. 2. It hence follows that the
only way they could use for conveying this Authority to others, after their
decease, must be by appointing sufficient Substitutes who might act for them
after their departure.. III. 3. The same reasons which prove it impossible for
the Apostles to convey this Power to any who did not live in their own Age do
also prove it impossible for any of their Successors to do so.. IV, V. 4. This
Negative Argument will only hold concerning the only substitutes of the
Apostles, and concerning them it will hold, That they who have not received
Power from them who are alone substituted by the Apostles to convey their power
to others, cannot at all receive any power from the Apostles.. VI, VII, VIII,
IX. 5. That this Negative Argument applied to any particular Age will hold
concerning the only substitutes remaining in that particular Age. Bishops were
the only substitutes of the Apostles then remaining when our Brethren began
their Innovations.. X. p. 476. CHAP. XXII. 4. The Authority of administering the
Sacraments is not now to be expected any where but in the Episcopal Communion..
I. Hence it follows that all the Authority which can be pretended in any other
form of Government now, must be derived from the Episcopal Government of that
Age wherein that form first began.. II. The first Dividers of the several
parties had never a Power given them of ordeining others by them who made them
Presbyters.. III, IV. 1. They have actually received no more Power from God
than they have received from their Ordeiners.. V. 2. They have actually
received no more from their Ordeiners than what their Ordeiners did actually
intend to give them, according to their presumable intention.. VI. 3. That is
to be presumed likely to be the intention of their Ordeiners which may be
presumed likely to be thought becoming by Persons in their circumstances.. VII.
4. The securest way of judging what the Bishops, who first ordained these
Dividers, thought becoming must be by the Notions then prevailing when these
first Dividers were ordained.. VIII. p. 483. CHAP. XXIII. The Objection
concerning the Opinion prevailing in the modern Schools that Bishops and
Presbyters differed not in Order but Degree. Answ. 1. It seems rather to have
been Interest than Conscience that inclined men to the belief of this Opinion.
This cleared from a short History of this Opinion.. I, II, III, IV, V. Answ. 2.
Though this Opinion had been received more universally than it appears it was,
by the Multitude, yet it is not likely that it would be so received by the
Bishops, upon whose intention the validity of the Orders conferred by them must
depend.. VI. Answ. 3. Though the Bishops of those Ages had been universally of
this Opinion, yet it does not thence follow that they must have given the
Presbyters ordained by them the Power of ordeining others. It does not follow
from the Notions of those times.. VII. Nor from the reason of the thing..
VIII.IX. The Principles on which these Persons proceeded in making on^ Order of
Episcopacy and Presbytery did not oblige them to believe that the Power of
ordeining others was a right of simple Presbyters.. X, XI, XII, XIII, XIV.
Answ. 4. They who then held this Opinion, did, in all likelihood, neither
intend, nor think of, any consequence from it prejudicial to the establishments
then received.. XV, XVI. p. 491. CHAP. XXIV. This supposition, That the Bishops
had the right of Presiding over Ecclesiastical Assemblies sufficient for our
purpose.. I. 1. In regard of that Power which must be granted due to him, even
as President. This proved by these degrees: 1. Even by the Principles of
Aristocratical Government, no Power can be given but by the act of that Body
wherein the right of Government is originally seated.. II. 2. No act can be
presumed to be the act of that Body but what has passed them in their public
Assemblies.. III. 3. No Assemblies can dispose of the right of such Societies
but such as are Lawful ones according to the constitutions of the Societies..
IV, V. 4. The Indiction of the Assembly by the President is a right consequent
to the Office of a President as a President, and a circumstance requisite to
make the Assembly it self Lawful.. VI, VII. 5. The Bishops have always been the
Presidents of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, even as high as our Adversaries
themselves do grant the practice of Presiding Presbyters.. VIII, IX. This
invalidates the Orders of our Adversaries.. X. This was a right which no
Bishops, how great Assertors soever of the Identity of their Order with that of
Presbyters, ever did renounce. or could renounce, without making their
Government unpracticable.. XI. Though the Bishops had received their Power from
their Election by men, yet that would not suffice to make valid any acts of the
same men without their consent after their Election.. XII, XIII. This right of
Presidency might hold, though the whole right of their Power had been purely
Humane.. XIV. But supposing that right Divine, all that men can do can be only
to determine the Person, not to confine the Power. The reasoning here used will
proceed though Bishops had been made by Presbyters alone without the
concurrence and consecration of other Bishops.. XV. The Primitive Bishops seem
indeed to have been made so by Presbyters without Bishops.. XVI. p. 508. CHAP.
XXV. 2. The Nullity of the same Ordinations proved even from the Principles of
Aristocratical Government, from the right which Episcopal Presbyteries ought to
have in giving Orders as they are considered as Presbyteries.. I, II. This
proved by these degrees: Though a Presbyter, when he is once made, is a
Presbyter in the Catholic Church, yet the reason that makes him so is the
correspondence of the whole Catholic Church with that particular one of which
he was made a Member at his Ordination.. III, IV, V, VI. 2. Hence it follows
that he who cannot validly make out his Authority in the particular Church in
whith he pretends to have received his Orders, cannot, in reason, expect that
the Exercise of his Authority should be ratified in other Churches who cannot
thus be satisfied that he has received them.. VII. 3. The Church, by which the
validity of the Orders of every particular Presbyter must expect to be tried,
must not be a Church that derives its beginning from him, but such a one as
must be supposed settled and established before he could be capable of any
pretensions to Orders. Applied to single Presbyters.. VIII. To whole
Presbyteries made up of over-voted single Presbyters.. IX, X, XI. 4. No Orders
can be presumed to have been validly received in any particular Episcopal
Church as Presbyterian without the prevailing suffrages of the Presbyteries..
XII. A smaller over voted number of Presbyters cannot validly dispose of the
common rights of the whole Presbyteries.. XIII, XIV, XV. The Power given in the
Ordination of a Presbyter is a right of the Presbytery in common, by the
Principles of Aristocratical Government.. XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX, An Objection
Answered.. XX, XXI, XXII. Another Objection. Answered.. XXIII, XXIV. Retorted..
XXV. The reason of the Retortion given.. XXVI. p. 525. CHAP. XXVI. 2. The
Episcopal Communion to which every one is obliged to join himself, as he would
secure the ordinary means of his own particular Salvation, is the Episcopal
Communion of the place wherein he lives, whilst he lives in it.. I. This
proved against the several sorts of the Non-Conformists according to their
several Principles.. II. 1. As to the Presbyterians, and those who acknowledge
an Obligation of Government antecedently to the consent of particular Subjects.
And that by these degrees: 1. That, by the obligation of Government in general,
all those particulars must be obliging without which it cannot be practicable..
III. 2. Many of the Presbyterians themselves do acknowledge the determination of
particular circumstances, and the Application of general rules to particular
cases, to belong to the Office of Ecclesiastical Governors.. IV. 3. It is
absolutely necessary for the practicableness of Government in general, that
every Subject know his Governor, and him particularly to whom be in particular
owes Obedience.. V. 4. The means whereby every particular Person may be
convinced, to whom it is, that he in particular owes Subjection, must be such
as may be presumed notorious to the whole Community, and such whereof others
may judge as well as the Person particularly concerned, and by which they may
judge as well concerning his Duty, as their own.. VI. 5. The Authority of these
means must be from God.. VII, VIII. Two Consequences inferred from hence: 1.
Positive, That they must be under a Divine Obligation to own the Authority of
these Jurisdictions whilst they live within them.. IX. 2. Negative, That from
this Divine Authority of Jurisdictions, they must find themselves obliged to
forbear all opposite Communions or Assemblies within those Jurisdictions.. X,
XI, XII. Application made particularly to the Presbyterians.. XIII. 2. As to
the Independents, who deny all Ecclesiastical Authority antecedently to the
voluntary obligation of particular Persons.. XIV, XV. That there is really a
Power of Government in the Church.. XVI. That this Power is not derived from
the Multitude.. XVII, XVIII. p. 547. CHAP. XXVII. 2. That the nature of this
Obligation to submit to all unsinful conditions of the Episcopal Communion is
such as will make them guilty of the sin of SCHISM who will rather suffer
themselves to be separated than they will submit to such conditions. The Notion
of SCHISM as it is only a breach of correspondence not sufficient for my
purpose.. I. As it is a breach of a Body Politic it is. Application to our
Adversaries.. II. That by the Principles here proposed, the Persons from whom
they separate must be their Governors.. III, IV, V, VI, VII. Other things
proved that are necessary for this Application.. VIII. That this separation
from their own particular Churches must necessarily infer a separation from the
Catholic Church also. The Objection proposed.. IX. Answ. If it were otherwise,
it would destroy all Discipline, and therefore all the dividing parties who are
for Discipline are obliged, as well as we, to answer this Objection, and to be
favorable to what we shall say in answer to it.. X, XI. A more particular
Answer proving the thing principally designed. 1. This pretense of Union with
the Catholic Church can be no encouragement for any to neglect any means of
continuing his Union with his own particular Church, unless he may be assured
that, whilst he wants it, he may notwithstanding continue united to the
Catholic Church.. XII. 2. That Union with the Catholic Church, of which we
may be assured, must be such as may appear to us by the use of those external
ordinary means which God has appointed for mainteining that Union.. XIII. 3. In
this way of judging, He that would assure himself of his being united to the
Catholic Church, must do it by proving himself united to some particular
visible Church by an external Communication in their Sacraments.. XIV. 4. The
external Communion of another Church, which while a separated Person does
maintein, he may have hopes of keeping still his interest in the Unity of the
Catholic Church, must not be any other Communion within the Jurisdiction in
which he lives, and from which he is supposed to be separated. This proved in
regard of Usurping Members of the same Church.. XV, XVI. And of Unauthorized
Members of other Churches, within the same Jurisdiction.. XVII, XVIII. 5. Such
Separatists cannot maintein their title to Catholic Unity by being received
into any other Churches, though otherwise absolute and unaccountable to the
Church from whence they are separated.. XIX, XX, XXI. This proved. 1. The
nature of the inconvenience, incurred by deprivation of Communion in a
particular Church, is such as that it is impossible that the censure can be
valid in that particular Church, unless it be valid in others.. XXII. 2. Hence
it follows that, if such a Person be received to the Sacraments in another
Church without as good an Authority, for uniting him to the Unity of the
Catholic Church, as that was by which he was deprived, only on supposition of
the continuance of his invisible Unity with the Catholic Church
notwithstanding his visible separation from a part of it, such Sacraments must,
as to him, be perfect Nullities.. XXIII. 3. No particular Church can, by its
Authority alone, restore any to Catholic Unity who has been separated from it
by another Church, without the consent of the Church by which he was at first
separated.. XXIV. 4. Hence it follows, That all that can be done by other
Churches receiving a Person separated from the Communion of his own Church, can
only be to judge of his case, not so as to oblige the Church to which he belongs
originally to stand to their judgment, but only so far as concerns their own
Jurisdiction.. XXV, XXVI, XXVII. 5. Whatever is necessary for the design of
Gods establishment, that he must, by his design, be obliged to ratify, whether
he has expressly said he will do so, or no. This applied.. XXVIII. The validity
of the separation proved when it is the act of the Separatists themselves,
without any censures of Ecclesiastical Authority.. XXIX, XXX. p. 564. CHAP.
XXVIII. The usefulness of this discourse as to its two great designs.. I, II.
1. For the most likely Notion of SCHISM. Two advantages of this way of stating
the Government of the Church above others.. III. 1. That the Government thus
contrived will be most wisely fitted for practice.. IV, V. Because best fitted
to the capacity of the illiterate multitude.. VI. Who will, 1. By these
Principles, be best enabled to distinguish their true Superiors from false
pretenders.. VII. As to the Ordination of our Ministers.. VIII, IX, X, XI, XII.
As to that of the Non-Conformists.. XIII. 2. They will hereby be best enabled
to judge of the extent of their Duty to their true Superiors themselves.. XIV,
XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII. 2. This Hypothesis is peculiarly suited to the practice
of such a Society as the Church is, for preserving Unity and a due respect to
Authority in it, especially in times of persecution.. XIX, XX, XXI, XXII,
XXIII, XXIV, XXV, XXVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXIX, XXX, XXXI. 2. The usefulness of
this discourse as to its second great design, the showing the real danger and
mischievousness of the sin of SCHISM. The impossibility of doing this on our
Adversaries Principles.. XXXII, XXXIII, XXXIV, XXXV, XXXVI, XXXVII, XXXVIII,
XXXIX, XL, XLI. On our Principles the Notion given hereof is popular, derived
from the nature of the sin it self.. XLII, XLIII. And suited to the affections
and relish of pious Persons, though illiterate.. XLIV. The great advantage of
reasons suited to the affections of the Persons to be persuaded by them.. XLV.
These Principles are more easy to be judged of by popular capacities, in three
regards.. XLVI. 1. Most of those disputes which are matters of Learning are
here avoided.. XLVII. 2. The remaining disputes are reduced to such things
which even illiterate Persons must be supposed experienced in, even in their
worldly affairs.. XLVIII, XLIX. 3. The main Principles of this discourse are
such as are granted by our Adversaries themselves.. L, LI, LII. The great
advantages of proceeding on granted Principles.. LIII, LIVE. Particularly in
relation to the accommodation of our present disputes.. LV. p. 593.
ERRATA.
this it. p. 62. l. 7. r. Church for want of such. p. 72. l. 27. r. World. p.
98. l. 21. r. (...). p. 112. l. 6. r. unloosening. penult. r. promise. p. 114.
l. 36. r. also that. p. 116. marg. r. Tertull. p. 119 penult. del. of. p. 133.
l. 21. r. so. 136.11. r. aggravable. p. 175. l. 1. r. Their design in producing
those. l. 6. del. no. after are add not otherwise. l. 7. for this r. the
disproof of these. p. 182. l. 17. r. be so. p. 185. l. 25. for unwilling r.
willing. p. 187. l. 17. for not r. that. p. 193. l. 2. for nay r. so. l. 6.
externals: Whence. p. 195. penult. r. Prayers. p. 199. l. 22. r. but l. 24. r.
rigor. p. 206. l. 35. (...). ib. (...). ult. (...). p. 220. l. 11. r. (...).
l. 28. r. apposite. p. 221. l. 4. del. it. p. 222. l. 15. r. thus. p. 223.
marg. 6. r. vulgata. p. 229. l. 36. r. crime in. p. 237. l. 25. r. pretend. p.
239. l. 8. r. (...). 35. (...). ib. (...). p. 240. l. 23. r. that as. p. 241.
l. 30. r. also separated. p. 245. l. 35. r. therefore as. p. 247. del.
marginem, and add ad not. (a) p. 248. p. 248. l. 6. r. excuse. marg. 20. (...).
p. 249. l. 16. r. to them. p. 250. marg. 10. r. (...). 11. (...) p. 254. l. 15.
r. there. p. 256. l. 14. del. that. p. 259. l. 21. r. severity. p. 261. marg.
4. (...). p. 262. marg. 17. r. Poliorcetes. p. 263. marg. Psalm. L. p. 276. l.
15 r. Xeno. 279.32. ingenuously. p. 281. l. 1. r. guilt. p. 291. l. 34. r.
extremely. p. 295. l 14. r. then. l. 35. r. sin. p. 297. l. 33. r. far. p. 307.
l. 17. r. faxit. p. 308. l. 29. for (...) r. (...). l. 35. for (...) r. (...).
ib. r. breath. p. 309. l. 17. r. of purer. l. 24. r. wink. p. 310. l. 21. r.
which. l. 26. r. Soul. p. 311. l. 18. r. and. l. 23. r. Poets is. l. 26. r. is
yet. p. 313. l. 4. del. if we deal ill with. p. 35. l. 5. r. think strange. l.
31. r. which. p. 319. l. 4. r. on. l. 9. r. be yet. p. 323. l. 29. r. proving.
Without. p. 326. r. Spirit, only. p. 336. marg. 11. r. (...). p. 337. r. the
return of Souls. p. 342. l. 23. r. are not. p. 361. l. 19. r. for. l. 27. r.
consider we. p. 362. l. 21. r. then. p. 363. l. 4. r. need a. p. 369. l. 16. r.
propagation. l. 17. r. invention. p. 373. l. 5. r. intention. l. 35. r. the. p.
376. l. 19. r. (...) l. 31. r. (...). p. 377. marg. 11. r. (...). p. 378. marg.
14. r. (...). p. 380. l. 38. for (...) r. (...). p. 394. l. 6. r. (...). marg.
4. r. Numenio. p. 396. l. 10. r. knew. l. 30. r. a Mystery. p. 397. l. 22. r.
were. p. 403. l. 9. r. new. p. 425. l. 17. r. pleases. Whatever. p. 442.
penult. r. Texts. p. 443. l. 34. r. there. p. 447. l. 21. del. his. l. 22. del.
to. p. 450. l. 25. r. the Spirit. p. 461. l. 25. r. prosecution. p. 463. l. 25.
r. Power. p. 478. l. 18. r. former. p. 482. l. 1. r. loss. p. 495. l. 10 r.
favorable. p. 498. marg. l. 8. r. (...). p. 546. 11. r. it. p. 550. l. 22.
del. not. p. 597. l. 22. r. the. p. 604. l. 1. r. lot. p. 614. l. 31. del. not.
p. 619. l. 17. r. another.

THE INTRODUCTION.
THE CONTENTS.
The concurrent sense of all, Irreligious, as well as Religious, concerning the
present necessity of our Ecclesiastical Peace, and the great mischief of our
Ecclesiastical Divisions.. 1. The management of Religious Controversies with a
design of Peace, will best answer the Qualifications of an useful
Controvertist.. 2. It is most agreeable with the most prudent Rules of managing
Controversies, either for finding the Truth it self, or, where humane frailty
might fail of that, for making the Error Innocent and Excusable.. 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. What influence this design of Peace would have particularly in those
Controversies which are debated between Us and our Nonconforming Brethren; How
far the Unpeaceableness of a Position of this kind may be urged as an Argument
of its Falsehood, and on the Contrary.. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. That our present undertaking is
not unsuitable to the Office of a Peacemaker,. 30, 31, 32. How much the Peace
of the Church is concerned in this Controversy concerning SCHISM. How
differently the Notion of SCHISM must be stated by them who make the Church a
Body Politic, and by them who make it not so. Our Adversaries Notions of
SCHISM, and of the Duty of a Peacemaker, Exactly fitted to the Supposition of
the Church's being no Body Politic, and indeed very Rational upon that
Supposition. What is to be thought of the Independent Tenet of placing all
Ecclesiastical Authority Originally in the People, and how far that will clear
their Practices from the charge of SCHISM.. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. How
the Notion of SCHISM must be stated on Supposition of the Church's being a Body
Politic.. 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51. An account of the
Division of this work into the Rational and Historical Parts. Some intimations
concerning the usefulness and design of the Historical.. 52.

THE Peace of the Church is a thing at present so extremely desirable, not only
in regard of its intrinsic Charitableness, but its many happy influences on
our dearest Interests, not only Sacred but Secular, that he must be as
Imprudent as Impious, as Inhumane as Vnconscientious, as little deserving the
name of a Friend of his Country, as of a Lover of his Religion, who can still
be unconcerned for a design (I do not say of such worth, but) of such
importance for our settlement. For though there are few so Prudent as to
foresee Inconveniences at a distance, or of so tender sense as to be vehemently
concerned for Absurdities in Reasoning, or of so Spiritual an apprehension as
to be moved by the purely Spiritual Threats or Rewards of the Gospel; yet every
one is apt to be affected by his own Experiences. And accordingly we find, not
only the Practicers, but, the very Enemies, of Religion to be now more than
ordinarily inclinable to a Reconciliation: Not only such who are endued with
that Modesty which would hinder Men from Imperious Dogmatizing or easy
Censuring of Dissenters; or that ardent Charity for their Brethren of the same
Profession, which would hinder them from either giving or taking any Offense
which were by any Lawful means avoidable; or that Humility which would incline
unskilful Persons to submit to the Judgment of Persons more skilful, at least
in such matters wherein they might be convinced of their own Unskilfulness, and
would make them diffident, if not in their Judgment, yet, at least in their
Practice, when contrary to the sense of the more Judicious (which would very
much conduce to secure the Church from disturbing Innovations) or that Pious
Prudence which would make Men especially cautious of Errors, either in Opinions
or Practices, which would prove extraordinarily mischievous, if Erroneous, as
those must do which are destructive of the Government of that Society to which
the Erroneous Persons are related, and yet more especially Cautious in such
Cases wherein their past Experiences might be sufficient warnings against
future Inconveniences, as they may here, where Men may find how little
available the goodness of their Intention is for preventing the dangerous
Events of their mistakes, when they have found themselves transported or
deluded into Events very distant from their Original designs. But even the
Enemies of Religion seem so far, at least, desirous of the Reconciliation of
the Religious, as they think nothing of Religion worth contending for with that
eagerness and bitterness which they find so very prejudicial to their worldly
Interests. And considering that Providence has thus found out inducements to
prevail with all Parties and all Interests to be thus Inclinable to receive, if
not Industrious to promote and offer, terms of Reconciliation; it will now less
than ever become the Sons of Peace, the Subjects of the Prince of Peace, the
Professors of the Gospel of Peace, to be averse to it. And as there are not
many Truths whose momentousness might in any Case make amends for public
disturbances; so it may be Questionable whether any may now, when so many
Parties and Conditions, so many different and great Interests, are concerned in
the Consequences of it, when even the Reputation of Religion it self, and its
most Fundamental Maxims are involved in the same success, and it is thought no
very good Argument for the Prudence of an Institution, that its Votaries are
conceived by it to be made implacable in their Contentions for many
Propositions so impossible to be decided to the satisfaction of the different
Parties; whilst they expose their common Belief to the derision of common
Adversaries, and cause them to blaspheme that worthy Name by which they are
called, and weaken their own Credit for the things of principal Importance by
their mutual Reflections and Animosities and extreamly-partial behavior for
Propositions of inferior moment and Credibility. And as these very weighty
Considerations of the present mischiefs of our Divisions must highly aggravate
the Sinfulness and Disingenuity of such as cannot clear their Consciences from
the guilt of having contributed to them; so the great Benefit of avoiding them,
besides the many Positive advantages of Peace, must now more than ever entitle
the endeavors of Peacemakers to that peculiar Beatitude promised to them by
our Savior himself in his Sermon on the Mount. Mat. v.9.


seasonable it be for this present Age, yet it is not so absolutely necessary
for my present design, to enlarge on a Topic so acknowledged as this, of the
necessity of Catholic Peace, is. My desire only is to let my Dissenting
Brethren know that, as it is my hearty desire to make this the design of all my
Studies, and the employment of my Life; and as I am not Conscious to my self
herein of any partial favor, but am induced to it by a hearty conviction of
the value and necessity of the design it self, that there is indeed no other
end more Pious, or more Generous, or more effectually conducive to the Service
of God or the good of Mankind; so it shall be my particular endeavor to demean
my self accordingly in the following Discourse; as not to oppose, so neither to
abet, any Party as a Party, that is, as subsisting by any peculiar Principles
inconsistent with Catholic Peace. And if I might prevail with my Adversaries
to concur with me in the observation of the same Rule, I am confident that as
our Disputes will prove more Edifying to all truly Christian Spirits, both for
discovering the Truth, and prevailing with our Readers to receive it in the
love of it; so our Errors, if after all our diligence we shall prove mistaken,
must needs prove more Innocent, and, in regard of their good design;
incomparably more excusable than otherwise. And I am the rather induced to
believe that this is indeed the best way of managing these Disputes, because it
does not only best comply with, and preserve, that temper which would most of
all accomplish an useful Controvertist, and best fit him for public Service;
but also, because it will in regard of the Considerations now mentioned, answer
the most Prudent Advices for the manner of their management.

THIS way of managing Controversies will best comply with the Qualifications of
an useful Controvertist. And he must needs be a Person very little versed in
our modern Controversies who has not observed the great influence of the
humors of the Controvertists on the Event. For when Men are Angry and Aerie,
forward to give and to receive provocation, how very easily do they digress to
Personal Quarrels? And such, as they are perfectly useless to the Public, so
they have a very ill influence on such as might otherwise prove useful. For by
that means they are blinded in the search of Truth, and indisposed for
following their own Convictions where they know it, and inclined to engage the
Public in their private animosities. It makes them favorable to such
Principles, not which are true, but which are for their purpose; It naturally
loosens and and emasculates that closeness of Discourse which is absolutely
necessary for our security where the Truth is obscure, and the Error dangerous;
It takes them off from that awe of Conscience which would both quicken their
Diligence, and oblige them to Sincerity; It naturally diverts them from sober
reasonings to Popular flourishes and Rhetorical Arts of insinuation. And the
shame of owning their mistakes in matters wherein they had been extremely
confident, or of yielding to a despised, yet upbraiding, Adversary, or of
losing their Authority and Interest in a Party which had admired them, when
they cannot be Ingenuous at any lower rate than that of a public Penance for
their Extravagances, does many times necessitate them to poor and palpable
contrivances of Evasion. And yet the concealment of their mistakes is not the
only inconvenience to the Public from the disingenuity of these Persons, but
many times they think themselves obliged to justify their former vehemence by
a continued eagerness, and so to maintain their own reputation by ruining the
Churches Peace. To which might have been added that averseness to conviction,
to which such a way of dealing does naturally incline the Adversaries for whose
conviction such Discourses are designed; how little they can value their
Authority when they find them so palpably swayed by other motives than the
merit of the Cause and the real conviction of their Consciences; with what
regret they must be likely to bear with any Victory, though even of Truth it
self, from such an Adversary who gives such indications of unkindness and
hostility against their very Persons; how very unwilling they must be to prove
mistaken when they must expect to be upbraided with their mistakes; how glad of
any shifts that may silence either their Adversaries or their own Consciences.
And to Persons thus disposed, it is hard to conceive a Cause so bad that cannot
afford sufficient and plausible Palliations. But on the contrary all the
Qualifications requisite for fitting a Controvertist for public use, whether
of Industry or Vnprejudicedness, or Sincerity, or of a fair and candid demeanor
which may sweeten the temper of the Erroneous Person, and dispose him to
receive Conviction, which are absolutely necessary to recommend his Endeavors
for the direction of the Judicious, or the Authoritative Guidance of the
Multitude, are not only very reconcilable with, but very naturally consequent
to, the temper of a Pious and Peaceable Person.

Qualifications of an useful Controvertist, but the most Prudent Rules of
managing that Employment. For the true design of an useful Controvertist being
the discovery of such Truths wherein Mankind is concerned for their Practice*
those means must be most Prudent for this purpose which may either secure us of
finding the Truth it self, where it is capable of being found, or make the
Ignorance excusable, and the Practice secure, where it cannot. And for both
these purposes this design of Peace in our Religious Disputes does best fit us,
especially in such as these concerning Government, for which we are at present
concerned.

OUR Enquiring with a design of Peace does best fit us for the discovery of
Truth it self, I do not now mean only as it provokes our Industry in our
search, and makes us Candid both in judging, and in acknowledging the success
of our own Convictions; but also as the Peaceableness of a Proposition of this
nature may be made an Argument of its Truth it self. For considering that the
Catholic Peace of the Christian Churches within themselves and with each other
is an End not only worthy of the Divine Providence, but actually designed by
him; and considering that it is not agreeable to the Divine Prudence that he
should have designed an End without Means, or with Means repugnant to it; and
particularly in our Case that he should design an End to be procured by the
Church (as certainly in all Bodies Politic whatsoever is necessary for the
preservation of its public Peace is inseparably and peculiarly the Province of
its Governors) without Means in the power of the Church for procuring it, or
with Institutions directly contrary; and considering withal that God in dealing
with the Church, has not considered her Abstractly, but as she is at present in
this Life, under all her frailties and disadvantageous Circumstances: We may
therefore argue both Positively, that whatever is necessary for preserving this
Peace of the Church in this Life as consisting of Persons, though well-meaning,
yet generally frail, and obnoxious both to mistakes and Prejudices, that has
certainly been provided for by God; and Negatively, that what is necessarily
destructive of that Peace, (I mean with a Moral Necessity considering the
frailties of the generality, even of well-meaning Persons) that is certainly
contrary to the true design of God. So that though we had no other Argument
against our Adversaries Principles and Practices but this, that Catholic Peace
is by them rendered unpracticable and Morally impossible, at least, in this
Life, and that by ours alone it is capable of being maintained, this alone were
sufficient to prove as well their Falsehood, as their Inexpediency and
mischievousness, and as well to prove the Truth of our own Principles and
Practices, as the convenience of them on Politic Considerations. I am aware
what ill Arguments some Men have deduced from this Topic, whilst they argue
what God must have done, or not have done, independently on Revelation. But
then I consider also that their mistakes are not deduced from this Proposition
in the general and indefinite way wherein I have expressed it, but from their
particular Applications, whilst they gratuitously presume either that an End
was intended by God which was not, or that some Means was conducive or
necessary for it, which has proved otherwise on a particular Examination. And I
confess that before this can be applied to our Dissenting Brethrens Case, it
will need several other more particular improvements. But though this Principle
or its Application were indeed as fallible as they are concerned to believe it
to be, yet I add farther,

THAT it will, at least, even in that Case, secure the Practice Innocent, and
render the Error Excusable. In Reason and Conscience, as well as in Policy, we
are obliged to be more wary, where our mistakes are like to prove of dangerous
Consequence; and where the mischief will be very great, there the necessity of
the thing and our Conviction of it must be proportionable, that may secure our
Practice. For besides that no Error of our Judgment is ever likely to be
imputed to us to our Prejudice, but that which is joined with some ill
disposition of our Will, and that it is certainly no such ill disposition of
our Will to prefer a Duty of greater, before another of lesser consequence, and
to prejudg in favor of it where there does not appear such evident conviction
to the contray, as may make amends for the danger of venturing on it (for in
matters of Practice, the dangerousnes as well as the Falsehood of an Assertion
is very Justly and Conscientiously considerable, especially when the danger is
of offending God, and ruining our own Souls) and besides that no Prudent and
Good Legislators could think it convenient for the Public, that their greatest
and most important commands should be neglected as often as there might appear
some little probable Evidence for some lesser Duty that were inconsistent with
them, and that they must therefore be better pleased with him who in such a
Case should stick to the greater Duty and neglect the less, than with him who
should extremely prejudice the Public by a too scrupulous adherence to his own
Convictions, and must judge it reasonable to be better pleased with him though
in the Event he should prove mistaken, not only in regard of his good meaning
and the pitiableness of his condition, but also in regard of the real
usefulness of such a Presumption for the Public in such a Case, wherein it
were managed with Sincerity and Candor, (and it can certainly be no dishonor
to Presume him pleased with that, which we have reason to believe would please
a Good and Just humane Legislator, in regard of its reasonableness and good
influence on the Public, for which he were concerned) and besides that this is
a certain Rule in all Positive Commands, where the omission is not
intrinsecally evil, that all such things cease to be, so much as Duties when
they prove inconsistent with others of greater consequence to the Public, nay
and that this is a Rule approved by God himself in the practice of his own
Commands, as is professedly proved by our Savior himself, Mat. XII.7.
in that of the Sabbath (which is an Observation which I believe might prove
very useful to facilitate our Dissenting Brethrens compliance if they would be
pleased to consider it) I say besides all these Considerations, the very want
of such an Evidence for smaller Duties as may make amends for their
consequential Prejudice to the Public, is indeed a more rational Argument to
prove them false, than such Probability as falls short of it is to prove them
true.

Good and Prudent Governor, and who withal cannot be forgetful of doing what
he knows to be most Prudent, as Humane Governors may, it is not Credible that
he should not give that Evidence of Conviction for every particular Duty which
is suitable to the moment of the thing required in it, that, as he is, by his
Government, obliged to value Duties differently according to their different
influence on the Public; so he might accordingly secure their performance,
that those which are more necessary for the Public may be principally secured,
which he cannot be conceived to have done if he have not proportioned their
Evidence to their momentousness. And therefore where a Duty does interfere with
the public Interest, though we may have some probability for it, yet if the
Probability be not so great as, upon the account now mentioned, may be expected
for an Action of such consequence, whatever we may think of it in regard of its
Probabilities, yet this will be a much more certain Argument to us that God
never intended in such Circumstances to oblige us to it. But, to omit any
further reasonings, this Presumption is in it self so very Equal as that, I
think, all Parties will acknowledge it to be so where they are unconcerned, that
is indeed, where they are Equal Judges. And as, I think, all Protestants will
believe that that degree of Probable Appearance, which might have excused an
Erroneous Conscience in Practices of inferior concernment, could not yet be
admitted as a sufficient Apology for Ravilliac, and the Powder-Traitors, for
their attempts against the Lives of their Princes, and the welfare of their
Countries; so the Romanists themselves will pass the same Censure on those Laws
and Severities against themselves, which they call Persecution, that these are
less easily excusable in us than our Heresy; because they are more
mischievous. And certainly the disturbance of the Churches Peace, not only by
forbearing Communion (which would expire with the Persons Life) but also by
erecting opposite Communions (which is the means to perpetuate the disturbance
to all succeeding Generations) would in the Judgment of every Peaceable, that
is indeed every truly Christian Spirit, be reputed a mischief so great as that
the moment of very few Propositions would be able either to excuse, or make
amends for it. Which is sufficient to show that it is as Safe as Wise, as Pious
as Politic, to be favorable to the Churches Peace in judging concerning the
merit of particular Controversies.

True or False? And if upon the most accurate and Sincere Enquiry he still
think it True, then 2. With what degree of Evidence it appears so to him,
whether Certainly, or only Probably; and with what degree either of Certainty
or Probability? For it is certain that variety herein will vary the Case of the
Lawfulness of the compliance of such a Person, for it may be much more Lawful
to suppress his sentiments in Probabilities than Certainties, and in less than
greater Probabilities. If he conceive it Certain, then 3. Whether it be also
Necessary, and with what degree of Necessity? Whether it be only Necessary for
himself who is already convinced of it, or it be Necessary for others that they
be convinced also? For it can only be in this latter kind that any can pretend
to any Obligation to divulge their Sentiments. If it be conceived also
necessary for others, then 4. Whether it be necessary to be taught them by a
Person in his Condition? For it is certain that according to the difference of
Men's Conditions their Obligations are also very different; and some Men's
Conditions may free them from those Obligations to which others may remain
obnoxious. If even this be so, that he be the Person obliged to Teach and
Propagate his different Sentiments, yet 5. Whether the mischiefs naturally
consequent to such an attempt be not greater than those which are likely to
follow from his omission, and therefore sufficient to excuse it? For it is, in
Conscience, as well as Prudence, Lawful to permit a lesser Evil for avoiding a
greater, though it be never Lawful to incur the guilt of a Sin for avoiding
any; and the Obligation incumbent on us for instructing others is to be deduced
from their Interest in the Truth wherein they are to be instructed, and
therefore where this Interest proves inconsistent with a greater, there it can
be no Sin, but only a lesser Evil, to omit it. If these mischiefs should not be
conceived sufficient to disoblige him, then 6. Whether he be obliged any
farther than only to propose it, and so to leave it to the Judgment and
Approbation of his Superiors, I do not mean in order to the determination of
his own Internal Assent, but as competent Judges of what is fit to be
externally transacted for the Proselyting of others? Or whether he be also
obliged to resist their determination, when different from his own? If he
conceive himself obliged to resist them, then 7. How far he is so obliged?
Whether only so far as to suffer himself rather to be cast out of Communion
than to comply? Or, whether he may also be Active in withdrawing his own
Communion, even before he is Judicially Excommunicated? Or whether, being
Excommunicated for such a Cause, he be not so much as Obliged to give Passive
Obedience to such Censures of his Lawful Ordinary Superiors, but may also be
Active, not only in encouraging and favoring, but also in erecting, an
opposite Society; seeing that if he himself should prove the Person mistaken
(as he has no reason to think himself more Infallible than his Superiors) this
is a way to perpetuate the Quarrel, and that, in such a Case, very Injuriously?
Especially 8. If he be a Person to whom the power of Governing and maintaining
Ecclesiastical Societies, either by an administration of the Sacraments in his
own Person, or by providing for an Ordinary Succession in Ordaining others, has
never been in an ordinary way communicated (which is generally the Case of our
Seperating Brethren) Whether this supposed Justice of his Cause can excuse or
warrant such an arrogating of a Power never received? Or whether he can expect
that God will countenance him in such his Usurpations?

Pious and Peaceable Person; though Men, whilst they are Men, might still be
supposed likely to dissent in matters truly Disputable and of inferior
concernment, yet, I believe, the Cases would be found very rare wherein
themselves would Judge it safe or excusable to prosecute their differences so
far as to divide the Church for them. And if the Persons concerned would be
pleased to consider further (what all wise men that are any thing conversant in
Controversies will acknowledge from their own Experience) that it is in all
Questions much more easy to Object than to establish any thing Positive; that
especially matters of Practice are only capable of high Probabilities, or
Morally Certain Presumptions, which not amounting to a proof a priori may
therefore be conceived very consistent with the unaccountableness of many
Phenomenon, so that if we were never to presume any thing true in order to
Practice till we were able to give a Positive account of all Objections against
it, much the greater part of Man's Life must be spent in a Pyrrhonick (...);
that seeing this is so, and that it must be therefore Prudent to proceed to
Practice in many Cases wherein we cannot Answer contrary Objections, therefore
it must be the wisest course to rule our Selves by Positive consistent Notions
fitted for the Difficulties on both sides, rather than by particular Objections.

Interest of the Church in a due respect to be paid to Governors in order to
the establishment of a Just and solid Peace, as well as in preserving the
Liberty of private Christians, and preventing Tyrannical Impositions; and would
therefore be so wary in their Arguments for the latter as that they may not
prejudice the former; but would therefore first think of a Prudent Mean which
might avoid both Extremes, and reconcile both Objections,, and then be wary
that the Arguments insisted on might prove no more than what they ought to do
consequently to such an Hypothesis; if, I say, they would seriously consider
these things, this would prove both a more Prudent Expedient for finding out
the Truth than that which is usually observed by them; and I verily believe,
would, in the Event, discover to them the Fallacies of many of their Arguments.

IT would better help them to find the Truth; for they would thus be forewarned
how much their Arguments must prove, and therefore which if they exceed they
may justly be presumed Fallacious, though their particular Fallacy be not as
yet discovered, which must needs be of excellent use in affairs of Practice.
Thus they who admit of the Churches being a Body Politic and subject to a
Government properly so called, and yet withal hold the unlawfulness of some
Impositions on Subjects, must Consequently be assured that all those Arguments
in favor of the Liberty of the Subject which either encroach on the Rights of
Government in general, or render the Government of that particular Society
unpracticable in such Circumstances with which all humane Government is to be
considered, or overthrow the Moral possibility of Catholic Peace, on the one
side; and those which so favor the Governors of the Church as to make all
their Impositions obliging, even in those Instances wherein their Subjects have
a Right to Liberty, on the other; they must, I say, proceeding on these
Principles, be assured that both these sorts of Arguments, how plausible soever
they may seem, yet are really Fallacious.

IT would also discover to them the fallaciousness of their own Arguments. For
let this Principle only be taken for granted, that all Arguments pleading for
the Liberty of Subjects from Ecclesiastical Impositions (so that by an
unavoidable Parity of Consequence they overthrow the Moral possibility of
Catholic Peace) conclude too much, and therefore indeed conclude nothing at
all; and it will then concern them to beware that their own Arguments be not
chargeable with this Fallaciousness.

espoused, therefore it would be much more equal to represent their own Case in
others Persons before they pass their Censure concerning it. I take it
therefore for granted that God has established Catholic Unity on such Terms
as are not likely to fail frequently and perpetually among Pious well-disposed
Persons, nay not at all perpetually. This I do not therefore take for granted
because I think it difficult to be proved, but because I conceive its proof
easy and unnecessary. This therefore being supposed, it will follow that, if,
by the general Principles of our Nonconforming Brethren, many and perpetual
Divisions must in all Probability happen even among Pious well-disposed
Persons, the Preservation of Catholic Peace is on these Principles Morally
impossible, and therefore that the Principles themselves are certainly
Fallacious.

Separation from us, and their Erecting opposite Communions, which is the way
to perpetuate their Separation, they have not given other Pious Persons an
Apology, by themselves unanswerable, to separate also from themselves, whom yet
they will undoubtedly blame for doing so? Which will consequently oblige them,
when this is proved true, to acknowledge the Fallaciousness of their own
Arguments. For what can be pretended in defense of their Separation from Us,
that may not be pleaded by others against themselves, for Justifying eternal
Subdivisions of their own Congregations into inconsiderable Fractions?

IS it the moment of the things? But they are as little momentous as is
possible, even such as themselves confess to be only Circumstantials of
Religion, and in their own Nature perfectly Indifferent. It were easy here to
retort the Arguments themselves make use of to persuade our Governors to yield
them. For can they pretend that they are Indifferent to be yielded by
Governors in condescension to their weaker Subjects? And can they at the same
time think them not Equally Indifferent for Subjects to be complied with in
Submission to their Governors? Or can any Cause be thought too frivolous and
inconsiderable for Justifying a Separation when such as these are thought
sufficient for it?

is it the Imposition of such things that is thought so very grievous, though
the things themselves were (as Calvin was pleased to call them) tolerable
Follies? Indeed this might rationally be urged to persuade Governors to
forbear the interposition of their Authority in such Cases where there were so
little need to interess it. But that it self were only rational when Governors
were also persuaded of their needlesness. But when it is further urged, as it
is by them, to Justify the Separation of Subjects in such Cases wherein
Governors cannot be convinced of their needlesness; how can they Answer such
as, on the same Terms, should be desirous to separate from themselves? For if
this be so, Governors must never expect to be obeyed but in such Cases wherein
Subjects are equally convinced with themselves of the particular Necessity of
their Impositions. Which must make Government perfectly useless, and must
necessarily leave themselves destitute of an Apology against Subdividers.

IT must make Government perfectly useless. For Government must needs be
unsignificant without a Coercive power over Dissenters, and on th^se Terms it
will be impossible for it to have any such power. For how easy is it for
Dissenters to pretend that they are not satisfied with their Impositions if by
this Means they may expect to be excused from their Jurisdiction? And if this
Plea be not conceived sufficient to exempt such Subdividers from themselves,
why do not themselves think of a better for their Exemption from ours?

it is impossible to establish any Preservatives of Peace which may not be
abused by Pretenders. I confess it is so, and from this very Concession I infer
the necessity of Governors following their own Judgment in their Government,
how different soever it may prove from that of their undutiful Subjects. For if
Pretenders may evacuate the best Preservatives of Peace, when they may be
permitted not only to Judge concerning them, but to conform their Practice to
such their Judgment; and it be also impossible to distinguish Pretenders from
such as dissent on account of real Conviction, as certainly it is impossible to
know their thoughts, and without that impossible also to distinguish them; it
will follow that no preservatives of Peace thus permitted to the Judgment of
Subjects can be significant, at least, that Governors cannot, in that way of
proceeding, of suiting their own Decrees to the Consciences of their Subjects,
fix on any certain Rules how the Public Peace may be preserved, and therefore
that they must be put on an unavoidable Necessity of trusting their own
Judgments. If a Coercive Power be necessary for the ends of Government,
certainly there are no Subjects more proper on which it should be exercised
than such Pretenders. And because such Pretenders cannot be distinguished from
others; and, if they Could, yet generally the Arguments for the Merit of the
Cause are more cogent than those which prove the Sincerity of any particular
Person whatsoever; and because in the Judging concerning such Arguments, every
one, and much more Governors, can better assure themselves of their own
Industry in Enquiring, and their own Sincerity in following Conviction;
therefore every one who is capable of Judging (which sure must not be denied to
Governors only) must find it much more reasonable to trust his own Judgment
than that of any other, which if he do, he must also conceive it most Prudent
to Practice accordingly. I cannot imagine what use there can be of Government,
if, after its determinations, private Persons must still be permitted to
Dispute their own Duty, nor with what confidence our Brethren can deny this
Liberty to others which they have so freely Practiced themselves.

if Governors did their Duty, and were careful either to impose nothing but
what themselves, at least, conceived very Necessary and very Reasonable, or to
Enquire into the Merit of the Thing before they imposed it; they would not be
likely to impose any thing that the generality of well-meaning Persons would
not think reasonable as well as themselves: And that Providence is only
concerned for the generality of Persons so qualified, that they have means
sufficient to inform them of their Duty if they be not deficient to themselves
(for that some few well-meaning Persons, or that even greater numbers of such
of them as are not sufficiently Industrious to inform themselves of their Duty
through their own fault, or that even the generality of ill-meaning Persons,
should be permitted to be mistaken, is so far from being derogatory to
Providence as that indeed it is very agreeable to the Rules of its proceedings)
and that in such a Case there could be no Inconvenience if Governors were
indeed rigorous in urging the observation of their own Decrees when it might
justly be presumed that either none but ill-meaning Persons, or, if any others,
yet but few of them, or such of them as were otherwise culpable for not using
sufficient diligence in procuring a better information, would suffer under such
Severities. This I do indeed conceive to give the most tolerable account of
the Practicableness of any Authority on their Principles who conceive it
necessary that Subjects be particularly convinced of the reasonableness of
those things which are made the Instances of their Obedience. Only for deducing
even this Consideration it self nearer home to Practice, several things would
be further considerable to let our Brethren understand that even by these
Principles themselves, if Prudently applied, their own Separation cannot be
excused; or if it may, it must be by such Arguments as may be urged
unanswerably by Subdividers from themselves. For I would entreat them to
consider, Who must be Judge of this Presumption? What things may be presumed so
necessary and evident as that well-meaning and Industrious Persons may
generally be presumed capable of being convinced concerning them? What kind of
things especially may be presumed capable of that Evidence, and so fit for the
Exercise of Authority? And in what Cases there is indeed any need of such
particular Conviction in order to the Practice of Obedience?

WHO must be Judge of this Presumption, Whether the Impositions may be presumed
so Necessary and Evident as that the generality of well-meaning and Industrious
Persons may be presumed capable of being convinced concerning them? By Judge I
mean not, as the Romanists do, such a one as must never be supposed by his
Subjects to be capable of being mistaken, and therefore whose Authority must be
allowed as a certain Argument of the Justifiableness of his determinations; but
as it is understood in our ordinary Secular Courts, whom none think Infallible,
and yet all Equal Persons think fit to be submitted to in Practice, with an
Active Obedience in all things Lawful, however inconvenient, and a Passive even
in things unlawful. Now if we do not agree who shall Judge of this Presumption,
it will be in vain to pretend there may be such a one for reconciling our
Differences, or healing our Divisions. For if every private Person must still
Judge of this Presumption in order to his own Practice, it will never be
serviceable as a Presumption. For can they think that he, who dissents from his
Superiors, can at the same time presume their Determinations (so repugnant to
his own present Sentiments) to be so Necessary, and Evident, and so capable of
affording him sufficient Conviction? And yet the whole Use of this Presumption
as a Presumption is only for Dissenters. For to such as are already of the same
mind with their Superiors, what need can there be of any Presumption to make
them so? If therefore the Superiors themselves must be taken for the competent
Judges of this Presumption, how can they excuse themselves for so manifest an
opposition of them? Or what can they pretend to implead the Separation of
others from themselves, when they have given them so pregnant and undeniable a
Precedent of opposition to their own Superiors?

Whether the matters wherein they differ from their Ecclesiastical Superiors be
generally capable of such a degree of Evidence? For if they be only capable of
Probable Evidence, it cannot be Presumed that the Generality of those whose
Unanimity must, on these Principles, be necessary for the preservation of
Ecclesiastical Peace, can be induced to an Unanimity by the intrinsic Merit of
the Cause. And generally matters of Practice, such as are the Subjects of our
dividing Disputes, are not capable of stronger Arguments than Probabilities,
especially such of them as are Prudentially fitted to present Circumstances.
Either therefore they must acknowledge themselves obliged to yield to the
Judgment of their Superiors, which may especially prove oftener reasonable in
such Cases where many times the Extrinsick Probability deduced from such
Authority may be greater than that which is Intrinsic from the Merit of the
Cause: Or they must (as indeed they seem inclinable to do) deny the use of
Authority generally in such Prudential Interpositions. If the former, that,
though it be indeed an excellent Expedient for Peace, yet I doubt they will
never be able to explain how it is reconcilable with their own Practices. If
the latter, they must deny all Authority in those Cases wherein Authority is
principally needful. For indeed this is the principal use of a Succession of
Authorized Persons, not only to make application of the perpetual standing Laws
of a Society to particular Cases, (though even that must require a decision of
many doubtful Cases undecided by the Laws themselves, and many times capable of
as little Evidence as those we are discoursing of, and yet in such our Brethren
cannot themselves deny the necessity of a standing Authority, which yet is not
Intelligible, at least, not Practicable, without a reciprocal Duty of
Submission in their Subjects) but also to provide for those varying Cases,
which, because they are themselves so obnoxious to change in variety of
Circumstances, are not therefore so fitted for the determination of Laws
perpetually obligatory. For though the Circumstances themselves be of their own
nature indifferent, yet their determination is many times absolutely necessary
for rendering those general Laws Practicable, so that in such Cases they are not
properly so indifferent as our Adversaries conceive them. And yet if they were
prescribed by general immutable Laws they must have been prescribed in such
Cases wherein they had not been either expedient or good, which, I believe, our
dissenting Brethren themselves will Judge unreasonable. And if when they are
good or evil there be no power to make provision concerning them, methinks all
wise men should look on it as a considerable defect in the Polity of that
Society which is concerned for them. But if any Provision be, it must either be
by a particular conviction of every particular Person (for it is the Unanimity
of their Observation that makes them edifying and useful) and that cannot be
expected in matters of so obscure Evidence, and so variable a nature; or by the
determination of Superiors, which is the thing they are so desirous to avoid.

Silence concerning them. But how far from Infallibly-convincing Evidence are
those Arguments which they produce to prove this Silence to be a sign of
Disapprobation? That the Scriptures are perfect none will deny them; nor that
they adaequately contain all those things for which they were designed by the
Holy Ghost as an adaequate Rule. But what those things were for which the Holy
Ghost designed the Holy Scripture as an adaequate Rule, seeing they depend on
his unsearchable Counsels, and his Arbitrary pleasure, we have no reason to be
very confident of, till we be assured by very particular, and very express,
Revelation. And here, where the true stress of the Controversy lies, where is
that Evidence which may be presumed sufficient to prevail with all Candid
Industrious Persons to make them Infallibly of one mind, if any Probabilities
may be allowed so inevident in themselves as even such after all their Industry
and Candor may be presumed still likely to differ concerning them? How do they
prove that the Holy Ghost ever intended it as an adaequate Rule of Discipline,
I do not only mean so as to prejudg against all Provisional Constitutions of
Ordinary Governors fitted to the Circumstances of future Ages, but even so as
that any Platform of Government, even of that Age, was designed to be explained
to us, much less recommended or imposed as an unalterable unimprovable
Precedent to all succeeding Generations? None of the Sacred Writers ever tell
us that this was so much as designed by them, nor can it be necessarily
concluded from the design of any particular Book in it. Nay rather, by all the
ways by which we can judge of such a thing, we have reason to presume that even
those parts of Discipline, which are occasionally alluded to, were never
designed for the Information of Posterity. For no more is mentioned concerning
them than what fell in very appositely with their other designs, and even those
that are mentioned are not explained, but presumed as Notorious to those to
whom their Writings were addressed, as other Antiquities and Customs peculiar
to that Age in which Posterity was never likely to be further concerned. And
where is then this Evidence which may be presumed by our dissenting Brethren
themselves Infallibly convictive of all Candid and Industrious Persons?

In what Cases there is indeed any need of this particular Conviction? Indeed
where the mistake might involve them in a Sin, that might be imputed as such to
their particular Persons, I confess they could not be too wary in Enquiring
after particular Conviction. But where the matter is of it self naturally
Indifferent, where it is only the Unanimity of its observance that makes it
good and useful, and it is plain that this Unanimity is best procured by
standing to the Arbitrament of Governors; such Submission must, even in the
Judgment of every private Person, be esteemed the most Prudent Expedient for
securing a good Practice, which is as much as a Private Person is concerned
for. And indeed this preserving Order, and a due respect to Governors, is a
Consideration so principal in this kind of performances as may make amends for
any mistakes in the Expediency of particular Impositions. Nay I might have
shown that the great Ends of public Edification might, on these Supposals,
have been as effectually promoted in many mistaken Impositions, as if there had
been no mistake at all. And where the mistake is so no way dangerous, where it
has so very little, if any, influence on that which alone, in the estimation of
Equal Persons, makes the Practice commendable, nay where Disobedience is
certainly a greater Evil than can be feared from any mistake in the Imposition
it self; what imaginable reason is there why we should be refractory?

Us, but our Superiors. And though the mistake were chargeable on us as an
Imprudence, yet how can it be reputed as a Sin? Especially considering that it
neither involves us in the violation of any of the Divine Commandments, nor
even in a sinful violation of the Moral Obligation of Prudence it self. For can
they think all our less discreet Actions to be Formal Sins on account of their
being so? Or can it be a Sinful violation of the Law of Prudence it self to do
that which is not so serviceable to its immediate end with a design upon a
greater? And is not that the Case exactly here? Is not the preservation of the
Churches Peace by a compliance with less Prudent Impositions a more
considerable End than the Edification of particular Persons by the suitableness
of every particular Ceremony? Will themselves think it agreeable to the Laws of
Christian Prudence, sometimes to comply with the weakness, nay with the
humoursomness of well-meaning Brethren, whom they think mistaken? And can they
think the same condescension Sinful and Imprudent only when it connives at the
equally-pardonable mistakes of a Lawful Authority? If these Presumptions be not
sufficient for Governors to exert their Authority over Refractory Subjects,
that either the matters themselves are of so little concernment as that the
Consciences of their Subjects cannot be reasonably prejudiced by any mistakes
concerning them; or if otherwise, that the native Evidence of the things is
sufficient to satisfy all Inquisitive well-meaning Persons; I confess I do not
see how they can avoid making the Duty of Governors intricate and
unpracticable, which certainly is to make it otherwise than God has made it.
And if Governors acting bona fide on these Presumptions must necessarily
interfere with the Consciences of the generality of their well-meaning and
Inquisitive Subjects, (as I think it follows unavoidably from our dissenting
Brethrens Principles) this methinks would be sufficient to discover the
Falsehood of them. For certainly the Catholic Peace of the Church as a Body
Politic is Fundamentally grounded on this reconcileableness of the Duty of
well-meaning Conscientious Governors with the Duty of the generality of their
well-meaning Conscientious Subjects; and therefore those Principles which
hinder the possibility of reconciling them, must, on that very account, remain
convicted of being False, as well as Unpeaceable.

Censure or separate from Dissenters from themselves? If they do, how can they
excuse themselves for separating from their own Governors at first, and giving
others a Precedent by them unanswerable? I am confident their own Doctrines and
Decrees are not in many Cases capable of higher Evidence than ours, as little
clear from express Scripture, or any obvious Consequence deduced from it, and
according to the sense of any Judicious impartial Person as liable to mistake.
If therefore notwithstanding this they think their Proof sufficient to ground a
Presumption of their Ingenuity, even in Persons dissenting from them, I do not
understand any disparity why they should not admit the like Presumption for our
Ecclesiastical Governors.

things Indifferent* Nor do I conceive it necessary on this occasion to
convince them of their mistake, and our own Fidelity, by references to their
own more ancient and famous Authors. For my part I do not think that there is
any real difference betwixt even them and their Predecessors, but only in a
misunderstanding of the Notion of Indifferency that is ascribed to such
Impositions of their Superiors. For if by Indifferency be meant an Indifferency
in the Circumstances of Practice after they are Imposed; we are so far from
thinking that they believe them thus Indifferent, as that we our Selves do not
believe them so, nor consequently have we here that ordinary occasion of such
mistakes of ascribing our own Sentiments to them. We our Selves believe them as
Necessary to be done when they are commanded by our Lawful Superiors, as they
believe them Necessary to be omitted. The Indifferency therefore which we our
Selves believe to be in them, and wherein we believe our Brethren also to be of
our mind, is in the nature of the things themselves antecedently to the
determination of ordinary Ecclesiastical Superiors.

Indifferent in this sense, why do they insist on the same Arguments with their
Predecessors concerning Christian Liberty and the Perfection of the Scriptures?
For can they pretend Christian Liberty in such Instances wherein Christ himself
has imposed on their Liberty? Or do they think that the Scriptures taking no
notice of a thing is sufficient not only to make the thing so omitted unlawful
to be Imposed, but unlawful also to be Practiced?

Indifferency therefore of the things Antecedently to the Interposition of
Ecclesiastical Authority is the thing we conceive them to believe. And their
belief that the things are thus Indifferent Antecedently to Ecclesiastical
Authority, and yet are Unlawful when Authority has interposed, this, I say, we
conceive perfectly destructive of such Authority. For by this means such
Authority can never oblige us to do any thing for its own sake, when its
interposition in a thing otherwise Lawful in it self is conceived sufficient to
make it Unlawful. For it cannot be discerned what is done for the sake of this
Authority, but only in such instances where no other reason of doing a thing
can be pretended. If therefore nothing be done for it, it cannot be conceived
to have any obligation of its own, which if it have not, it is impossible it
should be owned as an Authority.

proposing Divine Laws obligatory Antecedently to their Proposal, besides that
when it comes to Practice, it will not be found very significant with our
Brethren, when every private Person among them is permitted to Judge so freely
for himself, and so freely to practice according to his own Judgment, however
different from that of these Authoritative Proposers of the Divine Pleasure to
him; I say, besides this, the Authority thus acknowledged is not confined to
the Office or Jurisdiction, but is wholly grounded on the Personal skill of the
Persons Authorized, and consequently is not the Authority of a Body Politic,
so that at least this is utterly subverted by these Principles and Practices of
our Brethren, which is all that I am concerned for at present. This therefore
may suffice at present to show the inconsistency of these Principles and
Practices of our Brethren with Catholic Peace, because I am desirous to hasten
to my principal design.

viz. that of a Peacemaker. This is the rather fit to be taken notice of,
because it is conceived that the Apostles Precedent in that great Dispute,
concerning eating things offered to Idols, does oblige Peacemakers to avoid
maintaining either side of such disputed Propositions, or abetting either
Party. So the Apostle advises even them, Romans XIV.VIII.
whose better informed Consciences were sufficiently convinced of the
Indifferency of such meats in regard of themselves, to yield their own Right
rather than offend their weaker Brethren, who might take their eating them for
an honor to the Idol, and might be tempted not only to hard and undeserved
censures of such a Precedent, but might be induced, by Authorities so revered
by them, to believe such honors innocent, and by degrees to give those honors
which themselves conceived to reach the Idol, which, in regard of Consciences
so persuaded could be no better than downright Idolatry. In such a Case as this
he professes himself so tender of the welfare, even of such weak Brethren, and
so willing to abridg himself even of his own Liberty where it might prove
prejudicial to it, that he would rather never eat at all than scandalize a weak
Brother by doing so. 1 Cor. VIII.13.
Which way of accommodation seems rather to silence the Disputes than to decide
them, and is thought as suitable to the office of a Peacemaker in these
Controversies which occasion our present Divisions as in those which occasioned
those Discourses of the Apostles, both of them being alike conceived to concern
only things indifferent.

reason of the thing, or the Authority of the Apostle. I confess it is very
agreeable with the Office of a Peacemaker not to interpose with any
earnestness in such Controversies which are not momentous for Peace, and
wherein his earnest interposition may weaken his Authority with that Party with
which he engages, especially then when he foresees his Authority not to be so
great with the contrary Party as to oblige them to acquiesce in his
determination (which is a Consideration of more efficacy now when no particular
Person whatsoever can pretend to such an Authority with those of a different
Persuasion as the Apostle might then) and I confess withal that this is a Case
very applicable to many of our present Controversies, that either they are no
more than mutual misunderstandings, or if real (like those in these Texts) yet
they are not worth contending for, especially when they are debated betwixt
private Persons, whereof neither are under the others Jurisdiction. But does it
therefore follow that, even in such as these a Peacemaker may not declare his
Opinion, and offer his Reasons, in a way Modest and unprovoking? Nay is it not
warrantable by the Apostles Precedent, who plainly takes their part who
esteemed all meats alike, Romans XIV.14.
the Controversy then so fiercely disputed? Or do they, think it unbecoming a
Peacemaker so far to interess himself in a Party, as to let Dissenters
understand the reason they had, rather to yield to those for whom he had
declared? Did not the Apostle even so, whilst he defends his own Party as
strong, v. 1, 2, 3.
and only excuses the other as tolerable in their weakness and frailty?
Wherein therefore is it that we deviate from the Apostles Precedent? Is it
that, though we do not persuade to, yet, we also do not dissuade Superiors
from, the prosecution of Dissenters? But this is plainly none of the Apostles
Case, who had not to do with Differences betwixt Superiors and Subjects, but
only betwixt private coordinate Christians. So he argues: Who art thou that
Judge another Servant? v. 4.
To his own Master he stands or falls; Clearly implying a want of
Jurisdiction in their mutual Censures, which sure our Adversaries themselves
cannot understand of the Censures of the Church* if any such had been
interposed, especially considering her, as She was then to be considered, as
under the extraordinary Privileges of the Apostolical Office, and several
other Extraordinary, both Officers and Assistances of those earlier Ages.

the reason of the thing does oblige Peacemakers to abett some Controversies.
For sure it will not be denied but that there are some Controversies of that
sort, that, Men differing in their Judgments concerning them, and Practicing
consequently to such Differences, must be obliged to violate the public Peace.
And sure it cannot be thought dissonant to the Office of a Peacemaker that he
should oppose himself to such Opinions as are themselves so opposite to his
great design. It is easy to discern how improperly the Topics, on which our
Adversaries would have us insist, are applicable here, so easy as that I
cannot think it necessary to instance in them. Nay indeed the very same reason
which would prove it advisable for Controvertists not to abett Parties in
matters of inferior concernment, will, I do not say, prove it only advisable,
but oblige them to do it here. For can there be a more suitable employment for
a Peacemaker than to show his Zeal against the obstacles of Peace? And can any
obstacles of Peace be more mischievous than such as necessarily engage Men into
Parties and Factions, and when they are once so engaged make their differences
irreconcilable? And what can more effectually do this than Dividing Principles?
For what can more seriously terrify well-meaning Persons from their
complyances with Men, than to think that such complyances cannot be purchased
at an easier rate than the loss of their Peace with God? Or what can make them
more implacable to one another, than when all Moderation is interpreted as a
defect of Zeal? Nay when they are not only actually so persuaded, but even in
their cooler humors can have no reason to be persuaded otherwise as long as
they were serious in the belief of their first Dividing Principles? For such
there are no other Means of making them Peaceable than either the
Contradiction, or the better Information, of their present Consciences; and I
am confident our Brethren themselves are more Ingenuous than to assert the
former only for avoiding the latter. But besides this agreeableness to the
Office of a Peacemaker to engage in Controversies necessary to be abetted for
the interest of Peace, I might have added farther, that it is very suitable to
the Office of a Lover of Peace to be favorable to such endeavors; which how
near it will concern our dissenting Brethren as they would approve themselves
Lovers of it, themselves will easily understand without any application of
mine. And how far even a favor to Peace might proceed toward an actual
reconciliation, notwithstanding Men's other differences in Opinion, I have
already intimated.. 8, 9.


Peace of the Church be concerned in any Controversies, it cannot be denied to
be most considerably so concerned in these of Schism. Which the rather deserve
an exact discussion, because, as Schism is the great Ecclesiastical Crime of
our Age and Countries, so the Persons guilty of it have rendered the very Notion
of it intricate, that they might clear their own Practices from such an
Aspersion. Nor indeed have these false Notions only found acceptance among such
as are at present concerned to clear themselves from its Guilt, but have been
taken up from several disorderly Practices of some of the first Reformers, who
were not obliged to Enquire into it by the opposition of their Romish
Adversaries, who generally in the last Age did not insist on the charge of
Schism, but Heresy, against them; Nay have been too much countenanced by
several less wary Sons of our own Church, who partly being themselves ill
Principled in the Right of Church Authority, which they made very deeply, if
not wholly dependent on the power of the Secular Magistrate, (and such a Party
there has been among us from the beginning of the Reformation to this very day,
occasioned by the first Disputes concerning the Supremacy in these Kingdoms,
as it is not ordinary for the generality in such Disputes of Interest, and
especially where there were so great and intolerable Encroachments on the
Secular Power challenged by their Competitors, to avoid Extremes) on which
Principles it was easier to charge Dissenters with Sedition in the State, than
Schism in the Church; And partly being favorable to some Foreigners who were
hardly, if at all, excusable from that Notion of Schism with which our own
Non-Conformists have been chargeable; And partly finding so much advantage in
the Particulars Disputed of to convince Dissenters of the Unreasonableness and
Injustice of their Separation on such Pretenses without engaging themselves in
those less grateful Controversies wherein they were likely to expose themselves
to the Odium of the Populacy and Civil Magistracy; And partly being
unreasonably fearful to give their Romish Adversaries any advantage either
against themselves, if they defended themselves by such Principles as might
reach all the Cases of the several Reformers or against their Friends in the
main Cause, if they had thus a vowedly disowned their proceedings in the manner
of its management; These, I say, seem to have been the real Motives which in
all likelihood prevailed with the more Prudent and Intelligent Controvertists
to divert them to another way of managing those Disputes, and the Authority of
these may have been conceived sufficient for influencing others.

Odium to which an Enquiry of this Nature must be obnoxious, and the great
advantage our Adversaries have of us in the Sentiments of the vulgar. Yet the
establishing the true Notion of Schism is so extremely necessary for fixing any
solid grounds of Catholic Peace, as that I hope our Judicious and Candid
Brethren will not only excuse us, but conceive themselves obliged in Equity and
Conscience to hearken patiently, and to Judge favorably, especially when they
shall find in our way of management nothing offensive to such as are not ready
to be offended with Truth itself when it shall declare it self their Adversary.
For though it cannot be thought incredible here what we Experience so usual in
other Instances wherein particular Interests are concerned, that Men in
reducing their general Notions to Practice are many times swayed, and many
times misguided, into Extravagances unjustifiable by their general Principles,
and that well-meaning Persons as well as others are obnoxious to the same
frailties; yet many of our Nonconforming Brethrens Errors in Practice are so
naturally consequent from their Principles, as that indeed they cannot be
sufficiently prevented without discovering the Errors of the Principles
themselves.

Ecclesiastical Government, nay plainly supposes that either there is no such
thing, or that it is perfectly Democratical (if indeed that may be called
properly so much as Democratical Government it self where there is no
obligation to submit acknowledged even in the smaller part, when Government is
exercised upon them, but what arises from their disability to resist) so I
confess their Notion of Schism and the Duty of a Peacemaker as described by
them are exactly fitted to this Hypothesis. For supposing the Church as
established by Christ not to have been confederated, as all Commonwealths are,
by a Political Subordination of Governors and Governed, but only to have been
a Multitude of Men no otherwise united among themselves than by the Unanimity
of each particular, or, at the uttermost, only as the Schools of the
Philosophers were, by a reverential respect, and gratitude, of Disciples to
their Teachers; no Man can here be supposed to have any reason to impose his
own Judgment on another; or if he does, he cannot in reason expect that the
Person so imposed on should conceive himself obliged to yield to the
Imposition, or think the others proceedings Just if he should endeavor to
force him to it, any further than he is satisfied that the other has reason to
justify his proceedings.

Unity being, as I said, founded on the Unanimity of the particulars, they
cannot be obliged further to maintain this Unity of Amicable Correspondence
than as they are on all sides convinced concerning the reasonableness of the
Particulars exacted as Conditions of that Correspondence; or if any yielding
may be thought reasonable in such a State, even in particulars which are
thought unreasonable, yet it can only then be thought obliging, when the
Particulars are of absolute Necessity for maintaining such an Amicable
Correspondence. Otherwise, where the things themselves are not thought true, or
yielding them is not thought absolutely Necessary, I do not say, for humouring
the Person, but, for maintaining an Amicable Correspondence with the whole
Multitude; though it may be Lawful, nay sometimes Noble and Generous, to bear
even with the humors of particular weaker Persons, and much more when they are
Numerous; yet there being no Jurisdiction on either side, there can also be no
obligation to yield. And therefore they who deny their Correspondence without
submission to Terms unnecessary and humoursome, cannot in any reason exact a
compliance from Dissenters who believe their Terms to be of that nature; and
such Dissenters, refusing such Terms, and consequently such Correspondence
which cannot be had without them, do no more than what they can justify (which
in this Case cannot be pretended concerning the Imposers, who are supposed to
arrogate a Power not belonging to them, without any pretense either of
Authority or even of Necessity for maintaining a confident Correspondence) and
consequently the blame of such a breach cannot be charged on such Dissenters,
but such Imposers.

Hypothesis, that the Church is only such a Multitude united on no other Terms
than the necessity of an Amicable Correspondence betwixt the particulars, this
must indeed be the true Notion of a Formal and Culpable Schism; so it would be
very congruous to the Office of a Peacemaker, not to persuade the Dissenters
to yield, but the Imposers to forbear Imposing. For seeing in such a Case there
can be no other Necessity pretended for submitting to such Impositions, in
order to the signifying their own desires of maintaining an Amicable
Correspondence with their Brethren, but either their willingness to be
convinced of the Reasonableness of the things exacted from them, or their
willingness to yield in things necessary for a Correspondence, that is, which
the Exacters think themselves obliged to exact, and which they from whom they
are Exacted do not Judge more intolerable than the loss of their
Correspondence, which must not be hoped for but on such Concessions; They must
as well be guilty of the interruption of this Correspondence who confine it to
Conditions which even themselves confess unnecessary to be imposed, as they who
so undervalue it as to refuse to purchase it by some inconsiderable Submissions
even to humoursome Conditions.

Hypothesis of the Churches being no Body Politic, especially when themselves
are obliged in Interest to urge Authority for the restraint of their own
refractory Subjects; yet, if any do yet doubt of it, I shall, without
Digression, only desire them to consider the natural and obvious tendency of
those Principles so eagerly maintained among them concerning the Power of the
Church's being not a Power of Coercion but only of Persuasion (which coordinate
private Persons may as well challenge as Governors) and concerning the Justice
of their defending their Christian Liberty (as they call it) even in things
Indifferent and in opposition to Ecclesiastical Governors (which plainly
overthrows the Duty of Submission in Subjects which necessarily answers
Authority in Governors) and the great Disparities, which they always pretend
when they are urged with any Parallel Instances wherein themselves acknowledge
any Coercive Authority, betwixt such an Authority and that which they will
acknowledge in the Church, that I may not now charge them with such
Extravagancies of particular Persons as are neither generally owned, nor are
Fundamental to their Nonconformity.

Irreconcilableness of their Practices in urging the same Authority to their
own Subjects which they have denied to their Governors, it comes to pass that
they are unable to give any Positive consistent Hypothesis agreeable with it
self, and exclusive of the pretenses of Seditious Persons. Though I must withal
confess that of all the Non-Conformists the Independents, as in other Cases, so
here, seem to me to speak most Consequently to the Principles granted them by
the Presbyterians (who showed them the first Precedent of Division) in placing
the first Seat of Government in the Common People. For this gives the most
consistent account of the Calling and Succession of their Ministers
notwithstanding their not being empowered by such Officers as, according to the
Government established, from which they separated, were only possessed of the
power of Calling in an Ordinary way, and will afford the best Apology for their
resisting the first Church Officers, whilst they were countenanced by the
Communalty, to whom they conceive the Officers themselves accountable.

Hypothesis is very Precarious, and because that, though the Communalty had
been Originally invested with this power, yet, the Peaceable Prescription of so
many Centuries against them wherein this Power has been exercised by, and
acknowledged as the Right only of Church Officers, and unanimously submitted to
as such by the concerned Communalties themselves (which is certainly sufficient
to alienate even a Just Title that is by any Humane Means alienable, and, by
the Principles of Government, must make it as Schismatical for them forcibly to
retrive it without the consent of those whom they found actually possessed of
it, as it would be Seditious now for any to attempt to restore the old British,
or Roman, Title to England, because they were once good and Legal) I say
besides these Presumptions which lie against this power of the People for
legitimating their Usurpations; yet if this were granted to be the Peoples
Right, there are further very Just Exceptions against their Dissenting
Brethrens Proceedings which may make it questionable, whether what has been
done in favor of them be fit to be reputed as a valid Act of the People
themselves. For either they must establish some. Ordinary Rules of Assembling
and Acting by which it may be known what is really transacted by the
Communalty, and what is only pretended to be so by a few Seditious Dissenters
(without which no Notion of Government, not so much as Democratical, is
intelligible) and upon these Principles either they will, I doubt, find it more
difficult, than they seem to be aware of, to Justify their first Separation
from any Regular Proceedings of the Communalties themselves, (neither their
Assemblies being Legally indicted, nor their Suffrages being Legally managed,
according to the necessary Laws of Democratical Government:) Or they must allow
a liberty of Separation to every one who can persuade so many of the Communalty
to join with him as may make a distinct Church, that is according to them,
Seven Persons. That is, two Parties, two Witnesses, two Judges and an odd
Person that the Suffrages of the Judges may not be even. And thus they plainly
overthrow all Government, so much as Democratical, unless over such small
Numbers as Seven, and allow every Seditious Person, who can Proselite them, a
Liberty of Subdividing from, and in opposition to, themselves, by the same
Precedent as they have done from others.

Unity of the Church be supposed to be that of a Body Politic, the true Notion
of SCHISM must be this, that it dissolves the Church's Unity in such a sense as
this. And because this Unity consists in a due Subordination of Governors and
Governed, therefore the Notion of Schism consequent hereunto must be this, that
it is an Interruption of this Subordination. And therefore 1. such a Separation
as denies not only Actual Obedience, but the Lawful Jurisdiction of Superiors,
and withdrawes Subjects from the proper Legal Coercions of such a Society,
especially if continued in the same Districts where Separation from Government
is not intelligible without opposition to it, must needs be Schismatical. For
where there are two Governments not Subordinate there must needs be two Bodies
Politic, and therefore that Separation which interrupts this Subordination,
and erects an Independent Government must consequently dissolve this Political
Unity, and be Schismatical. This therefore, being the true ground of this
Notion of Schism, must be the principal thing requisite to be proved against
our Adversaries. And whether it be proved directly, that the Church is such a
Body Politic, and it be thence inferred that such a Separation as that I have
been speaking of is properly Schismatical; or whether the Separation be first
proved Schismatical and this Political Unity of the Church be thence deduced,
both ways of proceeding will come to the same event.

convinient and avaylable for the Salvation of particular Persons, that they be
thus confederated into Political Societies, yet we cannot prove it so necessary
as that, Antecedently to all Positive Revelation, we might have been able to
conclude that God must have thus confederated them. For besides the great
Presumption and Uncertainty of this way of Arguing what God must have done from
what we esteem fit and convenient, (acknowledged by all Equal Persons in
Instances whereof they may be presumed Equal Judges, that is, when this
Argument is produced in favor of Adversaries) the Argument is then more
especially Weak and Imprudent when the conveniences are no greater than still
to leave many things to the determination of Humane Prudence (and such they are
here) and when we can have securer ways of Arguing, as none will doubt but that
it is much more secure to Enquire what God has actually done from actual
Revelation, than from our own fallible. Conjectures what was fit to have been
done by him, especially in things so Indifferent and Arbitrary as these are
concerning which I am at present discoursing. If therefore it may appear that
God has actually made the Church a Body Politic, it will follow that
resistance to Ecclesiastical Governors must be actually comdemned by God as
Shismatical; and, on the contrary, if it appear that God has actually condemned
Resistance to Ecclesiastical Officers as Schismatical, it will also follow that
he has made the Church a Body Politic, there being no other difference betwixt
these two ways of Arguing, but that one of them is a priori, the other a
posteriori, but in both of them the Connection is equally certain from its own
rational Evidence.

actual Constitution of the Church is most proper to be proved from Scripture,
so the most satisfactory way of proving it thence will be, not only to prove
thence the Duty of Obedience to be required from Subjects to their
Ecclesiastical Superiors, but also to discover from thence the mischief likely
to befall Subjects upon their Disobedience. For 1. it is in vain to constitute
a Government, or a Body Politic, properly so called, without a Coercive Power
over its particular refractory Members. And therefore if, in the Constitution
of the Church as established in the Scriptures, there appeared nothing Coercive
over its particular Members to force them to the performance of their Duty
under pain of a greater Prejudice to be incurred by them in case of refusal
than that of barely acting irrationally and indecorously, this very Omission
would make it suspicious that the Duty exacted from them were no more than that
Reverential respect which we commonly conceive due to Persons of excellent
accomplishments, or from whom we have received particular Obligations, though
they have no Right of Jurisdiction over us; but not that Obedience which is
properly due to Governors of Societies by virtue of their Offices, without any
regard to their Personal accomplishments, and our Obligations to them. So that
this real Prejudice which is likely to be incurred by the Subject in Case of
Disobedience, is very necessary to be discovered from the nature of the
Constitution of the Church, as it is expressed in the Scripture, even in order
to the clearing the Nature of the Duty, and the extent of the obligation of
this Authority.

External Body Politic, its Coercive Power must also be External. And
therefore, though the validity of her Censures be derived from Gods seconding
them, that is, from his remitting or binding in Heaven what she remits or binds
on Earth, yet this power will indeed be very little Coercive if Gods
confirmation be thought easily separable from the Churches Act. For seeing that
a Society of this nature cannot imply any External Coercion of the External
Act, all the Coercion she can pretend to, can be no other than a Deprivation of
those Privileges which are enjoyed and may be pretended to by virtue of her
visible Membership, and an exposing the Person so deprived to all the
Calamities consequent to such a Deprivation. But if the Confirmation of these
censures by God be wholly resolved into the merit of the Cause for which they
were inflicted, they can never be feared, nor consequently prove Coercive to
their Subjects who are not convinced of the merit of the Cause it self. Which
in the event will make them never properly Coercive at all, especially in
regard of a Government which is acknowledged Fallible, as the Church is
generally by Protestants. For it is to be presumed that all who stand out so
obstinately against the Churches Authority as to provoke her Censures, either
are not, or pretend not to be, satisfied with the Justice of her Decrees; and
therefore if their own Judgments may be taken (as all the Coerciveness of such
Censures as these are, which are not Externally Coercive must be derived from
the Judgments of the Persons lying under them concerning their validity) there
can be no hopes of reclaiming them by Censures who are not already such as may
be presumed satisfied concerning the Justice of the Cause for which they were
inflicted, and yet such alone are the proper Objects of Coercive Power.

Declarative, not Operative, are not properly the Acts of Authorized, but
Skillful, Persons; for it is Skill, not Authority, that is a Prudent
Presumption that any thing is such as it is Declared, and therefore the
Opinions of Learned Doctors, though but private Persons, would, in this way of
Proceeding, be much more formidable than the Peremptory Sentences of
Ecclesiastical Governors as they are considered only under that Relation. I
cannot see how this can be denied by those who conceive the Declaration to be
purely-Speculative, and to be of no further force for obliging particular
Persons than as upon particular examination of its Grounds it may appear to be
well grounded. But if the Declaration be conceived to be Authentical as it is
performed by such Persons, the meaning of that must be, that it must be
generally presumed valid, so that the cases may be but rare wherein the Person
obnoxious to it may presume his own cause so good as to venture to stand out in
opposition to it. And to that purpose it will be requisite that the Sentences
be presumed valid before God even in cases wherein Governors may themselves be
mistaken in the Causes of their Infliction (as I see no reason why they may not
where the mistake is at the uttermost no more than an Imprudence, not a Sin,
either to Governors, or Governed; for in such a case though the Omission it
self be not Sinful as considered Precis^ly, yet it may as Obstinacy against
lawful Governors, and Disobedience and violation of Peace, which will oblige
us to condescend in Instances, howere Imprudent, if not Sinful, may make it so)
or that the Instances wherein they may prove Invalid before God be either so
rare, or so difficult to be known more securely by a Man's private Judgment than
by the public, as that it can very rarely be Judged Safe or Prudent for a Man
to rely on his own private Judgment concerning them in opposition to the
Public.

Fallible in matters of that nature for which we are concerned in our present
Controversy. The very Romanists themselves confess their Ordinary
Ecclesiastical Governors, at least, Fallible in matters of Fact, and in Rules
of Prudence; and our dissenting Brethren themselves do not charge our
Impositions with Heresy or Immorality. But if the Censures of a Fallible Church
cannot be presumed valid in any Instances wherein we cannot be assured that she
is not actually mistaken, and the nature of the thing is such as does not
afford certain Arguments on either side, but generally contrary probabilities
on both; such a Government must generally prove Useless and Vnpracticable, and
therefore unlikely to have been settled by God.

Body Politic being Spiritual, the Rewards and Punishments must be so too. And
therefore that Subjects may be encouraged to Obedience, and discouraged from
Disobedience, it will be requisite that they may as confidently presume that
they shall receive such Spiritual Advantages by virtue of their admission into
such a Society to which no private Dispositions whatsoever could, so assuredly,
entitle them (I do not say, if they had proved negligent in their Addresses to
be admitted into it, but also if they had not submitted to all Impositions not
Sinful in Order to their reception into it) and have as Just and Probable
Reasons for fearing Spiritual Inconveniences by their exclusion from it as
Secular Subjects are assured of Secular Advantages or Disadvantages by their
admission to, or exclusion from, Secular Societies.

exclusion does not (as it did in the Apostles time) expose the Person to
external visible Corporal Inflictions, (as now generally it does not) there it
be at least understood to deprive the Person excluded of all the Privileges he
enjoyed by virtue of his being a Member of such a Society, and so to expose him
to those mischieves, whatever they be, that are necessarily consequent to such
a deprivation.

Privileges of such a Society be understood to be all the Advantages designed
by God in its Erection. And therefore whatever good was designed to Mankind in
the Gospel there is no reason to believe that he designed it for any
particulars, any farther than as they should approve themselves willing to
submit to such Terms as he was pleased to prescribe them; and it is not
Credible that, if he were pleased to erect a Body Politic, he should be
thought at the same time, to allow such encouragements out of it, and
independent on it, as that it should be left to the Liberty of particular
Subjects either to enter themselves into it, or not to enter themselves; or to
submit to its constitutions, or to refuse submission.

external way Coercive, it is very convenient that their application to
particular Persons be transacted with particular external Solemnities. For it
is by this means that particular Persons may be justly terrified with the loss
of the Spiritual Advantages when they are excluded from the external
Solemnities of Application, without which they are not Ordinarily to be
expected. And this is all which can be done by Governors, to exclude
particular Subjects from such Solemnities, which can be of no efficacy for
terrifying Conscientious Persons if the Advantages to be gained by them may
also be easily expected without them. And as all this is very naturally
consequent to a design of Erecting the Church into a Body Politic, and does
effectually promote that design by letting Subjects understand their obligation
to submit to all Impositions not Sinful, under pain of losing all the Ordinary
means of intitling themselves to the Privileges of the Gospel; so certainly it
must give Men the most satisfactory account that God has actually intended such
a design, to let them understand that this is the very Method observed by God
in the actual Constitution of the Church under the Gospel. And indeed whoever
denies any of them will make Government so unpracticable as that it would be
improbable to have been designed by God.

express Scriptures, both because (as I have already observed) we do not find
the Scripture to enlarge professedly on Instances of this nature, but rather
Occasionally to intimate them as coincident with its principal design, as
presuming them already sufficiently Notorious from the Practices of the Church
to the capacities of the meanest Idiotes then living; And because it is not
usual for the Scriptures, even where they do indeed allude to notorious
Practices, to insist Critically on their true design and usefullness, which
were then also so very notorious from the manner of their Practice as that the
weaker fort of Christians (for whose use the Scripture was principally
accommodated) could not be presumed Ignorant of them as they were then
concerned to know them; And because it is not the Letter, but the Sense, of the
Scripture for which I am at present principally concerned, and it is in
Prudence the most advisable means to expound the Sense of all Laws, especially
concerning Power, by the actually avowed Practices of the Courts of their
respective Jurisdictions; And because the Practices of the Churches in those
Primitive Ages, especially those concerning the power of the several Orders of
Governors undoubtedly established by the Apostles, were not permitted to the
Judgment of Church Officers only as they were able to inform themselves out of
the Scriptures, but were as undoubtedly settled by the Apostles themselves
Personally, where themselves had propagated their Doctrine, and therefore as
agreeably to their minds as if it had been expressed in the Scripture it self,
and accordingly those Primitive Authors on whose Credit alone we can be
rationally assured of the Books of the Scriptures themselves, were as confident
that what they could thus make out from such Practices instituted by the
Apostles was as agreeable to the Apostles mind as what was written by them, and
were as confident that several of these Practices were indeed derived from the
Apostles as they were that several of these Books, which they have recommended
to us, were written by them; And because the usefullness of Arguments deduced
from Scripture-Consequences is generally owned by that sort of Adversaries with
whom I am at present dealing. But yet I do not intend to make use of any other
Arguments for clearing the design of the Scriptures in these Particulars, but
such as are, in Prudence, most proper for discovering it, and such as were in
all likelihood made use of by those then living for whose use the Scripture was
Primarily written, either plain Consequences, or plain Correspondencies to
those Patterns from which they were Originally derived, and Notorious and
Vniversally-received Practices then prevailing. And certainly if the Holy Ghost
had any design to be understood by them, he must have expressed himself so as
that the Sense, which he saw them inclinable to conclude from the use of those
Means they were likely to Judge most Prudent, must have been that which was
intended by himself; and it cannot be reasonable for us to fear that We should
be misguided by those means now, by which they were securely conducted then.
The distinct Proof of these Particulars I shall endeavor as they fall in with
the principal design of my following Discourse, not being willing to be more
tedious than my Subject will necessarily Oblige me.

Natural Philosophy, and rendering it useful for material purposes in Humane
Conversation, have now unanimously agreed on it as the most Prudent Course for
erecting a rational solid Hypothesis, first to inform themselves accurately of
the Phenomenon by a Natural History Prudently collected, and Credibly attested;
so the like Method of adjoining Historical Experiments to our other
Informations, in Order to our passing an accurate Judgment of the whole, must
needs be of Universal use in all kind of knowledge, which is only Probable and
Conjectural and a posteriori, but more especially in matters of Practice, and
even among them yet more especially in such as depend on Arbitrary Institution,
as matters of Government generally do. Nor will it only be a pleasing
entertainment to the Reader in affairs of this nature to find the Principles so
exactly agreeable to Practice and Experience and the Reasons so illustrated by
all the stages and Periods of History, even where there could be nothing to
reconcile them but the intrinsical agreeableness of their natures; but a very
solid Argument for mutually proving both the Reason and the History. For as it
will appear that the Practice of that Power cannot be excepted against as unfit
to be proposed to us as a Precedent when it is found agreeable to the
Principles of the Government; so it must needs be a very strong Conviction that
those Principles of the Government are genuine and natural which exactly are
found Answerable to all its justifiable Practices. It is certain that the true
Hypothesis (whatever that be) must necessarily be supposed agreeable with all
its Justifiable Practices; and though it may be possible that a false one may
be so too; yet neither is it likely that it should be false which is found to
do so, and if it were, yet it will serve our purpose for the direction of our
Practices (which is all for which we are concerned in its Truth) so well as
that our mistake cannot prove Prejudicial to us, and we may therefore as
confidently rely on it as ordinarily Astronomers do on their Hypotheses of the
Heavens in their Calculations for which they have no better security. Besides
this way of Proceeding will mutually supply each others defectiveness. For as
there are some things so clear in Reason and express Testimony as that by them
we may be able to Judge concerning Practices whose allowableness or
unlawfullness is not so clear from the Histories by which they are delivered to
us; so on the other side there are some Practices of whose allowableness we may
be better assured from their Histories, than by the Antecedent Evidence of
those Principles, on which they are immediately grounded; so that from both, a
much more entire account may be expected concerning this whole affair, than
from either singly. This is the reason that has induced me to divide my
Discourse accordingly into two Parts, the Rational and Historical. For I
conceived it more convenient thus to consider them distinctly than to mix them
together, both that I might thus confine them within more Legible limits; and
because in a Discourse of this nature wherein a Series of Principles is
endeavored, the very Interruption which must have been occasioned by so
frequent Digressions, must needs hinder the Reader from discerning the
closeness of the Discourse. In this former Part, I keep close to my Method, and
am more solicitous to prove my Assertions and to prevent any Adversaries
Exceptions than to make formal Answers to every one particularly, which will be
very easy to any who has understood my Principles; but I do not intend to
neglect any thing that I conceive considerable, and to multiply words
concerning such things as upon my stating of the Question appear to be plain
misunderstandings of it, I cannot conceive likely to prove grateful to the
Intelligent Reader. In the later I intend, not only to show, that, by the
Notion of Shism which was condemned for such in the first and purest Ages, our
Separating Brethren cannot be excused from its Guilt, but also, that the
several Principles on which I ground it were owned by them, and are certainly
agreeable to the sense of the Apostles.

Separation of Churches from EPISCOPAL Government as Practiced by the
NON-CONFORMISTS Proved Schismatical, etc.
CHAP. I. Less security of Salvation out of the Episcopal Communion, than in
it, sufficient to oblige to submit to all unsinful Conditions of continuing in
it.
THE CONTENTS.
1. That for proving our Obligation to enter into the Communion of the visible
Church it is not requisite to prove that we must otherwise be excluded from all
hopes of Salvation, but it is abundantly sufficient to make it appear, that we
cannot be otherwise so well assured of it. This proved as to both parts. 1. As
to the Negative, That it is not requisite for this purpose to prove that we must
otherwise be excluded from all hopes of Salvation.. I.II.III.IV.V.VI. 2. As to
the Positive part, That for proving this Obligation to enter into the External
Communion of the visible Church, it is sufficient to show that, without such an
external Communion with it, we cannot so well be assured of our Salvation; and
that this supposition of our less security without it, is sufficient to prove
us obliged to submit to all terms not directly sinful, however inexpedient, in
Order to the procuring this external Communion.. VII.VIII.IX.X. An application
of what has been said in this Chapter to the Adversaries.. XI.XII.

for proving our Obligation to enter into External Communion with a visible
Church, and of that part of it for which we are at present more particularly
concerned, it is not requisite to prove that we must otherwise be excluded from
all hopes of Salvation, but it is abundantly sufficient to make it appear that
we cannot otherwise be so well assured of it; And this want of so good
Assurance of Salvation out of a Church Communion as may be had in it, is
sufficient to oblige a Subject to submit to all unsinful Impositions (how
grievous soever otherwise) of them who have the power of such a Communion,
rather than suffer himself to be excluded from Communion by them for want of
such submission. Here are two things to be considered distinctly: 1.
Negatively, that for this purpose it is not requisite to prove that we must
otherwise be excluded from all hopes of Salvation. For supposing that their
exclusion from all hopes of Salvation could not indeed be proved; Yet what
possible security can we have, upon that account, to conclude that it is not
true? It is certain many things are actually true whose truth may not appear to
us who are so short sighted in our Informations, and so easily seduced in our
Reasonings. And the uttermost that, in any Prudence can be concluded from this
way of arguing is, only that, for ought we know, the Salvation of such may be
possible, and that, considering the unavoidableness of this case to some
particular Persons, and the Divine Goodness and Indulgence in such cases as are
really unavoidable, and the Divine Arbitrary freedom, if not in inflicting
Punishments, yet, at least, in forbearing them, and in the dispensation of his
Favors, notwithstanding his Covenant, it may be also Probable. But what then?
Can any of our Brethren assure themselves that this is their case, and that
they are in these Pardonable Cercumstances, and entitled to these extrordinary
unpromised favors? No prudent considerative person can think that they are as
easily excusable who cannot find conviction, when offered to them, as they who
never had it offered. And is not this exactly their case? If they should prove
mistaken, and they should really, as we suppose them to do, deprive themselves,
by their separation, of the Ordinary means of Salvation; can they to excuse
themselves pretend that they want any evidence of which the Cause is capable,
or of which their dissenting Brethren are able to inform them?

NOR must they think that the supposition of their being mistaken is precarious
or unseasonable here where we are discoursing concerning the excusableness of
such a mistake so supposed. For this is sufficient to show that the confessed
excusableness of the case of some Persons not communicating with the Church,
and consequently the possibility of the Salvation of such Persons, is not
sufficient to infer the possibility of the Salvation of our Brethren, unless
their case be proved equally pardonable with that of those whose Salvation is
acknowledged possible; so that in both cases a mistake is plainly supposed, and
its excusableness is the only thing disputed of.

mischievous, where nothing but the great apparent merit of the cause on an
impartial examination can make amends for their personal guilt, as excusable as
they whose Practices need no excuse, whatever their Opinions may. None can
think them who separate only for indifferent Practices and probable Opinions as
excusable as they who do not separate, but are driven out, because they cannot
profess to believe gross Falsehoods, and to approve undefensible Immoralities.
None can think them who Vsurp a power never given them, and who refuse passive,
as well as active, Obedience, and who propagate their Errors and perpetuate
them to the perpetual disturbance of the public Peace as excusable as they who
confine themselves within their due bounds, discharge their duty to their
Superiors as far as their Consciences will permit them, by a passive where they
cannot with an active Obedience, and who neither propagate nor perpetuate their
Errors, nor disturb the public Peace. So that in all these particulars, to
repeat no more, the disadvantage lies plainly on our dissenting Brethrens side.

Can they still assure themselves so well of their Title to them as to venture
all that is precious and valuable, their very Souls and their Eternity upon it?
If notwithstanding all these heavy aggravations, Schismatics may still be
rationally confident of the security of their condition; I must then indeed
confess that Schism will be no more than a Theological Scarecrow (as an
Advocate for it has been pleased to style it) and it will then be so generally
true that their Salvation is possible, Mr. Hales.
as that the Cases must be rare where they can be presumed likely to fail of
it, which must perfectly overthrow the terror and abhorrency which God as a
Prudent Governor must necessarily be supposed to have obliged men to, against
a Sin of so extremely malignant influence on the Public as this is.

Possibility of some men's Salvation out of the External Communion of the
visible Church, to make out their Title to a Pardon for their mischievous
Practices better, than I doubt they can; yet what wise man would not be very
wary of committing that which must need a Pardon in hopes of obtaining one? Who
would not rather choose that side on which the most probable presumtions lay,
and where fewest miscarried? Who would not think it safer to yield to any
Imposition, how heavy so ever it were, if it were not directly sinful than so
much as to hazard the guilt of a sin so criminal and mischievous as real Schism
is? Especially considering that the cases wherein a Possibility of Salvation is
to be allowed to persons out of Ecclesiastical Communion, must be rare and
difficult, that the condition it self may be rendered formidable; and the very
hazarding such a guilt rather than yield to an Imposition that is not sinful is
certainly none of the most excusing Circumstances. Though it were possible for
such a Person to nourish some hopes, yet it is not so easily intelligible how
he could rationally enjoy any comfort.

Romanists make of the Ingenuity of the Reformed Churches in acknowledging a
Possibility of Salvation to particular Persons of their Communion; and it is as
well known how unreasonable as well as unequal they are thought by Protestants
in this way of proceeding. And yet there are no Arguments producible by them to
prove it unreasonable, which may not be applied to show the unconclusiveness of
our dissenting Brethrens supposal of the security of some persons out of the
External Communion of the visible Church to prove the Prudence of their
venturing on it. For will they say that, notwithstanding this Salvability of
particular Persons in the Romish Communion, yet it is so little to be ascribed
to their being of that Communion, as that their being so is rather a Prejudice,
than an Advantage, to their Salvation, to be rather excused, than recommended;
nay that their danger is so great, and the escapes so rare, and so incapable to
be made out to the comfort of the Person concerned, as that not only that
Communion cannot Prudently be chosen upon equal terms where a better may be
had, but that all tolerable terms, that is, all that are not sinful, are rather
to be born with than that a better should not be actually obtained? And is not
this a plain Confession that a bare possibility of Salvation out of the
external Communion of the visible Church is not sufficient to excuse them from
submitting to all lawful, however inconvenient, terms of obtaining this
external Communion? Especially when it may appear that this state of wanting
this external Communion, is, and may be, notwithstanding this Argument, as
prejudicial to Salvation, and as dangerous, and as rarely escaped, and as
little capable of administering comfort to the Party concerned, as that of
Popery. And this is as much as I am concerned for at present, only to show the
weakness of this Argument, from the acknowledged salvability of some particular
Persons out of the external Communion of the visible Church to overthrow the
necessity of our joining with it in order to our comfort and assurance of
Salvation; whence it also appears clearly how little we are concerned to
disprove that Salvability.

Positively, that for proving this Obligation to enter into the external
Communion of a visible Church it is sufficient to show that without such an
external Communion we cannot so well be assured of our Salvation; and that this
supposition alone of our less security without it is sufficient to prove us
obliged to submit to all terms not directly sinful, however in-expedient, in
Order to the procuring this external Communion. This will be easy if it be
considered. 1. That there may be a Rational Obligation in Prudence to secure
our own Interests, and what may prove conducive thereunto, and to avoid such
things as may prove prejudicial to them, as well as an Authoritative Obligation
to submit to the Impositions of any Superiors whatsoever. Nay this Rational
Obligation is so far from falling short of that which is Authoritative, as some
less wary persons may conceive, as that on the contrary it is the Foundation of
all Authoritative Obligation. For all Authoritative Sanctions are imposed on
Subjects only in virtue of the Rewards and Punishments annexed to them, so
that, as he who undervalues the Rewards and Punishments can have no rational
inducement to submit to the Laws, so the only Original reason of valuing the
rewards and punishments can only be the value of those interests which are
concerned in them. And as, in this regard, this kind of Obligation is generally
greater than that which is Legal, so there cannot be a securer measure for
discerning the greater or lesser Obligation of things of this kind than by the
greater or lesser momentousness of the Interests concerned in them. For as it
is certain, that lesser Interests ought in Prudence to give way to greater, and
consequently may be denied in compliance with those Impositions which are
necessary to be submitted to in Order to the securing those which are greater;
so the greatest of all are most Obligatory, and can never yield to any Laws
whatsoever, because no Rewards or Punishments whatsoever can be ever supposed
sufficient to countervail them. Now this is the Case exactly here, there being
no other Interest comparable to that of our eternal Salvation.

not directly sinful, however in expedient, are necessary to be submitted to in
Order to the securing this great Interest of our Salvation. For as this
obligation to secure our greatest Interests in the first place is the first
fundamental Principle of all Laws, so the second is this, That for securing our
greater Interests we are in prudence obliged to yield those which are inferior.
For this is the reason why we are obliged to Laws even contrary to our own
humors and interests of lesser concernment, because the Interest yielded in
obedience to Laws is less than the Interest procured by the rewards and other
advantages of the society established by them, and because the prejudice
incurred by the performance of Duty is less than the Prejudice of the Penalty,
or of the Dissolution, or disturbance, of the Society it self. Seeing therefore
that all terms not sinful are lesser evils than the loss of our Salvation, it
will follow by this second fundamental Principle of humane Societies that they
are all to be yielded as far as such yielding may prove necessary for the
security of this. But because it is not so much the hazard of our Salvation it
self, as the hazard of our assurance of it, and consequently of our present
comfort of it, that we can so properly take for granted in our present
discourse, therefore it will concern us to show that though our Condition were
never so secure in it self, yet even the loss of our Assurance that it is so,
and of that Evidence which is requisite for grounding a prudent rational
Assurance, is a mischief to us greater than any we can suffer by the most, I do
not say Imprudent, but Oppressive, Ecclesiastical Constitutions, if they be not
sinful. Which will therefore by these principles of Obligation, oblige us
rather to yield to all compliances of this nature than to hazard the loss or
considerable diminution even of this Assurance.

themselves, but also and Principally the securing them to the Judgment of the
Person complying, that he may also Judge them to be secure; and that this is
not only actually true in practice, but also that it must be so considering the
reason of the thing. For neither indeed can any real security of any external
Object whatsoever be really for our Interest any further than it may be known
and judged to be so; nor if it were capable of being our Interest, yet is it
capable of being a reason of any of our compliances; nor is it capable of being
either our present Interest, or the present Reason of our Practice without a
present satisfaction of our Judgments concerning it that we really believe it
to be our Interest, and really believe it secured by this compliance, so that
it is in vain to pretend that the excellency of the promises of the Gospel can
be a rational inducement to us, to do any thing for them at present any farther
than we may at present be satisfied that by doing so we shall secure our
Interest in them. These things I conceive so easy as that I cannot think it
necessary to digres so far as to prove them: and accordingly we find that no
man can be rationally induced to enter into any Society, or to submit to any
Impositions barely on account of the real conduciveness of such submissions to
his greater Interests, unless he may be rationally convinced that they are his
real Interests which are promoted by such submissions and that they are really
promoted by them. So that, in order to our present design, it comes to the same
purpose in reference to our present actings, whether we lose our Salvation it
self, or lose the comfort of being secured of it by our being deprived of the
External Communion of the visible Church Submissions, and that they are really
promoted by them. So that, in order to our present design, it comes to the same
purpose in reference to our present actings, whether we lose our Salvation it
self, or lose the comfort of being secured of it by our being deprived of the
External Communion of the visible Church.

assurance of our Salvation is the great reason of all our Religious
performances; it will be easy to infer further, 4. that where we may be better
assured of our Salvation, there we have the greatest reason to oblige us to a
compliance. For if our Assurance be the ground of our Religious performances,
then where our assurance is greater, our performances ought to be so too; and
where the assurance, even to us, is greatest, there can be no inexpediency in
any thing else so great as that of venturing our greatest concerns on more
hazardous Conditions, and therefore there can be nothing which, by the common
Rules of Prudence, can be judged more avoydable. If therefore it may appear
that, by our External Communion with a visible Church, we may be better assured
of our own Salvation than by any performances whatsoever that we are capable of
doing out of that Communion, at least may be better assured of the Success and
efficacy of a good life within the Communion of the Church in Order to our
Salvation than we can of the same good life in a separated condition; it will
follow that the proof of this better Assurance will be alone sufficient to
oblige all considerative Persons (as they tender the better Assurance of their
Salvation, that is indeed, all the comfort they are capable of receiving from
the hopes of it in this Life) not only to embrace this External Communion,
where it may be had, but also to submit to all tolerable, that is, all unsinful
Conditions of obtaining it, notwithstanding that all possibility of Salvation
were not denied without it.

to our purpose it is what they discourse concerning the Salvability of
particular Persons either out of Church Society, or independently on it. For
though their pains had been more successful for proving the sufficiency of
Faith and Repentance for Salvation independently on the Sacraments, or any
other Exercise of Ecclesiastical Society, than, from our following Principles,
it will appear that they are; yet all this would not come home to disprove our
Obligation resulting hence to submit to all unsinful Conditions for obteining
Ecclesiastical Communion; unless they could prove, either that such a Condition
is more secure than that of being in the External Communion of the Visible
Church, that is, that we can be better secured of the success of Faith and
Repentance out of the Church, than in it; or that, supposing the contrary (that
we can be better satisfied of the security of our condition, even upon
performance of Conditions, in this External Communion of the Visible Church
than out of it) this would not oblige us, in the way I have explained it, to
submit to all such Conditions of obtaining it; neither of which has been as
much as attempted by them. Nay I very much doubt whether they themselves, when
the Case is thus truly stated, will differ from us in asserting the much better
security of a Communicant, where Communion may be had on terms not sinful, than
of a Person out of Communion. Nor indeed do I see how they themselves can avoid
it.

channels of Divine Grace, and though there were no Divine Influences
Instrumentally conveyed in the Exercises of Ecclesiastical Communion any more
than in our ordinary Political and Oeconomical Duties, and though they had no
other goodness in them than what they are capable of receiving from an
Arbitrary Positive Command; yet even this were sufficient to make a state of
Actual Communion preferrible to that of a separate Condition, even in reference
to our Assurance, inasmuch as there is far more reason for him to be assured of
the Divine Favor, who besides his Moral Eternally obliging Duties is also
punctually observant of the Positive Commands of God than for him who neglects
lesser on pretense of observing greater Duties; and he has certainly a better
Title to the Divine Favor who yields to any thing not sinful rather than he
would break even a Positive Command, (which breach must needs be sinful when it
may be avoided on such Terms) than he who suffers himself, to avoid such
yielding, to be transported into such a violation of his Duty. Our Saviors
words are very express, That whosoever shall break the least of his
Commandments, St. Matthew. v.19.
and teach men so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, as
it is usually understood, none at all; And St. James, That he that should keep
the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all. St. Sam. 11.10.
And certainly he that is so, cannot be so well assured of his Salvation. And
if it be not so much as the violation of a Positive Command to abstain from
actual Communion, I do not see how they can avoid denying the Divine Authority
to be concerned for the Sacraments (for if they acknowledged it to be so they
could not deny the Sinfullness of resisting it) and consequently denying the
perpetual Obligation of the Sacraments. And then it will be impossible for them
to explain any Sinfulness in Schism, as it is a Division of a Body Politic;
which as they are Consequences I doubt unavoidable from this Supposal, so I
verily believe that they will be so detested by our ingenuous Adversaries as
that they will oblige them to some serious second thoughts how they may avoid
them.

true Repentance should find acceptance with God independently on Sacraments,
or any other Act of Church Communion; yet it is not conceivable how there can
be true Repentance in them who willingly abstain from Communion when it may be
had by compliances not Sinful. For I believe our dissenting Brethren themselves
do not understand by Repentance a bare sorrow for our past Sins, but a serious
and universal design of Reformation for the future, and accordingly that he who
lives in any known avoidable Sin cannot be said to be truly Penitent. Nor do I
believe that they will deny any violation of our Political Duties to be as
truly and properly Sins as the violation of those which are Personal, so that
he who lives never so Temperately as to himself, yet if he disturb the Society
where he lives, he cannot be supposed in this sense universally Reformed, and
therefore not truly Penitent; nor do I think that they will deny that there is
a Duty incumbent on private Persons to preserve the Peace of Ecclesiastical, as
well as Civil, Societies (I am sure the Scripture recommends this principally,
even above the other) and that nothing but direct Sin can excuse us for the
omission of any Duty. Now upon these Concessions it is impossible that he who
is hindered from the Peace of the Church, or from her Communion by any
Impositions not Sinful can be supposed thoroughly reformed, or consequently
truly Penitent. So that still this obligation to maintain the Church's Peace,
and to submit to its unsinful Impositions, on account of the greater security
of our Salvation in its Communion than out of it, remains unshaken by any thing
which our Adversaries have yet Objected to the contrary.

CHAP. II. That we cannot be so well assured of our Salvation, in the use of
Extraordinary, as of Ordinary Means.
THE CONTENTS.
2. Head, That for proving this want of so solid Assurance of the welfare of
particular Persons out of Ecclesiastical Communion as may be had in it, it will
be sufficient to show that, however God may provide for the Salvation of
particular Persons, in an Extraordinary way, without this external Communion,
yet, that this is a Case indeed rare and Extraordinary, and not easily to be
expected, and therefore not to be trusted with any confidence; and that, at
least, the Ordinary Means of Salvation are confined to the External Communion
of the Visible Church. The difference betwixt the Ordinary and Extraordinary
Means of Salvation.. I.II.III.IV. The former Head proved in both particulars:
1. That we cannot be so well assured of our Salvation in the use of
Extraordinary, as of Ordinary, Means. The Extraordinary Means whereby we may be
assured of our Salvation are Conjectures concerning the Divine Uncovenanted
Goodness. Concerning these it is proved 1. That the Assurance grounded on these
Conjectures is not such as can afford any solid comfort to the Person
concerned. The extreme difficulty of making application of what might be
concluded from this Divine Uncovenanted Goodness to particular Cases..
V.VI.VII.VIII.IX.X. The particulars necessary for Assurance in this Case are
such as God is not obliged to by his Uncovenanted Goodness..
XI.XII.XIII.XIV.XV.XVI.XVII. 2. The comfort that might otherwise have been
expected from these Conjectures is not comparable to that which may be had from
those general Ordinary Means which God has provided for by express Revelation.
This proved by three Degrees.. XVIII.XIX.XX.XXI.XXII. 3. These expectations
from Extraordinaries not seasonable in our Adversaries Case who might obtain
the Ordinary Means by Concessions not Sinful.. XXIII. 4. The relief by
Extraordinary pretenses to Gods Uncovenanted Goodness must needs be rendered
more difficult since the establishment of Ordinaries.. XXIV.XXV.XXVI.XXVII.

I PROCEED therefore to the 2. thing proposed, That none be can so well Assured
of his Salvation out of this visible Church, or consequently out of that part
of it of which Providence has made him a Member, as in it; And that this
Visible Church must be the Episcopal, that particularly to whose Jurisdiction
he belongs. This may be resolved into two easy parts: 1. That though our
Salvation might be equally sure in it self, yet, at least, that none can be so
well assured of it in the use of Extraordinary, as of Ordinary, Means; 2. That
the Ordinary Means, at least, of Salvation are indeed confined to the External
Communion of the Visible Church; And that the Episcopal Church, under whose
Jurisdiction any one lives, is that Visible Church, out of which the Ordinry
Means of Salvation are not to be had by any whilst he lives under that
Jurisdiction.

THOUGH our Salvation might be equally sure in it self, yet none can be so well
assured of it in the use of Extraordinary, as of Ordinary, Means. For clearing
this it must first be understood what we mean by Ordinary, and what by
Extraordinary, Means of our Salvation. The Means therefore whereby we may be
assured of our Salvation are those whereby the Difficulties occurring in the
procurement of our Salvation are most Regularly provided for. And they are
reducible to these Heads: 1. To assure us that our past misdemeanors Antecedent
to our admission into the Favor of God, both of Original and Actual Sins,
shall not be imputed to us for the future, to our Prejudice. For till we be
assured of this we shall have very Just reason to Question the real security of
our condition. And because our Natural Strength is not sufficient to perform
our Duty for the future, though all our past offenses had been really forgiven
us, and yet without probable hopes of our future performance we can have no
assurance of our future Security; therefore it is further requisite 2. That we
be, upon our own Endeavors, assured of those Supernatural Divine Assistances
without which our unassisted natural Endeavors are not likely alone to prove
sufficient. For Rewards promised to impossible performances cannot afford us
any comfort, and without these Assistances our Duty would prove impossible to
us. And yet, notwithstanding these Assistances, we are still obnoxious to so
many inadvertencies and impure mixtures by reason of the faint concurrence of
our Wills, as might render our best performances unacceptable if God should
deal in rigor with them, so that even these Assistances themselves could not
sufficiently secure us of the Event, unless 3. We may also be Assured further
that neither the frequent Imperfections and faileurs to which the most regular
Lives here are obnoxious shall be rigorously insisted on to the Prejudice of
the principal Duties to which they do adhere; nor that even those lapses into
Sins, to which Sincerely-meaning Persons are sometimes inclinable, shall hinder
their reception again upon a serious Repentance and Reformation. And yet
further after all Heaven is a Supernatural reward and therefore not due nor
proportionable, to our performance of Duty though it had been more accurate
than we can pretend it is; and therefore it is requisite 4. That we be assured
actually of these Supernatural rewards on performance of these Duties, which,
though performed by the assistance of Divine Grace, and expiated from their
appendent weaknesses and Imperfections, do very much fall short of an adaequate
proportion to so glorious a reward. These are the true inducements to all those
Duties which are required of us in the Gospel, and upon these depends all that
rational comfort of our Consciences which we are capable of receiving in this
Life even from the performance of our Duty; and therefore those are the Means
of our Salvation by which we may be secured of them.

Ordinary and Extraordinary Means, upon these Principles, is, that we call
those Ordinary to which God has left the Generality of that part of Mankind for
whom he has intended these Favors to assure themselves of their performance;
but those Extraordinary by which those may assure themselves of them whose Case
has something singular, not comprehended under* those Generals for which
Ordinary Means are calculated, and therefore not capable of being Judged by
those General Measures by which other Men's Cases are generally to be Judged,
and yet withal has something singular not only to excuse the deviation, but
also to entitle to the principal Benefits attainable in the use of Ordinary
Means by the Equity of Gods design in settling those that are Ordinary. For
without these excusing Circumstances, which may expiate the deviation; and
without these recommending, which may in Equity i^^itle them to the reward
according to the true design of God in giving it; the Singularity of such a
Persons Case is so far from intitling him to Extraordinary Means of Salvation,
that as it plainly supposes him destitute of all good hopes by Gods Ordinary
provisions, so it can secure him no other refuge in that destitute condition.

Ordinary Means of Salvation are like our Courts of Common Law by which he only
can expect any benefit who can justify his Title by Ruled Cases or standing
Laws or some such other express provisions of the Legislative power, but the
Extraordinary are like our Courts of Chancery to which he only has recourse who
finds himself unable to hold out in a Legal way of trial, and who can expect no
advantage to his Cause from the general express Provisions, but only from the
Equity of the true design of the Legislators.

That we cannot be so well assured of our Salvation in the use of Extraordinary
as of Ordinary Means. And though I might, from the Explication now given,
appeal to the Consciences of our dissenting Brethren themselves, whether
themselves would not be more confident of a Title which might abide a Legal
trial, than of such a one as must need the relief of Chancery; and of such a
one as might be cleared from the plain and express words of the Legislator,
than of such a one as is capable of no other Evidence than only Conjectures
concerning the design of the Legislator, and Conjectural Consequences deduced
from it, which may be judged of so very differently by different Persons; Yet
to satisfy them of the reasonableness of it, and to make a more particular
application to their Case, and that they may not think my following Discourse
superstructed on any gratuitous Presumptions which have not been proved true in
that sense which is requisite for my design, I shall therefore consider it a
little more particularly. In order whereunto I consider that, though the
Ordinary Means whereby Men were to assure themselves of the Particulars now
mentioned which are necessary to assure them of their Salvation, were, before
the Revelations of the Gospel, at least in regard of the greatest part of
Mankind, no better than such indefinite Conjectures concerning the Divine
Goodness, yet God may alter that Case, and actually has done it since the
Gospel, and clear and express Revelations of his Will when they are made are as
capable of being the Ordinary Means whereby Mankind may assure themselves of
their Security in these Particulars as those indefinite Conjectures to which
they had been necessitated formerly for want of better Evidence. But we do not
call express Revelation an Extraordinary Means, though it had been concerning a
particular Case which is the only possible pretense for calling it
Extraordinary.

Means of Salvation mentioned in the Scriptures are such only as are common to
the Generality of Mankind, and that there are no favors there promised to
particular Persons but such as may be equally expected by all upon an equal
performance of Conditions; so that though Means of Salvation provided for by
express Revelation might, in propriety of Speech, be called Extraordinary, yet
that is not a thing capable of being pleaded in our Case. And therefore all the
Assurance of which a Person is capable whose Case is so singular as that it
cannot be Judged of by the general provisions of the Gospel, and who therefore
can derive no comfort from any Topic deducible from thence, can only be
grounded on those general indefinite Notions of the Divine Goodness, whereby he
is ready to pardon unavoidable failings, and to accept of our Wills and sincere
designs for Performance even in order to the reward which he had designed for
us upon performance, when it is not our own fault that we are hindered from
actual performance. I shall therefore endeavor to show 1. That the Assurance
which can be grounded on this Notion of the Divine Vncovenanted Goodness is not
such as may afford a Person concerned any solid comfort for the performance of
the things now mentioned; 2. That though it might afford some comfort, yet that
comfort cannot be comparable to that which may be had from those general
Ordinary Means which God has provided for by express Revelation; 3. That the
expectations from Extraordinaries are not seasonable in our Adversaries Case
who might obtain the Ordinary Means by Concessions not sinful; and 4. That the
relief by Extraordinary pretenses to Gods Vncovenanted Goodness must needs be
rendered more difficult upon the establishment of Ordinaries.

THE Assurance which can be grounded on this Notion of the Divine Vncovenanted
Goodness is not such as may afford a Person concerned any solid comfort for the
performance of the things now mentioned. I will not in general deny it to be
possible that a Man may be actually saved by being actually assisted in the
performance of his Duty, and actually indulged in the defect^ of that
Performance, and actually settled in the possession of this reward. Nor will I
deny that God may actually do this on account of his Natural and Essential
Uncovenanted Goodness; nay may be presumed frequently to do it, where he is not
confined in his transactions by Threat^ expressly denounced, and clearly
promulged, against Offenders (which, besides the obligation on his part from
his own Veracity to performance, must certainly prove, in the Event, an
exceeding aggravation of their guilt, and an incapacity of pardon to them, to
whom they are so denounced and promulged) Not only because God is naturally
Arbitrary in the distribution of his Favors, and he is not in that Case
supposed to have confined himself by any voluntary Obligations; but also
because the pardonableness of such Persons in their omissions of those Duties
which to such Persons are Morally impossible, and their good meaning to the
uttermost of their Abilities Morally considered may be rational inducements to
a Nature so generous and beneficient as God is, not only to pardon, but reward,
them. Nor will I deny further that even after God has been pleased to provide
better for us Ordinarily, by admitting us into Covenant with him, and by giving
us express Revelations, yet he may be merciful to particular Persons wanting
the Ordinary Means with out any fault of their own, that is, when they are in a
place where they cannot be had at all, or where their Fallible Superiors are so
unreasonable as that they cannot be admitted to them without Sinful
complyances. This is a thing so universally acknowledged, as that it is not
denied by the Romanists themselves who are the most rigorous Assertors of
strict Discipline, and blind Obedience, who hold Ordinary Superiors generally
Fallible, and others Fallible at least in matters of Fact, of which kind
something is generally mixed in most exercises of Ecclesiastical Discipline.
And I am so sensible that this is an undue deference to Ecclesiastical Powers
to make all their Censures even where mistaken and unjustly inflicted to
destroy the possibility of the Salvation of such a Person who is not only
Innocent of the Crime for which he is censured, but is ready to submit to all
unsinful Conditions whereby he may recover the Communion he has lost, and in
the mean time behaves himself Modestly, and gives Active Obedience as far as
his Conscience will permit him, and Passive where it will not; as that,
according to my own Observations in the Introduction,. 10.11.12. I shall
readily acknowledge those Arguments Fallacious that prove it, and shall
therefore be wary that my own Arguments be not liable to any such Exception.

Natural Goodness may incline him to do for us; yet these general Presumptions
concerning it are not so satisfactory to our particular Consciences, to assure
us of any of the Favors now mentioned, barely on that account; And
consequently cannot Encourage us either easily to presume that God may not be
of the mind of our Superiors in matters Disputable, or that he will not confirm
their censures, though mistaken, if we do not make use of all the Modesty and
Endeavors now mentiond for recovering actual Communion. For though it be
indeed most certain that God is good, and that his Goodness does exceed
infinitely that of the best natured Men; yet it is withal as certain that he is
not Fond, and that his Goodness must be reconciled, not only with his other
Attributes, but also the Intrinsic Merit of the thing, especially as it may
have influence on the Government of the Word, and particularly on that of
Mankind, that is, that his Goodness cannot prompt him to do any thing but what,
on some of these accounts, is really reasonable. Now in this regard many things
may be so pernicious, not only in respect of their intrinsic malignity, but
also of the ill influence of their Example for encouraging others by their
Impunity, as that even his Goodness may not hinder him from an Obligation to
punish them. It is certain that in this regard many faults neither otherwise
very great in themselves, and very pardonable in their Circumstances, are yet
thought very Necessarily and Justly punishable with great severity, as the
sleeping of over-watched Sentinels.

concerning any particular Action; and withal considering the weakness of our
Faculties either for discerning or judging without Prejudice; and Considering
that what may indeed be great in regard of Us or that Society for which we are
concerned, may yet be very little in comparison of the great designs of God for
the Universal good of Mankind, and on the contrary; so that it may be as Just
and Obliging, for any thing we know to the contrary, to destroy whole Nations
for the good of Mankind in general, as it is confessedly obliging,
notwithstanding any pretense of the Obligingness of Goodness to pardon, to
destroy many Criminals for the good of a particular Nation; and considering
particularly what Liberty our dissenting Brethrens Calvinistical Principles
allow God in the actual exercise, not only of his Justice, but, his Sovereign
Dominion, notwithstanding any Obligingness of his Goodness to the contrary; and
Lastly considering that the Sin of Schism, of which they must prove guilty if
by their own faults they are deprived of actual Communion, is of that sort
which is mischievous to the Public and for whose Punishment God is therefore
more concerned, and wherein his Relation of a Governor confines that Liberty
he might otherwise have of pardoning it: I say, all these things being
impartially considered, it cannot be thought so easy a matter to assure him of
his good condition that, upon any account soever is deprived of actual
Communion, as our Brethren conceive it.

Justice, withdraw his Vncovenanted mercies, such of them especially as he is
not by his Goodness obliged to grant us; and Seeing that our Information is so
extremely imperfect as that we cannot secure our Selves in these Cases, whether
his Justice be not only permitted, but obliged, to the actual infliction of
Punishments (in which Case it is unreasonable to expect that his Justice should
be over ruled by his Goodness) and Seeing that his Justice which is infallibly
guided by his Omniscience is certainly obliged in many Cases which our weaker
and more Prejudiced Faculties may not Judge so dangerous; the comfort must needs
be very small that can be gathered from these general Presumptions. Nor is it
in the least disagreeable with the design of God as a Governor, that even they
who in the event shall have the benefit of his Indulgence should at present
want the comfort of it. Not only to oblige them to greater cautiousness in
approving their own Sincerity by all Lawful endeavors to recover Communion;
but also to discourage all others who might otherwise venture on their Case
though they would not manage it with like Sincerity. For by rewarding them in
the other World God sufficiently corresponds with his natural Goodness; and yet
by making their condition uncomfortable in this World he does no more than what
becomes him as a Governor to deter others from imitating them without the like
necessity; Seeing nothing but a like necessity can make it any way Prudent to
venture on a State in it self so extremely dangerous and uncomfortable.

Obliged, by his natural Goodness to do something for them (without which
particular application it is impossible that particular Persons should enjoy
any solid comfort) I consider further that the particulars now mentioned, for
which we are at present concerned, are such as purely depend on his Arbitrary
pleasure, and to which he is not obliged by that Beneficence which is natural
to him as he is the Creator and Governor of the World. And when this is proved
it will then appear how little ground there can be for any to be confident of
any comfort in this condition so as to venture on it on any avoidable, that is,
on any unsinful conditions. For how can any one assure himself of Gods actual
will in things depending on his Arbitrary disposal without particular express
Revelation? And I have already given warning that that is not to be expected in
this Case of Extraordinary Means of which I am now discoursing. And yet this
will appear true in all the Particulars now mentioned. For neither is he
obliged by this Natural Beneficence to do any good to his Creature as
Offending, but only as Obedient; Nor does any necessary reason oblige his
natural Goodness to pardon that offense of which his Creature must be supposed
Guilty Antecedently to his Indulgence; Nor, if he would pardon the offense,
does his natural Goodness oblige him to give his further assistances for future
Obedience; Nor, if he would do this, is he obliged to reward his Creature
having once offended, and much less to accept of an imperfect instead of a
perfect Obedience in order to a reward; Nor, if he would be further pleased to
admit us to a capacity of a reward, is he obliged by this natural Goodness to
reward our best performances with a Supernatural and Eternal reward.

He is not Obliged by this natural Goodness to do any good to his Creature as
Offending, but only as Obedient. For as a good Governor of the World he is only
so far Obliged to do good to his Creatures as may make them voluntarily
subservient to the end of his Government. Now to this purpose, the most
rational way (and it is by the reasonableness of the thing that this sort of
Obligation is to be measured) is only to do good to those that are Obedient.
For if they who are disobedient do yet partake of the Divine Goodness as well
as the Obedient, it will thence appear that Obedience is not made the only
Means of obteining the influences of that Goodness, and therefore that such
Goodness cannot be a rational inducement to secure actual Obedience, if it may
be hoped for without it. I desire it may be remembered that I am not now
speaking of the Divine Goodness as inducing, but as Obliging, God, that is,
only of that precise degree of Goodness which is necessary to be exerted by him
if he would approve himself a gracious God and a good Governor. And so the
Argument will proceed with greater cogency. For if, notwithstanding our Sins
God be Obliged by his natural Goodness still to do us good, and especially if
he be obliged to show his Goodness to us in the instances now mentioned, to
forgive us our Sins and to receive us to Favor and Rewards, etc. So that he
cannot approve himself a good God, and a gracious Governor, without it (and it
is impossible that he should not act according to the Obligation of that
natural Goodness, as impossible as it is for him to cease to be a good God, and
a gracious Governor) than it will be plain that our Sins can prove no
hindrances to his Goodness to us. Which if they do not, what rational
Obligation can carnal Persons have to leave them, when notwithstanding their
committing them they can lose nothing by them?

obliged by rational inducements as others are by Positive Commands, and it may
be conceived to be as difficult for him not to do what he knows to be fit and
rational, or to do what he knows to be otherwise, as to omit what he knows
necessary to be done, or to do what he knows necessary to be omitted; inasmuch
as he may be conceived obliged, not only by the necessity of the thing, but by
that also of acting rationally. But besides that this Objection does as much
overthrow the Divine Liberty in other things as in the distribution of his
Goodness, and therefore must in other regards be acknowledged solvible by our
Adversaries themselves as well is in this: I am not at present particularly
concerned to undertake it. For my present design it is abundantly sufficient
that by the same reason whereby we Judge any thing else free to God. (and it
must be a great violence to our own Faculties and a contradiction to the
Current of the Scripture totally to deny the Divine Liberty) we have also
reason to believe that he freely distributes the good things for which we are
at present concerned. For supposing there were nothing really free as to God
himself, the reason then why we should conceive any thing as* free to him would
be only this, that we should conceive those things as free to him for which we
knew no necessarily obliging reason, and we must necessarily be ignorant of
such a reason in such things which exceeded our natural capacities. And
therefore considering that, Antecedently to Positive Revelation, the only
reason which we can conceive as obligatory to God, to do any good to his
Creature, is his Relation of a Creator or Governor to it, whatsoever is not
obligatory to him on these accounts must, in this way of proceeding, be
conceived as free to him. At least our Ignorance of any obligatory Cause is
perfectly sufficient for my present design, to show how little ground of
comfort we can have from such an expectation on these Terms.

NOR did any necessary reason oblige his natural Goodness to pardon these
Offenses of his Creatures, at least no such reason as is discoverable by us*
from these Relations of his being our good Creator and Governor. This appears
clearly from the Revelations of the Gospel by which we know that we were, upon
account of our Offenses, perfectly liable to the actual inflictions of his
Justice. If we had not been so, what need had there been of the Satisfaction
and sufferings of Christ for attoning the Divine Justice for our Sins
Antecedently to our admission into the Evangelical Covenant? And if we were, it
must necessarily follow that he was not obliged by his Providential Goodness to
pardon us. For the Divine Attributes must not be conceived as inconsistent with
each other, and they must needs be so if God may there Justly punish where he
is, by his natural Providential Goodness, obliged to forgive. For in this Case
the very Right of his Justice must be overpowered by his Goodness. And it is
further considerable in this Case, that his Justice does as well concern him as
a Governor as his Goodness; whence it will also further follow that, if the
Justice of his Government will permit him actually to punish, then the Goodness
of his Government cannot oblige him actually to forgive. For no actual Practice
of God can possibly oppose any Obligation of his Nature. Nay further yet it is
to be remembered that the Obligation of his Justice it self is indeed no other
but a higher Obligation of his Goodness. For it must not be conceived that the
essentially-Good nature of God can be obliged to inflict any evil whatsoever as
an evil. But that he is obliged to punish the offenses of particular Persons,
when either a greater good is promoted by the punishment than could be by the
Impunity, as none can doubt but that the good of the Public is greater than
that of a particular Person, and more concerning God as he is a Governor; or
even when the mischief likely to befall even the particular Person himself, if
permitted to go on without Punishment is indeed greater than that of the
Punishment it self (which may also be applied to our present Case, not that any
evil can be greater to the Individual than Damnation, but that real Damnation,
which may be avoided by the fear of it in this Life, is indeed incomparably a
greater mischief than the fear it self) this is indeed only a higher Obligation
of his Goodness, and therefore incapable of being taken of by such an
Obligation of the same Attribute as is certainly inferior.

NOR, if he would be actually pleased to pardon his Creature, is he yet obliged
further to give it his further assistances for future Obedience. For besides
that this is a favor Additional to the former, and of which the Creature
cannot, even by the Law of Gods Goodness it self, be supposed capable till it
be fitted for it by the former (I mean of that Goodness which obliges him to
act, not Fondly, but Justly and Rationally, and in compliance with his other
Attributes) and therefore cannot be due where the former is not, as none can
think him to have any Title to higher, who has none to lower, degrees of
favor; I say besides this, there can be nothing said for disobliging God in
point of his Goodness from preventing those Sins which were Antecedent to our
admission to his favor at first but will proceed with as much force here, and
no Objections can be urged for impeaching Gods Goodness, for not giving his
restraining and assisting Graces for prevention of future misdemeanors, but
will as well reflect on it for not giving the same Grace at first for hindering
those Offenses which at first made us need his pardoning favor. So that the
same Reasons, which prove the former Favor undue, must also prove these
Objections false and unconcluding. So that there will be no need for us at
present to be-solicitous for their particular Solution. Besides that this
Presumption lies against them, that this is a Case wherein Reason is so far
from concluding necessarily on either hand, and wherein it is so little able to
inform us of those Secrets of Government which if we understood we may conceive
very likely exceedingly to alter the merit of the Cause, and therefore actual
Revelation concerning it must needs be a surer way of arguing, and in Prudence
much fitter to be trusted for regulating our Practice than any of those general
Conjectures, which our Reason is able to propose concerning it.

NOR yet further (though he should be pleased to grant the Assistances of his
Grace for the better security of our future Obedience) does his Goodness oblige
him to reward his Creature having once offended, and much less to accept of an
imperfect instead of a perfect Obedience in Order to a reward. It does not
oblige him to reward his Creature having once offended. Indeed Reason of State
may sometimes oblige such Princes, whose welfare depends upon the State, to
connive at Rebellions where the Persons engaged in them are numerous. But where
Princes themselves are less dependent, and can Right themselves notwithstanding
any whatsoever opposition of their Subjects, it may indeed become their
Clemency, but they cannot be obliged to reward them even upon their return to
their Duty and their better observance of it after they have once been
pardoned. Especially where Justice and the Public Interest require a public
satisfaction, for fear of the ill consequence of an Example of Impunity, as our
dissenting Brethren themselves confess the Satisfaction of Christ to have been
necessary in our present Case. If it be requisite for the Good of Mankind that
Divine Justice should be satisfied before the Creature could be pardoned, no
Providential Goodness could oblige God to give his own Son to suffer for that
purpose; much less to give him for Mankind, and not for the fallen Angels;
least of all to purchase rewards for Us whilst we were in a Condition of
Hostility, and to reward those Services which as they come from us are weak and
imperfect and full of impure adherences, and as they come from him are no other
than his own Gifts.

native Goodness should even thus far prevail with him as to pass by these
disadvantages on our part, and to pay this debt of a Reward, not to our
performances, but to his own ^ative Generosity; yet the highest Rewards which
concern him as a Creator and Governor of the World are only Natural. And the
concession of these as they were abundantly sufficient, to prevail with the
Creature, in a way of rational inducement, to comply with the designs of his
Providence; so they were enough to entitle him a good Creator, and a bountiful
Governor. But it could have been nothing more derogatory to his Providential
bounty to have refused Supernatural Rewards than it is that he has not given
all Men the uttermost advantages for the Goods of their minds their Bodies and
their Fortunes, which there is no doubt but that his Omnipotence could have
procured for them.

THOUGH this Assurance, which may be grounded on this Notion of the Divine
Vncovenanted Goodness, might indeed afford some comfort to a Person who had
nothing else to rely on; yet that comfort cannot be comparable to that which
may be had from those general Ordinary means which God has provided for by
express Revelation. And this Observation comes perfectly home to the Case for
which we are at present concerned, that is, to prove our dissenting Brethren
obliged to submit to all unsinful compliances rather than want the use of the
Ordinary means of Salvation. For, by the Principles proved in the former
Chapter, the less security of a State for Salvation (but especially then when
this less security is extremely little, as I have now immediately proved it to
be) is sufficient, not only in Prudence* to persuade them to endeavor for a
State more secure; but also in Conscience, to oblige them rather to submit to
any condition of gaining it that is not Sinful, than fail of it. For proving
therefore that the Assurance which may be gained by the use of these Ordinary
means is indeed greater than that which may be had by Extraordinary, I consider
that whatever is pleadable from this Vncovenanted Goodness is much more
strongly pleadable from that Goodness which may be expected by such as are in
Covenant; That none of those Exceptions which have been objected against the
former way of Arguing in Case of Extraordinary means are capable of being urged
in Case of Ordinaries; And that indeed the thing is of that Nature that, as it
cannot be proved by any necessary consequence from the Divine Nature, so, the
only competent proof to be expected for it is only actual express Revelation.

WHATEVER is pleadable from the Vncovenanted Goodness of God is much more
strongly pleadable from that Goodness which may be expected by such as are in
Covenant. For God does not cease to be naturally Good by entering into Covenant
with us; and whatever is necessary for approving himself thus Providentially
Good before, must also be necessary after. For his being pleased to condescend
so far as to enter into Covenant being only a higher instance of his Goodness
cannot be conceived to disoblige him either from being or appearing as Good as
he was formerly, and whatever is necessary to make him appear so, being
necessary on account of its own nature, must be so unalterably and eternally.
And though it be certain that God is not by his natural Providential Goodness
obliged to be alike Good to all; yet that it self is not pleadable in our
present Case, as if he might on this Arbitrary account in the actual
Dispensation of his Goodness be expected better to those who are not in
Covenant with him, than to those who are. For they who are so far favored
already as to be admitted into Covenant with him are not only thereby entitled
to the further Favors which are expressly treated for in the Covenant, but also
to the indefinite expectations of his Providential Goodness. For by admitting
them thus far, he plainly owns them as his peculiar Favorites; and Favorites
are always looked on as the most likely Candidates for unpromised, as well as
promised, and Covenanted, Favors. And as they who are thus far owned have,
even in this way of Arguing from the Equity and reasonableness of the thing it
self, a much fairer Title, and consequently a much better Argument for assuring
themselves in their pretensions to those indefinite Favors than they who are
not; so they have above them that evidence of express Revelation of which the
condition of others is not capable. Which is not only an Additional but a surer
Argument in things of this nature, and of which Men in their Ordinary
Conversation are generally more confident. Every one is much better satisfied
with the express Promise even of a good Man than with his good inclinations and
well wishes; and where ever they are any thing diffident, it is to these express
Promises that they have their ultimate recourse for satisfaction.

NOR are any of those Exceptions, which have been objected against the former
way of Arguing in Case of Extraordinary Means, only from Gods indefinite
Goodness, capable of being urged here, in Arguing from his formal Covenant, and
express Revelation. All those Arguments concerning the obscurity of many things
to our Rational faculties, which in this way of proceeding, are absolutely
necessary for Judging accurately, or indeed with any Probability are here
prevented. For how obscure soever they are to us, yet they are sufficiently
clear to God, on whose Testimony it is that we are obliged to believe what he
has been pleased to reveal. And when we are thus assured of a Truth by the
Testimony of him who infallibly knows it, we are not then so much concerned for
other things which may have a connection with it, either as Objections or
Arguments, because we are sure such a Testimony is a much better Argument to
prove it true than any deducible from such Topics, either for proving or
disproving it. Especially when the thing is such as we have shown the Subject
of our present Disputes to be, that it does not it self fall immediately under
our cognizance, and when the Objections also do not disprove it, but only
weaken the force of some Arguments produced for proving it, as those are which
we have made use of against the Arguments only producible by Reason unassisted
by Revelation. Especially considering also that not only Gods actual Revelation
is a much better Argument to assure us what may be expected from him than only
indefinite Conjectures concerning his natural Goodness; but also that the
Arguments, whereby an actual Revelation may be proved, are more clear, and
cogent, than such Conjectures. Nor are those Arguments, which were there made
use of, to prove him not obliged by his natural Goodness to confer those
favors on us which he has designed for us in the Gospel, conclusive here;
because it may please him to do many Favors for us to which he is not obliged
by his natural Goodness, and it is his actual pleasure that we are assured of
by actual Revelation.

Head, That the things necessary to be proved, in order to the comfort of
Persons here concerned, are such, that, as they cannot be proved by any
necessary consequence from the Divine Nature; so, the only competent proof to
be expected for them is only actual express Revelation. This is so clear from
what has been already said, that it will only need application. For having
shown that our Title to these favors does not appear from any necessary
Obligation incumbent on him by virtue of his natural Goodness, it plainly
follows that their distribution is free and Arbitrary to him. Now in such
things as these the only way of knowing his actual pleasure is by an actual
Revelation. So that from hence it appears, not only, that Revelation is a much
more solid Argument for comfort than these Conjectures from the Divine Natural
Goodness, but also that it is the only Argument in most of those Particulars
requisite for this purpose where these Conjectures are not capable of proving
them actually true, but only possible to be so* that is, indeed where they are
not capable of being any Arguments for positive comfort, but only Exceptions
against those Arguments, that are deducible from the Divine Nature Antecedently
to Revelation, which might drive them into direct Despair. Which none can in
Prudence think it safe to trust to where better may be had by unsinful
condescensions. Especially considering how far actual Revelation may after the
Case, and that God may be obliged to do many evils to us, on account of his
actual Revelation, to which he had not been obliged by any of his Essential
Attributes.

plead a Title to the Promises by the performance even of those External
Conditions which are required by the Gospel, is exactly the same in this regard
with theirs who might have pleaded for Gospel Favors, by the performance of
Moral Duties, Antecedently to actual Revelation. They can plead as little
Revelation for their comfort, as the others. For though the Gospel do not
expressly deny its Favors to the performers of the Moral Conditions without the
external and ritual ones; yet it is withal as certain, that it does, with as
little expressness, entitle such to them. So that both of them are alike
necessitated to depend not on its Letter, but its Equity. And it is withal as
clear that this Equity of the Gospel cannot be pleaded independently on the
Letter, from any other Topic but only the Divine Essential Vncovenanted
Goodness; and that what is either obliging to God in regard of his Essential
Goodness, or the Equity of his design in promulging the Evangelical Covenant,
is alike obliging to him in respect of Heathens, who never heard of the Gospel,
as in respect of those who have heard it, but cannot assure themselves of their
Interest in it by their performance of its Conditions, Ritual, as well as
Moral. For the only Favor he can be thought to entertain for Christians not
performing Conditions is only this, that, by making that performance more
possible to them, he has thereby admitted them to better advantages for gaining
a Legal Title to the Privileges of the Gospel. But upon any faileur in
performance of Conditions, the Divine Goodness and Equity is so far from giving
them any advantage above others, as that they are less excusable than others to
whom that performance is not so possible; and none can doubt but that they, who
may be admitted to Ordinary Means by compliances not sinful, and willingly want
them rather than they will submit to such compliances, must be much more
culpable than they who cannot be admitted to them by any compliances
whatsoever. And therefore by the same reason whereby it has appeared that these
Conjectures from the Divine Goodness are improper, and insignificant for
comfort, in the Case of Heathens, without express Revelation; they will also be
as insignificant to failing Christians. For it is altogether as Arbitrary to
God whether he will excuse the nonperformance of, even External, Conditions
when they may be performed without Sinful compliance^, as whether he will
accept of the Moral Conditions alone where the Rituals are utterly impossible.
And consequently those as well as these are as incapable of being assured of
the Goodness of their Condition without express Revelation, which in this Case
must be as private and particular as in theirs, seeing it is so little spoken
to in the general Revelations of the Gospel.

These Expectations from Extraordinaries are not so seasonable in our
Adversaries Case, who might obtain the Ordinary Means, by Concessions not
Sinful. So that whatever force this Argument might have in other Cases, yet it
can have none in theirs. For the very name of Extraordinaries plainly implies
that they are such Means as God is pleased to make use of upon the fail^ur of
Ordinaries; and that, if they may be expected by any, they may most probably be
expected by them, who (as they cannot be supposed by any fault of their own to
have failed of the use of Ordinaries, nor consequently to have forfeited their
interest in Gods good will to them as their Creator and Governor so,) may
therefore expect those indefinite effects of that good will which is natural to
him as so related to them; not only such to which he is obliged by this Good
will, but also such as are supposed to be at his Arbitrary disposal. For as
even such things may not be despaired of by such, to whom as he is naturally
thus well affected, so they are not conscious to themselves of any neglect on
their part that might demerit or diminish this Affection. So that it is plain
that the whole reason of this hope is their present Interest in Gods good will;
which if they have forfeited, God may still wish as well to his Creatures and
Subjects as formerly, yet so as that his well wishes can administer no comfort
to them who have lost their Title to it. And how is it possible that he should
have the confidence to expect Extraordinary Favors from God, who has through
any neglect of endeavor on his own part failed of those that are Ordinary? How
can he with any reason expect any of those Favors to which God is not
precisely Obliged by that Goodness which is natural to him as a Creator and
Governor, whose actual performances have been so little endearing that he has
nothing that can recommend him to this natural Love of God but precisely that
he is his Creature and Subject, though an undutiful one? How can he expect that
God should condescend so far as to vary from his own General Rules and Ordinary
Provisions, and not only to excuse his deviations from them, but to contrive
Extraordinary Means for his particular Salvation, who in the mean time is so
unwilling for his sake to part with his own humor in compliances not Sinful?
But this, as it comes also exactly home to our dissenting Brethrens Case, so, I
conceive it so clear as not to need any further prosecution.

that the relief, by Extraordinary pretenses to Gods Vncovenanted Goodness,
must needs be rendered more difficult upon the establishment of Ordinaries. For
since the establishment of Ordinaries, there is reason to presume that God has
declared it, not only as agreeable to his wisdom, but his actual pleasure,
neither to save many without the use of those Ordinary Means; nor indeed any
but such as have these Ordinaries, at least in voto, and that so efficaciously
as that no Difficulties, or Impositions not Sinful, howere Inconvenient, could
hinder them from their actual use. So that such a Person who may have the
Ordinary Means on any tolerable, that is, not Sinful compliances, cannot, if he
want them, have any solid reason for Comfort on account of Gods Goodness in an
Extraordinary way. 2 Kings v.10. St. Joh. ix.7. Act. xxvii.31. Ver. 22.24.
This is agreeable with the constant Rule of Gods proceedings in matters of
this nature. Thus Naaman could not be cleansed from his leaprosy till he had
washed in Jordan; nor the blind man in the Gospel cured of his blindness, till
he had washed in the pool of Siloam; nor could St. Paul's companions have
expected to have escaped Shipwreck, notwithstanding Gods Promise for it to him
(which I am sure is an incomparably stronger and more convincing Argument than
our general guesses at the Goodness only of his Nature) if they had not kept
within the Ship. And in the Case I am at present discoursing of, the reason is
very easy. For it is not conceivable that God should institute Ordinary Means
of Salvation, and yet leave it to the Liberty of his Creatures to neglect them
without any pretense of unavoidable Necessity, or Sinful compliances required
as Conditions of them. And particularly in these External Ordinary Means of
Salvation, the only reason obliging us to the Observation of them is the
Spiritual and Supernatural benefit to be procured in the use of them (as the
Reward is the only Obligation to the performance of Duty in any Case
whatsoever) and therefore certainly it must be the Intention of God, in
inviting us to the Observation of these External Ordinary Means of Grace by the
Promises of these Supernatural Assistances in the use of them, that they who
are deficient to themselves, in not using their utmost Diligence to procure
these Means, should fail of the Reward.

Positive Injunctions we might indeed expect the effects of the general Divine
Goodness without such Positive Observations; yet the reason why we might do so
is plainly this, because in that Case we should have no reason to fear least we
should incur the Divine displeasure by such a neglect, and so being able to
maintain a Conscience on our part of having kept a fair correspondence with God
according to our weak abilities, we might expect the general ^ffects of the
Divine Goodness and Indulgence. But where God has expressly required an external
Observance, and has sufficiently promulged his mind concerning it, and the
Creature obliged knows its Duty, and yet neglects it, or does not use all Moral
Diligence, or submit to all Lawful compliances rather than hazard the
Probability of provoking God by its omission, there it is plain it cannot
preserve this clearness of Conscience on its own part, which is the only solid
ground of any probable expectations of the Divine Favor; whence is necessarily
follows, that, in this latter Case its hopes must necessarily be confined to
the performance of its Ordinary Duty. And considering that it is God who
requires this External Duty from them, and who must therefore be presumed
displeased by its Omission; and considering that no Inconvenience whatsoever
can in any reason be thought comparable to that of the loss of the Divine
Favor; it plainly follows that no Inconvenience whatsoever can in any reason
be sufficient to excuse this Omission, and therefore, that nothing can do it
under Sin.

Diffidence which ought in reason to follow from the Omission of any of the
Divine Commands; there is a particular reason to distrust the conveiances of
Grace when we do not make use of the Means of that conveiance: as in Gods
Ordinary Providence there is reason to distrust a Harvest when we have
neglected plowing and sowing; not only in regard of the displeasure of God to
be feared from the neglect, but also of the nature of the things as he has been
pleased to order and establish them. It is very true that God can, even since
his establishment of the Ordinary Means of Grace, give his Grace without the
use of the Ordinary Means, now as well as formerly, and that he has sometimes
done it. And it is withal as True, that he can give a Harvest without the
labor of the Husbandman, nay and has sometimes done it too, as in the Seventh
Year, Lev. xxv.5.11. 2 King xix.29.
and in other Cases, among the Israelites. But our Enquiry is not what may be
done, but of what we may be confident that it will be done; and therefore not
what is barely Possible, but what is also Probable: for of such things only we
can have any comfort or confidence. And can any Prudent Husbandman be confident
of a Harvest in such a Case because God can give it him still, and sometimes
has given it? If such a hope be counted extremely Irrational and Presumptuous,
and God be ordinarily thought obliged by the Rules of his general Providence to
defeat and disappoint it, to confine Men to the Ordinary Means of their own
Diligence, and so to oblige them to a regular and constant subserviency to the
designs of his Ordinary Providence; let it be considered whether it be not as
reasonable to expect the same dealing here, to confine Men to the use of the
Ordinary means of Salvation. Is not the Salvation of Rational Creatures, for
whose use the World it self is Created* as considerable in the Eyes of
Providence as those Laws of the inferior Creation which were only designed for
their use? God himself has shown the greater esteem he has for the welfare of
his Rational Creatures, when for their advantage, even in particular Cases, he
has broken the general Laws of this inferior Creation.

Animal Life, than their incomparably more valuable Interests of their Eternal
Salvation? Or is not a confinement of their Diligence to the use of the
Ordinary means of their Salvation as Prudent an Expedient to keep them lively,
and active, and subservient to Providence, in working out their own Salvation;
as a confinement to the Ordinary means of procuring external advantages is to
oblige them to a subserviency to general Providence? Gods care for the
Salvation of one Nation, the Jews alone, induced him not only to perform
Miracles at the first Publication of his will to them, but also to a perpetual
Succession of Miracles to future Ages. Such, besides those now mentioned, were
those of the Shechinah over the Mercy seat, the Oracles of Vrim and Thummim,
the ordinary Succession of Prophets, the water of Jealously, etc. And can we
think that God would prefer the Rules of Ordinary Providence before this
infinitely more valuable Dispensation of the Gospel? Could his care then be
greater for a single Nation than it is now for the general Salvation of
Mankind? Or for a Law designedly Temporal than for his Everlasting Gospel? Or
for a Covenant confirmed by the blood of Bulls and Goats than that which has
been confirmed by the invaluable blood of his dearest Son? For Promises,
Primarily and Literally, only relating to their settlement in a terrestrial
Inheritance than those exceeding great and precious ones of an exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory? I am sure the Apostle teaches us otherwise to argue.
Heb. x.28.29.
If he who bro^k Moses's Law died without Mercy under two or three Witnesses;
Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy who has
trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the Covenant,
wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite unto the
Spirit of Grace? If therefore God valued the Law of Moses before that of the
inferior Creation, he must rather prefer that of the Gospel before it. And
therefore if Men may not expect the benefits of Providence without the
Observation of the Ordinary Means, and all possible Industry in obtaining them;
no more can they, with any solid Prudent confidence, expect the benefits of the
Gospel without their utmost Industry for procuring the Ordinary Means appointed
by God for that purpose. Thus much concerning this. 1. Particular, that though
our Salvation might be equally sure in it self, yet we cannot be so well
assured of it in the use of Extraordinary as of Ordinary Means.

CHAP. III. The Ordinary Means of Salvation confined to the External Communion
of the Visible Church.
THE CONTENTS.
Ordinary Means whereby we may be assured of Salvation must be Promises
conveyed to us in a Legal way by the Solemnities of a Covenant.. I.II. 2. The
Ordinary Means of Salvation, at least, whereby we may be satisfied of it, and
receive any comfort from it, are confined to the External Communion of the
Visible Church; And that the Episcopal Church, under whose Jurisdiction any one
lives, is that Visible Church out of which these Ordinary Means of Salvation
are not to be had by any whilst he lives under that Jurisdiction. This to be
proved in two Parts. 1. That these Ordinary Means of Salvation are confined to
the External Communion of the Visible Church.. III.IV. This proved by three
Degrees. 1. The Ordinary Means whereby we may assure our Selves that we in
particular have any interest in the Divine Promises is by assuring our Selves
that we in particular are in Covenant with God..
V.VI.VII.VIII.IX.X.XI.XII.XIII.XIV.XV.XVI.XVII.XVIII.XIX.

NOW the Ordinary Means of assuring us of the Divine pleasure herein, either
concerning his Supernatural Assistances, or concerning his Indulgences to our
ordinary failings, or of his rewarding our weak and imperfect performances with
Supernatural Felicities, being all of them things depending on his Arbitrary
pleasure can be no other than Promises and a Covenant solemnly confirmed to us.
That they are things perfectly at his Arbitrary disposal plainly appears from
all that has now been said, by which it has been proved that he is not
necessitated to them by any Obligation of his naturally Beneficent Nature, nor
by any Relation by which he is necessarily related to us as our Creator and
Governor, which might further endear him to us. And as for any further
Relation to which he is not so naturally determined, the very Favor of
entering into such a one is as arbitrary as any thing else that depends on his
free disposal, and therefore cannot prejudg against the freedom of all the
Favors consequent to it. Now in Arbitrary things wherein God is, as to any
Obligation of his Nature, indifferent which way he determines himself, it is
impossible to know which way he will be pleased actually to determine himself
without actual and express Revelation. And because the actual performance of
these things must be future as well as present, not only as to the Reward, but
as to the Assistances also without which we could have little security of the
possibility of our Duty, or consequently of the comfortableness of our
Condition; we can upon these terms enjoy no solid comfort unless we may be
assured, not only that it is his will at present, but that it shall be also for
the future, which actual Revelation of his will for the future performance of
good things to us is that which is properly called a Promise. But it is certain
that God does not multiply these Promises according to the multiplicity of the
Cases of the Persons concerned in them. And therefore the Promises being only
General, the only way how particular Persons can assure themselves of their
Interest in them, can only be by their Interest in that Body and Community to
whom they are made.

Community does not consist of a particular number of Persons existing in one
Age, but is designed to comprehend the generality of mankind in a perpetual
Succession, and yet God is not pleased Ordinarily to presentiate himself
through the several Periods of those Successions in dealing with the several
Persons for whom he has designed those favors; and because that it is
impossible that any Covenant can be made on Gods part without a Declaration of
his consent to the Promises on performance of Conditions on our part,
especially in matters of that nature of which we are at present discoursing,
that is, in the dispensation of arbitrary Favors, to which he is not obliged
by his essential Goodness: Therefore it will be necessary that this Covenant be
made in general, but that the admission of particular Persons to it be
transacted the same way which is always thought reasonable in Contracts of the
same nature where the Party Covenanting does not Personally appear, by
delegating and empowering sufficient Proxies who may Seal it in his name, and
by whose Act he may therefore declare himself obliged. These things are
certainly so essential to the Notion of a Covenant properly so called, as that
that consent which may in some Cases be presumed without them, yet cannot for
any of these defects deserve the proper name of a Covenant, or infer that Legal
Obligation which is the advantage of a Covenant above other Contracts which are
not transacted with the like solemnity in order to our Comfort. And therefore
as this Conveyance of a right to Promises by a general Covenant is the only
ordinary way whereby we may be assured of a Title to them, so the application
of this Covenant by these Solemnities is the only Ordinary Means whereby we may
be particularly assured of our Interest in the Covenant. But that I may more
distinctly show, not only, that, in reason, this is fit to have been thus
contrived, but also that it has been actually Observed in the Evangelical
Covenant, and that I may bring the application more home to our particular
Case; I therefore proceed to

That, at least, these Ordinary Means of our Salvation, (at least, those
whereby we may be satisfied of it, and receive any comfort from it, that is,
(as has appeared from the things now premised) Gods Promises as conveyed to us
by a Covenant, and this Covenant as Legally applied to particular Persons by
Persons sufficiently Authorized by God for that purpose, to act in his name,
and to engage him with a Legal valid obligation to performance) are indeed
confined to the external Communion of the Visible Church; And that the
Episcopal Church, under whose Jurisdiction any one lives, is that Visible
Church out of which these Ordinary Means of Salvation are not to be had by any
whilst he lives under that Jurisdiction. This consists of two Parts: 1. That
these Ordinary Means of Salvation are confined to the External Communion of the
Visible Church; And 2. That in reference to the Duty of particular Persons that
Visible Church wherein they may expect to find these Ordinary Means is the
Episcopal in opposition to all other Societies not Episcopally governed.

THESE Ordinary Means of Salvation are confined to the External Communion of
the Visible Church. I say the External Communion, that I may prevent those
Exceptions which many are ready to make in behalf of our dissenting Brethren;
that they do already Communicate with Us in 36. of the 39. Articles, which they
believe as well as We; and that they heartily wish well to all good Men of what
Party soever; and that, at least, they Pray for Us where they cannot Pray with
Us. For these, if they could; in any propriety of Speech, be styled Acts of
Communion, which no good Christian can deny even to real Schismatics
themselves, with whom notwithstanding all, who hold that there is such a thing
as real Schism, must not hold it lawful to communicate; yet most certainly they
are not Acts of External Communion. By this therefore I only mean a
participation in those External Exercises whereby the Church subsists as a
distinct Society, that is, a joining in the Ordinances administered in it, but
especially in the Sacraments. I say the Visible Church, purposely to obviate
that pretense of the Church's consisting only of the Elect, who, as they are
supposed themselves not Visible, nor united among themselves by any Visible
commerce, so they think (and very consequently to this Notion) that Communion
may be maintained with them in an Invisible way by likeness of design and
Sympathy of Affection^. And therefore by this Visible Church I mean that
Visible Society which is maintained by an acknowledgment of the same common
Visible Ecclesiastical Government and by an external participation of the same
common Sacraments. So that my meaning in this whole Proposition is, That a
Legal Right, to these Evangelical Promises and Covenant, which are the Ordinary
Means whereby we may be assured of our Salvation on performance of Conditions,
is not conveyed to Us otherwise than by our participation of these external
Ordinances whereby we profess our Selves Members of such a Visible Society
which is maintained by those Ordinances, of which none can be partakers without
consent of the Visible Ecclesiastical Governors, which must therefore oblige
all to a Subjection to those Governors. This will be clear in discoursing
concerning these particulars: 1. That the only Ordinary Means, whereby we may
assure our Selves that we in particular have an interest in his Promises of any
of the things now mentioned as necessary for our Salvation, is by our assurance
of our being engaged in Covenant with him; 2. That the only Ordinary Means
whereby we may assure our Selves of our Interest in this Covenant with him is
by our partaking of these external Solemnities whereby this Covenant is
transacted and maintained; and 3. That the partaking of these external
Solemnities with any Legal validity (which can only be a ground of comfort to a
Person concerned in this Case) is only to be had in the external Communion of
the Visible Church.

the only Ordinary Means whereby we may assure our Selves that we in particular
have any Interest in these Divine Promises (without which assurance it has
appeared to be in vain for particular Persons to challenge any comfort) is by
assuring our Selves that we in particular are in Covenant with him; so that, at
least the Negative way of Arguing (for which alone I am at present concerned)
will hold here, That he who cannot assure himself that he is in Covenant with
God, can also never (in an ordinary way at least) assure himself that he in
particular has an Interest in the Divine Promises. For proving this I desire it
may be Observed 1. That it is only the Obligatory force either of the Divine
Promise, or Covenant, that can be a solid ground, (I do not say, of comfort in
general, but, at least) of any positive Assurance, and consequently, at least,
of that degree of comfort which requires positive Assurance. This appears from
what has been already discoursed under the former Head. 2. Therefore it is to
be Observed further, that Promises and Covenants are Legal transactions, and
that God himself herein condescends to the capacities of his Creatures, so that
they may be capable of judging him obliged to them by the same Legal rational
measures whereby they are capable of entering into Obligations to one another.
That it was Gods design that his Creatures should understand him as thus
obliged is very easy to be understood from his using expressions plainly
significative of a Legal conveyance with all its Circumstances according to the
Customs of those Nations. Thus the name of a Covenant, of a Mediator, of a
Testament, of a Surety, of Sealing, of giving an earnest and First fruits, etc.
are plain terms of Law, and allusions to the Customs of Legal conveyances in
those times, and therefore were so most obviously intelligible by those Persons
(who were concerned in them immediately, and to whose capacities they were
immediately fitted) of a Legal Obligation, and consequently were in all
likelihood designed by God himself so to signify. Unless we can suppose that
he designedly made use of Expressions which, by all Regular and Prudent
measures of Interpretation, were likely to be misunderstood by his Creatures
concerned in them, which it not reconcilable with his Goodness and Veracity.
Besides this appears from his doing this in Writings of a Popular style, and
particularly fitted to the vulgar capacities, who were certainly like to
understand him thus where they found their own familiar Expressions used, and
their Terms alluded to; nay from the many instances in the Epistle to the
Hebrews especially, where that Divine Author himself has given us Precedents of
Arguing from the received Legal Notions, concerning the nature of Contracts
(that Testaments are not of force till the death of the Testator, Heb. ix.17.
Heb. ix.18.
that Covenants must be confirmed with blood, etc.) which had been extremely
improper if he had not supposed in general, that Gods Covenant with Mankind in
the Gospel was of the same nature with other Legal Contracts.

Revealer of Gods Will, as of a Disputant; and therefore as arguing from
Premises, not only granted by the Persons with whom he had to deal, but also
true in themselves, and secure in their Consequences. For it is not probable
that he would have laid the main stress of so considerable a part of his
Discourse only on Arguments ad homines. And seeing that, in this way of
Arguing, the reason which he supposes sufficient to assure his Readers of the
Truth of the Premises of such Discourses could not be any Authority of his own
(for if the Premises must have been believed for his Authority, why might not
the same Authority suffice for rendering the Conclusions also Credible which
were to be deduced from them? And if so, what need had there been of any
Arguments or deductions?) He must therefore plainly suppose that Gods dealing
with them was really by way of a Legal Contract, and that all Maxims requisite
to the nature of such Contracts, according to the concurrent sense of such
Persons as in that Age were most Prudently to be presumed to be best acquainted
with the nature of such Contracts, were also applicable to these Divine
Contracts; and that Arguments grounded on such Maxims were solid and
conclusive. For these were the only proper reasons for assuring such Persons of
their Truth, Antecedently and independently on the Apostles Authority; and
therefore, by the same tenor of arguing, all those other Propositions to which
they were equally applicable must be presumed equally true.

Obligation of these Divine Promises and Covenant is to be explained in a Legal
way. And that not only by the Laws of Nature, and Nations in general; but also,
in many instances, by those then prevailing among the Hellenistical Jews (for
whose use the New Testament seems to have been primarily designed) those of the
Roman Empire in general, and those of their particular Nation. But especially
the securest arguing in this kind will be from the Laws of Nature and Nations,
and the general rational Notions concerning the Obligation of this sort of
Contracts, not only such as are really agreeable to the nature of the things
themselves, but also such as were conceived to be rational and agreeable to the
natures of the things by the unanimous consent of civilized Nations, and of the
Masters of reasoning whose Authority was then had in general veneration. For
though God be not any farther, than he pleases himself, obliged by particular
positive Constitutions, because he is not subject to the Authority by which
they are established; yet by virtue of the essential rectitude of his Will
whereby it is necessarily conformed to the Rule of right Reason, we cannot
conceive any thing necessarily obliging in point of Reason, and yet conceive
him indifferent to its observation. And therefore whatever, I do not say is,
but, is by us conceived to be, rationally obligatory in the nature of these
Contracts; that we may presume to be obligatory even to God himself, when he is
pleased to enter into such Contracts with us. For the very design of all
Contracts being to give mutual security for performance on both sides, it is
very rational that we be the same way assured of performance on Gods part as we
give security for performance on ours. But this cannot be unless the same
reason of obligation be supposed equally cogent in both Cases. Now it is plain
that our own obligations are measured by our own Notions; and therefore unless
we may Judge of Gods obligations by the same measures, we may conceive our
Selves to give security where none is given us, which is not agreeable with
that Simplicity and fair dealing which we must needs conceive inseparable from
Divine Contracts.

is, but is conceived, both because our Conceptions, as erroneous as they are
in themselves, are yet the only possible measures of our comfort; And because I
have already shown that it is not rational to believe that God will suffer the
generality of those, to whom his Revelations were at first proposed, to be lead
into any actual Error by following their own conceptions in such Cases; And
because I might, by this Clause, give a reason of the latter part of my
Assertion, that not only in general Propositions concerning the nature of the
Obligation of these Contracts, but also in such as were repvted for such by the
greatest Masters of reasoning in that Age, such an Assurance, as I am speaking
of, may be securely grounded. Because the sense of these Wisemen was most
likely, and in Prudence most fit, to have been followed by the generality of
those Ages; and therefore must not have been supposed likely to have been
permitted by Providence to misguide them. This I do the rather observe because
they are these general Rules, and eternal Reasons, concerning the Obligation of
these Contracts for which I am at present solicitous, and on which I do intend
to superstruct my future Discourse.

THEREFORE these Promises of forgiveness of our past Sins, and assistance in
our future performances, and acceptance of our imperfect Righteousness as if it
had been perfect, and passing by our daily frailties, and accepting of our weak
performances in order to a Supernatural reward, are to be considered as the
things to be performed on Gods part of the Evangelical Covenant. This appears
from the expressions of the Covenant it self, as they are transcribed from Jer.
XXXI.31, 32, 33, 34. by the Author to the Hebrews Heb. VIII.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
where, on Gods part of this Covenant, Jer. xxxi.33. Heb. viii.10. Jer. xxxi.34.
Heb. viii.12.
it is promised, That he will put his Laws into their minds, and write them in
their hearts (by which terms are employed all his gracious assistances of them
for the performance of their duty) and That He will be merciful unto their
unrighteousness, and that their Sins and Iniquities He would remember no more,
by which may be included his whole Indulgence to their Sins, not only his
perfect forgiveness of their Sins past employed in his remembering them no more,
but also his bearing with their future frailties, which may appositely enough
be intimated by his being merciful to their unrighteousness, as Vrighteousness
may signify, not that which is contrary to Righteousness, but that which falls
short of it in point of Perfection, and as being merciful may imply a weakness
and imperfection in the Persons to whom it is shown which might be a rational
inducement to the generous nature of God to incline him to mercy. Though I
confess when I consider the frequent use of these terms otherwise in the sacred
Writers, and especially that frequent practice among them, of making the later
part of a verse exegetical of the former; I cannot undertake that this Critical
distinction must necessarily have been designed by the Prophet himself. Yet on
the other side considering how many things this Author to the Hebrews himself
infers from the Old Testament, from the native signification of the terms
whereby they are expressed, as designed by the Holy Ghost, how little soever
thought of by the Sacred Writers themselves; this Exposition cannot barely on
that account be necessarily concluded irrational, whilst it appears congruous
to the strict signification of the terms themselves. But however though this
Exposition should fail, on account of the Critical importance of those terms;
yet it may be included even in the later expressions themselves, if by the Sins
and Iniquities which he promises to remember no more, be not only signified
those misdemeanors whereby they had forfeited their Interest in the first
Covenant, and made themselves unworthy of the Second, Jer. xxxi.32. Heb. viii.9.
in which regard they are said not to have continued in his Covenant, (that is
in the former Covenant) and therefore not to have been regarded by God, which
must therefore only imply such Sins as are Antecedent either to the
Constitution of the New Covenant, or at least to their Initiation into it (as I
verily believe these alone are primarily and originally intended) but also the
Frailties consequent to their initiation into the Evangelical Covenant. Which
are also capable of being remembered, not indeed in order to the establishment
of the New Covenant, or their admission into it, which must here be supposed
Antecedent to it; but in regard of the accomplishment of the Evangelical
Promises to them, several of which are supposed future to them whilst they live
in this World.

remission of Sins of Frailty consequent to the Covenant be implied in these
Words or not, yet most certainly it is in the Covenant it self; unless we
suppose this New Covenant less merciful than the Old under which there was
admitted an ordinary way of expiating Sins of this nature; and besides it might
have been proved from several other Texts of the New Testament, if it had been
necessary. Jer. xxxi.33. Heb. viii.10.
That which I desire only to remark further at present from this Text, is, that
it is expressly mentioned as one of the effects of this New Covenant, that God
would be unto them a God, and they should be unto him a People. Whence it will
be easy to infer that Gods Promises only belong to them as in Covenant with
him, because it is only by that Covenant that they become his People. For I
believe our dissenting Brethren themselves will not think that these Promises
were ever designed by God for any but his own People, even in this restrained
sense whereby they are made his People by virtue of this Covenant with him; and
to others that yet are not so only on condition of their becoming so. And if
they had doubted of it, it had been easy to have proved it. Thus Christ does
not so much as pray for the World, but only for them whom his Father had given
him out of the World, St. Joh. xvii.9. In the same sense wherein Judas himself
had been given him, Verse. 12. which could not be understood of a giving
successful in the event, but only of a giving of external initiation into his
Covenant, which is the very sense for which I am at present concerned. And it
is only to as many as are thus given him by the Father, that he has power given
him of the Father to give eternal Life, Verse. 2. and to raise them up at the
last day. St. Joh. vi.39. as both eternal Life and the Resurrection are usually
understood in the best sense, only for a state of Happiness. And they are only
they who thus come unto him ((...), a word signifying Proselitism and the
external rites of initiation then requisite for that purpose as it was then
practiced among the Jews) that he will in no way cast out, St. Joh. vi.37. And
to this purpose those Texts might have been urged which are produced for
proving Christ's dying primarily for the Church. And the Answers to them will be
prevented in the Sequel of this Discourse, whence it will appear both that
Faith and Repentance themselves, on which they so much insist, are not
available to Salvation, at least not pleadable in a Legal way, without our
being of the Church; and that the Church of which we are Obliged to be is an
External Body Politic.

Promises are indeed only His part of the Covenant, what can be more clear than
that on this account the Jews are said, under the Old Testament, to have had a
particular Interest in Gods Promises? So St. Peter tells them that the Promise
was to them and to their Children, Act. ii.39.
and to all that were afar of (that is with this limitation) even to as many as
the Lord our God should call, Ephesians. ii.12.13.
that is to as many of the Gentiles as should be admitted into their external
Society by Proselitism. For by the Phrase afar of the Gentiles are usually
signified. And it is not credible that he could here have taken it for granted
that the Gentiles were Salvable on the bare Moral Conditions of Faith and
Repentance without external Proselitism. For he seems here to argue from the
Concessions of his Auditors, concerning whom it is notorious that they never
believed the Gentiles Salvable on such easy terms: And St. Peter himself was
not as yet convinced of the Salvability of the Gentiles on other terms than
Proselitism to the Jewish Worship, Act. x.28. xi.16.17.
till his Vision upon occasion of the Story of Cornelius; and when he was, we
yet find him difficult in believing of it, as appears from his separating from
them as impure upon occasion of the Brethren that came from Jerusalem 14. Years
after St. Paul's conversion, which was long after, Gal. ii.12.13.
a sign that even then he had not the confidence to urge it as an Argument to
the Jews, as it is plain what is here insisted on is urged by way of Argument.
Nor is the Promise here mentioned that of the Messiah being of their Nation, or
of their numerousness, (of which the Gentiles, though Proselited, were still
incapable) nor indeed any of those Temporal ones which particularly concerned
them as even their Civil affairs were governed by a Theocracy, but Spiritual
ones of remission of Sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost, as appears from the
verse immediately preceding. And certainly these, if any, concerned them more
immediately as a Church, and may therefore by exact parity of reason be
expected to be confined to the Christian Church now, who have succeeded them in
that capacity.

Gospel has only thrown down that partition wall (as the Apostle calls it)
whereby the Jews as a particular Nation had been discriminated from the rest of
Mankind; so that the same Privileges which had been appropriated then must, by
the tenor of this reasoning, Ephesians. ii.14.
be understood to be made common now. Yet so as that this enlargement of the
Gospel is not so to be understood as if every Individual Person of other
Nations might immediately challenge these Privileges, by virtue of the
Evangelical Covenant, upon performance of the Moral Conditions, but that now
all are capable of being admitted into the Covenant it self; which will
consequently entitle them to those Privileges, without being obliged to leave
their National Customs, or to incorporate themselves into a particular Nation,
as they were then conceived obliged to incorporate themselves into the Nation
of the Jews in order to the gaining a complete Title to all those Spiritual
Privileges. This as it fully satisfies the design of the Apostles Discourse,
so it still supposes a like confinement of the Promises to the Evangelical
Covenant as had been to the Legal, the only difference being that all are
capable of being admitted to the Covenant now, who had not been so formerly.
Thus again the Apostle St. Paul tells us, that theirs were the Adoption ((...))
and the Glory, Romans ix.4.
(the Shechinah) and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the Service
of God, and the Promises. And besides this mention of the Adoption, which was
clearly a Spiritual benefit, as also that of the Shechinah was, if by it we
understand, not that Glory which appeared on mount Sinai at the giving of the
Law, nor that which appeared in the cloud and pillar of fire during their
journey through the Wilderness, nor that which overshadowed the Mercy seat
under the first Temple, but failed under the second; but that which according
to the notions of the Rabbis is supposed to rest on every Israelite on account
of his being so, which seems to be the same with that which is called the Holy
Spirit in the language of Christians, but according to the language of the Jews
(which seems here to have been observed by the Apostle) the Ruach Haccodesch
seems rather reducible to the (...) or the Gratiae gratis datae than the (...)
or Gratiae gratum facientes, concerning which I am at present discoursing: I
say, besides these, it also appears further that the other Benefits implied in
the general name of Promises were not only their Temporal Privileges, by the
general design of the Apostle in that whole Epistle, where he frequently
mentions Remission of Sins and Justification, as part of those Privileges
which were controverted betwixt them and the Gentiles. Now if the Promises had
been indefinite to all upon the bare performance of the Moral Duties of
Repentance, and even of Faith in the Jewish Religion, as far as it could appear
credible to other Nations, that is indeed as far as it could be obligatory to
them; I do not understand what special interest the Jews could have had in
them. For whosoever reads their Story, and considers the dull and sensual
humor of the generality of that Nation cannot believe them more inclinable to
Faith and Repentance than the generality of other civilized Nations; so that
they were not likely, by bare performance of the Conditions, to gain any
advantage of the Gentiles in the Event, if the Promises had been equally
designed for them and others. It must therefore have been from a designed
limitation of the Promises themselves that they, and not others, otherwise than
by becoming of their Community by Proselitism, should have a singular Interest
in these Promises; Especially if we compare them with those Gentiles which
lived among them (and it was with them that the Apostle compared them) to whom
the Divine Revelations, as to the directive part of them, might have been as
notorious as to themselves. And the most rational way conceivable of confining
them, and which seems to have been alluded to in the Apostles Discourses on
this Subject, is this, that the Promises were Gods part of the Covenant, to
which the Jews were admitted, as the Gentiles were excluded from it.

Jews was indeed singular in this, that it was confined to one Nation so that
no other Nations were admitted to it; and even no particular Persons of other
Nations were capable of being admitted to that favor without an Incorporation
into that particular Nation by the complete Proselitism of Justice, whereby
they became obnoxious to the Judicial Law which concerned them as a
Commonwealth as well as to the Moral and Ceremonial which concerned them as
they were a Church; and upon that account it is that the Apostles teach us that
in the New Evangelical Covenant God is no respecter of Persons, that in every
Nation he that fears him, Act. x.34.35. Ephesians. ii.14. Ver. 15.
and works Righteousness is accepted by him; and that now the Partition Wall
is broken down by Christ; that he has abolished in his flesh the Enmity, even
the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself of
twain one new man, so making Peace; Romans x.12. Gal. iii.28. v.6. vi.15.
so that there is now no difference between Jew and Greek; but they are all one
in Jesus Christ; and now neither Circumcision avails any thing nor
Uncircumcision; Yet all these Discourses seem only to aim at this, that all
sorts of Nations may now be admitted to the Evangelical Covenant by Baptism,
without remitting any of their National or Political Distinctives in compliance
to any one, which was not allowed them under the Mosaic Discipline. But this
Liberty cannot be urged from any design of the Sacred Writers in these
Discourses so far as to excuse them from the external rites of Initiation into
the New Covenant, as if their fearing God and working Righteousness, or the
Faith working by Love, or any other Moral Dispositions whatsoever, should prove
available to them in order to the procuring Supernatural rewards, without an
Interest in the Gospel Covenant; or that they alone should, in an Ordinary way,
procure an Interest in the Gospel Covenant without an external admission into
it in a solemn way where this admission might be obtained on any tolerable
unsinful terms, as our Adversaries conceive. But rather seeing the same Legal
way of correspondence between God and Us is continued in a way of a Covenant;
And seeing the Church with whom this Covenant is made is still a Body Politic
as formerly, though not a Civil one; And seeing that God has designed to oblige
all Persons to enter into this Society, and to maintein its Peace, (which could
not be significant if Persons might Ordinarily hope for the same advantages out
of it as in it) They will both of them seem to agree in this, that the Promises
are in both alike confined to the Covenant, at least as to an Ordinary way.

Testimonies, this confinement of the Evangelical Promises to the Evangelical
Covenant will appear from the Reason of the things themselves, even according
to that account of them which our dissenting Brethren themselves conceive to be
rational. To which purpose it is to be remembered that the reason why God has
been pleased to admit Mankind to this favor is not his own essential Goodness
alone, but the consideration of the Satisfaction of Christ by which it is
purchased, and by which it is made reconcilable with the Principles of
Government to admit of this Impunity of our offenses without any fear of
inconvenience that must otherwise follow from such an example of Impunity and
Favor to Persons so offending. Whence it will further follow that, seeing they
are the purchase of Christ's blood, they are to be considered as belonging to
his Right, and therefore as disposable only according to his pleasure. Now they
themselves acknowledge a Covenant betwixt God the Father and Christ concerning
this purchase, not only that the Promises were to become his Property, but also
that their actual distribution and extent should be according to his
appointment. However whether the distribution of them depended on his pleasure
or not, yet, as to the positive way of arguing, we who have an Interest in
Christ are sufficiently secure of obteining them, St. Joh. xvi.26.27.
because, by virtue of this satisfaction, his Father himself, as himself has
told us, loves us, and is as careful for the performance as if himself had been
the Person interessed in our behalf. And accordingly he has given our Savior
this power for this purpose that he should give eternal Life to us, St. Joh.
vi.40.
and he has received a Commandment from the Father to lay down his Life for us.
And the very Persons are, as truly given him by the Father, as the Father
himself has confined these favors only to the Persons which he should give
him. St. Joh. vi.37.39. xvii.6.9.11.12.
And if our dissenting Brethren would only be pleased to consider further, that
the Covenant betwixt Christ and Us is only pursuant to that betwixt him and his
Father, and only designed for its application to particulars, that as by the
Covenant betwixt him and his Father it is resolved that only his should have an
Interest in these Promises, so by the Covenant betwixt him and Mankind
particular Rules were agreed upon for knowing who should be accounted his; And
that Christ transacted this whole affair as a public Person the same way as
Adam had done in the former Covenant; And that accordingly, as the benefit of
the former Covenant belonged to all who bore the Image of the first Adam, so
the benefit of the later Covenant cannot be challenged by any but those who
bear the Image of the second; nay that the name of Christ is more expressly
applied to the multitude represented by him than that of Adam is to the
multitude represented by Adam: That only Adam and his Wife are called Adam, but
all who have an Interest in the New Covenant are called by the name of Christ;
that only Eve was said to be flesh of Adams flesh and bone of his bone, and one
flesh with him, in regard of the singular manner of her production out of him,
but the whole Church is said to be of the flesh and bones of Christ; Nay that
this Unity betwixt Christ and his Church is expressly urged so far as that
whatsoever is done to the Church is, in a Legal sense, 1 Cor. xii.12. Ephesians.
v.30. Act. ix.4. 2 Cor. 1.5.7. 1 Pet. iv.13. Col. 1.24. Gal. vi.17.
reputed as if it had been done to Christ himself, and what is not conferred on
his Members is said to be wanting to himself their Head (so he was persecuted
by St. Paul in his Members, and the remainder of his Sufferings in the flesh
was fulfilled by the sufferings of the same St. Paul, when now a Christian, and
he bore in his Body the dyings of the Lord Jesus, and from this relation of
ours to Christ as of Members to our Head the same Apostle concludes it as
impossible for him to have risen if we should not rise also as it is for the
Head to be enlivened whilst at the same time its Members lie rotting in the
grave, where I desire it may be observed that the Apostle is to be considered
as a Disputant from Reason, not as a Proposer of Revelation) whence it will
plainly follow that Christians are also included in this Legal person of Christ
which is sustained by him in transacting the New Covenant, and therefore that
as all Christians must necessarily have a Title to these promises (which cannot
otherwise be said to be performed to Christ in this Latitude) so that none but
they can have a Legal Title to them, because none can have a Legal Title to
them but by purchase, and none but Christ has purchased them, and none but they
have a Legal Title to the name and consequently to the purchases of Christ: If,
I say, these things had been impartially considered, I do not conceive what
could have been further necessary for showing that this Legal Title to these
promises is confined not only to the Covenant betwixt God and Christ, but also
to that betwixt Christ and Mankind.

Evangelical Transactions. For considering that that does imply not only a
Legal, but a mutual, Contract; it must follow that there must be mutual
promises, and mutual Obligations: and therefore that as God is pleased, in this
Covenant, to oblige Us in a Legal way to the performance of our Duty; so we may
expect that he would also be pleased to oblige himself by promising some
advantages to us, to encourage us in it. If he had in another way exacted our
Duty, on the bare account of his absolute Authority over us, without any
Promises on his part; it might indeed have been called a command, but could
never have been properly styled a Covenant. And if God obliged himself to any
promises in this Covenant with us, it is least of all credible that he should
leave out those promises which are of all others the most considerable, as
these are of which we are here discoursing. Besides that indeed the very nature
of a promise inferring a Legal Obligation; it is not likely that God would so
far condescend as to make them, but upon the like Legal security of Duty to be
performed by his Creatures, which when it is mutual on both Parties we call a
Covenant. And these promises of Duty, confirmed in a solemn way by a Covenant
on our part, being the only rational inducement likely to prevail with God to
make these promises; it is not credible that he would design those favors for
any but such as give him this solemn security which may induce him to it. For
even this external Solemnity is very considerable in regard of the influence it
may have on the Obligation and Security of a Covenant, especially as transacted
with a Multitude; how little soever it may seem to be so, in regard of the
rational Obligation of the mutual consent of the interessed Parties. Nor is it
only thus rational in it self, that God should thus confine his promises to his
Covenant, but it appears to have been his actual design in the contrivance of
it as I shall have occasion to show more fully in my future Discourse.

Calvinian Brethren may be tempted to think this Discourse for proving the
confinement of the promises to such as have an Interest in the New Covenant
purchased by Christ, to be both needless as to themselves, and to be
disagreeable to our own Principles in the Remonstrant Controversies: To be
needles as to them, because they are for a greater confinement than we can
approve of; so as not only to confine them in the Event, but also as to the
Original design. So that as to others they conceive neither the Promises to
have been designed for them on performance of Conditions, nor yet that Grace
which might have enabled them for that performance. To be disagreeable to our
other Principles when we prove both the Will of God* and the Death of Christ,
to have been designed for the Salvation of all. I confess if we understood the
Church in the same sense as our Brethren ordinarily do when they produce these
same Texts for their own purpose in the Remonstrant Controversies, only for the
secret number of Gods Elect; And that by the Death of Christ* not being
designed for them as scattered Individuals we meant; not only that his Death
should not be available for them as scattered Individuals, that is, whilst they
continued so scattered; but also that it should not as much as purchase that
actual Grace for them, even in that Condition, which might put it in their
power to be Incorporated into the Church; there had been some ground for this
mistake* But these senses are far from being ours. Nor is it indeed our
interest that we should own them. For they would fail us when we should have
occasion to use them, that is, when we should undertake to show that they are
not in the Church, and their danger in continuing so. Nor is it less
disserviceable to our design to suppose that Persons out of the Communion of
the Church are so deprived of the Promises by their being so as to want that
degree of Grace which is absolutely necessary for making their return to it
possible. If that were their Case, to what purpose should we endeavor either
to convince them of the dangerousness of their present condition, or persuade
them to come out of it? To talk to People of doing that, which we already know
they cannot do, is not to persuade, but to upbraid them. And it were not Good
will to them, but Inhumanity, as much as to discover to them that danger which
we knew it were impossible for them to escape. It would but add to them the
trouble of their present fears over and above the future mischief of it when it
should befall them.

all Mankind, as well those who are out of the Church as those who are within
it, yet so as that this general design is not actually available for the
Salvation of any particular (in an ordinary way so as that the Person may have
the comfort of it) without the Church, nay not within it without Universal and
Sincere Obedience. And the effect of this design to Persons without the Church,
is, to promise Salvation, and a gracious acceptance of them on condition of
their Incorporating themselves into it; and in the mean time to give that
Grace, which, if not resisted by their own free Wills, may be sufficient to
invite them into it. So also the present effect even on vicious Livers in the
Communion of the Church is not, that they shall be actually Saved whilst they
continue so; but that by virtue of their being in Covenant they can challenge
acceptance upon Repentance, and plead Promises upon performance of conditions,
and can have a free and open access to the ordinary channels of Grace to enable
them to perform Conditions, none of which can agree to Persons without the
Church who cannot as yet be supposed to have any actual Interest in the
Covenant. And upon these Supposals it will be easy to conceive how, not only
the actual performance of, but the very Title to, Promises may be confined to
the Church, and yet God may sincerely design the universal Salvation of
Mankind. For I think none can Question but a design on performable Conditions
may be easily conceived to be sincere, though it should fail of the Event,
through a voluntary Nonperformance of Conditions on the Creatures part; and it
hence appears that such a confinement of the Promises to the Church is very
reconcilable with such a design as this is for the Universal Salvation of
Mankind.

New Covenant to the Elect, than they can. For our Notion of a Church is more
obvious and ordinarily intelligible in that Age and even in the Scripture it
self than that which they pretend to; And it is exceedingly agreeable with the
design of God in erecting the Church a Body Politic, thus to oblige Men to
enter into it, and to submit to its Rules of Discipline, however the Secular
State should stand affected; And it is better suited to the capacities and
practice of even the very Vulgar of that Age, for whose use principally the
Scriptures seem to have been Written in that condescending style in which we
find them (for what use can there be in Practice of either of these Discourses
if the Persons hearing them cannot make out their interest in them? And it is
certainly more easy for the most Vulgar capacity whatsoever to prove their
interest in a Visible Church, than in an Invisible one consisting only of Elect
Persons.) And I do not know but they may indeed find that it is this Election
to Grace actually, and to Glory in design, which the Scripture generally speaks
of, and that this Election to Grace does not so much imply an infallible and
perpetual influence of Grace on the Person so elected as his actual
introduction to the Ordinary Means of Grace which others had been permitted to
reject, which amounts exactly to our present design of admission into the
Church, as I have now explained it (which though it be a Notion I think
exceedingly defensible, yet I would not engage the stress of my present Cause
in a Discourse so seemingly exotical to our design any further than needs I
must) And it will not engage us to Answer that current of Scripture which seems
directly opposite to the meaning imposed on these places by our Adversaries;
And less is requisite to justify our Sense than theirs who therefore ought to
have more and greater proof for what they add beyond our Assertions.

Promises are confined to the Covenant; I infer further 5. That he who would
pretend any Title to the Promises, must in order thereunto prove his Interest
in the Covenant. For if the Promises be Gods part of the Evangelical Covenant,
none can challenge them but he who has a Legal Title to them; And none can have
a Legal Title to them who has not an Interest in the Covenant on which such a
Legal Title at least must be founded, because the Covenant is indeed it self
the Legal conveyance; And it is only such a Legal challenge, that can give us
comfort, and confidence, that they belong to us. And as by our Interest in the
Covenant we may argue Positively, that we have an Interest in the Promises not
actual and absolute, but upon performance of Conditions (which is more than can
be pleaded by Persons not yet admitted into the Covenant) so the Negative way
of Arguing (for which we are at present concerned) is much more certain, That
he who cannot prove his Interest in the Covenant, whatever his performance of
Conditions may be, cannot challenge a Legal Title to the Promises. And as I
have shown that even the things promised cannot be hoped for by one in such a
Condition, upon any grounds so secure as a Prudent Person might safely venture
on with any comfort or confidence; so indeed a Promise as a Promise is it self
a Legal way of conveyance, and therefore, as it is the nature of all like
conveyances, cannot, I do not say, easily, but not, at all, be challenged on
any but a Legal Title. But I proceed.

CHAP. IV. The same thing further Prosecuted.
THE CONTENTS.
2. The only Ordinary Means whereby we may assure our Selves of our interest in
this Covenant is by our partaking in the External Solemnities whereby this
Covenant is transacted and maintained. This cleared in, 2. Particulars: 1. That
the partaking of these External Solemnities of initiation into, and maintenance
of, this Evangelical Covenant is the only Ordinary Means of procuring and
mainteining a Legal Interest in it.. I.II. An Objection urged and Answered. The
Assertion proved from Gods actual Establishment.. III.IV.V.VI.VII.VIII.IX.X.XI.
The same proved from the reason of the thing. 1. God is concerned to take care
that these External Solemnities be punctually observed as he is a Covenanter..
XII.XIII.XIV.XV.XVI.XVII.XVIII.XIX.XX.XXI.XXII.XXIII.XXIV.XXV.XXVI.

the only Ordinary Means whereby we may assure our Selves of our Interest in
this Covenant with God is by our partaking in the external Solemnities whereby
this Covenant is transacted and maintained; So that where we are either not
solemnly initiated into this Covenant by the rites and observances that are
necessary for such a purpose (that is, according to the Christian Religion by
Baptism) or where we a^e excluded from the Solemnities of mainteining it (that
is, according to the same Christian Religion by the Lords Supper) after we have
been once admitted to it, there we cannot ordinarily assure our Selves that we
have any real Interest in it. This will appear from two things: that this
partaking in these external Solemnities of this Covenant is indeed the Ordinary
Means for procuring or mainteining our Interest in the Covenant it self (...)
and that though this participation had not indeed that influence on the thing
it self, but that we might obtein or maintein our Interest in the Covenant
without it, yet that it is at least the only Ordinary Means of assuring us of
such an Interest, so that though it were not so certain that we might not have
this Interest, yet certainly we could not be assured of it without this
external participation.

The partaking of these external Solemnities of initiation into, and
maintenance of, this Evangelical Covenant is the only Ordinary Means of
procuring and mainteining an Interest in it, I mean still such a Legal Interest
as may immediately empower us to challenge the Promises on performance of the
Duties of it. This I conceive so clear from the nature and Obligation of
Covenants in general as that I do not know whether, our Brethren themselves can
find in their hearts to Question it in instances wherein their Interest may not
be Suspicious of tempting them to Partiality. For even in ordinary Contracts we
find that Promises, however fully agreed on with all their restrictions and
limitations that may prevent all future Cavils betwixt the contracting Parties,
have, by the unanimous consent of all Prudent Legislators, not been thought fit
to be allowed as pleadable in a Legal way till they were mutually Sealed and
solemnly confirmed before Witnesses; and though some Courts of Conscience may
oblige a Person to the performance of his private Promises, yet not immediately
and independently on the solemnity of doing it. But the immediate method is,
first to oblige themselves in a solemn way to what they have agreed to
privately, and then to perform the Contents of that Obligation. And
particularly (that I may give an instance parallel to our present Case wherein
Inferiors are supposed to contract with their Superiors) the Princes pardon,
though ^^tested from his mouth by Persons never so Credible, is not pleadable
in Law till it has past the great Seal, and other Solemnities requisite by Law.
And indeed this Solemnity of conveyance is generally insisted on with much
greater rigor in graunts from supreme Governors than in Covenants betwixt
private equal Persons. And the reason is clear, because what is transacted
betwixt private Persons is only of private concernment, and therefore can only
be prejudicial in the particular Case if they should prove mistaken in it, and,
of such particular prejudices to his own private Interest, every one of
ordinary Prudence is, in reason, to be permitted to judge as far as concerns his
own particular Practice. But the Acts of Superiors are likely to pass into
Precedents, and are therefore likely to prove of greater concernment in the
consequence than the value of the interest of the particular Person who is
immediately concerned. And therefore as Governors are, by their Office,
obliged to be more concerned for the Public than for any particular Case, so
it cannot be fit for them to pass any favors to particular Persons by such
Forms as may prove hurtful by way of Precedent, that is, which are likely to
prove hurtful in more Cases than they are likely to prove convenient, or even
innocent, in. And such certainly must be the omission even of these external
Solemnities. For if they had not been thought necessary in regard of their
influence on the Public, that is, if even this Solemnity of conveyance had not
been generally necessary for securing the Equity of particular conveyances, so
that if such grants were ordinarily passed without such Solemnities, they would
in all likelihood prove unequal more frequently than Equal; it is not probable
that the Solemnities would ever have been settled at first by such a Power as
must be presumed unwilling to impose any further on the Liberty even of its
particular Subjects than it finds it necessary for the Public to do so. And if
they have been thus thought necessary for the Public it cannot be thought
reasonable that they should be omitted in favor to particular Persons without
a very particular and express Indulgence, which is not here as much as
pretended. So that here the culpable omission of such Punctualities, is,
without any relief of Chancery, thought justly meritorious of a forfeiture of
the whole grant, especially when the grant is of Favors that are not otherwise
due in the rigor of stric^ Justice, as these have appeared to be.

solemn way of proceeding is the prevention of Cavils and misrepresentations to
which private Actions are very obnoxious, and which therefore make them
incapable of that Evidence which is necessary for the full information of
Authority in order to the passing a just Sentence concerning them; in which the
reason why private Promises cannot be admitted as Legal proof, is not that
Legislators have not thought them justly Obligatory, but because Judges
generally want those Evidences which might convince them that they were ever
made. Besides the necessity of formal Bonds in order to a Legal proof seems
especially to have been designed for the security of well-meaning Simple
Persons, from the Cheats of those who are more subtle, to which they would
frequently be betrayed by Precipitation; just as the Roman Axes carried before
their Consuls were bound up with the fasces, purposely that if the Consuls were
hasty in their Decrees, or too severe, they might, whilst they were
enloosening, gain time for the enterteinment of milder counsels (as it is plain
that they have been thus solicitous for the security of weaker Persons, by
disannulling such Contracts, even in other Cases, as would otherwise have been
thought sufficiently obligatory as to the nature of the things themselves, and
such as might in the particular Cases have been transacted with sufficient
Prudence and Deliberation, such as the Promises of Minors, and the private
espousals of Persons to be married) but that in instances of the nature of
these, concerning which I am at present Discoursing, neither of these Reasons
will seem to hold. For neither does there seem to be that danger of
Precipitation where the Case is clear, and clear to all, even the meanest,
capacities that are concerned in it, as it is here, both that our Baptismal
Promises are otherwise our Duty whether we promised them or not, and that the
Promises on Gods part are highly conducive to all our Interests, both Temporal
and Eternal; Or, if the Benefit had been less considerable, yet there is no
dangers of Precipitation where there is no danger of Prejudice to be suffered
by it, though we had been guilty of it, as it is also most certain, even to the
meanest capacity, that is capable of being rationally Religious, that there is
no danger of prejudicing themselves by being so. Seeing it is certain their
Duty can do them no hurt in the final Event, and that they cannot possibly fail
of Gods Promises whilst they perform their own, and that God will never take
the advantage of captious Expositions of their words to ensnare and entangle
them, but accept of their Practice in the same Simplicity in which it was
designed by themselves. Nor is there here that inconvenience of pleading a
Legal Obligation from private Promises, seeing that however private they may be
in regard of Men yet they are notorious to God, who, though he be indeed a
Party in these Contracts, yet is withal to be considered as the only possible
competent Judge of their performance. But otherwise the bare promises of an
honest Person is as justly obligatory to him, and as securely to be (...) by
the Person concerned in it, as if it had been passed in all the usual
Solemnities of Law. And therefore it being certain, that God cannot fail in the
performance of what he has once promised, it may be thought unreasonable to
distrust his performance only because his Promises have not as yet passed a
Legal way of conveyance.

performance of the Conditions is the thing only aimed at in a Covenant, and
the external Solemnities of it are only required for the reasons now mentioned;
there a Person performing the Conditions of it may have a just Title, though he
may want a Legal Evidence to compel his Adversary to the performance on his
part. And I confess withal that in dealing with God there being no danger of
wanting Evidence; the Justice of our Title is a sufficient Legal plea, not only
to oblige him, but also to secure us of the performance of any thing that has
been so promised by him. But if the nature of these Covenants of God with Us do
require, not only the performance of the Conditions to entitle us to the
Promises when we are in Covenant with him, but also the external Solemnities of
the Covenant it self to the instating us in a Legal Title to the Covenant; the
Case will be clearly otherwise. For upon this latter Supposition, it will
plainly follow that the bare performance of the Conditions, as far as they are
capable of being performed by us, will not give us so much as a Just Title to
the Promises, even in Conscience, that I may not now take any advantage from
what might have been said against a Legal Obligation.

external Solemnities are by God himself designed as the Ordinary Means of
procuring an Interest in the Covenant it self; I desire it may be remembered 1.
that the Divine Promises, Antecedently to the Covenant, bear such a
disproportion to our performances as that they cannot be thought due to the
performances themselves, but still to be pure effects of his own Grace and
Liberality.

Free and Just for God, besides the performances themselves, to oblige us to
any other Conditions, suitable to that disproportion, that he shall Judge
convenient. Indeed in Contracts of Commutative Justice, where things of equal
worth are Covenanted for, though it be free to every one whether he will part
with his own Right on any Considerations whatsoever, and therefore also whether
he will part with it on equal ones; yet it is accounted very hard dealing for
him who receives a full value for it to impose any further Conditions on the
Person he deals with for gaining the benefit of his Contract. For such a full
value does upon the Contract confer a full and actual Right to the thing he
contracts for, at least us to the Conscience, and the reason of the thing; and
it is not thought fair or reasonable that any should have Conditions imposed
upon him against his own will for gaining that which, in Justice, and
Conscience, is already his own. Especially considering that in all Contracts of
this kind the pains that are to be taken are looked on as valuable
Considerations, and according to the greatness or inconsiderableness of them
the value of the things is heightened or lessened; so that what is only equal
in it self must with the Addition of further Conditions prove
disproportionable, and the exchanging of a thing of less value for things more
valuable is that which is reputed foul and overreaching in this way of
Commutative Justice. But in our Case the matter is clearly otherwise. For the
Divine rewards incomparably exceeding the merit of our performances of the
immediate Conditions, nay, and of all Conditions performable by Us: it plainly
follows that they are not given us in lieu of our performance of the immediate
Conditions as a thing that may entitle us to them, even upon Contract, by any
Rules of Commutative Justice; and that it is therefore very Just for God to add
any further Conditions performable by us; and suitable to that excess, in order
to the attainment of such rewards. So that now we are only concerned to Enquire
further what is his actual pleasure in this whole affair.

Governor, and accordingly, that the Rule, by which the Equity of his
Proceedings is to be estimated, is that of Distributive Justice, such, I mean,
as of which the nature of these Divine Contracts with Men are capable. If
therefore it may appear necessary for his Government; not only that the
Promises should not be given to those who are in Covenant without performance
of the immediate Conditions, but also the external Solemnities should be
necessary in order to the procuring an Interest in the Covenant; we shall then
have reason to believe that this has been actually the design of God in the
Instances whereof we are at present discoursing. Now who is there more
competent for informing us in a matter of this nature than God himself? Who can
better tell us either what is really more fit for the Government of Mankind in
order to their Salvation, or what himself judges to be so (who, as he sees
otherwise than we do, may also judge otherwise, by his clear intuition of the
things themselves, than we can by our weak Conjectures and extrinsick
Probabilities concerning things so little obvious to our discovery) or what he
is at length pleased actually to do? And can we think that he would ever have
constituted Sacraments to be administered in external Symbols as the Solemnities
of giving us an Interest in the Evangelical Covenant? Would he have given them
an eternal and immutable obligation, not depending on the Prudence of ordinary
Sacred Governors in accommodation to times and Circumstances? Would he have
done this in a time when himself decryed the external observances of the Mosaic
Law, as unseasonable, though it had formerly been established by himself, when
it was his great design and employment to withdraw Men from too great a dotage
on external Observances, and to reduce them to the Morals and Spirituals of
Religion? Is all this, I say, likely to have been done without a great sense of
the necessity of it for the Government of Mankind?

representation of the Sacramental Graces can be so very useful to this
purpose? Is our washing in Baptism so lively a signification of our new Birth
in allusion to the old Practice of washing Children at their first Nativity: or
our immersion in water of being buried with Christ, and our rising out of it of
our being raised again to newness of Life, and of our being saved by water as
Noah and his Family were in the Ark? Is Bread more suitable for signifying the
Humane Body of Christ than many other of our usual Table Flesh-Provisions; or
breaking of the Bread, for the piercing of his Body, than that of the Greeks,
for piercing it with the (...) (as they call their Instrument for that purpose)
or the Unity of the homogeneal parts of Bread, for signifying the Unity of the
Mystical Body of Christ, which is represented by the Apostle as a Heterogeneous
Body, consisting of variety of Members and Offices, than that of the Pascal
Lamb which was indeed Heterogeneous? Or is Wine more representative of the
Blood of Christ, especially when of a different color and administered
differently from his Body than many red liquors which might have been crushed
forth immediately from the Bodies that contained them? If they had contributed
no further to the raising of Devotion in us than by the liveliness of their
natural representation, why might not many things have been more useful for
that purpose, whose natural representation is much more lively? Why have we
then discontinued the Milk, Epist. Barnab. Tedall. de Coron. mil. S. Hier. adv.
Lucifer. de Pudicit. ^.
and Honey, and white Garments, so anciently used in Baptism, for signifying
the Infancy of our new Birth? O^ the Shepherd with the lost Sheep on his
shoulders pictured on the Chalices in Tertullians time? And indeed what
representations can be more lively of the sensible Mysteries here commemorated
than excellent Pictures and Pageantry! Why should we be confined either from
thinking on these things, or from assisting our thoughts by lively
representations of them, without such a tedious solemn Preparation, and at such
rarely-returning opportunities of doing it at Public Assemblies? Why must we
have but one opportunity of raising our Devotion by a lively representation of
our dying to Sin and rising to newness of Life through our Baptism, in our
whole Lives; and that opportunity at a season so inconvenient, when we are
Children, and are incapable of having any Devotion raised in us? Why should not
Laics and Women be permitted to administer the Sacraments, seeing it is not
any circumstance of the Administrer that can alter their natural signification?
And then what need were there for Ecclesiastical Assemblies; especially for
such as can Pray and Meditate, and use the assistance of these lively
representations, and read better Books at home than they can expect to hear
Sermons in the Church?

Persecution, when it may be dangerous to themselves, and give offense to the
Secular powers, what can oblige such Persons as these to meet in Assemblies,
when they may, on these Principles, expect as much Grace, and as confidently,
in their Closet-Devotions as in Churches? Is it that they may confess Christ
before Men? But what need is there of confessing him before them who acknowledge
him already? Or how can they be said to confess him before his Enemies, by what
is done in their private Assemblies, and with all Arts of concealment? Why
should they not rather do it where their Adversaries may see and hear them? Is
it for their mutual Edification and encouragement to persevere? But why might
not this have been done as well, by private conferences at their occasional
meetings in their ordinary conversation, as in solemn, and numerous, and
therefore Suspicious, Assemblies* Why should it only be the employment of
Ministers and ordained Persons more than others* Nay indeed what will Orders
signify when, upon these terms, they who are able, may not only serve their
own Souls, but supply the necessities of others, without any Ordination; and
they, who are not able, are never likely to do it to any purpose though they be
Ordained? Is it that by Orders some may be engaged to the employment, and being
engaged obliged to continue in it for the securing the public Service, who
might otherwise be unwilling to neglect their private affairs for it when they
might be prejudiced by such attendance? But what need would there be of this in
times of Persecution when the Zeal of particular Persons may be supposed to be
more than ordinarily inflamed, and withal to be less than ordinarily diverted
by the care of their Secular affairs? What need even in times of Prosperity,
when either many might offer themselves out of Zeal for the Service of Souls,
or might be ambitious of the employment as more honorable and gainful than
their own, or might conveniently spare as many hours from their own Callings,
as professed Ministers, when allowance is made for their private Studies?
Especially when they might by this Means grow Popular, and either bring in some
Addition of gain, or at least save some expenses they must have been otherwise
charged with for the maintenance of others? I am sure we have not in our late
Experiences found these Cases unpracticable or unlikely. And if, as often as
they happen, every one that pleases, or that can gain a Party to follow him,
may without scruple invade that sacred employment; there would not be that
necessity of insisting on Ordination as the constant ordinary way. For even
Ordination cannot compel Men to undertake it, and they who were willing would,
on these Principles, need no Ordination to qualify them for it. And if the
Sacred Calling were little esteemed, it would be as hard to get in that number
which might be necessary for the Public as to continue them; but if it were
valued, and thought more desirable than Ordinary Callings, it is hard to
conceive but that as great numbers would freely offer themselves as are
observed to crowd into those Ordinary Callings, which are well reputed of, so
that Ordination would be rarely either necessary or useful. Or is Ordination
thought necessary for the exclusion of unfit ambitious Pretend^ ^s? But they
who could not gain a Party, would ^^ed no exclusion; and they who could, could
not, on these terms, ^e excluded, how unworthy soever. For indeed, on these
Principles, all Government must be resolved into the pleasure of the
promiscuous Multitude.

signification of the external Symbols does as little answer their design as
their nature, and that there must be acknowledged in them a more plentiful
conveyance of Grace than can proceed from their bare objective representation,
and the influence that may have upon us for raising Devotion in us; it will
plainly follow that Christ has been pleased actually to convey his Graces by
the Sacramental Symbols as Ordinary Means of his own institution by which he
has obliged himself to convey them, and not only to raise them up by their
Objective representation. That he has therefore thought it convenient to convey
his Graces themselves by these external Symbols even unto such as have already
all the Moral Dispositions they are capable of having Antecedently to the
reception of them (and no more can rationally be expected from them) And that
he has consequently obliged even Persons so disposed to a participation of the
Symbols, as they are desirous to partake of the Graces conveyed by them; And
that he has not only done this in particular Cases but to the generality of
Mankind that shall ever receive his Doctrine; And not left it to their
Prudence, but imposed it with an eternal and immutable obligation: These must
certainly be great Arguments that he thought it necessary for the generality of
Mankind, and consequently for the ends of Government. And it is by this general
advantage for the generality of Mankind that the Ordinary Means are to be
estimated, seeing it is thought fit in all humane Prudence and Legislations
that rarer Cases should be ruled by those which are ordinary, and therefore
should be left to extraordinary Provisions.

actual establishments be plain Arguments that Christ himself has thought it
necessary for the ends of Government to confine the conveyance of his Graces
ordinarily to our participation of the external Symbols; and therefore that it
is indeed so, seeing it is impossible he should be mistaken concerning it
(unless we will suppose him, as some of our dissenting Brethren seem inclinable
to do, to act merely Arbitrarily, and without any other reason than his own
pleasure, which is not agreeable to the clear Notions either of the Divine
Wisdom o^ Goodness: Not of his Wisdom, to act without any reason at all; not of
his Goodness, to lay such unnecessary useless restraines on his Subjects
Liberty) and though I may confidently lay the stress of my present design on
this proof (which must needs be of great weight with them who grant the
Supposition I here proceed on concerning the eternal obligation of the
Sacraments, and withal have honorable thoughts of the Wisdom and Goodness of
their Lord and Master in imposing them with such a degree of Obligation; And
even to them who do not grant it will easily appear from what we shall
hereafter discourse concerning the use of the Sacraments themselves
particularly for this purpose) Though to us who are so weak-sighted, and so
little acquainted with the Intrigues of his Government, the particular
reasonableness and usefulness of this way of contrivance for the great ends of
his Government might not appear: Yet because I am willing to endeavor to give
all the satisfaction I am able even to candid Curiosity, I shall endeavor to
show the necessary and useful influence of this establishment for the ends of
Government. In order whereunto I consider

on his part (for that might have been sufficiently performed by external
Revelation) as to assure the performance of Duty on our part. For this
fickleness and inconstancy in Us which would make us generally fall short of
the actual Benefit of Promises, how much soever we might have been assured of
performance, as long as they were only Conditional (as it is requisite they
should be for the ends of Government, which requires that Subjects be treated
in a moral and rational way, only of Rewards and Punishments) was a thing
indeed very suitable to the Goodness of Gods Government, whom it concerns as a
good Governor to take care that too great multitudes of his Subjects should
not miscarry under his inspection. For this indeed belongs to the reputation of
any Government* even among Men, that it attains its end with the generality of
its Subjects to put them in a prosperous Conditition, though when all is done,
Men being supposed as weak as they are; and the inducements to Obedience only
Moral; it cannot be avoided but that some will fail of the Rewards and fall
under the Punishments. This clearly Answers the Objections. For though it be
indeed true that there is indeed no need of these Solemnities of the Covenant
on Gods part to assure us of of his fair and candid dealing with us, nor indeed
on our part to let God know the Sincerity of our own dealing with him; yet
there may be inas-much as our Sincerity for performing the Moral part of our
Duty may be signified to others* And this signification of it to others, in a
solemn way, may lay a restraint on us for its more punctual performance; And
this restraint may secure our actual performance even to God himself, when we
believe our whole comfort of the Covenant not capable of being solidly grounded
otherwise than on the external Solemnities of our admission and continuance in
it.



external Solemnities of the Covenant are very suitable to Gods design in
making it, and very effectually conducive to it; nay their imposition as the
only ordinary Means of admission into it is so also; and therefore is very
likely to have been designed by God as he is solicitous for our good. The Ends
are both to confederate us into a Body Politic, and to lay an obligation on us
more likely to prevail on us for the performance of our Duty than any private
Promises, however plainly made and seriously intended. And the promotion of
both of these is both very proper and likely to have been designed by God as a
gracious Covenanter and Governor; and both of them (considering the influence
that the Customs and humors of Mankind have ordinarily on their actual
performance) are more likely to be attained by insisting on these Solemnities
as the only Ordinary Means of admission to the Privileges of the Covenant than
they would be otherwise.

THEY are very proper to have been designed by him. 1. the confederating us
into a Body Politic is so. This is proper to have been designed by him 1. as a
Covenanter. For Covenants are properly to be transacted between two Parties
only; and are properly multiplied, though possibly in the same form, when many
are concerned. Now though it be indeed possible that Mankind considered only as
a Multitude consisting of disunited Individuals might make a Party in this
Covenant; and though this might indeed be likely to have been actually true if
every Individual had been only obliged to Duties to be performed only by
himself in his single capacity (such as the Moral Duties generally are) yet
even so there would be requisite particular Solemnities for admitting
particular Persons into it, just as in the instance now mentioned of a Covenant
with many, the Bonds are severally repeated according as new Persons are
admitted into it. There may indeed be indefinite, and yet obliging, Promises to
any who should perform the annexed Conditions, and such as may be pleadable
upon such performance. But the name of a Covenant, especially as understood as
in the rigor of the Legal Notion of it in that Age (as I have shown it must be
understood) is not so properly intelligible without the external Solemnities by
which it is transacted. Digest. L.XLV: Tit. I. de verbor^ oblig.
For such the presence of both Parties was thought necessary, so that if any
Person absent were desirous to Covenant, he must do it by his Servant,
according to which God also being absent from our Senses, which is the thing
for which we are concerned in order to dealing with him, must be understood to
Covenant with us by the mediation of his visible Ministers. And besides the
Case it self is plainly against the Apostle who accounts the Children of
believing Parents holy (at least in a Federal sense) by the Faith of their
Parents, 1 Cor. vii.14.
which could not be if the Covenants of Parents did not at least so far concern
their Children as to give them a remote Title of admission to it by the
external Solemnities of it. For if the performance of the Moral Conditions of
Faith and Repentance were the only ordinary Means of intitling Persons to the
Benefit of the Covenant, and they were so also as they might make the Person
such immediately as God expects he should immediately be in order to an
immediate Title to it; it would follow that the Children can no more have any
actual Benefit of the Covenant on their Parents account than they can be made
actually Faithful and Penitent by their Parents Faith and Repentance; but then
especially Children who could not expect to be accounted holy on their Parents
account could not themselves be reputed holy, in regard of this holiness which
depends on the performance of Moral Conditions. But I may elsewhere have a
further occasion of clearing this Argument from the Practice and sense of those
Ages.

Solemnities of it. For I consider that God does not only oblige us to such
Religious Duties as concern us singly considered, but also to public and
solemn ones, Heb. x.25.
of not forsaking the Assembling of our Selves together whatever worldly
inconveniences may follow it, and of all the Duties there to be performed, such
as are offering up solemn Prayers to him, hearing his word, and assisting at
the celebration of his Sacraments. Now for these no particular Persons can
undertake as considered singly, because as considered singly they have not that
influence over each other as to be able to undertake for any but themselves.
Nor are the multitude even of particulars, even as singly obliged, sufficient
to engage for it, seeing there is requisite some further obligation when the
interests of all the particulars shall be prejudiced by it (as they are like to
be in times of Persecution) and when it may therefore be presumed that many
will of themselves be backward in it. Seeing therefore that these are Duties
required from us by God, it will concern him as a Covenanter to see that we be
obliged to the performance of these as well as others. And because the
performance of these public Duties cannot be effectually secured without a
power of Commanding in some and a Duty of Obedience in others, therefore it is
requisite that some be invested with that power, and all others be obliged to
this Subjection, without which it is impossible for us to engage for these
parts of our Duty. And yet it cannot be supposed reasonable to expect that God,
even as a Covenanter, should think himself obliged to perform his Promises
which are only Conditional for the security of our Duty, till we have given him
the like security of a Covenant for the performance of all that he requires on
our part. Thus the very nature of Gods Covenant with us requires on our part a
Body Politic for securing the performance of it; And that the Constitution of
a Body Politic will be best secured by confining the claim of private Persons
to its Privileges to its external Solemnities I shall have occasion to prove
when I consider Gods obligation hereunto as a Governor.

private Duties, God is also as a Covenanter concerned that we give the like
security for the performance of them (as far at least as we are capable of such
performance) as he does for the performance of his Promises. And therefore any
Promise, even of performing our Duty, that is not so likely to hold us, may
very justly be excepted against by him as a Covenanter as a proportionable
acquittance of him from giving us, at least that higher degree of, security of
performance on his part, if not indeed from giving us any interest in the
Covenant at all. Even in humane Covenants we are apt to look on a backwardness
in giving security as an Argument of unwillingness to enter into obligations.
And that unwillingness, though joined with no suspicion of designing
treacherously (which I therefore wave here because God with whom we deal in
this affair knows whether we do so) yet by the Rules, even of humane Equity,
may provoke God to deny us the benefit of the Covenant it self, even though we
were willing, if yet we were not willing, in such a degree, as to overcome all
obstacles short of unlawfulness: (both as it is very reasonable to deny favors
to Persons not duly valuing them, as such Persons cannot be supposed to do
these Divine favors who are unwilling to purchase them by any lawful
condescentions, how hard soever; And as such a present low degree of
willingness may be presumed unlikely to hold out in the performance in the time
of trial, and therefore may rationally be supposed not sufficient to give that
security of performance on our part of the Covenant which any wise and Prudent
Person would think fit to be trusted if he himself were to enter into a
Covenant.) Especially considering that this backwardness, in our Case, of not
being willing to yield to any unsinful condescentions for Gods sake must
plainly arise from such a perversity of disposition as would hinder us from the
actual advantage of the Covenant, though we had been Legally instated in it,
and therefore may with greater reason and Justice hinder us from our admission
to it, seeing a much less misdemeanour may suffice to hinder the Promise of a
favor at first, than can afterward hinder the performance.

justly God may refuse the benefit of the Covenant to such as neglect the
external Solemnities whereby it is maintained upon account of that neglect, on
supposition that he has been pleased to require their observance; yet there are
two things further very considerable that will bring these proofs more home to
my present design, to show what reason there is to fear that he will actually
do, what, it has appeared on these accounts he very justly may do. One is,
that, from this Doctrine, a reason is given even antecedently to the Divine
Command, why he should insist on the observance of these external Solemnities
as a Covenanter, and as he designs not so much his own satisfaction as our
good, viz. that by this means he might exercise us to that vigor of Resolution
which is necessary for rendering us capable of the favors designed for us,
which seems to be the same common reason of all the positive Injunctions he has
been pleased ever to lay upon us. Certainly not so much out of oftentation of
his own dominion over us, as to produce these beneficial dispositions in us
which are not in Prudence immediately to be expected from our conviction of
their necessity by the naked reasons of the things without habituating our
practick faculties to them by a constant course of exercise. For this we find
in experience to be the only prudent means of acquiring new or destroying old
inclinations. And yet unless the observance even of these external Solemnities
be so far exacted from us as that our failing in them, on any other reason
short of Sin, may proportionably defeat our expectations of the favors
designed by them they can have no influence on us for this purpose, even by way
of exercise; for these are the only seasons of trial, and without trial they
can never exercise us.

at least as to our means of knowing whether it be so we have no reason to judge
otherwise, and consequently have all the obligation that can be to practice
accordingly. For it is certain that we cannot as much as pretend to any reason
to prove them unnecessary on the account now mentioned of Exercise, though
possibly we may as to the nature of the particular Acts. And it is also further
certain that they may be really necessary though we could not prove them so.
But in such a Case as this is where neither side is capable of evident proof
the only way of securing a prudent Practice, is plainly, not to fluctuate in
matters whose practice may, for further designs with which we are not
acquainted, prove so very considerable, whatever we may think of their
immediate design as far as we are capable of judging concerning it. Now upon
this supposal that one side is necessary to be practiced, it cannot be
difficult to judge whether side. For upon our observation of the external
Solemnities of the Covenant we can plead a Legal Title to the Covenant and
Promises on performance of its moral conditions. But whatever claim may be
grounded on the performance of these Conditions otherwise, yet certainly it is
not Legal and express, nor such as we are capable of judging of with any
certainty, (as has been already shown) and therefore cannot, by any Rules of
Prudence, amount to such a proof as might any way stand in competition with
that which is producible for the necessity of observing these external
Solemnities, nay indeed can amount to no Proof at all, but only to Conjectures,
which no wise man can think fit to be followed where he may have direct
Arguments for his direction, though they were only probable. But then
considering this necessity in Prudence for these external Practices, not as
permitted to the general Laws of Providence, which may undoubtedly permit many
mistakes that may, in the event, redound to the prejudice of such a multitude
of Individuals, as, in regard of the narrowness of our knowledge, may seem very
considerable to us; but as particularly designed and contrived by God by this
way of management of things which can afford us no evidence for disobliging us
from these Practices: And considering withal that we can more certainly assure
our Selves of the Divine pleasure in particulars of this nature by his general
provisions than by particular Cases, for which we cannot suppose God obliged to
provide otherwise than as they are reducible to generals: We have reason to
presume that these Rules of Prudence to which he has generally left us for our
direction were designed by him as means of manifesting his pleasure to us,
independently on any actual express Revelation, as we usually expound the minds
of those with whom we deal by rational consequences as well as by express
words. Which yet is more reasonably to be presumed in our Case because we
cannot suppose any consequence, how remote soever, if rational, unknown to God,
and therefore undesigned by him, as we may very well suppose some such to have
been unknown to the most rational sagacious Creature. And when we consider
further how unlikely it is that God would have obliged us, especially in the
Gospel, to any thing which he did not judge necessary for us (and his judging
any thing necessary is with us a sufficient Argument to assure us that it is
so) we shall have reason to believe that the thing is indeed necessary to which
he is pleased in this rational way to oblige us, if not for its immediate
influence, yet at least remotely for the ends of his Government, of which we
can better assure our Selves from his pleasure who alone is privy to the true
nature of our Souls, and the intrigues of his own Government, than from any
evidence derivable from the nature of the things themselves. And it is
Analogous to the Principles of all Government that the penalties may very
justly be inflicted on particular Persons for neglects prejudicial to the
public interest as well as for such as are immediately hurtful to themselves.
Nay it is further Analogous to the same design that the Governors of Societies
take care that such Penalties be generally inflicted, which must discourage
particular Persons in hoping for indulgence.

People, and of belonging to his peculiar Property. Now let it be remembered 1.
how improperly a disunited multitude of Individuals could have been styled then
by the name of a People. For whether we compare them with the People who had
been rejected and in whose stead they were chosen, it is plain that the Jews
even in their dispersions were yet confederated as they were a Church in order
to their Religious Solemnities; Or whether we consider the notion of a People
as it was likely to have been understood ordinarily in that Age, there will
not, I believe, appear the least ground to suspect that it was ever likely to
have been understood for a disunited Multitude. I think there cannot be an
instance given of a People under the care of one common God (which is plainly
the Notion here alluded to) but who were visibly confederated by some external
Religious Solemnities. I am sure they generally were so.

profess themselves to be Gods People and to be owned by him for such in a
visible way. This plainly appears from the visibility and Solemnity of the
Duties required from them in their Synaxes. And from hence it will plainly
follow that their confederation, by which they are made a visible People, must
be also visible.

Multitudes of Believers are not a visible People Antecedently to their
admission into this Society. For Persons of all Nations and Interests are
invited into this Society who cannot be supposed Antecedently to have any
relation to each other; and therefore all the relation they have afterward
must be entirely derived from their being Members of it, and consequently must
be derived from the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the Society into
which they are admitted. So that hence it will follow that that Union in which
they are confederated on account of their being Members of this Society cannot
be conceived to depend on their pleasure any further than as these Fundamental
Laws and Constitutions do so too.

Fundamental Laws and Constitutions depend on their consent, will appear if it
be considered 4. that Antecedently to their entrance into this Society, it is
not in the power of all the Individuals, whereof it must afterward consist,
either singly or collectively to procure the End for which it is designed, that
is, the performance of the Promises and Privileges designed in it, which are
wholly Supernatural, not consequently to secure the Rewards of Obedience which
are no other than the performance of these Promises and Privileges to such as
perform their conditions, nor to inflict the Punishments of Disobedience on
such as neglect them. And how impossible it is solidly to confederate a Society
without a power of securing its Essential Ends, or of conferring its Rewards
and inflicting its Punishments, our candid Brethren themselves will easily
conceive.



external Solemnities has been always more rigorously insisted on by those who
are to be presumed the most competent Judges of intrigues of Government, in
affairs of this nature, where the public is concerned, or where the Covenant
is not only for particular things or Actions expressly mentioned, but where the
right of the Person is also disposed which must also consequently infer a right
to all his performances whatsoever. Where the public is concerned in the
Precedent there it is thought rational and necessary that private Persons
should want those favors to which their Personal integrity might otherwise
recommend them if their Case cannot be distinguished from others by such Notes
as may, in the event, prove more frequently advantageous to the Public than
prejudicial. And in all Societies it is to be presumed that the general
Solemnities of admission were such as were both thought, by the Persons who had
instituted them, most advantageous to the Public, and most agreeable to that
Evidence of which particular Cases are generally capable. And there is hardly
any thing imaginable wherein the Public can be more concerned, and wherein it
may be more influenced by a Precedent than in the Solemnity of admitting
private^Members into it, which must consequently entitle them to all its
Privileges. And in the disposal of Persons, there is not only the moment of
the thing which does require Solemnity, as we plainly find that by how much the
things are more momentous by so much their conveyances are required to be more
solemn, but the concern of the Public. For private Covenants for things or
particular Actions may indeed be transacted without Ceremony, because the
Public is not so concerned in them as it must unavoidably be in the disposal
of Persons, for which it must therefore be concerned to see its general Rules
more punctually observed.

assure God of our undertaking the performance of the Duties required of us,
(as the Objection supposes) as to put our Selves on those Services to our
Brethren, and to submit to those restraints of our Liberty to which he has been
pleased to oblige us consequently to our being Members of such a Society. Now
how is it possible for us to be serviceable to a visible People without
becoming visibly of their number? For as for others they are not so much
concerned for them, and therefore are not so naturally capable of being edified
by their behavior. And how is it possible for others to know who are of their
Society without a visible admission to the Solemnities of initiation into it,
and a communication in their common Offices? Indeed if the whole work of a
Christian were only visibly to profess the belief of the Christian Doctrines,
and visibly to Repent; I confess this were performable by particular Persons in
their private capacity. But considering that it is also to concur to the
constitution of a visible People; it cannot be possible for any to do so, at
least to appear to do so (as appearance is essentially necessary for the
constitution of a visible People as visible) without communicating in all those
Public Solemnities which concern them as a People, and he who designedly
refuses to do so, how heartily soever he may Believe and Repent, yet cannot be
supposed willing to concur to the constitution of a visible People. He cannot
do that service to his Brethren which he might by joining in their number, nor
promote the public Service which must be most advantageously promoted by a
visible Unanimity and Uniformity, nor give that visible signification of his
devoting his Person to the Divine Service which is requisite to his visible
Membership, when he appears to make such Exceptions and Reservations in some
parts of his Duty, and is unwilling to submit to such restraints of his Liberty
as are necessary to be submitted to in Order to these momentous Services to
which he is Obliged, as well in reason, as by positive Prescriptions. Thus far
I have considered the reasonableness of Gods insisting on these External
Solemnities as he is a Covenanter.

CHAP. V. The same thing further Prosecuted.
THE CONTENTS.
2. God is also concerned to see the same External Solemnities observed as he
is a Governor. 1. He is as a Governor concerned to confederate us into a Body
Politic. 1. That he may thus secure secure the performance of his own Will.
The great usefullness of the Distinction betwixt God as a Governor and as a
Covenanter.. I.II.III. The forementioned Point proved.. IV.V.VI.VII.VIII.IX.X.
2. That it may thus appear, even to Men, that his Will is performed by us
because it is his Will. How necessary this is for Government. How necessary a
Visible Society is for making this appear to others.. XI.XII.XIII.XIV.XV. 2. He
is as a Governor, concerned to oblige Us to the performance of our Duty by
such Means as may prove most likely to prevail with Us for its actual
performance.. XVI.XVII.XVIII.

God is also concerned to see them observed as he is a Governor. And this
again in regard of both the now mentioned particulars: That he is as a
Governor concerned both to confederate us into a Body Politic, and to secure
the most effectual Means of prevailing with us to perform our Duty. 1. As a
Governor he is concerned to confederate us into a Body Politic. For as a
Governor he is concerned to take care both that his will be performed, and
that it may appear that what is commanded by him is therefore performed by us
because it is his Will, not because it is our own humor. And for both of these
a Body Politic is very necessary.

FOR having his own Will performed, he is equally concerned as he is a
Governor, and as a Covenanter. I am therefore the more cautious in
distinguishing these two Relations because his concern to see his own will
performed as a Governor is indeed very different from that wherein he is
considered as a Covenanter, and that even in regard of that performance of his
will which is procured by Ecclesiastical Governors themselves. For as a
Covenanter he is only concerned to furnish Ecclesiastical Governors with so
much power as may qualify them for entering into Covenant with him for its
performance by their own Subjects as Persons Authorized to transact with him in
the name of their respective Societies, and then to oblige them* by virtue of
their Covenant, to employ their Authority for that design for which it was
intended by him when he gave it them. So that in this regard they are to be
considered as concerned on the part of Mankind, on which account I have already
shown the necessity of investing them with such an Authority. But considering
God as a Governor, they will be related to him under that Notion as
Subordinate Governors to their principal Head, and Original of Authority. And
so they will be concerned, not on Man's part of the Covenant but on Gods, so
that He will be more immediately concerned in the Duty and respect that is paid
to them; and consequently the principal Duty Covenanted for, on our part, being
a submission to the Divine Authority, and a performance of all his Commands,
Temporary and Prudential, as well as of such as are Eternally Obligatory; We
cannot perform our Covenant with God without being Dutiful to them because they
are invested with his Authority. As he is accounted a Rebel against his Prince,
who resists any of his inferior Officers who are Legally empowered and
commissioned by him, not only in things for which they have his particular
express Warrant, but also in such as are to be presumed to have been left to
their Prudence to Determine by Virtue of their General Commission.

Ecclesiastical Governors, being invested with a Power of Government in both
these respects, cannot be accountable to their Subjects, as our Independent
Brethren would have them. Indeed this might have been the Case, if they had
been considered only as our Representatives, and God had withal permitted us to
our natural Liberty, both to appoint them, and to allow them what degree of
trust we had pleased. For then we might as well have allowed them a limited
power as some Democratical Governments in the like manner derived from the
consents of their particular Members have confessedly done. And then, by the
Fundamental Rules of Democracy, all Persons being Subject to the Multitude in
all such instances wherein they had not been particularly empowered, and all
power being derived from the Multitude; it will follow that, if they should
presume to transgress the limits allowed them, they were still Usurpers, and
therefore still Subject, and accountable for such misdemeanors to those who had
empowered them. But if we consider the Multitude as prevented, even in this
their natural Right of choosing and empowering their Representatives (as it is
most certain that God may prevent them by virtue of his Authority over them
Antecedent to any compacts whatsoever; and it is credible that he would, if he
should think a Government independent on the Subjects most likely to promote
the designs of such a Government as this is.) And much more, if we consider
them as concerned on Gods part of the Covenant; So it will plainly appear that
they must derive their Authority wholly from God, and therefore can have no
other bounds than he is pleased to prescribe them, and even in Case of their
transgressing these they can be accountable for such Transgressions only to
God, not to the Multitude, from whom as no Authority was in this Case derived,
so none could be reserved from them, which might make the Multitude their
competent Superiors. So that the nature of this manner of conveyance of
Government must make the Governors to whom it is conveyed Absolute and
unaccountable, at least to any humane Judgment. At least if the Multitude would
challenge any Jurisdiction this way, they ought to derive their claim from the
same Original, by as clear and express donation from God himself as their
Governors do, which is not, that I know of as much as pretended to. And it is
a very strong Presumption against them that Ecclesiastical Government was never
derived from them, that indeed they never were in a condition of doing it. The
Primitive Converts, were never united into a Body Antecedently to their
admission into Christianity, but were admitted by single persons, and
successively; And such could not, even by the Rules of Democracy, be supposed
to have a power of disposing of the Original inherent Rights of the Multitude.
Besides it is plain that the first propagators of Christianity, Christ himself
and the Apostles, had a Right of forming a Society independent on the consent
of its particular Nembers, and their admission of all the first Believers into
their Society by Baptism does plainly show that they acted, and owned
themselves to act, by a power that could not have been derived from them. But
for proving this I may elsewhere have a more convenient occasion.

That God as a Governor is concerned to erect the Church into a Body politic,
and to appoint Subordinate Governors under himself, in Order to the seeing his
Will performed; This will be easy to understand if it be considered. 1. That no
Society whatsoever is governable only by general and immutable Laws without
particular prudential accommodations to present circumstances, both of which
must be derived from the same Authority; and therefore that there must be also
in the Church, if it be governed by God, as well particular Divine Commands for
things which are for the good of it in particular Circumstances as for those
which are to immutably and eternally.

particular Circumstances by particular Extraordinary Revelations. And
therefore, as in other Cases wherein a Prince cannot be consulted with in
things belonging to his Authority, that is to be presumed to be the Princes
pleasure which is proposed as such by his Ordinary Officers, and Disobedience
to such Injunctions of Ordinary Officers is punished as if it had been
committed against the Prince himself; so God must also be supposed to have
provided for such Cases by that general Power which he must therefore give to
Ecclesiastical Officers, whom we are therefore accordingly to revere as we
would approve our Selves obedient to God himself.

general Laws cannot reach all particular Circumstances, because indeed what is
Good in Circumstances is Evil if considered in general, and therefore no way
fit to be generally imposed; I say besides this, even in particulars that are
reducible to them, they are not sufficient for governing any Society without
Officers entrusted with a Power of Authentically expounding them, so that
Subjects may be obliged to stand to their Decisions, and of compelling Subjects
to submission in their practice. For if Subjects be willing to perform their
Duty, and able to discern it in all particular Cases, there would be no need of
Authority. But if Authority be supposed necessary, and that some Subjects will,
in all likelihood, prove disingenuous as well as mistaken; the Society can
never be maintained without a coercive power over such, vested in its
Governors, nor without a power of deciding of such Laws Authentically in order
to Practice. For this power of Authentical Exposition is as necessary for
preserving the Society in a Succession as the Legislative power it self was for
its first establishment; and therefore perfectly necessary for those Governors
which are to keep up the Succession. Especially considering that, as I said, no
Authentic Interpretations are now to be expected from God himself. And
therefore it is as unreasonable to appeal from the Governors of the Church to
the Scriptures in things concerning their Government (as matters of Practice
certainly must, if any) and to expect that either the Government or the Society
could be preserved if such an Appeal were admitted, as to expect that our
Secular peace and Unity could be preserved if we were allowed to appeal to the
Letter of the Law against all the power of Magistrates, either for their
Execution, or Interpretation.

Government, or the Safety of any Society, to admit of an Appeal from all its
Magistracy to its Laws; so it is also to admit the like Appeals from all the
Visible Present Governors to one that is Invisible, and from whom no present
decision is to be expected. For this is plainly to hinder all exercise of
Church Authority in this Life, and consequently to frustrate its whole design,
seeing it is here only that it can be seasonable. For if the Appeal be good,
the exercise of Government ought to be suspended till the Cause be decided by
the Power to which the Appeal is made, which, if it cannot be expected in this
Life, will consequently hinder, in this Life, all exercise of Government by the
Persons invested with it, and so leave such a Society destitute of the means
necessary for its own preservation in such Cases, that is indeed, in all which
the frowardness and mistakes of the Appellants, as well as the Justice of their
Cause, might make such. Whence it plainly follows that the supreme Visible
Governors of the Church must be absolute, and unappealable, even in regard of
Appeals to be made to God himself. Nor would our dissenting Brethren think this
expression arrogant if they would be pleased to consider it in a parallel Case,
wherein themselves (as many of them at least as are sensible of the moment of
the things discoursed of, and no others are competent Judges of them) will, I
believe think it Just and Reasonable, that is, in Secular Government. For will
any of them think it fit that such Appeals should be admitted, I do not say in
the State, but, even in their own Families? Could they ever expect to maintein
their Authority, or the Peace even of these little Societies, upon these Terms,
if their Authority must be controlled, and its execution suspended, as often as
their too partially-concerned Subjects should make such Appeals, nay where
themselves, the Governors, could not satisfy as much as their own Consciences
as to the matter wherein the Appeal were made, as our Church professes her self
unable to satisfy hers in the matter of our Brethrens Appeal? At least can any
fallible Authority subject to humane mistakes and Prejudices of the Persons
vested with it, ever reach the end for which it is originally designed (the
decision of Controversies among their Subjects) on these Terms?

Ecclesiasticals will proceed as strongly in Seculars. For are the Governors
of the Church tyrannical? I believe themselves will not deny but that many of
the Seculars are so too. Are they fallible? Certainly the Secular Governors
must be much more so, whose Errors are of less importance, and consequently
less obliging Providence to prevent them, and who cannot pretend to such
assistances of the Spirit as are given to the Ecclesiasticals at their
Ordination, for preventing mistakes and extravagances. Are they subordinate to
God and Jesus Christ? And are not the Secular Governors so too? Have we the
Scriptures given us a Rule for us to discover their failings, and as a Law, by
which themselves must be judged, at least, by their Supreme Master? And cannot
the same Scriptures, besides the Laws of Nature and Nations and the Fundamental
Constitutions of their respective Societies, and the Rules of Prudence, serve
us for the same purpose to discover the lapses of Secular Princes? And are not
they as obnoxious to Gods Tribunal, as the Ecclesiastics, for the violation of
these Laws, at the day of Judgment?

to him? I confess it does so. But must it therefore withal make them more
accountable to their own Subjects? Must they therefore be more subject to curbs
and interruptions in the present exercise of their Government? I am sure this
is contrary to the course of proceedings in humane affairs. We do not find
there, that Appeals are more easily admitted, but more difficultly, by how much
nearer the Persons, from whom the Appeal is made, are related to the Supreme
Prince. Nor are the miscarriages of that Government, which is limited or
curbed, either thought so aggreable, or accountable, as of that which has been
absolute and arbitrary. And I am sure this is contrary to the sense of all
those wise and Politic Nations, who have therefore either united their Sacred
power with that of the Secular in one Person, though their Offices and
Exercises were clearly distinct; or used ceremonies of Consecration in their
admission to the Secular power; or reputed them as mixed Persons, and given them
the style of Sacrosancti, not only to secure their Persons from violence, but
to conciliate a greater veneration for their Majesty, not to add any
restrictions to their Authority as to Men, but rather to possess them with a
greater reverence of their Prudence, when by this Means they should see them
entitled to such Extraordinary Divine assistances, and a more profound
submission to their Authority when resistance to them should look so like
fighting against God himself; and the very honor which God was pleased to
confer on them in admitting them to so near a relation to himself might justly
aw Men into an opinion that God would not admit of any resistance in any Case,
of Appeal it self, but that where Active Obedience could not be paid them, yet
Passive should, and that even Appeals themselves would not be admitted, no not
even in the Court of Conscience, but in matters of great importance, and very
evident, by the same proportion of Government as we see in all other Cases that
Appeals are much more difficult by how much the Judicatory from whence the
Appeal is made approaches nearer to the Supreme of all. And if the Secular
Prince have been always thought a gainer by this accession either of the like
Power, or the like Ceremonies of Investiture into his own Power with those
whereby the Ecclesiastics are ordinarily settled in theirs, then certainly the
Original Ecclesiastical Power must be conceived more obligatory, and less
obnoxious to Appeal than the Secular which has been thus fortified by it.

Representatives of the Prince, (such as are Viceroys and Deputies) but it is
also true of the meanest Officers that are (such as Constables, etc.) That
resistance of them in any Case is counted a resistance of the Prince, and even
where they transgress the Laws yet they are not to be opposed. But according to
the method of Regular Appeals, not by an immediate recourse to the Prince
himself, but their more immediate Superiors; And what is decreed in such Cases
by those inferior Subordinate Officers to whom the Appeal is made is the same
way to be obeyed as if it had been decreed by the Prince himself, and under the
same hazard of incurring the guilt of Rebellion against him, especially where
there can be no access to the Person of the Prince himself, as there is none in
our present Case. So that by this method there can be no lawful remedy against
the Exorbitances even of inferior Governors, but by recourse to their
Superiors; and the Sentence given by Superiors upon such Appeal cannot be
resisted without resisting Christ himself. Thus Christ as a Governor is
concerned to take care for the erection of a Body Politic consisting of
Visible Governors as well as governed, and Subordinate as well as Supreme
Governors, and to provide means of obliging all to obey them all respectively,
under pain of being accounted refractory against himself, as a means of
securing the performance of his own will by us, which must be performed by us,
if we be real Subjects.

He is also further concerned to see, not only that his Will be performed by
us, but also that it be performed by us because it is his Will, and not because
it is our own humor; and that it may appear to be so performed by us, the
erection of a Body Politic is also necessary. He is concerned as a Governor
to take care that it may appear, even to Men, that his Will is performed by us
because it is his Will, and not only because it is our humor to do the things
willed by him. For it is absolutely necessary for Government, that it may
attain the ends of Government, to keep up its own reputation in the minds of
Subjects. For a despised Government can neither awe by its threats, nor allure
by its rewards, nor consequently have any hold on the minds of Subjects to
oblige them to perform their Duties, or to preserve the public Peace, which
are the most essential ends of Government. Of this all wise Men have been so
very sensible as that it has always been thought fit to punish the least
affronts against Majesty, how inconsiderable soever otherwise in themselves,
with the severest Penalties. Though all civilized Nations and Places would
afford innumerable instances hereof, yet at present I name only one because I
believe it will be of most Authority with our dissenting Brethren, 2 Samuel
x.4.5. 1 Chronicles. xix.4.5.
and that is of David. The affront of Hanun the Ammonite was not that of a
Subject, but of a neighboring absolute Prince; not against his Person, but
only his Ambassadors; nor even against them was it such as might do them any
permanent inconvenience. It was only a matter of present shame, the shaving of
one half of their beards, and cutting off their garments to the middle. Yet we
see this occasioned a very severely managed War, wherein, besides the mischief
done in hot blood, the whole People, that were taken as Prisoners of War, were
treated with excessive rigor. They were put under sawes and harrows of Iron, 2 Samuel xii.31. 1 Chronicles. xx.3.
and axes of Iron, and made to pass under the brick Kilne. And to treat a
Prince thus to whose Father David himself had confessed himself so much obliged
(I suppose in his exile under Saul, for Nahash the Father of Hanun seems to
have been the same who was vanquished by Saul. 1 Samuel XI. Ant. l. vi. c. 5.
Whereas yet Josephus without any ground from the Sacred Text will have him
killed in the fight, though afterward in the Story it self he makes him newly
deceased when this Embassy was sent, Id. Ant. l. vii. c. 5.
unless possibly the distance between these two actions may incline us to
suspect that there were two different Kings of the Ammonites of the same name)
To do thus with the Ammonites to whom the Nation of the Jews was so nearly
related, to the generality of those who had yielded to his mercy, and in all
their Cities, may (to Persons not considering how fatal in their consequences
things may be which are inconsiderable in themselves, and how necessary it is
for Government that such consequences be in time prevented) seem an excessively
harsh expiation of so small a guilt. Yet by David (whom his History shows not
to have been cruelly disposed, nor revengeful) this was thought necessary for
preservation of his Government.

Government can signify nothing, without this reputation, for the good of
Subjects; so neither can this reputation be preserved among them unless it may
appear that they who obey the Authority, do it, not only to please themselves,
but him who has commanded the things to be performed by them, and thereby
signify their acknowledgment of his Authority and their own Subjection to him.
For what good can this reputation do, unless it may appear to them who are to
be edified by it? And how can it appear to them that Subjects doing the
commands of Authority have really that honor and respect for the Authority
that commanded them, unless this may also appear to them by their Practice
conformable to such a respect, which is indeed the only Prudent Argument for
discovering what another does seriously believe? And how can this appear by
their Practice unless they see them do something at the command of the
Authority, which they may have reason to believe they would not have done, if
the Authority had not commanded it? But in all things wherein themselves are
gratified, it may very justly be suspected whether they would not have done
them, though no Authority had required them; and in all things wherein this
gratification of themselves cannot be disproved, it may be very probably be
presumed.

ostentation of the Power with which the Persons Authorized are invested, nor
only for edifying others with the goodness of the example, but also for
securing the performance of the Duties themselves. Indeed if our Judgments were
always so incorrupt as that we might always be sensible of our own interests,
or all our Duties were accommodated, not only to our greater and more solid
Interests, but to our humors also, and we were likely always to continue in
the same humor, or at least secure from a frequent change; there might then be
some pretense that our Duty might generally be secured without contradiction of
our humors. But seeing none of these can be presumed certain and constant, nay
seeing all of them do most frequently fall out otherwise than it is requisite
they should, for securing the performance of our Duty; that we are frequently
either prejudiced against our Duty, or changed from our former humors;
therefore it is necessary for securing performance that we do our Duty on
constant and immutable reasons, such as may not be obnoxious to the changes and
vicissitudes of our humors. And such is that, and only that, of doing our Duty
with regard to the Authority of him who has required it.

Authority requiring it, a visible Body Politic, (wherein Men may be invested
with the Divine Authority, and may therefore be allowed for Authentical
Expositors of the Divine Will, that so our Obedience to God may be known by our
Obedience to Persons thus empowered by him) is much better accommodated, than
if we confine the Divine Authority in matters of this nature to the Scriptures;
and allow the exposition of the Scriptures to the Consciences of particular
Subjects, as the measure of their Practice. For as the Scriptures are now
managed, by them who reject all prudent use of Ecclesiastical Tradition for
expounding them; it is easy for them who will take their own fancies for the
sense of the Scripture, and then concern themselves not so much to prove what
they have so presumed, as to evade what may be objected against them, to evade
all possible confutation, how false soever the Errors may be which on these
terms they shall undertake to maintein. For it is impossible, on these terms,
so to assure any one sense of the Scripture in favor of any one side of a
Controversy newly raised to be the true sense of the Holy Ghost as to exclude
all other senses inconsistent with it; especially in matters of Practice of a
Temporary Obligation (and such are the particulars controverted by our
dissenting Brethren) wherein, whatever is pretended, it can never appear that
the Sacred Writers themselves designed to be so accurate and particular, as our
dissenting Brethren conceive. And it is least of all credible that they should
rightly understand the sense of the Scriptures in matters of this nature, or
assure any thing that may prevent licentious and dangerous expositions of
others, who wave the History of the Practice of the Church at, or near, those
Ages wherein these Books were Written, which must certainly be of most use for
explaining the sense of the Sacred Writers in such matters.

sincerely in following their convictions? How shall we know that Persons of a
violent temper and Seditious may not pretend the commands of God to be contrary
to those of their ordinary Ecclesiastical Governors, not that either they
themselves believe them to be so, or that they are at all solicitous for doing
Gods will; but merely that so they may make use of a plausible pretense for
gratifying their Seditious humors without the infamy of being thought
Seditious? It is certain many may do so, who may either not be guilty of any
inclination to any of those scandalous vices which are of ill repute with the
Vulgar; or if they be, yet they may count it politic, not only to conceal
them, but also to make an open solemn profession for the contrary in order to
the gaining of a reputation to their ill designs. And these are Cases which,
considering the humor of the Age, and the haughty behavior of many who are
deeply engaged in the several Parties, may, without any uncharitableness, be
supposed likely to prove ordinary. Now when we find Persons exceedingly
pretending to be Religious impatient of all restraints that we can judge of,
either to be likely to proceed from God, or to be thought by them to do so, and
only pretending to Subjection to God in such instances which may be as likely
to be designed for their own gratification as for the service of God; where we
can either not be satisfied of their Sincerity, that they do in earnest believe
their own Practices to be warranted by Divine Authority; or where, though they
were sincere, yet the Evidence on which they proceed is of so ambiguous
Interpretation as to be very capable of a compliance with their own desires
whatever they be, and so never likely to impose any thing on them contrary to
their own Inclinations (which is the only Case wherein we can conclude that
what is performed by them is performed with regard to the Divine Authority) how
can we conclude that they have any real reverence for the Injunctions
themselves, or for the Authority by which they are imposed? But further

HE is also, as a Governor, concerned to oblige us to the performance of our
Duty by such Means as may prove most effectual with us for that purpose; and
certainly the external Solemnity of undertaking them is such a means, and most
likely to prove successful. That he is as a Governor concerned to oblige us to
the performance of our Duty by such means as may prove most likely to prevail
with us for its actual performance, will appear if it be considered that he is
as a Governor concerned for such things as may make for the advantage of the
Society in general; And that withal it is much for the reputation of the
goodness and Prudence of his Government, to reconcile this public benefit with
the least prejudice to particular members of the Society; And it is much more
for its repute if it may prove advantageous to the interests of most of the
particular Members. And for both these purposes, the performance of Duty by the
particular Persons obliged, is very useful.

IT is useful for the Public. For this is indeed to the commendation of the
Prudence of any Government in general, and particularly of the Divine
Government, to make the Duties of particular Subjects subservient to the good
of the whole Community. Nor is this only true of the Duty of Subordinate
Ecclesiastical Governors (whose peculiar Province it is to take care of the
Public) though it be indeed most obviously and eminently true concerning them:
and God is as peculiarly concerned as a Governor to take care that such means
may be used with them as may prevail with them for the actual performance of
their Duty (because the neglect of their Duty has a more immediate ill
influence on the Public than that of private Persons) as they are for the
actual performance of those who are under them; and there are not more
efficacious means for prevailing even on them for the performance of their Duty
than these Solemnities which are made use of for the Obligation of private
Christians; and they who undervalue their Baptismal Obligations, at their
undertaking of Christianity, cannot in any likelihood be much awed by those
which are used ordinarily at the susception of Government. For no particular
employments whatsoever for Gods Service can, with any reason, prevail with him
who is not already effectually persuaded to be diligent in serving God in
general, seeing all particular obligations are only this general one reduced to
practice in particulars, and therefore can have no further force than what is
derived from it. But the actual performance of Duty by particular private
Persons is a thing fit to be regarded by God as a Governor as well as that of
Governors: both as it is the primary end of all Government whatsoever that
Duty should be performed, and only a secondary one to make them satisfy the
Public for their neglect of it by their punishment; And as none desires a
secondary end but upon frustration of his hopes of that which is primary, so it
is much for the reputation of a Prudent Person to lay his designs so as that he
may not frequently fail of his primary end, or frequently be driven to make
amends for its loss by that which is only secondary; And as the Public good is
not possible to be promoted but by the good of the generality of particulars,
seeing the Public is indeed nothing else but a complex of particulars; And as
indeed the principal Duties required from particular Persons, by the Precepts
of Christianity, are likely to prove eminently serviceable for the good of
others. For indeed the great design of Christianity seems to be to animate us
all with public and Heroic Spirits; nor are those indeed its
principally-designed Duties which are commonly mistaken for such by Melancholy
devout Persons, the restraining of our Selves from all kind of Sin, or the
recollection and fervor of Spirit which is gotten by assiduity in Prayer and
Meditation and the like exercises of Devotion, no nor indeed any Personal
accomplishment whatsoever any farther than that may make us useful for the
Service of God and the good of others. And accordingly our Savior represents
our Trial at the day of Judgment. Not to be how little mischief we have done,
but how much good; Not how Zealous and Devout we were, nay or how Sincere too,
but how charitable; Not how good we have been our Selves, but how good we have
been to others; Not whether we have prayed or fasted or addicted our Selves to
Penitential exercises and mortifications, but whether we have given meat to the
hungry or drinks to the thirsty; whether we have clothed the naked, or
received Strangers into our houses; whether we have visited the Sick and the
Prisoners. St. Matthew. xxv.35.
And the acceptable Fast, described in Isaiah, is not for a man to afflict his
Soul for a day, to bow down his head as a bulrush, to spread sackcloath and
ashes under him; but to loose the bands of wickedness to undo the heavy
burdens, to let the oppressed go free, and to break every yoke; Is. lviii.6.7.
to deal our bread to the hungry, to bring the poor into our houses, to cover
the naked, and not to hide our Selves from our own Flesh. And how innocent
soever we may be, yet if we do no good; we may justly fear that sentence which
shall be pronounced not only against the wicked and the evil, St. Matthew.
xxv.26.30.
but the idle and unprofitable Servant; not only against him who had embezelled
his Talent, but against him also who had not improved it. And therefore Daniel
advises Nabuchadnezzar to break off his Sins by Righteousness, Dan. iv.27.
and his Iniquities (not barely by forbearing them for the future, but) by
showing mercy to the poor; and our Savior tells us that, if we give alms all
things shall be pure unto us, and that our Friends of the unrighteous Mammon
are they who shall receive us into everlasting habitations. St. Luke xvi.9.
Mic. vi.8. St. Jam. i.27.
This it is that God requires from us, to do Justice, and to love mercy (to
Men) as well as to walk humbly with Him. And this St. James makes the sum of
pure and undefiled Religion, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their
affliction as well as to keep himself unspotted from the World.

every one should mind his own good, Philip. ii.4. Romans xii.15.
but the good of one another; that we must bear each others infirmities, and
sympathize in each others successes, that we rejoice with them that rejoice and
mourn with them that mourn. And the Analogy betwixt the mistical Body of Christ
and a natural humane Body, is paralleled in this as in many other instances,
that as every Member in the natural Body is sensible of every thing that
befalls the whole, and it is an Argument that it does not partake of the common
vital influence if it be not so; so, in the Body Mistical, if one Member suffer
that all the Members must suffer with it, 1 Cor. xii.26.
and if one be honored all the others must rejoice with it. And it is a great
part of the design of the first Epistle of St. John, to ground all our comfort
or discomfort on this one Trial of our Love to the Brethren: 1 St. Joh. iv.20.
So he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen cannot love God whom he has
not seen; and he who does not relieve his Brother when he is able to do so,
cannot have the Love of God dwelling in him. 1 St. Joh. iii.17.
And on the contrary it is an Argument with him, that we are in a good
condition (not that we behave our Selves innocently, or are frequent at
Sermons, or feel transports in our Devotions, but) that we love the Brethren, 1
St. Joh. iii.14. Ver. 19.
and are ready to lay down our Lives for them. Hereby it is that we know that
we are passed from Death to Life, that we are in the Truth, and may assure our
hearts before God. Very much more might have been produced to this purpose; but
I should not have been willing at present to have said so much if I had not
conceived it conveient to take this present occasion of recommending this Trial
of our Consciences, rather by our usefullness in our generation than by any
other ordinary signs, not only as most generous and most agreeable with the
true design of Christianity, but as more really solid and comfortable to the
Persons concerned in it. But I must not digress further from my present design
to show how it comes to be so. All that I am now concerned for in it is, only
to observe how great an influence the actual performance of the Duties of
Christianity have on the good of that Society wherein they are performed, when
by this means the Members must be so mutually endeared, and so strongly
inclined to the mutual performance of all good Offices; and therefore how very
worthy it is of the care of all good Governors, but especially of God as the
Governor of that Society for which it is more immediately and principally
designed; and withal how very heinous in Gods sight the Sin of Schism must
prove, consequently to these Supposals, and how very destructive to the comfort
of the Persons engaged in it, when it is so extremly prejudicial to the Public.

CHAP. VI. The same thing further Prosecuted.
THE CONTENTS.
Ends now mentioned concerning God as a Governor are more likely to be
atteined by admitting us to the Benefits of the Covenant by the External
Solemnities of it than otherwise.. I. 1. That of confederating Us into a Body
Politic. A short account of the usefullness of the whole Hypothesis promoted
in this Discourse for this purpose..
II.III.IV.V.VI.VII.VIII.IX.X.XI.XII.XIII.XIV.XV.XVI.XVII.XVIII.XIX.XX.XXI.XXII.XXIII.XXIV.XXV. 2. That of securing our performance of Duty.. XXVI.XXVII.XXVIII.XXIX.XXX.XXXI.XXXII.XXXIII.

2. THEREFORE I proceed to prove that both these Ends, of confederating us into
a Body Politic, and of obliging us to the performance of the Duties required
on our part, are more likely to be atteined by admitting us to the Benefits of
the Covenant only by the External Solemnities of it as the Ordinary Means
rather than by admitting us to them immediately by our own Resolutions or
Promises. Both these I shall consider distinctly.

This admitting of us to the Benefits of the Evangelical Covenant only by the
external Solemnities of it as the Ordinary Means is very useful for
confederating us into a Body Politic, and for obliging us to submit to such
Governors as those of the Church, who may be supposed obnoxious to frequent
Persecutions of the Secular Power, and then to be left destitute of any thing
but their own Sacredness which may aw their refractory Subjects to Obedience.
For according to the Principles which I have partly proved already, and shall
partly have occasion to prove further in prosecution of my designed Method, I
suppose 1. That no Prudent Person can ever be willing to venture his Soul on a
less secure way that can obtein a more secure one by any condescensions of less
concernment than the thing he ventures. As though it be very possible to escape
Shipwreck by a plank, yet no wise man will ever venture it that may have a Ship
by concessions of less concernment to him than the hazard of his Life by such a
venture. The very fear and probability of his miscarriage in such a Case would
be thought sufficient to Oblige him to yield to Conditions otherwise very
intolerable, if yet they might be less hurtful to him than his present Fears in
such a Condition;

Fear of his Souls miscarriage would be really judged more hurtful, by a
Prudent Person, than any condescension whatsoever, how grievous soever, if it
were not directly sinful. Because, at least to him, his own Soul is his dearest
interest, and nothing can prejudice that but Sin.

Ordinary Means of Salvation, and is only to trust to Extraordinaries, will
have reason to judge himself to be in as great and probable hazard of his Soul
as he, who in a storm were cast out of a Ship, and had nothing given him to
favor him in his escape, but a plank, were of his Body. And such a Person were
therefore obliged to yield to all conditions not sinful, because nothing but
Sin could make his condition more desperate or less comfortable to him than
that wherein he is thus supposed to be already engaged; as in the Parallel
condition nothing but Death, or that which were worse, could make that Persons
condition, more disconsolate than it is, who in a Shipwreck could have nothing
but a plank to trust to.

Soul, the only Ordinary Means of its Salvation is its interest in the Divine
Promises; at least this is the only Ordinary Means of our Assurance of it.

Covenant by which alone it comes to pass that God is Obliged to the
performance of them.

Ordinary Means of procuring an interest in this Covenant is by admission to
the External Solemnities by which it is ratified and confirmed.

External Solemnities are the two Sacraments. And therefore that it will hence
follow that all unsinful Conditions, however inconvenient, are rather to be
submitted to than that we should suffer our Selves to be deprived of the use of
them; And that therefore they, and only they, who only have the power of
administering them, and of admitting us to them, must, by this very contrivance
of things, be necessarily understood to have a power to impose on us what
Constitutions they please that are not sinful. And though it be very possible
for other Governors, who may not be aware of Consequences, to give away a
greater power to their Inferior Officers by the words of their Commission, or
by some other subtle Consequence from the nature of the Power entrusted to
them, than they intended; yet this cannot be understood of God who is
Omniscient. And therefore whatsoever Consequence does follow from the nature of
the Government entrusted by him may therefore be concluded to have been by him
designed for the Governors so entrusted.

administration of these Sacraments, and consequently the admission of
particular Persons to them, is not common to all Christians, but only confined
to some Persons Authorized for that purpose by God; so that if the
administration of the External Symbols were attempted by any other, such an
attempt were not only irregular, but invalid; and therefore could not confer
any Title to the Spiritual Benefits to be conveyed by it, but rather a Curse
for the Presumption it self in the Person principally guilty, and on others
also that should prove accessory to it by communicating with him in such his
Usurpations.

Authorized to administer them, would be invalid, ipso jure, that is, would
confer no Legal Title to those Benefits, will plainly appear whether we
consider God as a Governor or as a Covenanter. If as a Governor, then it is
necessary that all his inferior Governors be empowered by his Commission to
act by his Authority, which Commission if they want they cannot be said to act
by his Authority, and no Illegal Authority can confer a valid Legal Title. If
as a Covenanter, he cannot be thus obliged without his own will, and therefore
none can celebrate a Covenant in Gods name so as to oblige him to performance
of it unless God signify it to be his pleasure to empower him to do so, as in
Law none can be obliged by another act who has not been empowered to act in
his name by his Letters of Proxy. And he that presumes of himself to make a
Covenant, wherein God is by him engaged as a Party, without being so empowered
by God; as what he does cannot in any Legal exposition be reputed as Gods Act,
so neither can it infer any Legal Obligation on him to performance.

Ministers for the conveyance of Spiritual Blessings by the Sacraments, and
that which is given by Worldly Princes to inferior Officers for the conveyance
of Secular Favors. For because the possessions of Lands are in effect subject
to the power of the Sword, the inferior Officers who have the power of the
Sword, and withal have the Lands within the Jurisdiction wherein that power is
allowed them, as they may decree wrong in giving Lands to Persons who have no
Legal Right to them, so they may also for a time put them in possession of
them. But the advantages of the Sacraments are Spiritual; and consequently
their Possession, as well as Right, must depend wholly on the Divine pleasure,
and it cannot be presumed likely to please God to give any validity to the Acts
of Usurpers. Nay that a Curse instead of a Blessing is to be feared from
Ordinances so administered, will appear by the same Principles of Government.
For there are no Crimes more punishable, by these Principles, than those which
encroach on the Supreme Government, and none reputed more Treasonable than
pretending a Commission where none is given, and counterfeiting the Broad Seal;
especially when they proceed so far as to raise actual Sedition on these
pretenses. Now of all these Crimes these Vnauthorized Sacraments must be
charged by these Principles.

pretend a Commission from God when they have none; because they plainly take
upon them to intermeddle in that Government which nothing can empower them to
intermeddle in without an express Commission; at least they cannot expect to be
trusted, and submitted to by Loyal Subjects, without such a pretense. They
presume to counterfeit the broad Seal (for such our dissenting Brethren
themselves conceive the Sacraments to be in respect of the New Covenant, and
accordingly charge the Romanists with counterfeiting the Broad seal of Heaven
for adding to the Number of the Sacraments) in taking upon them to oblige God
as a Party of a Covenant, and pretending to set his Seal to it, without Power
received from him to do so. They raise Sedition, by setting up Societies within
the Jurisdiction of those Churches whereof themselves were Originally Members,
and yet independent on the Government of those Churches. Which if it be not
Sedition by the Principles of Government in general (not as confined
particularly to that which is Civil or Ecclesiastical) for my part I must
confess I do not understand what Sedition is. And certainly the Principles of
Government in general, as prescinding from both these kinds, must be admitted
in these Disputes, unless we will pretend Ecclesiastical Government not to
agree with that which is Secular in as much as one Univocal Notion, which is
indeed to divest it of any thing of Government but a bare Name. And then by the
same Principles of Government, not only they are Traitors who raise the
Rebellion, but also they who maintein and abet it when it is raised, which will
involve the Communicants in these Sacraments in this Capital Guilt as well as
the Administrers of them.

valid Administration of the Sacraments is thus confined to the
Regularly-Ordeined Clergy, will appear whether we consider the Sacraments as
Confederations into a Body Politic, or only as sacred Rites and Ceremonies
instituted by God in Order to some great effects to be promoted by them without
any design upon a Body Politic. If we consider them as confederations into a
Body Politic, that is, as Baptism does admit a Member into the Church, and as
the Blessed Eucharist does, not only signify, but, perpetuate and effect, that
Union with Christ the Head of this Mystical Body, and with their Brethren as
Fellow Members, which may make them capable of receiving those vital influences
which are here expected, the same way as a Member of the Natural Body, by being
vitally united to the Living Head and Members, is made capable of receiving
that Communication of Blood and Spirits by which the Life of the whole Body is
maintained: Then they will plainly appear to be the Right of Governors. For in
all Governments the Right of admitting Members into their Societies at first,
or continuing them in it in order to the instating them in the Legal
Privileges of such Societies, is never conceived to belong to particular
Members, but only to Governors. So that if a particular Vnauthorized Member
should presume to admit a Member into the Body Politic whereof he is himself a
Member, such an Act were not only Irregular, but Invalid in it self, so that a
Member so admitted cannot be reputed a Legal Member of such a Society, nor
consequently be Legally entitled to the Privileges of it without a new
admission. For considering that this admission and continuance of Members in a
Society does withal entitle them to all the Privileges of it, if the power of
this admission and deprivation be not confined to the Governors, they must
consequently be deprived of the Rewards and Punishments (for indeed the
Privileges Men gain by being of any Society are the only Rewards that are
proper and natural to invite Men to it, or continue them in it, and the
deprivation of those Privileges, especially if they be so necessary for their
Preservation as that the loss of them must inevitably expose Persons so
deprived to the greatest inconveniences, are the only natural Punishments to
discourage Men from doing any thing contrary to the Will of the Governors of
such a Society.) And how possible it is for any Government to be maintained in
a Society where the Rewards and Punishments are not at the disposal of the
Governors, I believe our Brethren themselves will never be able to explain.
And therefore, pursuant to these Principles, for my part I must confess I do
not understand how the validity of Laics and much more Women's Baptism (who by
the Apostles Rule are much less capable of Ecclesiastical Authority) can be
defended, unless it may possibly be by that general Delegation which may be
conceived to have been granted to them by the Governors by those Customs and
Constitutions which permit them to administer it. But it would then be a
further Doubt, How far such Persons as these are capable of such a Delegation?
To which I do not intend at present to digress.

Sacred Rites instituted by God for his public and solemn Worship, to which he
has been pleased to annex such Blessings as might encourage Persons to their
observation; yet even so they will belong to the Clergy, if not immediately as
Governors, yet, at least, as Persons consecrated, and set apart, for the
Solemnities of the Divine Worship in Public. For under this notion it will be
their proper Province to officiate in the Solemnities of Divine Worship; and it
is plain that the Sacraments do not concern the private Devotions of Closets,
but that which is performed publicly in Churches. That Baptism does so,
appears from all its ends, both as it is an initiation of a Member into the
Church, as a Multitude, at least, if not as a Body Politic; And as we are
hereby united to all Christians, by partaking of one Baptism as well as by our
believing one God and one Faith; And as we here partake of one Spirit with
them, which plainly concern us, not in our private, but public capacities. And
that the Blessed Eucharist does so too, is notorious, and appears from all the
Discourses of our Authors against the private Masses of the Romanists.

It will be sufficient to secure these employments from the Invasions of the
Laity. For thus God has always been extremely severe against all encroachments
in the Public Solemnities of his Service, usually more severe than against
those Sins which our Brethren are generally inclinable to look on as very much
more flagitious. The Examples of 2 Samuel vi.6, 7. 1 Chr. xiii.9.10.
Vzzah and 2 Chronicles. xxvi.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
Vzziah are very considerable to this purpose. But especially that of Saul, 1 Samuel xiii.
who, though he had first waited for Samuel Ver. 8.11.
seven days together, and though the People were Ver. 6.11.
scattered from him, and those few that followed him were under an excessive
Ver. 7.
consternation, and that the Ver. 12.
Philistines were ready to engage him on these disadvantages, which must be
more formidable to him not having first invoked the Divine assistance; Yet,
because, upon all these Considerations, he Ver. 12.
forced himself (as himself professes) and offered a burnt offering, he had
this severe sentence from Samuel at his next meeting, that his Kingdom should
not be Ver. 13, 14.
established in his Posterity. Which by the way may let our dissenting Brethren
understand how unwarrantable their pretense is for venturing on the celebration
of Sacraments without a Call, though they must otherwise be hindered from all
Sacraments in a Regular way by the Ordinary Regular Church Governors. For as
Saul here might have had more hopes of a merciful return of his Prayers without
the Solemnity of Sacrifice in these Circumstances wherein it was impossible to
have it performed with its due Solemnity than by presuming to transgress his
Order in performing them irregularly; so by the same proportion God would more
easily excuse our Brethren for the want of Sacraments, if they could not have
them on Terms consistent with their Consciences, than accept of their Devotions
accompanied with these Solemnities, when they cannot have them without
Usurpation.

Saul and our Brethren too had not been chargeable with the Sin of omitting
these Solemnities when they could not have them without Sin (I mean in our
Brethrens Case without the Sin of compliance with Conditions which they think
unconscionable, if they were to receive them from their Ordinary Governors; or
of Usurpation, if they should attempt to administer them themselves) And
besides they might have had great hopes of having such their Prayers heard, not
only on account of the general Uncovenanted Goodness of God, but even of the
Equity of the Covenant it self, it not being likely that God, who is the Party
here concerned, would ever deprive us of Promises so necessary for us merely on
nonperformance of Conditions, though Morally only, not Naturally, impossible,
I mean such as were impossible to a good Conscience if it would continue good
as well as such as were impossible in the nature of the thing: So in the later
Case (where both Saul and they usurp a power of celebrating these Solemnities
rather than they would be content to want them) they incur the guilt of a Sin
in procuring it, and that (as has appeared from the instances now mentioned) of
very great heinousness in the esteem of God, seeing he has punished it with so
great Severity, which does not only pollute their Prayers, and make them
unacceptable, even by the Rules of Equity as well as strict Legal Justice, but
also render them very justly obnoxious to a severe punishment.

Legal examples, and therefore not to be extended to the condition of the
Gospel. For this unlawfullness for any but Levitical Priests to intermeddle
with Sacrifices cannot, I think, be proved from any express prohibition against
the other Tribes grounded on any reason singular and proper to that
dispensation. If it were I should then confess that such Positive Commands
would not oblige us now who are under another Legislator than Moses. But it is
not for our Brethrens interest to deny the present Obligation of several
Commands of the Mosaic Dispensation so seemingly Positive as that their Moral
reason had been very hardly, if at all, discoverable by us Antecedently to the
Positive Injunction of them. Not to mention the prohibition of incestuous
Marriages which all believe us at present concerned in, there are two very
considerable instances for which our Brethren usually plead with no little
Zeal, that is, the morality of the Sabbath and of Tiths, wherein they can prove
very little, if the perpetual seasonableness of the reason on which the Command
was grounded at first be not admitted as a sufficient reason to prove its
perpetual and present Obligation.

Levitical, intermeddling with Sacrifice seems wholly derived from the Notion
of Consecration, which is a part of that Natural Religion which, being
obligatory by its intrinsic reasonableness, concerns all Mankind independently
on Revelation. So because God had set the Levites apart for himself above all
the other Tribes of the Israelites, and had appointed Ceremonies of
Consecration of which they alone were capable, therefore they alone were
empowered to intermeddle with the Solemnities of Divine Worship, because their
Consecration it self was understood as a solemn admission of them to the Right
of officiating in the Solemnities of Religion, and therefore they who were not
thus admitted were reputed as Intruders. And the same reason may be
proportionably applied to those higher Offices which were appropriated to the
several Orders of the Priesthood by virtue of their different degrees of
Consecration above the other Ordinary Levites. For from the Examples of Korah
and Vzzah it plainly appears to have been as piacular and Sacrilegious for
ordinary Levites to invade the Offices of a higher Consecration as for ordinary
Laics to have invaded the Levites Office without any Consecration at all. And
accordingly we find that when Korah murmured against the appropriating of the
Priesthood to Aarons Family his Argument was that all the Congregation was
Holy, Number. xvi.3.
plainly supposing that it must be their holiness above others (I mean this
relative holiness which was transacted by these external Solemnities of
Consecration) that could give them this advantage above others in order to
their having the Priesthood appropriated to them. And Moses by way of reply
plainly graunts this, but withal tells them that God would show who were his,
and who were Holy; v.5.
that is in that Degree of Holiness which was then disputed of. Which was
neither any internal Holiness of their Persons, nor all degrees of relative
Holiness on account of Solemn Consecration. For of some such degrees it was
notoriously true that the whole Congregation had been indeed consecrated to God
by their Circumcision and other external Solemnities) but in regard of that
particular degree wherein the Priests had plainly the advantage of them in
regard of those particular Solemnities of consecrating them to their Office,
which the Ordinary Levites, and much less the Ordinary People, could not
pretend to. However we plainly see that Moses did not put the issue of this
Dispute to that express prohibition, That the Stranger (that is, as it is
explained here, Numb. xvi.40. Numb. iii.10.
He who was not of the seed of Aaron) who should come nigh, (that is, to
officiate in the Priests Office) should be put to death; but on this, Who of
them should be found to be more Holy in regard of this relative Holiness, and
the evidence God was to give of his own choice of the Sons of Aaron above
others.

Laics as well as others, are a Royal Priesthood, and a peculiar People. And
it was as true what was pretended by Corah Dathan and Abiram in favor of this
promiscuous Liberty of Sacrifice by the other Levites, at least, as well as
those of the Family of Aaron, that all the Congregation was Holy. Nay God
himself had frequently owned it in calling them a Holy Nation, and a peculiar
People; for these present Privileges of the Christians are the same and the
same way expressed as the Jews had been used to express themselves in this same
matter, and very probably used by the New Testament Writers in allusion to
them. And yet as that did not excuse that attempt then, did not conclude
against a peculiar Holiness in the Tribe of Levi and the Family of Aaron above
others, did not give even the Levitical Family of Corah a Liberty of meddling
with the Office of the Priests, nay made them obnoxious to an unexampled
vengeance for such their presumption; so neither can the like pretense excuse
the like encroachments on the Ministry of the Gospel from a proportionable
heinousness.

then, that will not proceed with proportionable evidence now? Were those
Priests separated from that Holy People to a nearer relation to God, and
consequently to a higher degree of this Relative Holiness? And are not ours so
too? Were there discriminating Solemnities appointed then by God himself for
consecrating such as were admitted to that Honor? And have not we the like
Solemnities? Were there Authorized Persons continued in a Succession who only
could pretend to an Ordinary Call from God, both to officiate themselves in
these sacred Solemnities, and to admit others to a participation of the like
Divine Authority? And have not we so too? And where all the tokens of a
peculiar Consecration of Officers, and a consequent exclusion of others from
that Function who had not been so Authorized, are so extremely parallel; what
is it that can make an Invasion of it less piacular and Sacrilegious now than
then? Could these particular Solemnities appointed for the Admission of Persons
to Sacred Offices then, be then understood as a designed exclusion of all such
Persons from them who had not been so admitted? And what disparity appears to
make it otherwise now? Or was Sacriledg more punishable then than now?

Positive and Temporary, I confess there might have been some pretense for
this. But I am sure the general sense of Religious Mankind has thought it
condemnable by the general Principles of Natural Religion; and that what is so,
is so eternally unlawful as that it can never be otherwise under any whatsoever
Positive Revealed Religion. And I know none of our Brethren themselves that
deny it. They who have defended the Practice of Sacriledg have not done it on
this pretense, that the Gospel admitted any Invasion of the Divine Property
more than the Law; but that they conceived Gods dispensation under the Gospel
to leave all things to their Original Liberty, and to reserve no peculiar
Property to himself. But this pretense has been already prevented in our Case.

Persons as in Things? Or can they think an Invasion of Things chargeable with
Sacriledg if the Invasion of Sacred Offices may be excusable from it? This is
not only contrary to the same Rules of Natural Religion as agreed in by the
consent of all Civilized Religious Nations, but against the Fundamental
Principles of Government which allow the Supreme Prince as peculiar a Property
in the distribution of Offices as of his Lands or Tributes. Or can they believe
the Invasion of Sacred Offices less criminal than that of Sacred Possessions?
But however we make the comparison, it will appear to be clearly otherwise. If
we make that the greater Sacriledg which is a violation of the more intrinsic
unalienable Divine Property, the distribution of Offices is, by the Fundamental
Principles of Government, more unalienable from God as a Governor than that of
any Possessions whatsoever. For Majesty may be preserved without private
Possessions, but not without the free distribution of Offices. But if we Judge
of the greatness of the Sacriledg by the value of the things invaded by it,
Offices will appear much more valuable than any Possessions. For both by
Offices a Dominion is gotten over Men's Persons which none will deny to be more
valuable than their Possessions: and from this Dominion over their persons
there arises secondarily a Dominion over their Possessions also; which is also
proportionably true in this Spiritual, as it is in Natural, Dominion. For by
this Sacred power the distribution of all Spiritual Benefits is also
consequently gained, which are truly more valuable to Men than all their
worldly Possessions; and by this Sacredness of Office Men become entitled even
to that Worldly maintenance in which God is allowed to have a real property, so
that it will prove in practice impossible to rob God of one without the other.

Gospel is not conceived to be so rigorous in exacting external Punctualities
as under the Law? This, I confess, is a true reason why so few external
Observances have been imposed on us under the Gospel; but there is no reason at
all, that appears to me, to urge it further, as our dissenting Brethren do, to
prove that God will be less Severe, now than formerly, in exacting the
performance of those few Externals which he has been pleased to require. Both
the excellency of the Dispensation, and the great concernment of the Churches
Peace in Order to the great designs of the Gospel Dispensation, and the natural
influence of Government for the preservation of that Peace, and of
Disobedience, even in things seemingly small, to the contempt of Government, and
the Apostles Argument, Heb. II.3. Would rather incline us otherwise to argue,
that all violations of the Gospel-Authority must expect a severer vengence than
those of the Law.

Authority, even of the Old Testament, may not be allowed (not to prove any
thing to be now a Sin by its Positive Prescriptions, but only to prove how
highly Criminal a Sin is in the account of God, and how severe a Punishment
Persons now guilty of it may expect, when it is otherwise proved to be a Sin by
immutable and unalterable reasons, that it can neither cease to be a Sin, nor
cease to be Criminal in such a Degree, and therefore if it were Criminal in
such a Degree under the Law it must be so under the Gospel too, or if it admit
of any variation of Degrees by the variation of Circumstances (as certainly
these Sins against the Law of Nature may, if not in the Kind, yet at least in
Individual Instances) that all the alteration of Circumstances under the Gospel
tend rather to its aggravation than its excuse) if I say this way of Arguing,
even from the Old Testament, be not now admitted as conclusive under the New,
it will utterly destroy all use of the Old Testament as a Rule of manners to
Christians. For it will, by the same way of Arguing, be easy to evade all
proofs from it by pleading our present unconcernedness in it; and if its
Authority be taken for nothing, not as much as for the Degree of Criminalness
of a Sin in the actual esteem of God, but that other rational proofs must be
demanded even for that from the nature of the Sin it self, it is plain that
thus the Authority of the Old Testament in affairs of this nature is plainly
slighted, and all is ultimately resolved into Reason independent on it, which
is a Crime of which, I believe, our dissenting Brethren would be very unwilling
to prove guilty.

Sacraments thus depending on the Authority of those that Administer them,
there are none that can lay a just claim to that Authority (now that God does
not appear immediately himself to Authorize them, but leaves them to the use of
Ordinary Means) but they who can show a Succession continued in all the
intermediate Ages from the Apostles themselves who were thus immediately
Authorized, as no Commission can be derived from a Prince, who cannot
immediately be consulted, but by the mediation of his Ordinary Subordinate
Governors. The proof of this I shall not now insist on because I believe I
shall have occasion to do it in my following Discourse. And as it has thus
appeared that this confinement of the Benefits of the New Covenant to the
External Solemnities of it is very useful for confederating us into a Body
Politic; So

THIS Solemnity of Promises is more likely to secure our performance of Duty
than any private Resolutions or Promises whatsoever. I know indeed that in
reason a Promise made with equal freedom, is as obligatory, if made in private,
as if made before never so great an Assembly of Witnesses; nay that in reason
an Assembly can so little contribute to advance our Obligation, as that it
would rather weaken it (for how can He, in reason, be thought capable of being
awed by Men who is not afraid to break those promises which are made to God,
and wherein God is also invoked as a Witness?) Nay rather might make us
distrust our having that due respect for God when we should find our Selves so
much more efficaciously influenced by Men: And I know withal that only the
performance of Duties on truly-rational Motives does make them strictly
virtuous and rewardable. But having already premised that God does, in
Covenanting with us, and more in Governing us, treat us suitably to our
humors, and does accordingly bear with the Imperfections, if the Duties
themselves be performed (both because the External performance of Duties, how
little virtuous soever they be to the Persons performing them, yet, is of great
use to the Public, for edifying others, and for mainteining the reputation of
the Government, which are the prime designs of Governors; And as, in process
of time, a Custom of materially-virtuous Acts, will naturally produce, even in
the Person who exerts them, a materially-virtuous Habit, which, when it is
gotten, is easily made formally-virtuous, only by changing the design on which
it was performed, which will then be also easy; And because all the design of
Religion is, with Beginners, to Suppose, and therefore to Indulge, these
Imperfections which are naturally consequent to the Condition of Man in this
Life, where, not being pure Spirits, nor free from the Prejudices of our
Complexions, we are not so capable of pure and naked reasonings) And that
therefore it does not here concern him to make use of such Inducements as are
most solidly conclusive of his purpose, so much as of such as are most likely
to prevail with us* how weak soever they be in themselves: These things, I say,
being considered; my concernment at present is only to show that the
Solemnities of a Covenant, how little soever they may add to the reason of the
Obligation, yet, do very considerably affect the Generality of Mankind, as
well those who have weaker, as those who have stronger, Impressions of
Religion; And therefore must very considerably promote the actual performance
of Duty.

Experience of the World, whether even wicked Persons themselves, who have not
arrived to such a degree of wickedness as not only to have lost all real sense
of Religious Obligations, but also all sense of the reputation of seeming, at
least, to be Religious (and they who are thus wicked can never be trusted on
any Compacts whatsoever) do not think themselves much more Obliged by Covenants
solemnly engaged on than if the same Covenants had been mutually ratifyed
without these Solemnities? And the reason is almost as obvious as the
Experience.

Covenants whatsoever for securing performance depends on these natural
Impressions of Conscience which are to be supposed in Men capable of being
obliged by Covenants Antecedently to them; and therefore where these
Impressions are more general, and more deeply rooted, there they must naturally
produce a greater horror against any thing contrary to them, and consequently
give a greater security for the performance of such Obligations. If therefore
it may appear that Men have naturally a greater horror against the breach of a
Covenant solemnly confirmed than if it had not been so confirmed, it will
plainly follow that its Solemnity must very considerably add to the Security of
its performance. Now for showing this to be so.

Sense and Experience of Mankind is the only competent proper Topic for
showing what Motives they are most affected with. I do not mean only that
Experience which every one has of his own Inclinations and Affections, but that
also which we find every one to have of all Mankind with whom he has to deal,
and which he therefore supposes in his conversing with them. My meaning is,
that Mankind in general are most probably affected with such Motives which
every Individual in dealing with others, if indeed he think them fit to be
dealt with, takes it for granted that those others, with whom he deals, will
also be affected with them. For generally their Judgments of others is grounded
on their Experience in themselves; and therefore what they presume others to be
fearful of, of that it seems they are fearful themselves, and by the same Rule,
that of which every Man supposes another to be fearful, of that they feel
themselves to be fearful. And what can be a more certain Argument how every Man
is himself affected than his own Experience?

Mankind generally supposes others with whom they deal most affected with, it
is most probable that they are generally affected with it Indeed.

Promises and Contracts, because when he has them so Obliged to himself in
matters concerning his own Interest, he is confident of performance, so those
Obligations which make him more confident, it is a sign that he believes them
under a greater horror of violating them.

Experimentally of which Obligations Men are most confident is to Observe in
which they do more ultimately acquiesce. For it is plain that all Persons are
not trusted upon the same Obligations, but according to the Opinion Men have of
the Integrity and Resolution of the Person with whom they deal, so they desire
greater, or are contented with lesser, Assurances. And it is as plain an
Argument that New Obligations are desired when the former are, at least
comparatively, distrusted, and that even where they are not altogether
diffident of the former, yet that they are more confident of the later. So that
that Obligation to which Men have ultimate recourse after Trial of all others,
is that of which they are most confident, and every one is by so much the more
trusted by how much it approaches nearer to it. Now by this way of Trial it is
plain that many Men are trusted on their public solemn Promises who would not
be trusted on their private ones; and that not only in regard of the remedy the
Persons to whom they are made may have to force them to performance by proving
them (as Solemn Promises are more capable of proof than private) for even such
Persons are more trusted on their Solemn Promises as are subject to no exterior
compulsion, as Princes (to whom the greatest trusts are committed, and from
whom it is therefore very just and reasonable to expect the sacredest
Assurances) and there must be something supposed in them more likely to prevail
with the Person, who made them, to performance than if they had been made
without such Solemnity. And it appears also further that these Sacramental
Solemnities are of the nature of those Obligations to which Men have their
ultimate recourse in their Gradations of Trust. First they who are believed
truly-Conscientious, and to have a perfect command of their own desires are
trusted on their bare word. Then they, whose repute is more liable to
Exception, are yet trusted if the same Promises be made before Witnesses, which
kind of Promises not only they will revere who are truly-Conscientious, but as
many also as are desirous to preserve the reputation of being accounted so. But
even they who neither value the Conscience nor the reputation of being Just,
have yet a natural horror of the mischief that may befall them by being
otherwise, especially from an Invisible Being whose Knowledge cannot be avoided,
nor his Power resisted, and then more especially when this punishment of their
Persidiousness is not only likely to befall them on account of Gods general
Providence whereby he governs the World, and punishes Men's offenses whether
they will or no, but also on account of a voluntary consignation of themselves
to it, as it is in Oaths which are always understood to have Imprecations
either expressed, or implied, in them. For the Punishment thus feared is both
conceived more dreadful, when it is inflicted not only for the Injustice of
nonperformance, but also for the Impiety of making God a voucher of their
falsehoods (for Men have naturally a greater horror of Impiety than Injustice)
and more inevitable, when they have thus divested themselves of an Apology by
contributing to their own Punishment by their own Act. But then an Oath is
thought most formidable when it is deliberate and solemn, in matters of the
greatest consequence, and where the Punishment to be feared, in Case of
Perjury, is therefore to be expected most severe, and where all this is
performed before many Witnesses, so that the Perjurer must lose the Reputation,
as well as the Truth, of being Conscientious.

greatest Assurance Men can have, and He who cannot be trusted on these Terms
is looked on as incapable of any Trust at all, and unfit for any humane
Conversation. It were easy to apply all this to our Sacramental Obligations,
and to show that all those Circumstances which can make a humane Obligation
formidable do here concur: That they are in matters of the greatest importance,
That the Mischief to be feared on these Breaches is most insupportable, That
they are most deliberate (for Men are particularly warned to examine and try
themselves before they come to them) That God is not here, as in other Oaths,
concerned only as a Witness but as a Party too, and that they ought to be
performed with the greatest Solemnity. This last thing especially is that for
which I am now most nearly concerned, to show the sense of Mankind, how much
the Solemnity of these Obligations does contribute to their Efficacy; which
appears plainly in this, that no Obligation whatsoever does give that
Satisfaction to the Parties concerned for its performance, as when it is
undertaken Solemnly. Which is a plain sign that they look on the Solemnity it
self as likely to make it efficacious to Humane Nature; and therefore, by the
Observations now laid down, it really is so; and therefore is very suitable to
Gods purpose, thus to oblige Men to undertake their Religious Obligations in
the same way which is found most effectual to secure performance, even in their
Worldly concerns.

CHAP. VII. The same thing further Prosecuted.
THE CONTENTS.
2. That, at least, our partaking in the External Solemnities of this
Evangelical Covenant is the only Ordinary Means whereby we may be satisfied of
our Title to the Covenant it self.. I.II. This proved by three Degrees: 1.
That, for our satisfaction, it is requisite that we have positive Arguments for
us, as well as that there appear no positive Arguments against us..
III.IV.V.VI.VII. 2. That no Arguments can comfort, but such as may Externally
appear, and so be capable of being Judged of by the Persons concerned.. VIII.
3. Our partaking of the External Solemnities of the Covenant, is, at least, the
only Argument appearing to Us whereby We can be assured of any Legal Title to
the Benefits of it.. IX.X.XI.XII. A further Presumption for proving the same
thing.. XIII.

Supposing, that this partaking in the External Solemnities of the Evangelical
Covenant had not been so necessary to confer a valid Legal Title to the
Benefits of the Covenant; yet certainly it is necessary in Order to our
Satisfaction, that we in particular have any Title to them. And this alone will
be sufficient for my present design. For unless we may be satisfied of our
Interest in the Covenant, we can have no comfort of it; and it has already
appeared that this Consideration alone of being better assured of Pardon and
Assistance and Acceptance on the performance of Duty in the Communion of the
Church, and being better secured from the danger of miscarriage than we could
have been out of it (especially when it also appears that the Ordinary
Arguments of Probability are for the advantage of those who are in Communion,
and all the Ordinary Arguments of Improbability either of Salvation, or
Security from danger are applicable to them who are out of it) is sufficient in
Prudence to Oblige all as they tender their own Comfort and Security to submit
to all unsinful Conditions of the Churches Communion rather than want it.

1. That in Order to our Comfort and satisfaction out of the Churches Communion
it is not sufficient that there are no Positive Arguments against us to prove
us certainly liable to Damnation, but there are also requisite Positive
Arguments to prove the Security of our present Condition; 2. That no Arguments
concerning even the Security of our present Condition can comfort us but such
as may Externally appear, and so be capable of being judged of by the Persons
concerned; And 3. That though the thing might be true, That we might indeed
have even a Legal Title to the Benefits of the Evangelical Covenant without
partaking in the External Solemnities of it; yet the External Solemnities are
the only Arguments whereby we can judge of our Title, and therefore that where
we want them there we must at least want such Arguments as we can judge of. Of
these very briefly now, because I have elsewhere discoursed something
concerning them.

It is not sufficient for our comfort and satisfaction out of the Communion of
the Church that there are no Positive Arguments to prove us certainly liable to
damnatation, but there are also requisite Positive Arguments to prove the
Security of our present Condition. This is plain from the common Experience of
Mankind. For no man in a storm thinks it a ground of Positive comfort that
there are no certain Arguments of actual Shipwreck, as long as there are also
no Probabilities of escaping it. The want of such Positive contrary Arguments
may indeed in reason prevent his perfect despair (if indeed his contrary
discouragements do not make him incapable of so very little supporting
reasonings) but cannot so much as in reason be thought a sufficient ground for
any Positive comfort. At least no Prudent Person, (let his temper be never so
inclinable to hope, and therefore let him be never so ready to lay hold on any
Arguments for this purpose) can think this hope so valuable as to be willing to
continue in it if he might be relieved from it on any tolerable
CondiConditions; And I have already proved that all Conditions not Sinful are
to be thought Tolerable in such Circumstances.

weighty and Probable Arguments persuade their confidence, and very few and
weak and inconsiderable ones discourage them. And we find withal by the same
Experience that this want of contrary Arguments is of all weak Arguments that
which has the least influence on humane Nature. No Man thinks it a Prudent
Argument of Fear in passing the Streets because he is not sure that the next
Tile he passes under shall not fall on his head.

fearful when all appearing Probable Arguments make for their comfort, much
less can it be thought sufficient to give them any Hope where all appearing
Probable Arguments Oblige them to be Fearful. For of the two Humane Nature is
naturally more inclinable to Fear than Hope (as appears from those
Superstitions which have generally prevailed in most ignorant Nations, how
resolute soever otherwise, which is not so accountable on any other Principle
as this) and it is plain that the efficacy of any Arguments is to be accounted
for from the prevailing inclination of him who is to be persuaded by them.

want of all Means necessary for an Escape is by all Prudent Persons counted a
sufficient Argument to prove the imminent danger of the Person wanting them; so
that this alone is sufficient to have all the influence of a Positive Argument
on a Person who is concerned. For in several Cases the effect does follow as
certainly and inevitably from the want of the interposition of a Cause that may
hinder the present natural Course of things, as if it were proved immediately
from the influence of the Causes themselves; in which Case, the present Causes
not hindered do certainly determine the effect, and all the use of the Negative
proof is only to show, that they shall not actually be hindered. It is thought a
certain Argument that a Man falling down ^ precipice shall assuredly come to
the bottom, if we be assured that nothing else shall interpose to hinder him,
or if we be assured also that even those Causes, which we can apprehend as only
capable of interposing, shall not actually interpose. Even in this Case we
think our Selves Morally Certain of the Event.

sufficient Cause, not only for falling short of the rewards of the Gospel, but
also for incurring the Punishment of it, if unrelieved by the favors of it,
that is, Original Sin; And therefore they, above all others, are very
Pathetical in aggravating the inevitableness of Man's l^ss without Christ. Thus
far therefore it is as certain with them that all must actually perish for
whose rescue God does not especially interpose for Christ's sake, as it is
certain that a stone must fall downwards, if it be not hindered and supported by
the interposition of some other Cause. And seeing also that there is not any
other Interposition to be expected in this Case, even by our Brethrens own
Principles, but that of the mercy of God through Christ, that which will take
away all hopes of this Interposition, must in all reason and Prudence make us
proportionably fearful of the Event, that is, must, at least, perfectly ruin
all hopes of escaping, and consequently all comfort and satisfaction in our
present condition. If therefore it may appear that there are no Arguments to
put us in hopes that God will interpose; there can, upon these Principles, be
no hope nor comfort at all, at least, not sufficient for our dissenting
Brethrens purpose, to make it safe for any wise man to acquiesce in this
condition when he may change it by unsinful condescensions. For indeed for that
I have proved it requisite that this continuance out of the Churches Communion
had been righter and safer than having it on these Terms, and therefore that
the Probabilities making for it had been more, and more pregnant than those
which made against it.

2. THEREFORE no Arguments can comfort but such as may Externally appear, and
so be capable of being judged of by the Persons concerned. This is so plain of
it self, and so coincident with what I have already discoursed as that it
cannot need many words to clear it further. For no Person can be comforted by
the real goodness or safety of his condition unless he Judge it so, and none can
Judge whether it be so but by reasons appearing to himself.

Our partaking of the External Solemnities of the Covenant is, at least, the
only Argument appearing to us whereby we can be assured of any Legal Title to
the Benefits of it. For, as it has already appeared, it is only by our interest
in the Covenant that we can be assured of a Legal Title to the Promises on Gods
part; And a Covenant as Obligatory in a Legal way does necessarily imply such a
Legal Notoreity as that both Parties may be mutually assured of the others
Obligation. For as in Covenants neither of the Parties singly would engage but
on consideration of the Conditions to be performed by the other; so it is not
to be presumed in Equity that either of them would engage without assurance of
performance on the other Party, or give any further Assurance of their own
performance than they receive from the Party with whom they contract. Now the
reason why both Parties are willing to submit to Legal Obligations is only for
this mutual Security of performance of what both Parties were Antecedently
willing to contract for, and the farther use of making this Contract Legal is,
that, by some common means of Communication, each of them may be as well
secured of the performance of the Party with whom he deals as that Party is
secured of his own performance. And if a Contract were made more secure on the
one side than on the other (how Legal soever it might be in regard of Men who
can only proceed on generally-fallible Presumptions, yet,) it is not Equal, nor
consequently obligatory, in the sense in which we now understand Legal
Obligations when we speak of such as are betwixt God and Man; because it is not
agreeable with the presumable design of the Contracter, which is all that any
can in Equity be obliged to; unless we make the Law a snare to oblige Men
beyond their own intentions, which is not agreeable to the nature of voluntary
Contracts, such as Covenants are understood to be.

Covenanting with us must give us the same Security of performance on his part
as he receives from us of ours by virtue of the Legal Solemnities whereby the
Covenant is managed; And till he does so, and that we have reason to be
satisfied that he has done so, the Covenant cannot be said to have been
completed, because this is indeed the tacit Condition on which it was made,
and on which it was intended to be ratified, and therefore till this be done it
cannot be supposed to have received a final and complete ratification on both
sides, nor consequently to be Obligatory Legally.

Legal Notoreity of each others Obligation mutually is thus necessary to the
Equity and Validity of the Obligation, so indeed the Ordinary Solemnities of
entering into these compacts are the only Instruments of this Legal Notoreity;
so that indeed that cannot be presumed to be Legally Notorious which is not
transacted with these Solemnities, and therefore, not being Legally Notorious,
cannot, on the Principles now mentioned, infer a Legal Obligation. Especially
considering that God is pleased herein to condescend to deal with Men according
to their own customs and capacities. And therefore having erected a Visible
Body Politic, and placed Visible Vicegerents to act in his name, and
appointed Visible Seals, and withal having removed himself from our Ordinary
access and consultation; It is very reasonable to believe that it was his
design that we should judge of his proceedings the same way as we do of those of
other Princes, that having appointed Visible Means of promulging their
pleasures they would not have that taken for their will which is not so
promulged according to the Method and Rules which themselves had appointed for
it. Now this is the Ordinary method observed by such Princes in their
promulgations that all their Acts must be promulged by their inferior Officers
to whom we may be capable of having an immediate access, and that they be
Sealed with their Seal, and that nothing which is not thus attested should be
presumed to be the Act of the Supreme Magistrate, seeing that the very
constitution of such a Method of proceeding was purposely designed to let
Subjects know the true Acts of such Princes from Counterfeits. And therefore
God having made the same External provisions of Visible Officers to represent
him, and Visible Seals to confirm what is Covenanted for in his Name, it is the
same way to be presumed that he would not have any Covenant trusted to as his
which is not thus managed and sealed by his Visible Representatives.

Pardon and Salvation upon the Conditions of Faith and Repentance which the
Ministers are Obliged to declare in Gods name to all Men, even Antecedently to
their actual initiation into the Church, were never intended for immediate
Covenants with them upon performance of those Conditions, but only as
preliminary invitations to dispose themselves for an actual Reception into his
Covenant by qualifying themselves by these Conditions of Reception. I say, it
seems to me a very just reason to believe that those general Invitations are no
Covenants, because they are never Sealed in general, but only then when Persons
so qualifyed are actually Admitted, which had indeed been needless if it had
been general on Gods part, Obliging him to every particular, only on the
performance of those Moral Conditions, without any further Act of God for the
consummating his Obligation in a Form of Law. But whether there may be
Obligations, or not, Antecedently to Sealing, I am not at present concerned.
This, at least, seems clear that Seals are designed as Instruments of
Notoreity, and therefore that no Obligation can be Authentical, that is, such
as may assure us of its validity, without them. This I have already proved
sufficient for my purpose, and shall not need any more to repeat the Arguments
whereby I have proved it to be so.

Presumption in our Case, that though it had been granted to have been
possible for God to have made his Promises immediately to the Moral Duties of
Faith and Repentance; Yet our dissenting Brethren can never prove it necessary
that he must have done so. And if this be not Necessary, the contrary may be
also possible. Which will suffice for showing the much greater Security these
Moral Duties have of a Title to the Promises if accompanied with these
Solemnities than if they be separated from them. All who say that Faith and
Repentance alone have a Title to these Divine Promises cannot doubt but that
they still retain the same Title when they are practiced in the Church's
Communion as when they are practiced out of it. But the very Possibility of the
saylour of their Title as considered separately is enough to show how much more
secure it is to practice them in the Church's Communion. But considering withal
the reasons now given why these Moral Duties alone should not have that Title
on the constitution of these Solemnities which they might have expected
otherwise; this must considerably add to that Security. And this greater
Security has been proved sufficient for our purpose, to show how our Brethren
are Obliged rather to Submit to all Vnsinful Impositions than lose, even these
Solemnities, on which this greater Security has thus appeared to dep^nd.

CHAP. VIII. The same thing further Prosecuted*
THE CONTENTS.
3. The participation in these External Solemnities, with any Legal Validity,
is only to be had in the External Communion of the Visible Church.. I. The
Church as taken for the Body of the Elect incapable of being Communicated with
Externally.. II.III. That all things here contrived are exactly fitted for a
Visible Church, and no other.. IV.V.

THEREFORE the participation in these External Solemnities, with any Legal
Validity, is only to be had in the External Communion of the Visible Church.
And it is only this Legal Validity that can signify any thing to the comfort of
the Persons concerned. For if they be performed without Legal Validity they can
Oblige God to nothing, neither to pardon past Sins, nor to give Grace for
better performance, nor to acceptance upon imperfect performance, nor a Title
to a Supernatural reward. And he who cannot Judge himself to have a Title to
these, nay not, a Legal Title to them, cannot have reason to think his
Spiritual Condition very comfortable. Now that these External Solemnities are
not to be had in the Church in that notion of it as it is made Invisible, which
our dissenting Brethren make use of to overthrow all Ecclesiastical Government
and Subjection, and indeed the entire Notion of its being a Body Politic, is
very plain. For they are not pretended to have any External Solemnities of
confederation among themselves, as well as with God, but those wherein all
Visible Professors. Hypocrites as well as others, communicate with them, and
therefore by which they are not distinguishable from others. Nay, that these
External Solemnities do not concern them as Elect, is not only clear thence,
that others who are not Elect communicate in them as well as these who are; but
also that many who are Elect want them, as they who are not yet called, and
they who are Excommunicated clave ^rrante, nay and all they who live where
Communion cannot be had, so that with them no Communion is maintained even in
the participation of the External Symbols themselves.

Visible Communion with them who are not themselves visible? Gods secret
Decrees are known to none. They may indeed be known by the effects and
influences of Gods secret Communication with the Spirits of those who are
concerned, if our dissenting Brethren may be believed; so that the Argument may
hold good, according to them, that they who feel those influences may conclude
themselves to be Elected. Yet will it not hold even in all Elect Persons
themselves. Not only they who are not as yet called may nevertheless be
Elected; but also all they who are called, but are not yet arrived to that
singular degree of proficiency in Religion as to feel these Evidences, may
notwithstanding not be able as yet to know as much as their own Election, even
according to our dissenting Brethrens own Principles*

another Election. And seeing the Persons themselves are thus incapable of
being distinguished from others; Seeing at least there are no visible
distinctives of any Society of them; how is it possible to maintein any visible
Communion with them by visible Solemnities? The Elect may indeed be capable of
mainteining a Communion with God, because they know him, and are known by him,
without any visible Societies; but, for want of these necessary conditions of
Communication, they can never constitute any Society nor maintein any
Communication with each other. And therefore if this be the Church to which our
dissenting Brethren would pay the respect due to the Church, all our Sacraments
must be perfectly insignificant, which seem plainly designed not only, nor
principally, to maintein a visible Communication with God, but with each other.

Legal validity depends on the due administration of these External Solemnities
by which they may be believed Obligatory of God by the same Rules of Legal
Equity whereby they would be Obligatory of Men; And seeing that this is the
only way among Men to infer an Obligation on Persons not immediately appearing
in their own Persons* (as God does not in Covenanting with Us) that it may
appear that the Persons acting in their behalf be indeed empowered by them to
act in their Names, and to pass such Acts into Legal Forms by solemn sealing
them; this must also be conceived requisite to Gods Obligation as it may be
valid in Law, and as it may be capable of appearing to Us. And therefore* his
Covenant is Transacted with Us by Ministers dealing with us immediately, and
who must make out their Authority to Act and Administer the Seals in his Name;
the same way as Legal Procurators do, by their Deputation from them who were
Originally concerned.

visible, the Covenant it self, the Seals, the Ministers, their Call by
Authorized Persons; and therefore are incapable of being Transacted any where
but in a visible Church and an External Communion. And it is further Observable
that this way of proceeding will resolve the ultimate Trial of the validity of
these Solemnities into the Authority of the Persons administering them, which
will more directly prove that the visible Church here supposed must also be a
Body Politic. And this may suffice at present for proof of this second thing
necessary for the Justification of this Proposition. That the Ordinary Means of
Salvation are confined to the External Communion of the visible Church.

CHAP. IX. That the Grace, to be expected in hearing the Word Preached, is not
sufficient for Salvation without the Sacraments.
THE CONTENTS.
11. That, in reference to the Duty of particular Persons, the visible Church,
wherein they may expect to find these Ordinary Means, is the Episcopal in
opposition to all other Societies not Episcopally governed; and particularly
that Episcopal Communion under whose Jurisdiction the Persons are supposed to
live.. I. 1. The Episcopal Communion in opposition to all other Societies not
Episcopally governed is that visible Church to whose External Communion these
Ordinary Means of Grace are confined. This proved by several degrees.. II. 1.
The Ordinary Means of Grace are now confined to the Sacraments. Two things
premised. The former.. III.IV. The later.. V. The thing to be proved.. VI.
Proved two ways. 1. Exclusively, of other Means of gaining that Grace which is
necessary to Salvation besides the Sacrament.. VII.VIII. 1. Of the Word
Preached. Some things Premised.. IX.X.XI.XII. 1. Much of the Grace conveyed by
the Word Preached in the Primitive times was undoubtedly proper to those times,
and not fit to be expected now.. XIII.XIV.XV. 2. There were reasons proper to
those times why such Grace might be expected then, which will not hold now, for
the conviction of the Persons who then received the Spirit.. XVI. 3. There were
also other proper Reasons necessary for the conviction of those with whom they
had to deal.. XVII. 4. That Grace which might otherwise have been expected in
attending on the Word Preached, is yet not so probably to be expected in the
Preaching of Persons Vnauthorized, especially if they Preach in opposition to
them who are Legally invested with Spiritual Authority.. XVIII.XIX. 5. It is
yet farther doubtful, whether the Grace, which may now be Ordinarily expected
at any Preaching whatsoever* be so great as to be able to supply the want of
the Sacraments at least, so great as to secure the Salvation of those who enjoy
this Ordinance whilst they want the Sacraments?. XX.XXI. 6. It is also very
doubtful, whether all the Grace which is supposed to accompany the Word
Preached be any more than what is necessary to dispose the Auditors to receive
and believe the Truth of the Doctrines Preached to them? Or whether there be
any the least ground to believe that they shall there receive that further
Assistance which is necessary to help them to Practice what they have thus
received and believed.. XXII.XXIII.XXIV. 7. This first Grace of Persuasion, if
we suppose it alone to accompany the Word Preached, will fully answer the
design of the Word Preached.. XXV. 8. The Grace here received seems to be only
some actual Influences of the Spirit, (which wicked men may receive whilst
they continue so, and which therefore cannot alone be thought sufficient for
Salvation) not the Person of the Divine Spirit himself.. XXVI.

That, in reference to the Duty of particular Persons, that visible Church
wherein they may expect to find these Ordinary Means is the Episcopal in
opposition to all other Societies not Episcopally governed; and particularly
that Episcopal Communion under whose Jurisdiction* the Persons are supposed to
live. This will also consist of 2. Parts fit to be considered distinctly: 1.
That the Episcopal Communion* in opposition to all other Societies not
Episcopally governed, is that visible Church to whose External Communion th^se
Ordinary Means of Grace are confined; And 2. That, in respect to particular
Persons* that Episcopal Communion under which the Persons live is that
particular Episcopal Communion to which these Ordinary Means of Salvation are
confined in the Case of these particular Persons.

The Episcopal Communion, in opposition to all other Societies not Episcopally
governed, is that visible Church to whose External Communion these Ordinary
Means of Grace are confined. This I shall endeavor to prove by these degrees:
1. That the Ordinary Means of Grace are now confined to the Sacraments; 2. That
the validity of these Sacraments depend upon the Authority of the Persons by
whom they are administered; 3. That no other Ministers have this lawful
Authority but only they of the Episcopal Communion.

The Ordinary Means of Grace are now confined to the Sacraments. Before I prove
this, it will be necessary that some things be premised. 1. Therefore I am not
now considering the Sacraments as they are Ceremonies of initiation into the
Evangelical Covenant, or of continuing in it; but as to the particular Benefits
for which they are designed. In the former regard I have considered them
already. And in that Notion there can be no doubt but that all the Benefits of
this Covenant will be concerned in them. For as they who have no Title to the
Covenant it self can pretend no Title to any of the Benefits of the Covenant,
so they who are not validly initiated into it, or continued in it by the
External Solemnities appointed for that purpose, cannot have a Legal Interest
in the Covenant it self. So that by this way of proceeding the Negative way of
arguing is best secured, " That they who do not partake of the Sacraments as
External Solemnities of transacting this Covenant can have no Legal Title to
forgiveness of Sins, or the Holy Spirit, or any Supernatural rewards, or any
other such Benefits which God is obliged to do for us only by virtue of his
Covenant. But though this alone be very sufficient for my purpose, yet that it
may appear how exactly our general Hypothesis suits with the nature of the
Sacraments themselves; I shall here endeavor to show that the loss to be
sustained by the deprivation of the Sacraments, I mean, the loss of those
Graces which the Sacraments Convey, as well as signify, to us by virtue of
their Divine Institution, is indeed as great as that of the loss of a Legal
Interest in the Covenant it self, at least incomparably too great to be
hazarded for want of any condescension that is not Sinful. So that although we
should not consider the Sacraments as Solemnities of investing us into a Legal
Right to the Covenant, but only with relation to those Graces for whose
conveyance they were immediately instituted and designed, yet even these are so
considerable as to oblige us to depend on them who are alone invested with the
power of administering them. And certainly the least prejudice that can be
thought to be sustained by them who want the Sacramental Symbols rather than
they will purchase them by unsinful condescensions, must be at least the loss
of those Graces for whose conveyance they were purposely designed by God as the
only Ordinary Means by which Men might expect them. Especially when the
voluntariness of such a want is as well a crime as a neglect, and therefore
must so justly cut them off from all hopes of relief by Extraordinaries.

Hypothesis with the nature of the Sacraments, and the great Probability which
will thence follow, that both of them must be true when they are found thus
exactly to agree, the only reason why I am willing to add this proof from the
particular nature of the Sacraments themselves to that general consideration of
them as Seals of the New Covenant. The truth is I am unwilling to lay the
stress of my present design upon a form of speaking so new, and so liable at
least to Dispute, as that of the Sacraments being Seals of the New Covenant. I
am not so cautious, as if I doubted whether this were true, at least concerning
Baptism, that that is indeed a Seal of the New Covenent; but because I had
rather, where I can have choice, insist on Principles least liable to
contradiction. Nor yet could I think it altogether fit to wave that Argument,
both because it is so very apposite for our purpose, and so easily granted by
our Adversaries, and so more likely to prevail with them than Arguments less
questionable in themselves; and because I think so much of it really solid as
is necessary for our purpose. Valid Baptism being only to be had from the
regularly-Ordeined Clergy is a great Obligation to a dependence on them. And if
we only wave the word Seal we may take in the other Sacrament also under the
general term of the Solemnities whereby the Evangelical Covenant is transacted
and maintained. Which as it is equally subservient to our purpose, so I have
rather chosen to make use of it because I conceive it really more justifiable.

That it is one thing to say that the Sacraments are Ordinary Means of Grace,
and another to say, that the Ordinary Means of Grace are confined to the
Sacraments. By the former no more is implied but that worthy Communicants do,
in the use of these Sacraments, partake of this Grace, which may be very true
though God had appointed other Ordinary Means by which the same Graces might be
obtained by them who cannot have the Sacraments. But if this were the Case, the
Negative Argument (for which we are alone concerned at present) would not hold,
that they who want the Sacraments must, even in this ordinary way of
proceeding, be presumed to want the Sacramental Graces also. For they who want
one Ordinary Means may still make use of another for obteining the same thing,
where there is acknowledged a variety; and even in this Case they might have
comfort and confidence without the desperate recourse to Extraordinaries. My
design therefore being to show that they must want the Sacramental Graces who
want the Sacraments themselves upon the terms now mentioned, this later thing
must be that which I am principally obliged to prove. I confess there are many
Errors current among our Brethren concerning the virtue even of Sacraments in
general, especially where they think themselves obliged rather to contradict
than to lay down any thing positive. And I withal confess that they are their
Errors of this kind which have rendered the true Notion of the Sin of SCHISM so
very difficult to them. Nor can it be thought strange that their Practice of
Schism should unawares betray them into Errors on a Subject whose right
understanding would go so far to recover them out of Schism, and to let them
see its mischief as well as its Sinfulness. And though I think we have as great
advantage against them on this Topic as on any; and that their Notions herein
are so clearly contrary to the sense of Catholic Tradition and Antiquity, and
so destructive to the true nature of Sacraments, as that they come the nearest,
of any Paradoxes maintained by them, to their being Fundamental Errors; yet
that I may confine my present design within as narrow limits as can be allowed
for dispatching it with accurateness and solidity, I shall at present consider
this virtue of the Sacraments no further than as it shall fall in with my
design of proving that the Ordinary Means of Grace are confined to them.

confinement has appeared from the Principles laid down in the former Chapters.
For as it is certain that the Covenant of God with us is the only Ordinary
Means whereby we may be assured of Salvation; so it is withal as certain that
our participation in the External Solemnities whereby this Covenant is
transacted is the only Ordinary Means whereby we may be assured of our Interest
in the Covenant; and that God has neither instituted, nor is pretended by our
Brethren themselves to have instituted, any other External Solemnities of
transacting this Covenant besides the Sacraments. But because I am now
considering the Sacraments under another Notion, not as Solemnities of
transacting the Covenant, but in relation to those Graces for the communication
whereof they were particularly designed and instituted by God himself, that
which I am at present concerned to prove will be, that the Graces hereby
conveyed are such as that, without them, Salvation cannot ordinarily be
expected; and withal that they are such as that God has instituted no other
ordinary way of giving them besides the Sacraments. Both these I shall
endeavor to prove together as I have already expressed them in the Proposition.

Grace is not otherwise to be expected Ordinarily than by the Sacraments: From
the later, That this Grace is such as that Salvation cannot Ordinarily be
expected without it.

THEREFORE I shall endeavor to disprove those other Ordinary Means which are,
or may be, pretended to, by them who are out of the Communion of the Church.
And they are especially two: either the hearing of the Word Preached, or
private Prayer. The former will, at least, so far serve our purpose as to
oblige Men to depend on some Assemblies, and consequently on the power of those
who alone enjoy the power of calling such Assemblies, or at least to depend on
the Preachers. But the later is such as, if it be allowed to be an Ordinary
Means of obteining that Grace which is necessary for Salvation, will excuse Men
not only from all Sacraments, but from all Assemblies too, and will allow a
liberty to those who join with no Party at all on pretense of the sufficiency
of their Closet-Devotions. Which is a thing I am therefore the more willing to
warn them of, that none may venture to defend this later way till they have
first considered how they can give an account of this dangerous Consequence of
it. And the same Inconvenience will much more concern them who conceive the
Moral Duties of Faith and Repentance to be sufficient for obteining this
Evangelical Grace which is necessary for our Salvation. But of this Opinion I
shall say no more now, both because I have considered it already, and because
it must necessarily fall, if I suceed in my present undertaking.

Ordinary Means therefore pretended for obteining the Grace of the Gospel,
independently on the Sacraments is the Word. But before I oppose this, I shall
first lay down some Cautions, from which it may appear how far I am indeed
concerned to oppose it. 1. Therefore if by the Word be understood the
subsistent Word, whether the fontal (...) in Christ himself, or the derivative
as the Spirit which is given to us upon our becoming Christians, in regard
whereof Christ himself is said to be Gal. iv.19.
formed in us, 2 Cor. iv.10. Col. iii.4. St. Joh. xiv.6. 1 John i.1.2.
to live in us, to be Gal. ii.20.
crucified and Romans vi.4. Col. ii.10.
buried in us; and We are said on account of this living Spirit, which we
receive from him, to 1 Cor. xv.49. Comp. wiith Ver. 45.
bear his Image as by our Ib. 1 Cor. xv.45.49.
Souls we bear the Image of Adam: I then conceive my self so far from being
concerned to deny that, by this Word, we receive all the Graces of the Gospel,
as that indeed it is from hence that I infer the necessity of Sacraments as the
only Ordinary Means of partaking of the Word in this sense. And yet it is very
much to be suspected that some of the places, produced by our Adversaries for
proving the efficacy of the Word, are only to be understood of the Word in this
sense. So in 1 Pet. 1.23. Where we are said to be born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God which lives and
abides for ever. The abiding for ever here is not so naturally intelligible of
the permanency of the Decrees of God, as Ps. cxix.89.
elsewhere this Phrase is used, as of the (...) within us. For the Argument
here produced is to prove the permanency of our new life to which we are here
born, that that should also endure for ever, because it is the fruit of this
incorruptible seed. But for that it had not been so proper to argue the
incorruptibleness of the effects of the Divine Decrees; because the same
Decrees which are the reasons why some things are incorruptible, are also the
reason why others are corruptible. But the subsistent (...) is a very proper
Argument for concluding the incorruptibleness of those things which partake of
it. In this sense Life is an usual Epithete of this Word. And from our
partaking of this quickening Spirit, the Apostle concludes the necessity of our
immortality and resurrection. 1 Cor. xv. The only difficulty is that the (...)
here spoken of is called (...), Ver. 25. And yet if St. (...).
Justin Martyr understood the (...) in the Orphaicks of this subsistent (...),
it must seem less strange in the Hebrew Idiom, according to which it is so very
ordinary to put Words for Things, None can doubt but that the Hebrew (...) is
as properly rendered by (...) in the Greek as by (...). And the same way also it
may probably be understood in St. James 1.18. Where our (...) by the Word of
Truth is opposed to the birth whereby Concupiscence is said to bring forth Sin,
and the (...) whereby Sin when it is consummated brings forth Death. Ver. 15.
But this is not so likely to be understood either of the Doctrines of
Concupiscence, or Sin, as of the things themselves. And therefore it will be
also much more suitable to understand our Regeneration by the Word rather of
that Subsistent Being which is so called in the ordinary language of those
times, than of the Doctrine of the Gospel.

Word be meant either the Things or Doctrines discovered to us by the
Revelations of the Gospel, it will not be the least inconsistent with my design
to grant that all the requisites of Salvation may be ascribed to it. For in
this sense it may include the Sacraments themselves. And in this general
indefinite way of Speaking, that is very properly ascribed to the whole which
is performed by any one particular contained under it, as the whole Man is said
to speak though it be only his Tongue which properly performs that office. And
yet of the Word in this sense several of those passages will be found to be
understood which are produced by our Adversaries for proving this efficacy of
the Word Preached. Not of the Preaching of the Doctrines and Institutions of
the Gospel in opposition to the other ways of administering them (which is the
only thing for which they are concerned in this Dispute) but of the whole
complexion of Doctrines and Institutions Preached by the Gospel, in opposition
to those preached by the Law, or by any other Dispensation which might then
pretend to rival it in being a Rule for Manners, and a Guide to Happiness. This
plainly seems to have been meant by St. Paul, when he asks his Galatians,
whether they had received the Spirit by the Works of the Law, Gal. iii.2.
or by the hearing of Faith? Where the hearing of Faith not being opposed to
receiving the Sacraments, but to the Works of the Law, may plainly take in the
whole Gospel Dispensation in opposition to the Legal.

Sacraments, so long as those Causes are not pretended to apply them
immediately to particular Persons. What if St. Mat. xxvi.28.
Remission of Sins be purchased by the blood of Christ? What if we be 1 Pet.
i.3.
begotten to a lively hope by his Resurrection? What if the Act. ii.31.33.
giving of the Spirit be ascribed to it? What if we are said to Romans vi.5.8,
10, 11.
die to Sin by his Death, to be Gal. ii.20.
crucified together with him, to Col. ii.12. iii.1.
rise with him, and to be Romans viii.17. 2 These. i.10.
glorified with him? My interest does not oblige me to pretend that Sacraments
could do these things for us as principal Causes, neither by any power of their
own, nor by any which they may derive from his Institution. It is abundantly
sufficient for my purpose that these are the only Ordinary Means by which we
come to have an Interest in Christ himself, which will consequently give us a
Title to all his other Graces, what means soever he have used to purchase them
for us. It is sufficient that by these we are immediately initiated and
continued in Covenant with him, by virtue whereof we have a Title to his
Promises on what account soever he was pleased to make them, or his Father to
confirm them. It is sufficient that by these we are united to Christ, and
become one Legal Person with him, by which means it comes to pass that what has
been done or suffered by him is as much ours as if we had done and suffered it
our selves. It is sufficient that these are the only Ordinary Means by which he
has promised to communicate, and where we can therefore only be confident to
receive, them. These things, if true, will oblige all to a dependence on the
Sacraments. And none of these are any way disproved in any of these passages of
Scripture.

Gospel, but even to the Preaching it self. The design of those places being
plainly to assert such an efficacy in the Ordinance of Preaching as that they
who enjoy this, may enjoy Grace sufficient for their Salvation, though they
want the Sacraments, and that it may communicate Grace sufficient for the
Salvation of such Persons who have no other Means to trust to, who are in our
Brethrens Circumstances; this will abundantly suffice for my present design, to
show our Brethrens Obligation to depend on the Sacraments. Now that they may
understand how little encouragement they can have so to depend on the Grace
communicated by the Word Preached, as to neglect any Moral diligence, or to
refuse any unsinful condescension, requisite for obteining the External
Sacraments; I shall entreat them seriously to consider;

1. HOW much of that Grace, which accompanied the Preaching of the Word in
those first beginnings of the Gospel of which the Scripture History gives us an
account, was extraordinary, and proper to those times and Persons? And how much
was Ordinary, and fit to be expected now as well as then? It is most certain
that the Grace which then accompanied this Ordinance was incomparably greater
then than what is ordinary now. Our Savior St. Joh. vii.46.
spoke as never man spoke, and the transport and courage of the Apostles was
Act. iv.13.
admired even by their Enemies themselves who had known their Education. And
Ver. 33.
with great power they gave witness to the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and
great grace was upon them all. And the Word of God is observed then to have
Act. xix.20.
grown mightily and prevailed, and thousands Act. ii.41. iv.4.
are said to have been converted at one Sermon, and obdurate and obstinate
Persons were on a sudden, and frequently, changed, and changed in the Orig. c.
cells. L. I.21, 50. L. II.78, 85, 110. L. III.128, 150. Lactant. L. III.26.
Cyprian. Ep. ad Donat.
habitual inclinations of their Wills as well as in the conviction of their
Judgments. And must we therefore expect the like things now? I am sure we do
not find them so. Nay the Apostle appeals to this efficacy of his Preaching as
a sign of his Apostleship, and makes his Auditors who had been so mightily
influenced by him the 1 Cor. ix.2.
Seal of his Apostleship, when he was to assert the dignity of his Apostolical
Office in opposition to the false Apostles, a plain sign that then the power of
an Apostle was incomparably greater than that of ordinary Preachers.

then which our present Preachers cannot pretend to: The external gifts of
Miracles; their Personal (...), with some of which the Preachers of that Age
seem to have been generally endued, but the Apostles more than others; that
zeal and courage and confidence which must needs have made their delivery very
pathetical; the fitness of their expressions to their Auditors Cases, when
those expressions were none of their own, but inspired on the St. Mat. x.19.
particular occasion; that particular gift of 1 Cor. xii.10.
discerning their Auditors Spirits, whereby they were forced to confess that 1
Cor. xiv.25.
God was in them of a truth. Not to mention their unwearied Zeal, the great
toils and dangers they endured in the employment, the shame, and contempt, as
well as the other inconveniences attending it, which must needs possess their
Auditors with very favorable thoughts of their Persons, of their Sincerity and
freedom from sinister designs, and their hearty good will to them, whatever
they might think of the Prudence of their undertaking. And if it was only this
Extraordinary degree of Grace that was then sufficient for the Salvation of the
Persons influenced by it, that will certainly be no Precedent for what Men may
Ordinarily expect now. And where so much was undoubtedly extraordinary, it will
be very difficult to distinguish what was not so. At least this will be
impossible to be known from the bare Historical Records of these times, wherein
so many things in this very Case were extraordinary, which will, at least,
suffice to show how unconcluding such Texts as these are must prove for our
Adversaries purpose, without either express Promises assuring us of their
actual continuance, or immutable reasons from the nature of the things: Which
will confine their Proofs within a narrow compass.

Prophet. On this account Abraham is called a Gen: xx.7.
Prophet; and the Jews, as they pretended all of them, and they alone, to have
this Spirit, so they do on that same account pretend to be a Nation Cozri Part
I. S. 95.103, 109.
of Prophets. Nor are they only the modern Jews alone who make this challenge;
their Ancestors did the same. So the Author of the Book of Wisdom, among other
effects of this heavenly Wisdom which with him is the same with the Divine
Spirit, reckons this that it Wisd. vii.27.
enters into holy Souls making them Sons of God, and Prophets. And it is very
probable that the Christians, who challenged to themselves all the Privileges
of Israel, as being themselves that true Spiritual Israel for whom God
principally designed these favors, did accordingly challenge this Privilege
among the rest, that they received not the Spirit by the works of the Law, but
by the hearing of Faith, Gal. iii.5.
and that this Spirit, which they thus received by means of their Christian
Profession, made them Prophets, according to the passage in Joel ii.28.
Joel thus applied Acts ii.16, 18.
by them. And though the generality of Converts, then, being Heathens, had not
been favorable to Jewish Notions, but those of the then prevailing Gentile
Philosophy; yet even so they had been inclinable to take this Divine Spirit for
a Principle of Prophecy. Every extraordinary Person was, by them, thought
inhabited and influenced by a God, to be capable of conversing with Spirits
when thoroughly purged from matter, to be conscious of the Divine Secrets, to
have a Theurgical power. And what greater thing can be ascribed to true
Prophets than these things, especially when put together? And it is observable
that all the Language and Notions of Mystical Theology are borrowed from them,
which do plainly suppose that these Influences of the Spirit are Extraordinary
and Prophetical in all Souls capable of receiving them. And to this the Apostle
seems to allude when he challenges, in the name of all Christians, to know 1
Cor. ii.16.
the mind of Christ, and when, from the nature of the Spirit, he concludes the
Spiritual man must know the Ib. v. 10, 11.
hidden things of God, because the Spirit of God with which he is endued, is
privy to them as naturally as the Spirit of every Man is privy to his own
Secrets. This discovery of the Divine Secrets is that which most properly
belongs to the office of a Prophet. So God is said to teach David the Ps. LI.6.
(...), and Ps. xxv.14.
the Secret of the Lord is said to be with them that fear him. And this is a
thing to which I suppose our Brethren will not so much as pretend.

that there were some reasons why Persons in that Age should feel extraordinary
emotions upon their hearing the Christian Doctrine preached to them, which were
certainly proper to that Age, and cannot now be urged with any proportionable
parity. This was then to be made a proof of the Truth of that Religion whose
proposal was seconded with such preternatural transports. This was a proof of
our Saviors veracity when they found the event so answerable to his Promises
and Praedictions. This proved him indeed to have a power over the Souls of Men,
and to have the disposal of those hidden influences of the other world when
they found themselves so unaccountably animated and transported beyond what
could have been expected from the rational evidence of the things themselves.
And therefore the Spirit thus given is said to be the Ephesians. I.13. IV.30.
seal of God, the Romans VIII.23.
first fruits of their new inheritance, the 2 Cor. I.22, V.5.
earnest of their promised future possessions, a Ephesians. I.14. Romans VIII.16.
witness of God to the Spirits of them who had it that they were the Children
of God. And St. John tells them of this witness 1 St. John V.10.
of God within them, this Unction 1 St. John II.20, 27.
that should teach them all things, and particularly to distinguish between
pretenders to the 1 St. John IV.1, 2, 3.
Spirit, whether their pretenses were true or false? And 1 St. John IV.13.
hereby they might know whether they dwelt in Christ, or Christ in them,
because he had given them of his Spirit. By which it appears that their having
the Spirit was more notorious to them who had him than their Interest in
Christ. And accordingly the state of the new Covenant, as it was then in the
Apostles times, is so described that God would Joel II.28, 29. Acts II.17, 18.
pour out of his Spirit on all flesh, that all should see visions and dream
dreams; that I. LIVE.13.
all should be taught of God, and so taught as that they should need Heb. V.10,
11.
no other Instructors; that the word of God should dwell Col. III.16.
plentifully in them, in their Deuteronomy. xxx.14. Romans x.8.
mouths, and in their hearts; that even Tongues themselves should be no
argument to them who 1 Cor. XIV.22.
believed, but only to them who did not yet believe. All which things do
certainly imply that they who then had the Spirit could certainly know they had
it, and make an argument of it to prove the Doctrines and Spirits of others,
and much more in themselves. And accordingly wherever this Spirit was given it
seems generally to have discovered it self by some sensible indications in the
(...) by which others were able to discern it as well as he who had it.
Therefore our Savior promises that miraculous signs should generally follow
them which should S. Mark. XVI.17, 18.
believe; and it was by these sensible signs that Simon Acts VIII.18.
Magus, though a professed enemy of the Apostles, was notwithstanding convinced
that the Spirit was given by the Imposition of the Apostles hands, and this by
their Imposition of hands on the generality of those who had been baptized by
St. Philip, that we may not suspect that their Case was then thought
extraordinary. And St. Paul speaking of the (...), tells us that though they
were distributed differently, yet that all had some. And this seems to have
been continued till the Religion was sufficiently propagated, even to St.
Cyprian and Lactantius's times. So far baptized Christians felt that strange
and sudden change in themselves which they could not sufficiently admire, and
could never have believed if they had not felt it. And particularly ordinary
baptized Christians found themselves to have a power over Devils to torment and
vex them, and to force them to quit their Oracles, and to confess themselves to
be seducing Spirits. Now as these sensible indications to the Persons
themselves are, by the confession of all Parties, long since ceased, so also
this reason is ceased of the influences themselves, that the Persons who now
receive the Spirit do not expect any new conviction of the truth of the
Religion by which they receive it, but confess themselves abundantly satisfied
with those Credentials which were exhibited at its first publication. But it is
also further considerable that besides these reasons for the conviction of the
Persons receiving the Spirit in those Ages,

THERE were also (3.) others necessary for the conviction of those Persons who
were to deal with them. Especially when they were to be instructed in something
new of which they were ignorant before. Thus it was necessary that the Holy
Ghost should fall upon Cornelius and his company upon St. Peter's preaching to
them, and before their Baptism, because else the Apostle had not been so well
satisfied that it was his Duty to baptize them, notwithstanding his vision for
that purpose immediately before his coming to them. At least he had wanted that
satisfaction which had been requisite for his defense to others, who would have
been extremely scandalized at him if he had ventured to practice upon a
Revelation made only to himself. We find him expressly making this use of it as
an Argument for his own direction in this affair. Who can forbid water that
these should not be baptized, Acts X.47. Acts XI.17.
who have received the holy Ghost as well as we? And again, If God gave unto
them the same gift as unto us who believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I
that I could hinder God? The necessity hereof then appears by the Apology he
was afterward obliged to make for himself in this particular. And indeed it
was very agreeable to the methods of Prophecy in that Age, for God to instruct
some even inspired Persons themselves by visible signs of his influences upon
others. Thus St. John Baptist himself was directed to the knowledge of our
Savior, That whereas he knew him not himself, John I.33.
he who had sent him to baptize with water, had said unto him, Upon whom thou
shall see the Spirit descend and abiding on him, that is he who baptizeth with
the Holy Ghost. But much more this was requisite then when the matter was of
universal concernment, and where it was convenient for the Prophets reputation
that others should be satisfied, as well as himself, that he might not seem to
impose on them on his single Authority, which was exactly St. Peter's Case here.
Thus the Apostles Authority was recommended to the multitude by the visible
descent of the Holy Ghost upon them at the Feast of Pentecost. Acts II.
But now that we have no hopes of any further Revelation either concerning
things or Persons; but that God has left us entirely to our own natural
Prudence, both for knowing the manner of administering those Sacraments which
have been derived to us from the beginning, and what Persons have a Title to
them; all those gifts of the Spirit which, on this account, were given at the
Preaching of the Word cannot now be expected by us.

it is worth considering in what Preaching of the Word it may be expected,
Whether it may only be expected in the Preaching of such Persons as are sent
and Authorized; Or may also be expected at the Preaching of such as Preach
without Authority, nay in opposition to them who are legally invested with this
Spiritual Authority. And it may be, when our dissenting Brethren have
thoroughly considered the now mentioned Observations, and shall then recollect
their proofs for this influence of the Spirit accompanying the word Preached,
which may reach our present Case, and prove it reasonable for them to expect
the like influences now, possibly they will find this to be the solidest reason
for their purpose to show the parity of the Case now as in the Primitive times,
That, whereas they will hardly find an express and immutable Promise which may
reach our times, the only reason why we may expect the like Assistance now, is
that the Apostolical Office is still continued as to its Ordinaries, though it
have ceased long since as to its Extraordinaries; that they who are called by
Persons Authorized by God to call them are as properly Authorized by God in
their several Successions, as they who were Authorized by him immediately; that
deriving their Authority from God, he must in reason be obliged to second them
in all Exercises of this Authority, relating to the end for which he had
designed it, on the same account as every Supreme Worldly Governor thinks
himself obliged, by the Principles of his Government, to ratify and promote
all the Legal procedures even of his inferior subordinate Officers; and that
God is rather obliged to do this than even worldly Princes themselves, because
indeed the effect of all their Ministry depends on his immediate interposition,
whereas the power of the Sword committed to inferior Magistrates enables them
to do many things without immediate recourse to the Supreme.

Legality of their Call. And however express Promises might have been found to
assure our expectation of the like influences in hearing the word Preached even
in our present Age; yet certainly their actual performance could not be
expected in the hearing of any but Authorized Persons, as no Supreme Prince
can, in reason, be thought obliged to ratify, or second, what any Rebel or
Usurper should presume to proclaim or promise in his name. The boldness of such
an attempt is so far from a just title to a confirmation from the Lawful
Prince, as that it is always thought to deserve the most exemplary punishment.
And if this be the Case, it will serve my end as well as if these influences of
the Spirit were thought to be confined to the Sacraments themselves. For this
will oblige all to as strict a dependence on the Governors of the Church as
the other. For both the Episcopal Clergy will be found to have as just an
Authority, and the Non-Conformists as unjust a one, to Preach the Word, as to
administer the Sacraments; and it is as much in their power to whom they will
Preach, as to whom they will administer the Elements, and consequently it will
be also as much in their power to impose Conditions for the one as for the
other. And indeed my whole design, in confining these expectations to the
Sacraments, is only, by this means, to confine them to the regularly-ordeined
Clergy on account of that Right which they alone have to administer these
Sacraments. But though these Influences had been granted always to accompany
the Word preached, and by whomsoever preached; yet it were fit to be considered
farther,

WHETHER this Grace accompanying this Ordinance be so great as to be able to
supply the want of the Sacraments, at least so great as to secure the Salvation
of those who enjoy this Ordinance whilst they want the Sacraments? That this
may appear, it will be absolutely necessary, that either no grace at all be
conveyed by the Sacraments which may not also be expected in hearing the Word;
or that, if any be conveyed, at least it be not such as is necessary to
Salvation. For if any Grace necessary to Salvation be communicated by the
Sacraments, which is not communicated by Preaching, then still the Sacraments
may be also necessary for the Salvation of such a Person who still enjoys the
Ordinance of Preaching; and therefore he may still be obliged to submit to all
unsinful Impositions in order to the obteining these Sacraments which, on these
accounts, will appear so necessary for his Salvation. But this cannot be much
as plausibly pretended from any of the Texts produced for this purpose by our
Brethren. Where are there any Texts that mention the pardon of their Sins, or
the sanctification or acceptance of their Persons, or their actual
reconciliation, barely on account of that Grace which they had received in
their attendance on the Word preached? Where are they said to be thereby united
to Christ, to be made members of his Body, and to be thereby entitled to his
constant vital influences? These are the effects of the Sacraments, and
whatever Grace may be otherwise supposed communicated in hearing the Word
preached, yet, if it fall short of these, it must also consequently fall short
of administering any solid security for the Salvation of the Persons so
concerned. But where is it indeed that they can find that either the Persons
who had received this Grace, or the Apostles who were sufficiently satisfied
that they had received it, ever thought them secure without that additional
Grace which they were further to expect in the Sacraments? Nay where is it that
after the receiving of this Grace they do not immediately hasten to Baptism?
Nay they are urged and importuned by their Converters to do so. Acts II.37.
Can they deny that the pricking of the heart in St. Peter's Auditors was an
effect of that Grace which accompanied the Word preached by him? Yet after this
we find the Persons themselves further solicitous what they should do. v.37, 38.
We find St. Peter further advising them to repent every one of them, and to be
Baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and that so
they should receive the Holy Ghost. Whence it appears that as yet they had not
received pardon, or the Holy Ghost. Nay further he advises and exhorts them to
save themselves from that untoward Generation, v.40.
a plain sign that all that had been yet done was not sufficient for their
Salvation. What do they think of the Ethiopian converted by St. Philip? He
seems to have been a Proselyte of the Gates, at least, because he came up to
Jerusalem to worship. Acts VIII.27
And he had received all the Grace of the Word read as well as preached. Nay he
had professed to believe that Jesus Christ was the Son of God. v.30, 37.
Yet all this satisfied not him without Baptism. v.36, 38.
And certainly they cannot think the Grace received by St. Paul himself in his
miraculous conversion, inferior to any that had been received by them who had
been converted by the Word preached. And the effects were answerable upon him.
As soon as he had been struck down, he immediately cries out with trembling and
astonishment, Acts IX.6.
Lord what would thou have me to do? v.11.
And he was praying when Ananias was sent to him. And it should seem to be his
excessive pensiveness upon that Providence that occasioned his fasting for
three days together. v.9.
What moral Dispositions could our Brethren themselves have required more from
him for his Salvation? Yet see how Ananias accosts him: And now why tarriest
thou? Acts XXII.16.
Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy Sins, calling upon the name of the
Lord. It seems then, as yet his Sins were not washed away, and this was it that
obliged him to make all possible have to be baptized. And yet the Case of
Cornelius was more remarkable. He was, as to his Person, a devout Man, Acts X.2.
and one who feared God, and did many alms. Nay he had also this Testimony,
that his Prayers and alms had been accepted by God. v.4, 31.
And upon St. Peter's preaching to him, he received so plentiful a proportion of
these gifts of the Spirit which accompany the Word preached, as amazed his
Spectators. v.45.
Yet all this was not thought sufficient to supersede the necessity of Baptism,
or to delay it; but was rather thought an Argument to entitle him to it. Even
Lydia whose heart God is said to have opened, and whose example our Brethren do
so much insist on for proving this efficacy of the Word preached, v.47, 48.
Acts XVI.14, 15.
did not think her self thereby the more excused either from receiving, or
hastening, her Baptism. v.29, 30.
So in the Case of the Jailer, whose excellent demeanor to St. Paul and Silas,
even before his conversion, bespeaks an extraordinary change and a mighty
influence of the Spirit of God upon him, though they told him that if he
believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, he should be saved, and his house; yet by
their proceeding with him they plainly show that their meaning was not that he
should be saved by his Faith without Baptism. For the event was, that he and
his household were immediately baptized upon their profession of this belief.
v.33. Acts XVIII.8. Acts XIX.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
I mention not the Baptism of Crispus the Ruler of the Synagogue, and the other
Corinthians that believed and were baptized with him, nor even of those
Believers at Ephesus, who notwithstanding their having already received the
Baptism of St. John the Baptist, notwithstanding their belief in Christ upon
the same Baptists Preaching, notwithstanding they heard St. Paul himself
Preach, and therefore must in all likelihood have felt that Grace which
followed his Preaching in Persons qualified to receive it, yet remained still
incapable of receiving our Saviors Spirit till they had first received his
Baptism. By all which instances it appears that how great soever the Grace of
God was which then accompanied the Word Preached, yet even then it was not
thought so great as to supersede, I do not say, the Use, but even the Necessity
of Sacraments. So far it is from being reasonable to expect it should do so now
when all confess it is not distributed in so plenteous a measure.

safe condition whilst they have it, though they want the Sacraments and want
them through their own faults, I mean when they are unwilling to purchase them
by unsinful condescensions; Yet because this is the great support of many in
our Age, even who pretend to live Religiously, and I do not doubt do really
mean so too, that satisfy their Consciences with frequenting Sermons, and the
ordinary Prayers which accompany them, whilst in the mean time they
notoriously neglect the Sacraments, even where they may have them on neither
sinful, nor so much as grievous, terms, nay not on such which themselves think
either sinful or grievous, and because this is a Popular mistake which
certainly hinders many Conscientious Persons from discerning that danger in a
state of Schism which they would certainly have discerned, and resented,
otherwise; and because it must needs give greater satisfaction to Prudent
Enquirers to believe that this Grace is not so great as to excuse from
Sacraments when they shall understand Positively, how great it is; it will not
be amiss, on this occasion, to invite our Brethren to some closer thoughts
concerning this matter than possibly they may yet have enterteined. Let me
therefore desire them to consider further,

Whether all the Grace, which is supposed to accompany the Word Preached, be
any more than what is necessary to dispose the Auditors to receive, and
believe, the Truth of the Doctrines Preached to them? Or whether there be any
the least ground to believe that they shall there receive that assistance which
is necessary to help them to practice what they have thus received and
believed? That thus much Grace is necessary for atteining the end of Preaching
will not be doubted of by those who believe the Church's Definitions against
the Pelagians concerning the necessity of Divine Grace to make us willing as
well as able. Voss. Hist. Pelag.
Nay even Julian himself went so far as to grant, at least, Gods illumination.
And this is indeed an eternal immutable reason why the Grace of God should
accompany his Ordinance of Preaching, concerning as well our present Ages as
those of the Apostles. For if this be the Case, that we can neither apprehend
the reasonableness of what is preached to us without the Divine Illumination
extinguishing our carnal Prejudices, and quickening and Spiritualizing our
faculties, nor be willing to perform Conditions till the Divine Grace has has
made us unwilling; it will thence plainly follow that some Divine Grace must be
granted us Antecedently to the performance of Conditions, namely all that Grace
which is requisite to make the Conditions performable by us, that is, all that
which is requisite to make us willing and able to perform them. And because the
Preaching of the Word is the first address made to us in Gods name, and so the
first ordinary step to our conversion, therefore here it is very suitable to
suppose us rather Passive than Active. And therefore if God be supposed indeed
to be in earnest with us in his invitations here proposed, it will be
absolutely necessary that he perform those beginnings for us without which he
knows it impossible that we should perform the rest. But when he has thus put
it in our power to receive conviction by the Word Preached to us, this Word
will direct us whence we are to expect our further supplies, and it will then
be in our Power to go thither for them. And when it is thus in our power to
receive those Assistances which he communicates to us in the use of the
Sacraments, it will then be most agreeable to his design in instituting those
Sacraments as ordinary Means of conveying those Assistances that he should
oblige us to the use of them by refusing to grant them otherwise. For all the
Ordinances being instituted by the same Power, it is for the reputation of the
wise contrivance of them that no one Ordinance should supersede the use of the
other, and that as every Ordinance has its distinct benefit, so there should be
that obligation to keep up the respect due to an Ordinance of Divine
Institution, that none should be encouraged to hope for the benefit but in the
use of the Ordinance. And indeed the only way, to keep up a constant dependence
on an Ordinance, is to confine to it the benefit to be expected by it, and
therefore it is not agreeable with the Rules of the Divine Government to
institute two Ordinary Means of obteining the same benefit, so that it might be
in the power of good Persons to live in a perpetual neglect of one of them, and
it might be in the choice of every particular Person to choose whether of them
he would be pleased to neglect.

NOR is this less agreeable with the Politics of the Divine Government than it
is with the ordinary methods of the Divine Goodness in other Cases. Though he
be very Liberal, yet he is not Prodigal. Though he distribute favors
proportionable to the necessities of all, yet he contrives no more Ordinary
ways for obteining them than what may make them possible to the generality,
Many particular Individuals do want the necessary supports of his Ordinary
Providence when they want the Ordinary Means of obteining them. But much more
he observes this Method of proceeding when the benefits are very excellent. For
these he ordinarily appoints fewer Means, and obliges particular Persons to
greater diligence if they will have them, that they may not fail of those few
ordinary Means. But God is yet further more sparing in his Provisions when the
benefits expected exceed the power of Nature. 2 Kings V.12. S. John IX.7, 11.
Numb. V.17, 18, etc.
No water but that of Jordan was allowed the power of curing Naamans Leprosy.
No Pool but that of Siloam, could recover the blind man's sight. No Water but
that of Jealousy prepared according to the Rules of his own appointment could
discover the Adulteress. It is sufficient in this Case that the methods
prescribed by him be generally in the Power of the Persons concerned; and they
are sufficiently in their Power if, by any Moral diligence, or by any lawful
condescendence, they may be obtained.

Reasons rather than Testimonies. But it may be, when they shall examine their
Testimonies more narrowly, they will find that they will not be applicable to
our present circumstances any farther than parity of reason will make them
hold; and that these are the properest Reasons for judging of the application.
And however this method of Conversion here described do fit our Brethrens
Systems who speak only of the Conversion of professed initiated Christians,
from a bad, or careless, to a good, and considerate, way of living suitably to
their Profession, yet it will certainly better fit those Conversions mentioned
in the Scriptures, from a state of Judaism, and Gentilism, to a belief, and
Profession, of the Christian Religion. Now if this be the Case, not only the
Grace of Conversion is to be expected in this Ministry, and that of a
Conversion not from one Life to another, but only from one Religion to another,
it will thence appear how little comfort can be expected from an attendance on
this Ordinance without the Sacraments. For what comfort can it be only to
believe the Christian Religion true without performance of the Conditions
prescribed by it? Or to know what the Conditions are without ability to perform
them? Or to know where this ability may be had if we do not make use of Means
to come by it? Nay, to make application even to our Brethrens Systems, what
comfort were it, to be convinced of the necessity of a holy Life, nay to be
under the greatest and most serious sense of this necessity, if they want that
further Grace which is necessary to enable them to practice Holiness?
Conditional Promises cannot indeed be valued as Promises to them who find
themselves unable to perform the Conditions. And therefore if this ability to
perform Conditions be only to be expected from the Sacraments, this will be
sufficient to weaken that extreme confidence which many place in the Word
preached without the Sacraments.

Persuasion is all that can, in reason and Prudence, be expected from the Word
Preached, our dissenting Brethren themselves may understand if they shall be
pleased further to consider (7.) that this does fully answer the design of the
Word Preached. The end of all Popular Discourses is only to persuade and
direct, to persuade the Auditory to aim at the End proposed by the Orator, and
to direct them to the most Prudent Means for obteining that End. And therefore
if God do so far assist the Word preached in his name by his Ministers as to
make it effectually persuasive to such as are not deficient to themselves, and
withal the Word Preached direct them further where they may be furnished with
all things necessary for reducing their Convictions to Practice, this will
abundantly answer the end of the Word Preached. If he be withal pleased to
assist them further in the actual Practice of what they are persuaded to be
necessary to be practiced by them, yet that will not concern him as a Proposer
of his own Will, nor consequently as he uses Preaching as a Means suitable for
that purpose; but under another Notion, and therefore will be most proper for
another Ordinance. I confess he might have used Words that should at once
perform what they represent, as he did in the Creation, and continues to do in
the Consecration of the Eucharist, not to the changing of the nature of the
Elements, but to the producing those Graces in the use of them, which so much
exceed the nature of those Elements. But where we have no more express
intimation of his actual pleasure than we have here, there we have no better
way of judging what he is pleased to do than by judging what he is, by his
design, obliged to do. And whatever may be his design in other words, (as those
now mentioned) yet certainly no more than I have said is rational to be
expected in Words of address to Persons, and especially when those Words are
urged with the usual ordinary Arts of Persuasion, as Preaching is, as practiced
by Ministers.

it were well our Adversaries would be pleased to consider, Whether by the
Spirit he meant only an influence of the Spirit, or the Divine Person of the
Spirit himself? If the Person of the Spirit were given, and ordinarily given,
to qualified Hearers of the Word Preached, by virtue of the Ordinance of
Preaching, and this as often as they come duly qualified for hearing it; I
should then confess that the Spirit thus given would serve all Ends of the
Sacraments, and make them unnecessary to such Persons. For the Spirit thus
given would be a Principle of Divine Life in them, and therefore must renew,
and regenerate, and sanctify, them. It must unite them to Christ, for this
Unity is the Unity of the Spirit; and as they who have not the Spirit of Christ
are none of his, so they who have it must be his. This must therefore entitle
them to all that he has done and suffered for them. It must purify them by his
blood. It must make him live and abide in them. It must convey his influences
to them. It must be a Spirit of Adoption in them crying Abba Father, and
assuring them that they in particular are the Sons of God. And what other
favors can be expected from the Spirit which is given in Baptism? It must make
them one Body with him. And that is all that our partaking in one Bread can do;
or, at least, will necessarily infer whatever other favor may be expected in
the Eucharist. And if we may expect new degrees of influence from it, as often
as we come prepared Hearers of the Word Preached, what further interest can we
have to be promoted by receiving the Lords Supper, that can either oblige us to
receive it, or be taken for a likely reason why Christ should require it from
us, who requires nothing from us in the Gospel, but what either already was our
interest, or at least has been made so by his Institution of it, and yet for
some more momentous reason than the bare exercise of our Obedience? But it is
certain many more are influenced by the Spirit than they who are possessed by
him. Caiaphas St. John XI.51.
was influenced by the Spirit. So was Balaam, Numb. xxii.xxiii. 2 S. Pet.
II.15, 16.
and so were all they who are said to have resisted Acts VII.51.
or grieved Ephesians. IV.30.
him. Our Calvinistical Brethren themselves distinguish between common and
special Grace; and, to keep to the now-mentioned Notion of the Spirits making
Prophets, the Jews do also distinguish between a Prophetic instinct and the
Spirit of Prophecy. These first Impulses of the Spirit are so far from making
Men good as that indeed there is no Man so wicked but has them at some time or
other, and it is an aggravation of his wickedness by how many more he has
resisted of them. They are but dispositions and inclinations to good courses;
but do not turn to good will, and good resolutions, till they be consented to.
And no man is to be reputed either good or bad without some kind of consent.
And yet even when they are consented to, they make a man only willing; but for
ability to perform what he is then willing to perform, they leave him in a need
of further Assistances. At least they do not suppose the constant abiding of
the same Spirit, as a constant certain Principle from whom they may still
expect the like influences. Which consideration alone is sufficient to show how
little confidence is to be reposed in them without the Sacraments. Now that
these influences which thus accompany the Word Preached are of this kind, may
appear hence, that wicked Men are as apt to feel them as others in the hearing
of zealous Preachers, and may at the same time strive against them to stifle
and suppress them, and this with too fatal a success. But they who have the
Spirit as an inhabiting enlivening Principle, must, whilst they have it so, be
predominantly influenced by it. This must at least be granted by our
Calvinistical Brethren, who think no proper Grace resistible or amissible,
whereas we daily see many, who have been affected with zealous Sermons, to fall
totally and finally too, as far as we can judge of them. And it is clear in the
Cases of Herod hearing S. Mark VI.20.
St. John Baptist gladly, of Felix hearing St. Paul and Acts XXIV.25.
trembling upon it, and of all those who received the Word with S. Mark IV.16,
17.
gladness, yet fell away in the time of tribulation. This I take at least for
an Argument ad homines. I have intimated others which I my self think more
solid, but I shall not now repeat them.

CHAP. X. The Grace, which may be obtained by Prayer is not sufficient for
Salvation without the Sacraments.
THE CONTENTS.
Exclusive Part proved 2. as to Prayer, That neither this alone, nor the Grace
which may be expected in the use of it, are sufficient for Salvation without
the Sacraments. The Objection proposed.. I.II. The Answer, 1. That no Prayers
can expect acceptance with God but such as suppose the use of Ordinary Means,
and consequently of the Sacraments, if they should prove such.. III. 2. No
Prayers can expect acceptance which are offered by a Sinner, continuing in the
state of Sin, even at the same time when he offers them.. IV. 3. It is more to
be considered what is the Ordinary Means appointed by God, than what is
Ordinarily observed by the best-meaning and wisest Men.. V. 4. It is no way
safe for us to venture on our own Judgments, concerning the design of God in
instituting the Sacraments, to neglect them. This proved by several degrees. It
is hard to know the true design of the Sacraments.. VI. They are not sure that
raising Devotion by the sensible Representations was the principal design of
these Sacraments.. VII. They cannot assure themselves that this use of the
sensible Representations was either the Only, or the Principal, End of the
Sacraments.. VIII. Though they were sure of these things, yet they have no
reason whereby to be assured that God will be pleased with their taking upon
them to judge of his designs, and, by that Means, allowing themselves the
liberty of paying their Obedience at their own Discretion.. IX. 5. Another
design of the Sacraments has been proved, the confederating Subjects into a
Body Politic, and the obliging Subjects in it to a dependence on their
Governors. It is no way convenient that any should be excused from these
Establishments upon pretenses to Perfection. They who were really Perfect would
not make this use of such Pretenses for their own sake.. X. They would not do
it for the sake of the Public.. XI.XII.XIII. They would not do it on account
of the Divine actual Establishment, and the Divine assistances conveyed by the
Sacraments, which are necessary for Perfection of the Person.. XIV. and of his
Prayer.. XV. 6. The Scripture no where allows of such a Degree of Perfection
atteinable, in this Life, as can in reason excuse from the reason of the
Obligation to Ecclesiastical Assemblies. All Members of the Church need the
Gifts of each other.. XVI. They need particularly those Gifts which belong to
Government.. XVII. All the other Members need the Head; which cannot be
understood of Christ, but of Persons eminently Gifted.. XVIII. This Head not a
Head of Dignity only, but also of Influence and Authority.. XIX. Though they
needed not the Gifts of others, yet they are obliged to join themselves in
Ecclesiastical Societies, in regard of the good they may do to others. They are
obliged to this as Platonists and as Christians.. XX.

THE Second Expedient which many are too apt to trust even to the neglect of
the Sacraments is Prayer. And the reason which makes them inclinable to this
excessive confidence in this seems to be, that as it is the Ordinary remedy to
which Men betake themselves when they find themselves destitute of other
supports, so withal the Benefits to be expected by it are not confined to any
one certain kind. But as it is the design of Prayer to make God our Friend, so
when he is made so, and that his good will is gained, all things then seem fit
to be expected from him which are within his power, which is unlimited. And if
this be so, that all things may be expected by Prayer, and that Prayer is the
Ordinary Means of obteining them, it must then indeed follow that there can be
no obligation in interest to use any other Means. And if the Spiritual things
of Religion be so Spiritually transacted in the Soul of Man as this kind of
Persons seem apt to conceive, as to depend on no externals, but that rightly
disposed Souls are capable of receiving them in all times and circumstances,
and Prayer be the Ordinary Means to produce those Dispositions; and that it be
withal one great design of the Christian Institution to restore Religion to its
most natural Spiritual way of management, so that as the nature of the
Spiritual things themselves require no externals for their communication as
Temporals do, nay that Temporal things do so little contribute hereunto as that
they cannot communicate them by any general virtue received from the Divine
Institution, but that God must be present himself immediately to do the things
represented by Externals, it will seem to follow that God may as conveniently
communicate them without them.

Externals were only to raise the Devotion of the Persons by the lively
representation of the things signified by them (as these Persons conceive this
to have been his whole design in them) for then where this Devotion is already
raised by other Means, there can be no need of the Sacraments, at least, to
such Persons; and if there be Ordinary Means more effectual than the Sacraments
themselves, either for raising the Devotion in a more Spiritual way, without
any sensible Representations at all, or where such Representations themselves
might seem necessary for weaker Persons of a less Spiritual apprehension, by
using such as were more lively, such Provisions as these must (on these
Principles) produce the effect, and consequently supersede the use of the
Sacraments themselves. And the design, even of these complyances to sense,
being by degrees to fit Men for more immediate and Spiritual ways of
communication, as they which are more excellent and more agreeable to the
nature of the things themselves; therefore by how much the more Spiritual, the
more excellent they must be also, and the rather to be preferred by Persons
whose improvements are so high as to make them capable of being benefited by
them. But Closet-Devotions are managed in a much more Spiritual way than these
at the Sacraments. And therefore they who, by a devout Meditation on the Death
and Resurrection of Christ in their Closets, can find themselves more sensibly
affected with them than by that sensible representation of them, by going under
water and rising out of it in Baptism, cannot think themselves, on these
Principles, obliged to use that which they find less sensibly to affect them.
And they who by reading the Story of our Saviors Passion, or by using a lively
well^contrived Picture of it, can find themselves raised to a greater
compassion than by seeing it represented in the breaking of a piece of Bread,
or the pouring out some Wine, must needs, on these accounts, be induced to
prefer their private Contemplations before Communion in the Eucharistical
Elements. These are the degrees by which Men come from despising the Authorized
Communion of the place where they are born, and of the Church in which they, or
their Predecessors, were first Baptized, at length to despise all Communion,
and from disparaging Notions of these Ordinances which they have first taken up
only to defend a neglect of them, at length proceed to a contempt of them, and,
on a pretense of their own proficiency beyond the needs of such weak
Assistances, turn Superordinances. I could heartily wish that as many of our
dissenting Brethren as dislike this Consequence would review their own
Principles, and, at least, so far reject them as they find them, on such a
review, to justify this Consequence. If they would do thus with that Equity
and Candor which would become them, they would undoubtedly grant me such
Principles as would much facilitate my present design.

what Men they mean? And in what Cases they ordinarily take this course? It is
only the Practice of wise men that can be urged for a Precedent. And such can
never think it a becoming course, nor can ever expect to be heard in such
Prayers as are not accompanied with their own endeavors, so that the only Case
wherein they have recourse to such Prayers, is only either for a blessing on
the Means when they can procure them, or to supply the want of them when they
cannot. No wise man can with any confidence expect that God should as much as
supply in his Case the want of ordinary Means till he have used his utmost
diligence to procure them, till he have denied all humors of his own, and
submitted to any thing that is no Sin that falls out to be a Condition of
procuring them. So that if there be any Ordinary Means of procuring his
desires, he must first be supposed to have used these before he can with any
reason expect that his Prayers can find acceptance. And therefore this pretense
of the efficacy of Prayer can never encourage any to the neglect of any
Conditions short of Sin that may be requisite to procure the Sacraments
themselves. If there be Ordinary Means appointed for that purpose, it matters
not what the reason is why they are appointed, whether it be any natural
efficacy of the Means themselves, or whether it be only the arbitrary pleasure
of him who has appointed them: The obligation is still the same. While they do
any way put the thing in our power, we must endeavor, if we expect that our
Prayers should prove successful. But suppose God would excuse our want of
endeavor, yet it is further to be considered,

THAT we cannot expect that any Prayers should be heard which are offered by a
Sinner continuing in the state of Sin, even at the same time when he offers
them. He that neglects Ordinary Means, and is guilty of Sin in neglecting them,
cannot expect that God should supply the use of those Means which he wants only
by his own Sin. Now the breach of any Command of God, how positive and
arbitrary soever it may seem, is certainly a Sin, if Obedience be a Duty. So
that the issue of the present Question will be, not whether a devout Prayer may
hope for a gracious acceptance at Gods hands? But whether such a Prayer as
desires the Benefits of the Sacraments whilst the Persons who prays neglects
the use of them, can be indeed be esteemed by God as devout, with what warmth
soever it be offered, and how much soever the Person who offers it, pretends to
feel himself ravished and transported in offering it? If it be sinful, it is
most certain no warmth of the Person can make it really devout. And if it be in
disobedience, it is as certain that it is sinful; and as certain also that the
breach of any Command whatsoever is Disobedience.

it is much more considerable, in this Subject, what is the Ordinary Means
appointed by God, than what is the Course Ordinarily observed even by the
best-meaning and wisest Men? Their good meaning may possibly do something to
excuse and expiate their Sin, but can by no means recommend their Example to us
as a Precedent fit to be imitated by us. It is only the observing the Divine
Institutions that can secure the favor of God, and make him exorable by us.
And unless this be first secured, we can have no confidence in our Prayers. I
have already shown how free God is from any obligation to accept us from his
own Essential Goodness notwithstanding any moral performances or dispositions,
which must needs hold more firmly in Prayer which are only addresses, not
performances. And yet this natural Goodness is all that can be relied on for
the acceptance of these Prayers. His Promises of hearing us, as well as of his
other Graces, are confined to his Covenant, and our interest in that to our
performance of the Conditions, even of all those Conditions which he is pleased
to prescribe. Where these are willingly neglected, we have not so much as his
Goodness to plead for us. It is so far from expiating our other guilts as that
it is it self a new provocation.

IT is no way safe for us to neglect the Sacraments, by venturing on our own
Judgments, concerning the design of God in instituting the Sacraments. The
neglect of things which he has made so sacred must prove a Crime of a very high
nature if it prove one at all, that is, if we should prove mistaken in our
conjectures concerning them. And where the danger is great, the Caution ought
to be so too. They are not the same Probabilities that can excuse us here which
might excuse us in matters of smaller importance. We ought to be very sure of
Gods design here before we run the hazard of practicing our own thoughts
concerning it. But if our Adversaries would be pleased soberly to reflect, what
reason can they have to be so confident of their own Conjectures as a Practice
of this nature would require them to be? Has God told them what his whole
design was? This is not, that I know of, as much as pretended by them. Or are
the natures of the Sacraments themselves so very obvious as that whoever
considers them must needs discover their design? Whosoever thinks so, if any do
so, does not consider why they are called Mysteries, which is the Greek term
answering the Latin, Sacrament. If God designed them as Mysteries, certainly
it must have been his design that the sacredest part of them should not be
known, at least not obviously, but only to Persons very well disposed. And if
so, it is not likely that he would have expressed it in the Scriptures which
all may read, at least not so obviously as that every one should understand it.
And if so, how come they to be so extremely confident in a matter so extremely
obscure which God has designed to conceal from them?

sensible Representations was the principal design of these Sacraments? They
have rather all the reason imaginable to believe otherwise. The Representation
is so weak, and the Elements here made use of so unsuitable, as that any
ordinary prudent Man could have made a better choice, if that had been his only
design, so far they are, in that regard, from discovering a Divine contrivance.
Besides the design of the Gospel being, as themselves think, so much for
Spiritualizing the Divine Worship, it is not likely that God would here have
instituted new representations merely for Representations sake, when he
purpose-came to abolish so many Representations of his own Institution. And
certainly it is much rather likely that he would never have instituted such
Representations whose use should so frequently and so easily fail, than that he
would permit them to be neglected as often as they should do so. If particular
Persons might be excused, as often as they find other Means of raising their
Affections than the Sacramental Representations, who would almost be obliged to
frequent the Sacraments? They that presumed themselves most perfect (and they
are generally the less perfect who presume themselves to be so) would think
themselves disobliged from coming, because they needed no Representations at
all. And, according to the humor of our dissenting Brethren, who generally
disdain all the Externals of Religion as not only vain, but useless to a truly
Religious Soul, the number would be great who would absent themselves on this
account. But even the weaker sort would not want an excuse, that they could
meet with many other sensible Representations which they feel more moving to
themselves than those of the Sacraments. And then what need would there be of
such a formal Preparation of Priests, and Altars, and appointed Solemnities,
when there would be so few, if any, obliged to be present with them? Public
provisions are never made by prudent Governors but upon account of general
necessities. And is it probable that God should make such unalterable
Provisions so little permitted to the Prudence of particular ordinary
Governors, (whose office it is, by the general Principles of Government to
consider and provide for rarely occurring circumstances) for so very few as by
these Principles must be obliged to make use of them?

only, or the principal end of the Sacraments? If they fail in either, they
cannot be excusable. If there be other ends besides the raising their Devotion
by the sensible Representation, then they may be obliged to receive them for
those other ends, though they had not been obliged for this. If it fail of
being the principal end, it will then be much more unreasonable to neglect them
for the principal end, which they do really need, on pretense that they do not
need some other end which is less principal. And it will be impossible to know
whether it be the only, or the principal, end till they can first assure
themselves that they know all the ends designed by God in the Institution of
the Sacraments. For there may be other ends that may have been designed by God,
then for ought they know there are. And then how can they presume that this end
which they pitch on is either the only or the principal one? How do they know
but as there may be more, so there may be also more considerable ones? And
indeed how can they presume to know all the Ends of what God has himself
designed as a Mystery? Is it by the Scriptures? But God who designed them as
Mysteries cannot be supposed to have revealed there what he designed as
Mysteries. Is it therefore by the reasons of the things? But alas! how unable
are they to fathom the depths of Gods designs? How little acquainted with the
intrigues of Providence! How little with the affairs of the other World! How
little with the nature of Spirits! Nay how little with the nature of their own
Souls! These are all necessary for judging right in affairs of this nature, and
no doubt if we had known them very many things would appear very rational which
we now think arbitrary, only because we are ignorant of them. Yet concerning
these things, though we do not know the things, we do at least know our own
Ignorance. But how many things more are there which may be accounted for by God
in instituting the Sacraments concerning which we do not know so much as our
Ignorance? And how can any then be confident that he knows all Gods designs,
especially in such a matter as this, merely by the reasons of the things?
Certainly all these things being considered, it would be much more rational to
presume that these things are not arbitrary because God has been pleased to
continue them under such a Dispensation as the Gospel, than to presume them
arbitrary for no other reason than because we do not know the reasons of them;
and much more rational to presume that something more was designed in them than
bare Representation, because they are imposed in a Dispensation so Spiritual,
and which has taught us so little to esteem sensible Representations, than to
conclude their unobligingness to any, because their principal design is only
sensible Representation.

judge of his designs, and by that means allow themselves the liberty of paying
their Obedience at their own discretion? How do they know but he may value
their Obedience more than he does the moment of the thing which he requires of
them as the instance of it? How do they know but the Precedent of neglecting
their Duty, on pretense of complying with the design of it, may be of worse
consequence to the Public than their reaching the End may be a service to the
Public? It is certain the wisest and most public spirited Politicians have
thought so in many Cases, even concerning the observation of their most
arbitrary commands. It is no doubt but victory is the principal End of all
Generals of Armies, Yet Manlius put his own Son to death for deserting his
Station though he proved victorious by it. Live. L. VIII.7. Plut. in Parall.
Live. VIII.30, 31, 32, 33, 34.
And Fabius very hardly escaped the like punishment from Papyrius Cursor,
though his success was so great as could have been desired or expected from the
most punctual observation of Military Discipline. All the intercession of the
Army, and even of the Senate too, were little enough to procure his pardon, and
that from a Person who had no other Quarrel with him but was concerning the
public interest and the danger of his Precedent. And even among Persons who
proceed not with that extreme vigor and punctuality in observing the strict
measures of Justice, though Governors have so well approved of the designs of
Persons who have done thus as that they have rewarded them for it, yet if they
do not punish, at least they have formally pardoned, them the transgression of
their Duty. And a Pardon implies the same guilt as Punishment does. So that
they seem by no means willing to endure that either many should take this
liberty, or that even the same Person should do it frequently. Nay they never
allow it but in such Cases wherein the advantage of it is extremely
considerable. Nor even in such Cases do they think it allowable, when the Party
concerned, presumes on a design which the Prince had not been pleased to
discover to him. In this Case his Precedent is of very dangerous consequence as
well for the Presumption, in prying into what his Prince was not willing he
should have known, and the great hazard of missing the design it self, as for
his Practice of Disobedience. And certainly no Earthly Prince can be supposed
more concerned for the Public, or more punctual in the Execution of Justice
than God is. Genesis XVIII.25.
The Judge of all the Earth will undoubtedly do Righteousness. This
consideration may suffice to show at least how dangerous this Practice is, as
our Adversaries are concerned for it, to live in a perpetual neglect of the
Sacraments, on pretense of reaching the End of Sacraments by their
Closet-Devotion. This is yet incomparably less excusable than any of the
instances now mentioned. But there is no need thus to implead their Ignorance;
for

I HAVE already endeavored to let them understand another design of the
institution of these Sacraments, that is, the confederating a Body Politic,
and the obliging Subjects in it to a dependence on their Governors. And if
this design hold true, all sorts of Persons will be obliged to communicate in
them notwithstanding the Spiritual nature of the Christian Religion. If God as
a Governor and as a Covenanter be concerned to take care that the Church be
erected into a Body Politic, it will also as much concern him to take care
(when he has done so) that its Rules and Constitutions be punctually observed,
and its Government revered, without which it is impossible for any Body
Politic to subsist. And it is least of all convenient that Men should be
permitted to plead exemption from these establishments upon pretense of their
being perfect. For if this pretense be once allowed, the least perfect will be
found most forward in their pretenses to Perfection, especially if themselves
be also allowed to be Judges in their own Case. And then how can it be expected
that Order should be observed? And from whom can this be expected? It is
certain that Modesty and Humility are the principal ingredients of true
Perfection. And they who were endued really with those virtues, though God
should excuse them from these external Observances, yet they could not find in
their hearts to excuse themselves. They would be too conscious of their own
frailties to think themselves not to stand in need of such Provisions as had
been fitted by God himself for such frailties as he supposed incident to the
generality of the Professors, even of the true Religion. They who were
seriously of St. Paul's temper in believing themselves to be the Ephesians. III.8.
least of all Saints, and the 1 Timothy I.15.
chief of all Sinners, could not pretend that they needed not those reliefs
which were necessary for many whom they would* on these terms, believe to be
greater Saints, and for many whom they would be lieve to be less Criminal, than
themselves. And we have reason to believe that this contrivance of things was
designed by God himself, and that he has therefore made good Men by how much
really the better they are, by so much the less inclinable to take this
Liberty, because he knows how hurtful it would be if they took it.

to themselves, yet certainly it must prove very hurtful to the public, that
those really-weaker Persons, who, even by the Principles of these pretenders to
Perfection, might be supposed to need the Sacraments, should be made less
solicitous for them by this behavior of them from whom they might justly have
expected so much better an example. Which consideration alone were sufficient
to oblige them who are bound to mind not only their own good, but the good of
one another. We find it frequently represented as obligatory in the Scripture.
Thus he who was in himself assured that no meats could contract any real
pollution by being offered in Sacrifice to an Idol, was yet obliged to abstein,
not only from such meats, but from any other also, and that for 1 Cor. VIII.13.
ever, rather than scandalize his weaker Brother by an undue use of his
Liberty. Thus St. Paul shore his head for no other reason but to let the Jews
understand that he Act. XXI.24.
walked orderly in the Law of Moses, and circumcised Acts XVI.3.
Timothy to please them, even after he was himself sufficiently satisfied of
the little availableness of Circumcision; nay 1 Cor. IX.20, 21, 22.
became as a Jew to the Jew, and as a Gentile to the Gentile, and was made all
things unto all Men, that by all means he might save some.

S. Luke II.21, 22.
Circumcision, nor his Mothers Purification, which were transacted in his
younger years, and by such Persons as might probably not have been so well
acquainted then with those reasons of singularity in his Case which might have
justified their exemption from them. When St. John Baptist would have excused
himself from Baptizing him on account of the little availableness of his own
Baptism to so excellent a Person, Our Savior denies not the cogency of his
reasoning for proving the no-necessity of it. Yet however he desists not from
his former demand, only for this reason, that he might St. Mat III.15.
fulfill all Righteousness. And when the tribute of the Temple was demanded from
him, he first proves the unreasonableness of the demand; yet afterward pays it
that he might not S. Matthew. XVII.24, 25, 26, 27.
offend them who understood not the singularity of his Condition.

Perfection desire more? They dare not pretend to a Perfection greater than
that of the Apostle, nay greater than that of our Savior himself. Do they
therefore think themselves less obliged to avoid this scandal? Or can they
better secure themselves from giving it in this practice of their Liberty? If
they had those mean thoughts of themselves as not to apprehend the likelihood
that weaker Persons would be influenced by their example, they could not be so
easily puffed up into so great Opinions of their own Perfection. If they think
Men so utterly unacquainted with their worth, as that, upon account of that
ignorance, they do not think them likely to be influenced by their example;
they are then to consider, whether they will not teach Men by their Practice
that which they disown in their Judgment. For on this Supposition, Men will
take them also for weak Persons. And then the obvious Consequence inferrible
from hence will be that even weak Persons may also neglect the Sacraments. And
yet even in this Case, whether Men value their example or not, yet, at least,
they will be likely to derive their contagion to others, which is sufficient to
render them Responsible to God for the Liberty taken by them. But if they think
Men possessed with great opinions of their worth, but unacquainted with those
particular degrees of proficiency which makes their Case so singular; this is
the thing which will make their example so very dangerous. For the good opinion
they have entertained concerning them will add Authority to their example. And
their ignorance of the singularity of their Case will tempt them to believe it
is not singular at all, and consequently to presume that they may also venture
on it. And this is an inconvenience which they cannot possibly avoid. For the
Arguments by which they are capable of judging concerning their own Perfection
are of such a nature as that they are incapable of being known by any but the
Person concerned in them, if they be indeed capable of being certainly known,
even by him himself.

need any assistance that others might be able to afford them, and though it
were possible God might excuse them from giving their assistance to others less
perfect than themselves, and it were also consequently possible that they might
have been excused from associating themselves in the external Communion of the
visible Church on those accounts; Yet if God have been actually pleased to
order the matter otherwise, both to oblige them to associate themselves, and in
order thereunto to confine the ordinary communication of his Graces to the
Sacraments (as by our Hypothesis we suppose him to have actually done) this is
a reason which will oblige the perfectest Persons that are to frequent the
Sacraments. For suppose they were already so perfect as to need no assistances
from Men; yet can they have the confidence to pretend the same perfection in
reference to God also? They will not, they dare not, pretend themselves so
perfect as to stand in no need of the Divine favor. They cannot challenge
acceptance, even upon the most perfect performance of the Moral Duties of
Religion, were it not that God has been pleased to promise acceptance on the
performance of those Duties. They can neither continue to will nor do, nor
consequently continue in the state of Perfection without new and continued
assistances of the Divine Grace. And if these constant communications of new
Grace without which, the most perfect Persons that are, are not able to perform
their Duty; and if this Title to acceptance, even on performance of Duty,
without which the most perfect performance of Duty were not available, be both
of them confined to the Sacraments, as these are things which the most perfect
that are do stand in need of, so they must also need the Sacraments, if without
them these things be not attainable.

perfection of the Person who prays, but also to the perfection even of his
Prayer it self. Indeed if Prayer were only a lip-labor, a repetition of the
words wherein the Prayer is expressed; if it were only a readiness of inventing
those expressions, or a volubility of the Tongue in pronouncing them; if it
were only a heat of fancy, or a warmth of temper, or a natural Enthusiasm
peculiar to some tempers; if it were any of these things which are usually
mistaken for it by our dissenting Brethren: I should then indeed not wonder
that a perfect Prayer should be separable from the Sacraments, because I know
such a Prayer as this is separable from a good Life it self. But if perfect
Prayer be wholly transacted in the Soul of him that prays; if it be a real and
hearty sense of his want of the things he prays for, and a sincere desire of
them, and an entire Resignation unto the Divine Will in things wherein he
desires the Divine conduct; if it be to think seriously as he speaks, and to be
affected as he thinks; if it be Prayer Ephesians. VI.18.
and supplication in the Spirit, which helps Romans VIII.26.
their infirmities and intercedes with sighs and groans unutterable: then it
will be as impossible to suppose such a Prayer separable from the Sacraments,
as it is to suppose it separable from that Grace which, according to our
Principles, is confined to the Sacraments. Such a Prayer as this must
necessarily suppose a good Man, and he who is perfect in it must be perfect in
goodness too. For this must suppose good inclinations as well as good Actions,
and therefore must suppose extraordinary degrees of Grace, and a fixed
inhabitation of the Spirit as an abiding and enlivening Principle, which if
they be not separable from the Sacraments, this kind of Prayer will also be
inseparable from them. At least these other Popular Principles of Prayer are so
like in their signs, as to us, to the Spirit it self, that it will be, at least
extremely hard, if at all possible, to distinguish them. And therefore it will
be a much surer way of arguing to prove a Prayer imperfect if it proceed not
from the Spirit, than any other Argument can be to prove it perfect distinct
from the Spirit. And we have just reason to suspect that he wants the Spirit
who has neglected the ordinary means of coming by it, what preternatural
transports soever he may feel otherwise. As therefore none can rationally
presume that his Prayer is perfect unless he can be rationally assured that he
has these Assistances of the Spirit which are requisite to make it so; so none
can rationally presume that he has these Assistances, but by his frequenting
the Sacraments themselves, wherein, according to these Principles, these
Assistances are only to be expected. By which way of proceeding, a perfect
Prayer must suppose the use of the Sacraments; so far it will prove from being
an Argument to excuse any from them. Nor are these Assistances necessary only
to make a Prayer perfect, but also to continue it so, and the Sacraments as
necessary to continue these Assistances to a Prayer that is already perfect, as
at first to give them, whilst it was imperfect. Which will oblige all, even
whilst their Prayer is already perfect to continue the use of the Sacraments
if they would continue that Perfection, as well as suppose that they must have
made use of them at first before they could attein to that Perfection.

That the Scripture no where allows such a degree of Perfection attainable, in
this Life, as can in reason excuse, I do not only say, from the obligation to
enter into Ecclesiastical Assemblies, but also, from the reason of that
obligation. One great reason which may oblige any one, in interest, to enter
into a Society, and consequently to submit to such conditions without which he
cannot expect Admission from them who are supposed alone to have the power of
admitting him, is the advantage he may receive from other Members of the
Society who are endued with gifts which he cannot pretend to, and which yet he
finds very necessary for himself. This is the most likely account why a perfect
Person should not need these Assemblies, because such a dependence on others
gifts must necessarily suppose the Person so depending imperfect, at least in
those gifts for which he depends on others. But whether this notion of
Perfection may deserve the name of Perfection properly, or not, it may at least
deserve it comparatively, in regard of others inferior to it. And it is plain
that the Perfection spoken of in Scripture is such as is only gradual, and
still capable of further improvement; and that the highest degree of if
attainable in this Life does not make any so perfect as not to need the gifts
of others. This is the Apostles express Doctrine, even where he speaks of the
gifts of the Spirit: That 1 Cor. xii.11.
he distributes his gifts to every one as it pleases him; That he gives Romans
xii.3, 6.
a certain measure of this miraculous Faith to every one, which I take to be
the true meaning of the (...) mentioned afterward; That 1 Cor. vii.7.
every one has his own gift from God, one after this manner, and another after
that; That to every one of us is given Grace, but Ephesians. iv.7.
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. And accordingly the fullness,
which is that which answers these terms of measure and proportion, is still
ascribed either to Christ S. J^hn I.14, 16. Col. I.19. II.9.
himself, or the Col. I.23.
Church, never to any particular Member. And the very design of the Spirit in
distributing his Graces so very differently is described to be, that he might,
by this means, oblige them to a mutual dependence; That as in the natural Body
the several Members have different employments, and it is by this peculiarity
of employments that the Unity of the whole Body is maintained, he has taken the
same course to oblige them to the same mutual dependence in the Body Mystical.
Here also the several Members have not the same Romans xii.4.
(...), that is the Apostles word. Here also the whole 1 Cor. xii.14, 20
Body is not one Member, but many; and the Apostle takes it to be as
destructive v.19.
to the Body Mystical, as it would be to the Body Natural, if it were
otherwise. And that he means by the difference of Members, not a difference of
Individuals only, but a difference of Office which makes them all necessary to
each other, he plainly shows by his continuation of the same Allegory; That as
in the natural Body v.17.
the Eye needs the Ear to hear by, and the Nose to smell by, as well as both
those Organs need the Eye to see by; so it is also in the Body Mystical: That
as v.21, 22, 23.
the Eye cannot say to the Hand, I have no need of you, nor again the Head to
the Feet, I have no need of you; but by so much the more those Members which
seem to be weaker are yet necessary; and as upon those Members of the Body
which seem to be less honorable we yet bestow the more abundant honor, and
our more uncomely parts have the more abundant comeliness: So by the same
proportion of reason he plainly implies that the more noble and more perfect
gifts and Members must yet not be understood to be so perfect as to stand in no
need of the Assistance of the least perfect ones. And he after tells us that
God has therefore followed our example in the Body Mystical also, in bestowing
v.24, 25.
more abundant honor on those Members which most wanted it, for this very
reason, that there might be no SCHISM in the Body. From whence our Brethren may
be pleased to observe the original of this term, which will be of great
consequence for stating the true Notion of it. But of this I may possibly
discourse more largely in the Second Part. At present I only observe that this
independence of one Member on another, and the consequent withdrawing of the
correspondence of any particular Member from the rest, how perfect soever he
pretends to be, is that which the Apostle stigmatizes here expressly by the
name of Schism.

Romans xii.8.
(...) from whence the name of (...) so frequently given to the Governors of
the Church, and the Cor. xii.28.
(...) are expressly mentioned. And in all likelihood this was the (...) which
was then reputed so necessary for Persons to be ordained, the 1 Timothy iv.14. 2 Timothy I.6.
(...) which St. Timothy received by imposition of hands. And to know who had
this gift there was also in in those Ages given another gift, the (...), the 1 Timothy I.18. IV.14.
Prophesies mentioned concerning St. Timothy, in relation to his Ordination,
the trial by the Spirit in Clem. Romans Ep. ad Cor.
Clemens Romanus, and the Clem. Alexandr. (...). and apud Ews. I.III. Eccl.
Hist. c. 23.
signification of the Spirit in him of Alexandria. For if it had been any
natural gift which they were then so careful should be in Persons to be
ordained by them, it had not been necessary that their Ordainers should have
been endued with another gift to know it. And particularly this gift of the
Spirit to fit Men for Government was a thing the Jews had been so well
acquainted with in the Old-Testament-instances of Numb. xxvii.18, 19, 20, 21,
22, 23.
Joshua, and 1 Samuel x.9.
Saul, and 1 Samuel xvi.13.
David, and many others; nay was the very Mystical Union which the external
Unction did only signify and convey, from which their Governors were called
the 1 Samuel xvi.6. XXIV.6, 10. XXVI.9, 11, 16, 23. 2 Samuel I.14, 16. XIX.21.
XXIII.1. Lam. iv.20. 1 Samuel II.25. 1 Chronicles. vi.42. XVI.22. Ps. CXXXII.10, 17.
LXXXIV.9. LXXXIX.38, 51. Hab. III.13.
Lords Anointed Pursuant whereunto it is that (according to the rules of the
Philosophy then current, which ascribed the Truth of names rather to the
Spiritual things which were represented than to the sensible signs and Types
which represented them) the Spirit it self is called Unction by 1 John II.20,
27.
St. John that, upon these considerations, it is very unlikely that this gift
should have been wanting in those times, where every thing was so fitted to the
Jewish Notions, and wherewithal it was so very necessary for the Christian
themselves though they had less regarded the Jews in this particular than we
find they did in many others. Nay how near a Title even Ecclesiastical
Governors as well as others (how little Spiritual soever they were as to their
Persons,) were then thought to have even to the Extraordinary (...) on account
of that gift of the Spirit which they were supposed to receive upon their
investiture into their Office, appears from this, that the Evangelist gives
this as the reason why even Caiaphas Prophesied, because he was High Priest S.
John XI.51.
that time when he did so. If therefore this was a gift which obliged all that
wanted it to a dependence on them who had it, how much less perfect soever they
were in other regards; then it will plainly follow that no pretense of
Perfection whatsoever could exempt from a dependence on their Governors. Which
will more immediately reach my purpose than if they had depended on the
Sacraments themselves, or any other Exercises, or Solemnities, of the
Ecclesiastical Assemblies.

Head is mentioned as one. Certainly there is no office in the Body Mystical so
suitable with that of the Head in the Body natural as that of Governing. Nor
can it here be understood of Christ, who is indeed frequently called the Head
of the Church, because such a Head is here spoken of as 1 Cor. XII.21.
cannot say to the Feet, I have no need of you, that is, such a Head as is
capable of receiving necessary offices from the other Members, as well as of
performing necessary offices for them. And though it should he understood of
particular Governors, yet it cannot be thought more strange that, in this
Allegory, all particular Governors should be represented under the Metaphore
of one Head than it is that all their Churches, are frequently in the
Scripture, called one Church, and here are represented in a Metaphore exactly
answering the other, that of one Body. And the utmost that can be made of this
expression will only amount to the one Episcopacy in St. de Unit. Eccles.
Cyprian, which he makes common to all particular Bishops. And it deed when one
Body had been mentioned before, it had spoiled the suitableness of the
Metaphore to have mentioned any more than one Head. Though indeed a shorter way
might have been taken for giving an account of this whole matter, that it is
not distinction of Persons, but distinction of Romans XII.4.
Office, which is here taken notice of by the Apostle for the constitution of a
distinct Member. And therefore though the Persons of Governors be different,
yet so long as their office is undoubtedly the same, and it is the same (...)
that qualifies them for that office, that is sufficient to show how they may be
here all accounted for under the Notion of one Head. And if we may have leave
to urge the Allegory further, as the Apostle shows us a Precedent in other the
like Arguments from, and applications of, the same Allegory, that the
dependence of other Members on the Governors of the Church must be as great as
that of the Members of the natural Body on their Head; this will both show how
extremely dangerous it must be for them to be cut off from the Communion of
their Governors on any account, That it must be in an ordinary way as
impossible for such Members to live, as it is for Members of the natural Body
when they are deprived of those influences which they receive from their Head;
and how necessary it must be for them rather to submit to any Conditions short
of Sin than to suffer themselves to be reduced to so dangerous a Condition.

Head, not for a Head of influence and Authority, but of eminency and dignity
only; and I know that this is a Notion used in the Scripture also where the Is.
IX.14, 15.
Head and Tail are taken for the most worthy and unworthy places, as here the
Head and Feet may be taken for the same with the more noble and baser Members
in the next verse, and I know that this Notion is suitable enough to the Ebrew
(...) in the Syriack Idiome. But withal when I consider how much Numb. XXV.15.
Judge. X.18. XI.8, 9, 11. 1 Samuel XV.17. Ps. XVIII.43. Is. VII.8, 9. Hos. I.11.
oftener it is used, even in that style it self, for a Head of influence and
Authority than of dignity only; how much more natural it is in this particular
Allegory, where all things in this Mystical Body of Christ are so exactly
parallelled with the like things in the natural Body, nay where they are
parallelled in this very instance of the derivation of influences from Member
to Member, by which mutual communication the whole Body Mystical is supposed to
be maintained, the same way as the Body natural is; When I consider that this
communication of influences is that which is absolutely necessary to the
Apostles design in this place, to show the mutual need that the Members have of
each other, and that a bare Priority and Posteriority of dignity would be
utterly impertinent to this purpose, and of the two would rather seem to prove
the contrary; When I consider further that according to the customs of those
times it seems very probable that according to the greatness of their Gifts
they were usually entitled to their several Offices, that as their Gifts were
generally given them for the service of the Public* not for themselves, so
they who were found to have the greatest Gifts were generally preferred to the
most eminent Offices; Nay when I consider that at first, before the settlement
of an ordinary Government in the Christian Societies, that is, while they
concorporated themselves with the Jews, and met together with them in their
Synagogues, and as to any external coercion depended also on the Government of
the Synagogue, and before there was an ordinary course taken for deriving
Authority regularly to Posterity (which was not so necessary at first till they
were put upon it either by the gradual decay of these Gifts, or at least of the
Evidences of them, and the multitude of false pretenders to them, or by the
disorderliness of the administration of them in their public Assemblies) the
very Gifts themselves seem immediately, without any further approbation of Man,
to have entitled them to the several Offices, and accordingly the Offices
themselves are reckoned as 1 Cor. XII.28.
Gifts, as indeed the Case now described seems really to have been the Case of
the Corinthians when this Epistle was written, that they were not as yet under
any settled establishment for Government; and St. Paul proves his Apostleship,
among other things, from his Gifts, on which supposition this latter exposition
that the Head and Feet signifying higher and inferior dignity of Gifts must
infer the former, that the same Persons who were so qualified for their Gifts
were accordingly ranked in their Offices in the Church, and the interest they
had in the Government, yet still with this advantage for the former Exposition,
that that does more immediately comply with the Apostles design in showing the
mutual necessity and usefulness of the Members to each other: I say, all these
things being considered, whatever may be thought of this latter Exposition
otherwise, yet it can hardly be thought so peculiar to the Apostles meaning as
to exclude the former, on which I have grounded my Argument.

true as we have proved it false, that some Men might be so perfect, even in
this Life, as not to need the Society of others in regard of any advantage
themselves were capable of receiving by such a Society; yet still they might be
obliged to it, and to submit to all unsinful Conditions of being admitted into
it, on account of the benefit that others might be capable of receiving from
them. Even the Principles of that Philosophy which generally inclines Men to
these Enthusiastic fancies, I mean the Platonical, would have taught them that
they are Tull. Somn. Scipion.
not born for themselves, and that all the good which they are able to do they
are also bound to do by the great design of Societies, and of God himself, if
he design the maintenance of them, whose principal advantage is this, that they
who of themselves are weak may there expect the benefit of all the gifts of
those which are more able. But the Christian Religion does further assure us
that all our Gifts are S. Matthew. xxv.15.
Talents, which we are bound to improve for the good of others as well as our
Selves, and that accordingly we must at length be accountable, not only for the
Principal it self which we have received, but also for the v.27.
improvements we might have made if we had used our utmost diligence in
improving them; and for those Gifts, whose nature is rather to be useful for
others than for the Possessor, they are such wherein Men are principally
obliged to use this diligence; that all Men have some of these; but that they
who are perfect must be supposed to enjoy them in a more plentiful measure: And
indeed none are more capable of doing good to others than they who are perfect
themselves. They must be supposed to be best experienced, their Examples would
be more securely imitated (and in matters of this nature Examples are more
instructive than the most accurate Notions) there would be that pretense which
the vulgar are too apt to make use of, to recommend the very failings of great
Persons by the Authority of the Persons who are guilty of them. These would
approve the Practicableness of Virtue, even in our present Age and
circumstances, and the very reverence which Men would have for such Persons
must needs go far to recommend their advices and Instructions. And yet all
these usefulnesses would be in a great measure lost if this Perfection were
practiced any where else than in the visible Communion of the Church where all
Men might observe it. And particularly, how very useful would they prove to the
Public who had attained to the Perfection of Prayer? How generous and noble,
how free from corruption and base designs, must those excellent Souls prove who
had by this exercise raised themselves above the World, and temporal
considerations? With what a vigorous Zeal? with what courage and confidence,
must they be animated, both to undertake and dispatch their great designs, when
they undertook them purely for the sake of God, and the love of Goodness; and
when they might therefore confidently expect his irresistible assistance? Who
could have the confidence to oppose them when they might justly fear least they
should oppose God himself in doing so? This is an obligation to the Public
from which Perfect Persons are so unlikely to be excused on account of their
Perfection, as that indeed their being supposed Perfect is a stronger Argument
to prove them obnoxious to it.

CHAP. XI. Prayers for Persons out of the Church have no encouragement that
they shall be accepted.
THE CONTENTS.
7. The Scripture gives us no encouragement to believe that any Prayers shall
be heard which are made out of the Communion of the Church, or even in the
behalf of those that are so, excepting those which are for their conversion.
This proved from St. John who was the only Apostle who lived to see the Case of
Separation.. I. St. John xvii.9.. II. Where by being given to Christ is meant a
being given by external Profession.. III. By the World all they are meant who
were out of the visible Society of the Professors of the Christian Doctrine..
IV.V. They are said to be in the World purely for this reason, because they did
not keep to the Society of the Church.. VI. The same thing proved from 1 St.
John v. concerning the Sin unto Death. The Argument according to the
Alexandrian Ms.. VII. According to the Vulgar Reading. The Sin unto Death is
leaving the Oxthodox Party.. VIII.IX.X.XI. The same thing proved from 2. St.
John 10, 11.. XII. Pardon possible for Persons out of the Church's Communion
upon their admission into it, according to the Doctrine of those times, but
much more difficult for Relapsers than others. The latter part proved from 2
Pet. II.21.. XIII. and from Heb. X.25, 26, 27.. XIV.XV. and from Heb. XII.15,
17. 1 John V.16.. XVI. and from other Arguments.. XVII.XVIII. The actual
practice of the Primitive Church not to pray for Spiritual benefits for those
who were not actual Members of the Churches Communion.. XIX.XX. An application
of what has been said.. XXI. Object. That these things are spoken of a total
relapse from Christianity, not from one Party of Christians to another.. XXII.
That Life was properly ascribed to the true Christ as the Messiah according to
the Notions of the Ordinary Jews.. XXIII. and according to the sense of the
generality of the first Converts to Christianity. That the (...) was thought to
be the proper Principle of Life.. XXIV. That the Messiah as Messiah was to be
the (...) also.. XXV. Answ. 1. It were well our Brethren would allow the same
Candor in expounding other Texts produced by them, as they do in these produced
against them.. XXVI. 2. It is not likely that the Antichrists of those times
did generally deny the true Christ to be so.. XXVII.XXVIII.XXIX. 3. Whatever
the occasion was, yet the reasoning used in those Disputes is to prove their
being separated from Christ from their being separated from the External
Communion of the Visible Church.. XXX.

Prayer, I consider further 7. That the Scriptures give us no encouragement to
believe that any Prayers shall be heard which are made out of the Communion of
the Church, or even in the behalf of those who are so, excepting those which
are for their conversion. And no Prayers can be thought to supply the want of
the Sacarments but only such concerning which the Person who makes them may be
confident that they shall find acceptance. I know this will look like a Paradox
to them who have been accustomed to believe otherwise. But I shall entreat them
to consider what I shall say concerning it impartially, because they are very
highly concerned if they should prove mistaken concerning it. Of all the
Apostles St. John is the only Person concerning whom we have reason to be
confident that he lived to see the open separation of the Heretics from the
Church's Communion, at least so as to convene in opposite Assemblies.
Hegesippus assures us that till Trajans time, the Church of Jerusalem, at
least, Apud Eus. L. III. Hist. Eccl. C. 32. L. IV.22.
continued a pure Virgin. So far he says that if there were any of them, they
did yet (...), lurk in dark dens, a Metaphor taken from hurtful Beasts; But
that after the Apostles were all gone by different sorts of deaths, and that
that generation was past of them who had had the honor to hear the Divine
wisdom with their own ears; then began the conspiracy of Atheistical Error by
the deceit of other Masters, who, when none of the Apostles were now left to
confront them, had then the confidence to preach up their (...) in opposition
to the Preaching of the Truth. Though the Case be here mentioned only of
Jerusalem, yet the reason extends to all other places whilst any Member of
the Apostles were living. And it is very probable that it was in memory of
these happy times of Unity as far as he was capable of remembering them, which
was not very far, that St. Ep. ad Florin. apud Eus. L. v. c. 20.
Irenaeus tells us that Polycarp, when he saw the multitude of Heresies in the
second Century used to cry out, O God to what times have thou reserved us! From
St. John therefore we have reason to expect that he should speak more
distinctly to our Case than any of the rest because he lived to see more of it
than they did.

Members of the Church: I John XVII.9.
pray for them. I pray not for the World, but for them whom thou have given me.
And least we should understand this Intercession to have been proper for the
Age wherein it was made, he afterward expressly adds: v.20.
I pray not for them only, but for all those who shall hereafter believe on me
through their word. Here we find that the Prayer of Christ is expressly
confined to those, and those alone, who either then were, or should afterward
be, given him; and that the World is as expressly excluded from the benefit of
his Prayers. It remains therefore only to show who these are who are said to be
given him? and who they are who are signified under the Notion of the World?
Which are the rather to be explained because of the Popular mistakes,
concerning both, of them who choose rather to bring their Notions to the
Scriptures than to deduce them from them.

giving, if we may judge of it by the Parallel expressions here used concerning
it, it will rather imply a giving by external Profession, than of a giving of
Predestination, in the sense wherein Predestination is commonly understood,
that is such as is infallible in the event. For thus it is explained by their
v.8.
knowing assuredly that Christ came from the Father and by their believing that
the Father had sent him. And accordingly they who are opposed to them who are
already given him, that is, they who were to be given him for the future, are
they who should afterward v.20.
believe on him through the word of the Apostles, in the place already
mentioned. And thus Judas said to be v.12.
given him, who yet seems never to have been Christ's otherwise than by an
external Profession: Not by Grace, for he is said to have been a Joh. XII.6.
Thief, and to have had a John VI.70.
Devil in him, before his attempt to betray his Master; Not by Election, in our
Adversaries sense, because he fell away totally and Joh. XVII^12.
finally, and therefore also, by their Principles, could never have been really
in a state of Grace. So he also prays that his Father would v.11.
keep them in his name whom he had given him, which he afterward explains by
v.15.
keeping them from the evil of the World. But giving in our Adversaries sense,
for giving effectually and finally, had employed keeping them, and therefore
could have left no room for a new request of that nature. And the Phrases of
v.11, 12. v.17, 19.
keeping them in his name, and of sanctifying them by the Truth, seem rather to
imply the Party they were of, than any peremptory Decree concerning them what
they should be. That of being in his name seems to imply their being 2 Chronicles.
VII.14. Is. XLIII.7. LXV.1. LXIII.19. Jer. XIV.9. Dan. IX.19.
called by his name as it is expressed in the Old Testament, that is their
owning him for their God, their giving up their names to him, and stiling
themselves his Servants, in opposition to the Gods of the Heathen, and his
owning them for his People in opposition to all other Peoples whatsoever. So
that by keeping them in his name is understood a keeping them in that visible
Society which he was pleased to own for his People. And the same thing is
generally understood in the style of St. John by the term of Truth, the true
Orthodox Party in opposition to all erroneous ones, as appears generally in the
same Apostles Epistles, which seem generally to have been written in the same
later times of that Apostle as his Gospel was, and on the same occasions, and
with the same design, to keep the Persons he wrote to from the Societies of
those Seducers who then began to appear. So to 2 John 4. 3 John 3, 4.
walk in the Truth is plainly to be of the true Communion out of which those
deceivers had departed. And to have 2 John 2.9, 10.
the Truth remaining in them is the same thing with remaining in the Doctrine
of Christ, which is immediately opposed to the receiving him who should bring
another Doctrine. Which plainly implies only an external Profession of that
Doctrine, and a keeping within the Society of them who did so. I need not
multiply instances out of the First Epistle where it seems also to have been
the constant language of this Apostle in the matter we are speaking of. St.
Peter also seems to have used it the same way, where he exhorts 1 Pet. V.12.
and testifies that that was the true Grace wherein they stood to whom he then
wrote, which he does plainly to prevent their falling away to those deceiver of
which he then only Prophesied that they should come, and therefore still
understands it of that visible Society wherein the true Doctrine of the Gospel,
(which was then frequently called (...)) was taught and professed. And that St.
John speaks consonantly to himself even here also in his Gospel, appears
plainly in this that they who are said to have been given him by his Father are
they who have John XVII.6.
kept his word. And what that word is appears also from v. 17. where it is said
to be Truth. So that as the word of Christ rather implies the Doctrine of
Christ than his Commands (at least when it is made to be the same with the
Truth, we have seen it explained so by this Author himself in the forementioned
passage of his Second Epistle) so the keeping of this word as true must
accordingly rather signify an adherence to the Profession of this Doctrine as
true, and consequently a continuing firm to that Society wherein it was taught,
than a practice of its Prescriptions as useful and convenient. And accordingly
when he prays that his Father would v.17.
sanctify them in this Truth, as he plainly implies that they might be in the
Truth without any further Holiness than that of external Profession only; so
the thing he further desires for them is that his Father would further improve
this Profession of the Truth of his Doctrine into a Practice of what they
believed which was that alone which could effectually sanctify them.

World, who are expressly excluded from the benefit of Christ's Prayers, all
they are meant who were out of the visible Society of the Professors of the
Christian Doctrine, at least this seems to be the meaning of it in the
customary style of this Apostle. The World is said not John XVII.25.
to know either Christ or his Father, in the same sense as the Disciples are
said to have known them. And this knowledge is plainly explained in the same
place what it is, that it was their knowledge that Christ was Ib. v.8, 25.
sent by his Father. It seems therefore that the World who in this sense did
not know him, were not they only who denied him in their Works by not
practicing as the belief of his true Mission would have obliged them to do, but
they who denied him even as to the very external Profession. And on the
contrary they who in this sense are said to have known him are they who,
whatever their works were, yet at least joined with others in an external
Profession of a belief that Christ was the Son of God, and the true Messiah,
and a Prophet sent by God. And this is the rather credible to have been St.
John's meaning, because we find it to have been the pretense of the Seducers
alluded to by him, that they also pretended to 1 John ii.4.
know him in owning the Antichrists which they received in his stead. Therefore
it is that in opposition to this pretended knowledge of theirs; he does also so
frequently make use of the same word though in a more justifiable sense. Nor
does he observe this only in his Epistle, but in his 1 John iii.14, 16. v.13,
16. v.15, 18, 19, 20. Joh. xix.35. xxi.24.
Gospel also. As whoever will accurately observe, will find that most of his
peculiar terms, which he seems so much pleased with, and which he therefore
does repeat so frequently, were such as were taken from the pretenses of the
adversaries, and by him challenged as justly due only to the Orthodox
Communion; and that this is observed in his Gospel as well as in his Epistle.

Society of the Church, and all those opposite visible Societies of deceivers
who had departed from the Church. As therefore these Deceivers did pretend only
to the (...), (if this be that from whence the Gnostics received their name,
who seem to have appeared more publicly about these times), and consequently
held all that were not visibly of their parties, to be Irenaus concerning Simon
Magus. Iren. adv. haeres. l. 1. c. 20. ib. c. 21. c. 22.
Quapropter and solvi mundum and liberari eos, qui sunt ejus, ab imperio eorum,
qui mundum fecerunt, repromisit. Concerning Menander: Dare quoque per eam quae
a se doceatur magiam scientiam addidit, ut ipsos qui mundum fecerunt, vincat
Angelos. So Saturninus pretended that the World was made by the seven Angels,
among whom he reckoned the God of the Jews for one, and that the design of
Christ's coming was for the overthrow of him and the other evil Demons, and for
the Salvation of them who believed him, that was of them who had scintillam
vitae ejus, that is of Christ as he was the Principle of Life. So Basilides: c.
23.
Innatum autem and innominatum Patrem videntem perditionem ipsorum misisse
primogenitum Number suum, and hunc esse qui dicitur Christus, in libertatem
credentium ei a potestate eorum qui mundum fabricaverunt. And afterward: Et
liberatos igitur eos qui haec sciant a mundi fabricatoribus Principibus, that
is by their (...). And again: Siquis igitur confitetur, Crucifixum, adhuc hic
servus est, and sub potestate eorum qui corpora secerunt: qui autem negaverit,
liberatus est quidem ab iis, Cognoscit autem dispositionem innati Patris. And
again: Igitur qui haec didicerit, and Angelos omnes cognoverit, and causas
eorum, invisibilem and incomprehensibilem eum Angelis and potestatibus
universis fieri, quemadmodum and Calaucau (so they called the Redeemer himself)
and sicut filium incognitum omnibus esse, sic and ipsos a nemine oportere
cognosci, sed cu ^ sciant ipsi omnes, and per omnes transeant, ipsos omnibus
invisibiles and incognitos esse. Tu enim, aiunt, omnes cognosce, c. 24.
te autem nemo cognoscat. So Carpocrates thought that the Soul of our Savior
himself was herein like the Souls of other men, and that it was only by its
Parity and contempt of these Angels, the makers of the world, that he had that
virtue sent him by which he was enabled to escape them. Ea igitur quae
similiter atque illa Jesu anima potest contemnere mandi fabricatores Archontas,
similiter accipere virtutes ad operandum similia. And accordingly they thought
it possible for them who could despise these makers of the World more than our
Savior himself did, to be more perfect and better than he was. Si quis autem
plus quam ille contempserit ea, quae sunt hic, posse meliorem quam illum esse.
And to this purpose they made use of Magical Superstitions, pretending hereby
to have potestatem ad dominandum jam Principibus and fabricatoribus mundi
hujus. Non solum autem, sed and his omnibus quae in eo sunt facta. More may be
seen to this purpose in that same place concerning their Exposition of the
passage in St. Matthew, Matt. v.25.
Agree with thine Adversary quickly while thou art in the way with him. which
they understand of one of these Angels of the World, as also the Manichees
afterward. Iren. L.i. c. 29.
The same thing also was pretended by Marcion, that the design of Christ's
coming was to dissolve the Law and the Prophets, and all the works of the God
that made the World, whom he also called the Cosmocrator. Many more things
might have been produced to this purpose, if it had been necessary. For it
seems indeed to have been the general sense of the Heretics of those times.
Thence the (...) that the matter was to put upon their heads to make them
invisible to the Demons of the World. Thence their forms of Baptism, Iren.
L.i. c. 18.
wherein the Baptized Person was to make this Profession, (...). Thence their
forms of Prayers, and addresses to be made to every one of these seven Angels
of the World, Orig. c. Cells. L.iv Porphyr. de Abst. L.ii. p. 157. Poem. c. 1.
which may be seen in Origin; not unlike that Form, translated as it should
seem, out of the Egyptian Heathen Ritual of Hermes by Euphantus in Porphyry,
that they might gain their good will for a passage through their respective
Jurisdictions. So also the Author of Poemander, under the name of Trismegistus,
gives a particular account what the soul was to leave behind it at each of the
seven Planets of the (...). And that Author in all likelihood was one of those
early Egyptian Heretics. Nor was there any thing in this whole Hypothesis but
what agreed exactly with the Notions, Vid. Macrob. in some. Scipion. Porph. de
Ant. Nymph. and alios.
and generally with the very language of the Platonists and Pythagoraeans of
that Age. They also made it the great design of their Philosophy to endeavor
the (...) or Regressus Animae, as St. Augustine translates the Title of a Book
of Porphyry on that Subject, as the infelicity that occasioned it was the (...)
or descent of the soul into this World. And the ascent of the soul was not only
out of this inferior part of the World under the Moon, which they conceived
subject to the Demon (...), but also above the seven Spheres, which they
called the (...), because it was from the motion of those seven solid Orbs, and
the proportion between them to each other, that the Music of the Spheres was
occasioned, Plat. in Timaeo.
according to their Doctrine. This inferior World was also made by the Angels,
according to them, lest otherwise it should have been immortal, and it was
their office to tie the (...) which they took out of the (...) given them by
the supreme God, to Bodies. The inferior World was thought subject to the
Planetary influences, and not only to the influences of the Planets themselves,
but those also of the Demons by which they were supposed to be animated. At
least all Bodies were thought to be thus subject to them, and consequently the
Soul it self, according to the greater or lesser grossness of its vehicle,
Porph. de Abst. Orac. Chald.
was conceived to be more or less subject to them. This therefore was the great
work of this Philosophy to free the Soul from these grosser vehicles, which
were the bonds of her captivity. And still the purging of her vehicle, and the
quickening the Principles of her Intellectual Life, made her by degrees more
and more capable of ascending. And as the terrestrial vehicle confined her to
these lower parts of the World, so her freedom from that would only give her
liberty to soar above the Earth, but still her aerial vehicle, would as much
confine her from ascending above the air now as her earthly vehicle did from
ascending above the Earth before. So that till she were divested of all
excepting only her pure atherial vehicle, she could not, according to them,
ascend above the Planetary Spheres from whence she had descended. And therefore
the way to free the Soul from this World, and from those Demons to which it
was subject, was first to free it from these vehicles. And because the Angels
were they who had tied the soul to those vehicles, therefore there was no other
way of ridding the soul of these vehicles, but either by appeasing those
Demons, or overpowering them by the assistance of some more powerful Demons.
And both these ways were taken by the several Sects of the Philosophers as well
as the Gnostics. And particularly one chief means recommended for this purpose
even by the Philosophers, was this (...). So the Pythagoraeans. -- (...), Aur.
Car^.
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).


(...). And that this, among other things, was thought a means of freeing from
the Body, at that was for mounting up into the pure ether, and being made in
their sense a God, appears from the end of those verses, where the Authors give
an account of the benefit their Readers might expect by following their
Prescriptions: (...).
(...).


And so it should seem the Author of Poemander, Poem. c. 4.
expressing the benefits of the Christian Baptism according to the Notions of
the Egyptian Philosophy: (...). For it has already been shown that that Author
is for raising the soul above the World, in the sense already explained, and
probably according to the sense of Basilides. But I must not now digress to
show why I think so.


(...), and therefore subject to the (...), and to be ignorant of this knowledge
which they pretended to as so peculiar to themselves: so the Apostle shows that
this does really belong to the Catholic Society in opposition to all others,
that they know 1 St. John v.20.
Christ and the 1 John ii.13.
Father as they are visible members of that Society which professed the belief
of Christ's Doctrine, and that none other knew them but they; that as they who
are in the Communion of the Church are frequently said not to be Chap. iv.4.
of the World, so all who are not of that Communion are still in Ver. 5.
the World, how much soever they pretend to be above it, the same way as St.
Jude twits the Gnostics who pretended that they themselves were (...) and the
Catholics only, (...)* when he tells them that they, the Gnostics themselves
were only St. Jud. 19.
(...), and like Romans 1.22.
St. Paul's (...). And indeed for any deeper knowledge of the Christian Religion
than a bare belief of the Truth of Christ's Doctrine in general, the Apostles
themselves could not pretend to when Christ spoke these words, no not till the
descent of the Spirit upon them at Pentecost, which was to Joh. xvi.13.
lead them into all truth. It was but little before that they were asking him
concerning his Act. i.6.
restoring the Kingdom to Israel, so that it seems they had so long retained
their old fancies that he should be a temporal Prince, which must needs put
them into very different apprehensions concerning the whole scheme of the
Christian Religion from what it really was. But besides the great design of the
Apostle being to persuade his Readers to keep to one visible Society in
opposition to many others, it had been extremely improper to understand the
World only of ill Livers, seeing there might have been many such in the Society
he persuaded them to continue in, and many otherwise in those which he
persuaded them to avoid. But the sense I have given is as opposite as could
have been thought of, that being out of the visible Church they were in the
World, and so were excluded from this Intercession of Christ of which we are
now speaking.

And from this way of arguing it will appear that they who were out of the
visible Society of the Church are not therefore said to be in the World,
because of the peculiar impiety of the Heresies then taught by them, or because
of the peculiar debauchery of their lives, but purely for this very reason,
because they did not keep to the Society of the Church. This I the rather
observe that our dissenting Brethren of the present Age, who neither teach such
wicked Heresies, nor lead so wicked lives, may not think themselves unconcerned
in this Argument as long as they yet keep themselves at as great a distance
from the visible Society of the Church as they did then. Now this does plainly
follow from the appropriation of the Gnostics, who made all who were not of
their Sect to be of the World, for that very reason because they were not of
it, their Sect, which must therefore also hold proportionably here if the
appropriation be made the same way to the Orthodox Church, as those Seducers
had made it to their own party. And besides, it appears from the constant
adequate opposition between the Orthodox Society and the World, which must
therefore necessarily suppose all who are not of that Society to be therefore
in the World, because there is no third to which they may be supposed
reducible. And accordingly the false Prophets who are said to have gone 1 John
ii.19.
out of the visible Society of the Church, are said to be gone 1 John iv.1. 2 John 7.
into the World, and Demas's forsaking St. Paul's company is ascribed to this,
that he 2 Timothy iv.10.
loved the present World. And plainly St. John gives this as a reason why the
seducers he there speaks of, 1 John iv.5.
spoke of the World, and were heard by the World, because they themselves were
in the World, a plain sign that he had concluded them to have been in the World
for something antecedent to their worldly practices and interests. This may
suffice to show, that they who are out of the visible Communion of the Church
are expressly excluded from the intercession of Christ.

own Prayers, or the Prayers of any others made in their behalf, because none
can pretend to any hopes of acceptance otherwise than by virtue of his general
intercession; yet that our Brethren may understand how constant this Apostle is
to the sense I have given of him: I proceed further, to show that he allows no
hopes of acceptance for any Prayers to be made by such Persons themselves
whilst they continue in that separate Condition, nor for any others in their
behalf, allowing only the exception now mentioned. This appears from what the
same Apostle discourses concerning 1 John v.^
the Sin unto Death. Therefore this sin is said to be of so heinous a nature,
as that Prayers made for any good things for Persons guilty of it, whilst they
continue guilty of it, cannot hope to find acceptance. For when he had told the
Persons to whom he writes, that this was their V.14.
(...), the condition of their confidence of showing their faces before Christ
when he should appear for the destruction of their enemies, mentioned before,
Chap. ii.28. that if they would ask any thing from him he would hear them; he
expressly limits this general encouragement by telling them that what was to be
thus asked by them must be asked, (...), as it is commonly read, or (...),
according to the Alexandrian MS. If this later reading be taken, then the
meaning will be that what they who were on Christ's side in opposition to the
Antichrists there discoursed of throughout that whole Epistle, might alone
expect to have their Prayers heard, and none others. For the phrase is not the
same as in other places where such Prayers are spoken of as are offered for his
sake, or by virtue of his general Intercession. That is (...). But (...) does
frequently signify distribution of Parties. This (...) and (...) signifies
them of those Parties. And the name of Christ is frequently taken for his
Authority. Thus it is said concerning the Heathens, Isa. lxiii.19.
Thou never barest rule over them; they were not called after thy name. Where
bearing Rule, and being called after the name of their Ruler, are taken for the
same thing. And thus the name of Christ is taken elsewhere for the external
Profession of the Christian Religion. So that, according to this reading, the
sense will be, that only they who take Christ's part in opposition to all other
Parties by an external Profession of his Doctrine, and a visible acknowledgment
of his Authority, that is, by owning those visible Governors who can prove
their Authority derived from him, can offer any Prayers to him with any
confidence of a gracious acceptance: which is the very thing I am immediately
concerned to prove. And indeed it is not possible to understand the owning it
as a Party in opposition to all other Parties, without external Communion with
those who are of that Party, and external Submission to the visible Government
of it. For whoever does disown a subordinate Governor who can make out his
Commission, cannot be supposed to own the supreme Governor from whom he
derives his Commission.

according to the will of Christ, and that therefore those Prayers which are
discouraged, are for that very reason to be presumed to be disagreeable to his
Will. And to know what they are on which the Apostles design is particularly
bent, we must have regard to that which follows. And there we find the reason
of this limitation, and what Prayers they are which are agreeable to his Will,
and what are not so: Ver. 16.
If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask,
and shall give him life, to them that sin not unto death (this is the Prayer
supposed to be according to the will of Christ.) There is a sin unto death. I
do not say that he shall pray for it. This is the commonly received reading,
according to which the Prayer of others in behalf of the sinner is spoken of,
that that must not be put up for him who has sinned unto Death; and
consequently, that being put up, it must not expect acceptance because it is
supposed disagreeable to the Will of God. But the vulgar Latin (...) -- Veles.
in var. Lect. 5. vulgata editione collectis.
reading it in the third Person, seems rather to refer it to the Prayer of the
sinner himself, that he must not expect to be heard so long as he continues in
that state. It remains therefore that I now enquire what this sin unto Death
is, that our Brethren may understand how nearly they are concerned in it. And
this will not be so difficult to know as it is commonly conceived if the former
observation be remembered, that it is the Apostles whole design in this Epistle
to deal with whole Parties, and to appropriate to the Orthodox Society what the
Societies of Deceivers had been used to appropriate to themselves as signs that
they were in the Right, and as invitations and allurements to draw Disciples
after them. Now among other things that were then insisted on as Arguments or
advantages of the Orthodox Party, this was one that in the Orthodox Party,
wherever it was, Life was only to be expected, and that all other Parties or
Societies besides were in a state of Death. This was granted on all sides. So
that the Topics for managing the remaining disputes of those times, if they
were to prove their own Party true, was either to infer that it was the true
Party because Life was attainable in it, or to prove the advantage of Life
being attainable in it from the other proofs they had that their own was the
Orthodox Party; or if they were to confute their Adversaries, either to prove
that their way was wrong, because Life was not attainable in the way observed
by them, or to prove that they were in a state of Death, because their way of
serving God was not such as had been appointed by him. It had been easy to
have shown that all the Arguments produced by the Apostle upon this Subject are
reducible to some of these Topics, not only in his Epistle, but his Gospel
also. Where he makes use of the Authority of an Apostle, there his own
Testimony was a sufficient Argument; because such a Person was indeed most
competent for witnessing the Doctrine of his Master, and because his Testimony
was generally revered even by the seducers themselves, as appears from their
backwardness to appear publicly whilst any of the Apostles were living, at
least it was generally revered by those good well meaning persons who might
otherwise have been in danger of being seduced by them. But where he is more
distrustful of his Authority, either in regard of the perverseness of the
persons he had to deal with, or in regard of the peculiar Principles of the
seducers who denied the Authority of his Master himself, which must
consequently overthrow all his credit as an Apostle, which was only to bear
witness to the Doctrine of his Master, yet still the things he either says as
an Apostle, or proves as a Disputant, belong to some of these Topics.

Joh. xx.30, 31.
might believe that Jesus was the Christ the Son of God, and that believing
they might have Life in his Name. Where the name is taken the same way as
formerly for that Party which owned him for the true Messiah, and the Son of
God in opposition to those other Parties, which then followed the Antichrists
or false Christ's, who pretended to that name as well as he. And we see that
Life is immediately made a consequent to his being the true Christ, and the
true Son of God, that he who really was so must give that Life to his
followers. And when he had thus proved the credit of his Master by credentials
much greater than any of his rivals could pretend to, from hence he proves his
own credit as an Apostle: Joh. xxi.24.
This is the Disciple who testifies concerning these things, and who wrote
these things, and we know that his testimony is true. And particularly he
proves his own credibility from his presence at our Saviors Transfiguration,
Joh. i.14.
which was at once an Argument of our Saviors being really such as he
pretended to be, when he was owned for such by God himself, and of the credit
of him as an Apostle, who was made choice of as one of his Lords greatest
favorites to be privy to his most secret concernments. But most fully he
insists on this in the beginning of this Epistle. 1 John i.1, 2.
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have beheld, and our hands have handled of the word of
Life: (And the Life was made manifest, and we have seen it, and bear witness
and declare unto you the Eternal Life which was with the Father, and was
manifested unto us). And immediately after he tells the reason why he so much
urges his Testimony in this particular: Ver. 3.
That which we have seen and heard, that we declare unto you, that ye might
have (...) with us, that is, Communion or Participation rather than Fellowship,
as it is rendered in our English. No doubt meaning in the first place that they
should leave or avoid the external Communion of the Seducers, and join in the
Communion of the Orthodox Church; and in order hereunto implying, 2. That by
doing so, that is, by being externally joined to the Church, they might expect
to be made partakers of the benefits of the Churches Communion, which was a
very proper Argument to induce them to the external Communion; and certainly,
3. Including among those benefits of the Churches Communion, that which he had
before so particularly, nay only, mentioned, that of Life. And therefore seeing
this Life was to be gained by keeping in the Churches Communion, it plainly
follows, that till they had that Communion they must be supposed to want this
Life, and therefore to be in a state of Death.

Disputant: having thus shown that himself owns it as his principal design,
both in his Epistle and his Gospel. That which I shall now observe, is, that
this is mentioned immediately before this whole passage concerning the sin unto
Death. 1 John v.13.
These things I have written unto you that believe on the Name of the Son of
God, that ye may know that ye have Life Eternal. And then follows the farther
privilege of those who enjoy this Life, that they shall be heard in their
Prayers, but with the limitation of which I have already taken notice. And
therefore the Death mentioned on this occasion must in all likelihood be
opposed to the Life here mentioned at the first occasion of introducing it.
Consequently whereunto the sin not unto Death will be such a sin as is
consistent with their being in a state of spiritual Life. And because they Ver.
12.
who have the Son have Life, as the Apostle had told them immediately before;
and they who had Communion with that Party in which he endeavored to confirm
them, had Chap. i.3.
Communion also with the Father and the Son; therefore none of those sins which
did not cut them off from the Orthodox Party could be unto Death, but were such
for which their Prayers for forgiveness, might be heard, on the conditions of
Repentance and amendment. Nay, on these terms he assures them of a (...), a
confidence of being heard in such Prayers. And that they might not wonder that
he now supposed even these persons capable of sinning, though he had told them
before that Chap. iii.9.
he that is born of God sins not, nay, cannot sin; he therefore adds, that
every unrighteousness, (...) (opposed to (...) which in the Hellenistical style
is frequently taken for that eminent degree of Righteousness, which the Cicer.
Off. L.i.
Greeks call (...)) that is, every failure of an eminent degree of
Righteousness, which might be very capable of befalling even Righteous Persons
themselves, but Righteous in an inferior degree, was sin, and that by this
means it came to be very possible that there might be a sin not unto Death.
Which exactly agrees with what he had said Chap. i.7, 8, 9, 10. ii.1, 2.
before concerning these sins, even of such Persons: but especially where he
said, If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous. And he is the propitiation for our sins. For that is certainly the
ground of the 1 John v.14.
(...) mentioned here. For Christ is by his Office an Advocate for all his
Church, but not for those who are out of it, especially as their case stood
then with them, who maintained other false Christ's in opposition to him.

Chap. v.12.
he who has not the Son, has not Life, and he who has not Life is certainly in
a state of Death; therefore whatever sin does deprive of this Communion with
the Son, that must consequently be a sin unto Death. It must be unto Death,
both as it self deprives of the principle of Life, and as it makes all the
other sins and lapses such a person may be guilty of, unpardonable, though he
should amend them, without a change of his state, by depriving him of the
benefit of Christ's Intercession for him, by virtue whereof alone he can expect
that any Prayers himself can make for pardon can prove acceptable. Now that
such a Person cannot expect the Benefit of the Intercession of Christ, I have
already proved from the Doctrine of the same Apostle in his Gospel.

pray for Persons out of the Churches Communion, especially for such as had
separated themselves from it, (for concerning such only the Apostle speaks, and
concerning such alone I desire to be understood;) nay, that they thought such
Prayers to be sins, and so disagreeable to the will of God, as was implied in
the passage already mentioned, appears plainly from the second Epistle, where
the Author charges them to whom he wrote, that 2 John x.11.
if any came unto them, and did not bring with him the Doctrine of the true
Christ, they should not receive him into their houses, not give him the jus
Hospitii, which was then a part of Communion; nay, more than so, should not bid
him (...), the usual Greek form of civil Salutation at their first meeting, to
which (...) was answerable at their parting. And that for this reason, because
he that should bid him (...), should thereby make himself a partaker of his
evil deeds. By which it appears, that he who used only this civil Salutation to
such a Person, sinned in doing so, and yet of all Prayers this seems to have
had the least of a Prayer in it.

1 John ii.1.
Propitiation, not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world;
Where certainly the whole World opposed to us must imply those who are at
present out of the Communion of the Church. And seeing Christ is the
Propitiation even for their sins also, they also may expect to have their
Prayers for pardon heard on his account, upon condition of their repentance,
and entering into the Churches Communion. And accordingly they are also
mentioned in our Saviors Intercession, where he also prays for them who should
afterward Joh. xvii.20.
believe on him on the Apostles Preaching. And therefore also St. Paul exhorts
that 1 Timothy ii.1.
Prayers, etc. should be offered for all men, and says it is good and
acceptable to God to do so, for this reason, because he wills Ver. 3, 4.
that all men should be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the Truth, and
that Christ has therefore also given himself Ver. 6.
a ransom for all. So Cornelius's Prayers were heard Act. x.4.
before his Baptism. But all this might be true though all men were allowed,
only once, the liberty of being admitted into the Church. And it is certain
that the case of Desertors is described in the Scriptures as much more
desperate than it would have been if they had never been of the Communion
deserted by them. As all Persons who were out of the Communion of the Church
were supposed to be under the power of the Devil, and accordingly, casting out
of the Church is the same thing with 1 Cor. v.5.
delivering over to Satan: so our Savior himself describes the condition of a
Desertor to be so much worse than it was at his first reception, and his last
end to be so much worse than the first, that if he had one Devil at his first
reception, he has Matt. xii.43, 44, 45. Luke xi 24, 25, 26.
seven (which is usually the number used in Scripture for perfection) at his
Desertion, and those more wicked than that which first possessed him. So also
St. Peter; 2 Pet. ii.21.
It had been better for them that they had not known the way of Righteousness,
than having known it, to turn from the holy commandment which had been given
them. For it is happened to them according to the true Proverb, The dog is
returned to his own vomit, and the sow that is washed to her wallowing in the
mire.

Hebrews is very severe in this case; especially that passage in the tenth
Chapter: where having persuaded them not to Heb. x.25.
forsake the assembling of themselves together, as the manner of some was, He
immediately gives this reason why they should not do so. V.26, 27.
For if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment and fiery indignation, which should devour the adversaries. Here, by
the connection, it is very plain that the forsaking of the Assemblies, the
visible Communion of the Church, is the sin here spoken of, which will also
give light to other parallel places in this Epistle, particularly that in the
6th Chapter. And concerning this it is expressly said that there remains no more
Sacrifice even for the other sins of those who are guilty of this. This plainly
depends on what he had observed before V.11, 12.
concerning the several daily Sacrifices offered under the Law, to which the
one only Sacrifice of Christ was answerable under the Gospel. From whence he
argues, that they who had forfeited their interest in this one Sacrifice must
not expect any relief by any other, because the dispensation of the Gospel
affords no other; no, nor any other repetition of this one Sacrifice which is
but Chap. x.26.
once offered, neither daily, nor once a year, as those under the Law; nor that
any further dispensation can be expected by them who fail of a relief by this,
because the only reason why the Law allowed a further dispensation was its own
imperfection and insufficiency to perfect its observers: but the Gospel is
perfect, and its Salvation (...), for ever. Nay, he further urges the Argument,
that even the Law it self allowed no Sacrifice for Apostatizers, Heb. x.28.
not from its Practice, but from its Religion. For the place alluded to is
certainly that of Deuteronomy. xvii, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. especially compared with Chap.
xiii. for it is the worshipping of other Gods, the transgressing the Covenant,
Deuteronomy. xiii.6, 7, 13. xvii.2, 3, that is the (...) the despising of the Law,
Heb. x.28. and the (...), Heb. xi.2. The (...) here, Heb. x.28. seems to allude
to, Deuteronomy. xiii.8. The two or three witnesses here are also mentioned expressly
in that very case, Deuteronomy. xvii.6. And accordingly he argues, that they who offer
the same despite to the Gospel, not by transgressing its particular Precepts,
but by disowning the very Covenant of it (which he supposes them to do who
forsook the Christian Assemblies) must be liable to a much sorer punishment.
Because hereby he Ver. 29.
trampled under foot the Son of God, and counted the blood of the Covenant, by
which he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and had done despite unto the spirit
of Grace. For these are the privileges of the New Covenant, which he had been
formerly so much commending above the old one of Moses, which must therefore
aggravate any contempt that may be offered to this beyond the contempt of the
Law of Moses. And accordingly this sorer punishment allotted for this contempt,
is greater than that of stoning which was the highest that was proper to be
inflicted by the highest Legal Judicatories, and which was the punishment
appointed for this very crime, the now-mentioned place of Deuteronomy. Exactly
the same way as our Savior expresses the greater severity of the Gospel
Punishment above the Legal by this same instance of Matt. v.22.
fire, after he had mentioned the inferior degrees by two of the supreme
Judicatories, the (...) that of the Ordinary City Sanhedrims, consisting of
xxiii. and the (...), properly so called the great Sanhedrim of lxxii. at
Jerusalem. And indeed this punishment of fire is that the Apostles always
mention as the punishment, not only of those who finally persist in opposing
the Gospel, but also, and more particularly of them who should Apostatize to
them.

Covenant-Assemblies, do thereby forfeit their interest in the Covenant it
self; nay, are reputed despisers of the Covenant it self, which exactly agrees
with the Principles of which I have been hitherto discoursing; and that they
who do so have no interest in the Sacrifice of Christ, nor in any other, which
indeed will cut them off from any benefit of Prayers, if we consider, that
Sacrifices are only Solemnities of Prayers; and particularly, that Christ's
intercession does principally consist in his presenting to his Father the
memory of his own Heb. vii.25, 27. ix.7, 8, 9, 24, 25.
Sacrifice once offered for us here on earth, as the intercession of the
High Priest among the Jews consisted in his presenting the blood of the
Sacrifice, which had been offered without, before the Mercy-seat in the Holy of
Holies, and that this is the very Doctrine of this Author concerning it; and
that it is only on this account of the Sacrifice of Christ that any Prayers of
men can expect to find acceptance, so that they who are defeated of their
expectations this way, cannot expect that their Prayers should be accepted in
the use of any other way.

Church Assemblies, to whom it appears that, according to this exposition of
it, it will no way agree (which certainly must needs be an acceptable piece of
Service to those who have suffered by their common misunderstandings concerning
it, and must oblige all to keep close to the Churches Communion as they would
secure themselves from being concerned in it) and that our Adversaries may
understand how far themselves contribute to the bringing Persons under the
discomforts of this Text, which themselves account so formidable, whilst they
endeavor to withdraw them from the Regular Church Assemblies. Thus much, at
least, seems certain, that if any be concerned in this Text in our present Age,
these separaters are the Persons most likely to be concerned in it. But that
they may see how constant this Author is to himself in this Doctrine, there is
another Parallel place to this purpose in the 12th Chapter; Heb. xii.15.
where having warned them that they should not fall short of the Grace of God,
(which is the term whereby the Gospel is usually expressed) to show the danger
of doing so, he produces the example of Ver. 17.
Esau, who though he afterward desired to inherit the blessing, was yet
rejected, and found no place of repentance, though be sought it carefully with
tears. And if this be the case of Lapsors, to be like the Transgressors of
Moses's Law, to die without Mercy, to be like Esau, to find no place of
Repentance; nay, not to have their Prayers heard for it, though they should be
as ^arnest for it as he was for the Blessing, though they should seek it
carefully, and even with Tears; then I doubt it will be too likely to expound
St. John's words, 1 John v.16.
(...), not of the sins which such Persons are guilty of, who are in a state of
Death, but of that very sin of lapsing from the Church, which at first reduced
them into that state, that he durst not encourage them to Pray for forgiveness
of it with any confidence that they should find acceptance in such Prayers.

limittedness of the day of Grace do prove the thing they are produced for:
Which is the rather apposite to pur present purpose, because this Author to the
Hebrews makes the time of adhering to the Church Assemblies to be the day Heb.
iii.13.
of Grace, if he carry on the same design in that place as in the 10th Chapter.
And indeed the (...) in the 3d Chapter, seems to make it exactly Parallel with
the (...) in the Heb. x.25.
10th. and to express the very use of their Ecclesiastical Assemblies. And what
do we think was the use of that ceremony of shaking off the dust of their feet
against refractory Persons, for a testimony against them, which was instituted
by our Savior himself, with a promise that he would ratify their censures in
using it, that it should be x.14, 15. Mark. vi.11. Luke ix.5. x.11, 12.
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, than for such
Persons on whom these censures should be inflicted? Why do we find St. Paul,
Act. xiii.51. xviii.6.
when he used these censures, immediately to desert the Society of those
against whom he had used them, and to forbear the use of any farther m^ans for
their recovery, if he had not thought the condition of such Persons desperate,
and the use of any further means unavailable for their good? And if they dealt
so with those who never yet had received the Gospel, on their first addresses
to them, when they had behaved themselves very obstinately and perversely; and
yet withal profess that the condition of Lapser^ is much worse than if they
never had received the Gospel: it must follow, that whatever was employed by
that ceremony must much rather agree to these Apostates, than to those to whom
it was used.

1 Cor. xvi.22.
Anathema Maranatha against those who loved not the Lord Jesus, if by not
loving our Lord Jesus be meant Apostatizing from the visible Profession of his
Doctrine, and the visible Communion of those who were united in that
Profession, as a Dr. Hammond.
Learned Man has proved; and if by Maranatha be meant the same degree of
Excommunication in the Syriack Idiome, with that which the Jews in the ordinary
Hebrew Idiome, call Shammat^a, as there is very little doubt but it is, this
will also suppose the Persons, against whom it was used, in the same condition
incapable of being benefited by Prayers, which were afforded them under the
first censures, but denied them under the last, which was a consignation of
them to the Judgment of God himself. And indeed the fiery indignation which
should devour the Adversaries mentioned in the Heb. x.27.
Hebrews, as it is frequently mentioned as the punishment of refractory Persons
and Apostates, so the time allotted for the infliction of this punishment is
still determined to the 2 Thessalonians. i.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. St. Jud. 13.14, 15.
coming of the Lord, which exactly describes the condition of Persons described
in this Sentence. However, the least that can be inferred from these places
concerning the desperate condition of Relapsers, is that, at least, they have
not that confidence of being received, even upon their return, without complete
satisfaction which those have who at first come over to the Christian
Profession; which was unanimously granted by the Catholic Church, even in
those times when the Novatian Heresy was unanimously condemned by them; and
that Relapsing is a sin of so great guilt, as, though every inferior degree of
it be not unpardonable, yet becomes easily so when it is persisted in with any
great degree of obstinacy and obduration, and which withal, of its own nature,
is more likely to come to that degree than other sins which are not naturally
so placular, which is a very prudent sufficient reason of that particular
degree of zeal which the sacred Writers make use of against this rather than
any other sin, and which may withal as nearly concern our Brethren, and oblige
them to recover themselves out of the danger, as it did those to whom these
things were addressed by the Apostles. And indeed I am very apt to believe that
this was the true sense of the sacred Writers. But concerning the Novatian
Heresy I have elsewhere Proleg. ad D. Stearne de Obstin.
discoursed as much as may suffice for our present concernment. And thither I
refer my Reader.

impossible to hope, or not impossible, that the Prayers of Persons out of the
Churches Communion might be heard for their reconciliation, yet there can be no
reason to admire that this should have been the Practice of the Church, to
forbear Praying for Spiritual Benefit of Religion for Persons, who, as yet,
were not actual members of the Churches Communion, nay, to distrust their being
heard in such Prayers, if they should have made them. I will not now mention
any Arguments taken from the reason of the thing, but only such as may clear
the actual Practice of the Church. And certainly there cannot be a more likely
Precedent for the Church's behavior in this particular, than our Saviors
first instructions to his Disciples when he sent them forth to preach the
Gospel. And they were these. St. Matt. x.12, 13.
When ye come into any house salute it. And if the house be worthy, let your
peace come upon it; but if it be not worthy, let your peace return unto you. I
need not warn that the wishing Peace among the Jews was the same customary form
of Salutation, as (...) was among the Greeks. It appears sufficiently from the
Text it self, to go no further, where Salutation mentioned in the former verse
is explained in the latter by letting their Peace come upon it. And
particularly, that by this form of Peace all Prosperity is understood, but
especially that of their Ecclesiastical state. So it appears when the Psalmist
is so earnest in exhorting every Pious Person to Psalm. cxxii.6.
pray for the peace of Jerusalem. And therefore when it is said that in case
the house where they were proved not worthy, their Peace should return to
themselves, the meaning seems plainly the same with that already observed in
the 2d Epistle of St. John, that they should forbear those Salutations, and
consequently that they should not presume to pray for any of those Spiritual
good things as were signified by them, for such Persons as these were; and
indeed he gave them no encouragement to expect that such Prayers should be
heard, because he did not undertake to ratify them as he did where the Persons
were worthy. And accordingly as this form of Salutation is used in several of
the Apostles Epistles, so it is never used but to those who were in the
Church's Communion; nay, frequently this limitation is expressly inserted. St.
Paul prays for Peace, but it is only to the Romans i.7. 1 Cor. i.2, 3. 2 Cor.
i.1, 2. Ephesians. i.v.2. Phil. i.1, 2. Col. i.1, 2.
Saints, to them that Ephesians. vi.24.
loved the Lord Jesus, (...) without following any of his Rivals, to the Gal.
i.2, 3. 1 Thessalonians. i.1. 2 Thessalonians. i.1, 2. Ephesians. vi.23.
Churches and the Brethren, to them that walk according to the Gal. vi.16.
Rule, and at the utmost extends his wish no further than to the whole Ib.
Israel of God, and to them that 1 Cor. i.2.
every where call on the name of the Lord Jesus. St. John 2 John i.2.3.
the Elder does so too, but it is only for such as are in the Truth, and for
this very cause, because they were so. I mention not other places in their
writings where the particularity of their address required this limitation.

Jews, they did so appropriate Spiritual favors to themselves, Sanhedr. cap.
10*
as that they did not allow any Nations a portion in the World to come, how
excellent lives soever they might lead, whilst yet they continued in their
National distinction. And therefore it must have been extremely vain to have
prayed for any such thing for them, that I may not now take notice of that
contempt and hatred of all other Nations but themselves, which we see plainy
possessed them by the Histories of the first times of Christianity. And it is
very observable that the great design of the Apostles, and that which, no
doubt, very much facilitated the progress of their Doctrine with many others in
that Age, who had hardly ever been induced to have received it otherwise, being
not to overthrow the confinement of these Promises (which are the foundation of
the Prayers we are speaking of) to Israel, but only the confinement to the
carnal Israel, to the seed of Abraham's flesh rather than of his faith; we have
very great reason to believe that those great multitudes of them who came over
to the Christian Religion on these terms, and who would not have done so on any
other, must still have believed this confinement of the Promises to the
Spiritual Israel. And considering withal that of the three Ceremonies of
initiation, even of the carnal-Israelites, only two were disliked by those
first Preachers of the Christian Religion, viz. those of Circumcision and
Sacrifice; but that of Baptism was so well approved by them, as that they did
not only receive it from the Jews as they had found it, but also endeavored to
prove that it had been prefigured and prophesied of, even in the Old Testament,
as the proper way of distinguishing the Spiritual Israelite from others, as it
had been formerly of the carnal Israelite; they must, on these Principles, have
been inclinable to believe that herein the carnal and the Spiritual Israelite
agreed, and therefore that still the Promises were confined, though not to
Circumcised, yet at least to Baptized Persons. And this being an error (if
indeed it had been one) so obviously following from the Principles by which the
generality of them were then made Christians; and being so likely to be taken
up by those who had been made Christians on those Principles, as recommended to
them with the same Authority which had made their Christianity it self seem
credible to them: it had highly concerned them who had used such Principles to
them to have warned them of the error of such a consequence.

Intercession of Christ, no Interest in that one perfect Sacrifice of his, nor
hopes of any other: If they have no Title, even to the Prayers of good
Christians for any Spiritual favors for them whilst they continue in that
condition, excepting only that one for their Conversion: If such Prayers as
should be offered for them cannot be offered with any confidence of being
heard, because they are not agreeable to the Divine Will; nay, if they be so
far from any hopes of acceptance as that they rather provoke God against them
who offer them, by making them partakers of the sins of those for whom they are
offered. If at least, neither they, nor the Persons who need the relief of such
Prayers, have any Promise of being heard in them, and therefore must at length
be left to the extraordinary uncovenanted mercies of God, Chap. 2^
which we have already shown how very weak and uncertain a support it is to
them who have no better confidence; nay, if it should prove true that Desertors
of the Church's Communion, on any pretense whatsoever, though it be that of
Perfection, have not the very hopes of being heard in such Prayers as should be
offered by themselves or others even for their Conversion it self, which I only
propose as a thing too much, at least, in danger of being the sense of the
places produced for it. I say, if these things should prove true, or even prove
so much as probable to be so; it will concern them all to be, at least, more
solicitous for finding out the true Communion, than as yet they seem to be,
when their error is like to prove of so fatal consequence, if they should prove
to be mistaken concerning it. At least it will follow (what I am at present
only concerned for) that no pretense of Closet-Prayer without the Sacraments
can supply the use of the Sacraments, when they are so far from being heard for
those great and necessary Spiritual favors which are procured in the
Sacraments, as that they have no hopes of being heard at all, if the Sacraments
be neglected for them. But the reasons given by St. John through the current of
his whole Epistle, why such Prayers should not be heard, are yet more
formidable, that they who are not in the true Communion are in a state of
Death, that they are in the World, how much soever they pretend to have escaped
out of it, that they are really in darkness what Light soever they pretend to,
which comes more immediately home to the case of these Enthusiastic Persons
with whom I am at present dealing.

then was a forsaking, at least of the external Profession of the Christian
Religion it self, whether upon the forsaking them they went over to the Heathen
Idolatries, or to the Jewish Law, or kept themselves from all external
Profession of any Religion whatsoever, so to avoid the Persecutions which
attended the external Profession of Christianity. But that now there is no
necessity of this, seeing the several Parties are all agreed in this, in the
external Profession of the Christian Religion. That indeed the Reasons here
urged for showing the danger of withdrawing from the public Assemblies do only
concern the Christian Religion in general, not any particular Party of it in
contradistinction to others. That the Reason why Separaters were supposed to be
in a state of Death, was because such their separation divided them from Christ
who is their Life. That this derivation of Life was from Christ himself, and
Christ alone, according to whatever Hypothesis we understand it, whether of the
Palestines or Hellenistical Jews. For the Jews generally expected that the true
Messiah should be the Author of Life to them; and accordingly it is urged by
St. John, not to discriminate one Christian Communion from another, but to
discriminate the Christian Communion from the Antichristian, that is, indeed
the Professors of the true Christ from the Professors of those who falsely
pretended to his name. For certainly the Antichrists in St. John seem to be the
same with the false Christ's prophesied of by the true Matt. xxiv.24. Mark.
xiii.22.
Christ himself in the Gospel, and concerning those our Savior himself had
warned them, that they should pretended to be Christ's themselves, and therefore
that they should Matt. xxiv.5.23. Mark. xiii.6.23. Luke xvii.23. xxi.8.
come in his name, because they would take his name upon them. And indeed the
current of the reasoning of the whole Epistle does seem plainly to suppose this
Notion.

Jews Vid. Maimon. in Chap. x. Sanhedr. Edit. Poco^k. p. 159. Coch in Exc. Gem.
Sanhedr. Cap. 11. p. 317. Buxtorf. Syn. Jud. c. 50.
in which they ascribed Life to the Messiah, all that they could mean by it
could only be that portion in the first Resurrection in the times of the
Messiah, when they should live long and happily in Earth, but however should
dye at length; and possibly afterward a Portion in the second Resurrection,
when they should not eat nor drink, but enjoy pleasures wholly intellectual.
Though I cannot tell whether the ordinary Palestine Jews did believe any thing
concerning the second Resurrection. The Scribes pronouncing him blessed who
should Luke xiv.15.
eat bread in the Kingdom of God, and the Sadduces Question concerning the
Woman who had married seven Brethren, Matt. xxii.28. Mar. xii.23. Luke xx.33.
Whose wise she should be of them in the Resurrection, seem to imply the state
only of the first Resurrection. And even this Notion we find to have been
derived to the Primitive Christians, no doubt from their former Sentiments
concerning the Messiah then expected among the Jews, and applied to our Savior
when they believed him to be the true Messiah who had been promised to them.
But because the generality of those who were converted to the Christian
Religion were of a more Philosophical genius, and were better pleased with the
Mystical than the Literal expositions of their Law, as indeed being that which
then had generally the greatest influence on their conversion; therefore the
Life likely to be expected by them, and most likely to be valued by them, was
the (...), not only as that might signify a Life during the (...) of the
Messiah, who was to be the Prince of the (...), whom the modern Jews make to be
mortal himself, but as it signifies a Life for ever. For indeed the Doctrine
then received concerning the Messiah himself, was, that he should Joh. xii.34.
(...), so as not to die at all; nay, this was received as the sense of the
Law, no doubt according to the Mystical and Cabalistical sense of it, which had
been given of it by their sublimer Doctors. Wherein are they also seconded by
some of the modern Vid. Coch in Sanhedr. ubi supra p. 365.
Doctors themselves, how consonantly to the sense of their Brethren, I leave
them to determine.

Philosophical Hellenistical Jews of the Dispersion who were influenced by the
School of Alexandria, this Notion of Life was properly to be expected only from
the (...), and therefore St. John 1 John i.1.
calls it (...) in his Epistle, and in his Gospel he tells us that Joh. i.4.
in him, that is, in the (...), was Life. Which agrees exactly with the
Philosophical Systemes of those times. For, 1. They granted a Mystical Life
belonging to the Soul, as well as a Natural one belonging to the Body, and this
opposed to a Mystical Death, which was only capable of agreeing to immortal
Beings; And, 2. As they made this Mystical Death to consist, not in a cessation
of Being, but a separation from God, so, by the Rule of the same proportion,
they made the Life opposed to it to consist in an Union of the Soul with God,
who was thought to have the same influence in quickening the Soul, as the Soul
had for quickening the Body. These two things are the express Doctrine of the
Pythagoreans, if In Aur. Carm.
Hierocles may be believed; and of the (...). Trism. Poem. c. 1.
Egyptians, if the counterfeit Trismegistus represent their Doctrine
faithfully. 3. The God with which the Soul was capable of being united
immediately was not the (...), but the (...). For the (...) was conceived to be
a (...), having no certain seat in the Universe, and therefore incapable of
being enjoyed by Mortals, but by the mediation of the Son; just as the Apostle
tells us, that he inhabits (...), the 1 Timothy vi.16.
Light unapproachable, that no man has Joh. i.18.
seen God at any time, that no man 1 Timothy vi.16.
either has or can see him. But the (...) being the resemblance of his Father,
the (...) as the Author to the Heb. i.3. Wised. vii.22.
Hebrews, therefore in being joined to him they were made capable of
contemplating and enjoying the perfections of the Father, as far as it was
possible for a creature to do so. And therefore John i.18^
the only begotten Son is said to reveal him to us, and we are said to see his
glory in the face 2 Cor. iv.6.
of Jesus Christ; and our Savior himself tells St. Philip that he who had seen
Joh. xiv.9.
him had seen the Father also. And hence that Doctrine of the Philosophers, and
from them of Origin and the Alexandrians, however mistaken by later Fathers,
that the Father was (...), but the (...) in the sense that the word (...) was
used against the Pyrrhonians, not for an adequate comprehensive knowledge, but
for any that was certain. And particularly, 4. They held the (...) to be the
(...) mentioned in Plato's Timaeus, from whence the Demons, whom they supposed
to be the immediate Authors of this inferior World, were supplied with the
immortal seed which they were to infuse into those Beings, who were to consist
of a nature mixed of mortal and immortal. So that by this means the immortal
part, even of the Soul of Man, was thought derived from the (...). And who can
then think it strange that this Diviner kind of Life should be derived from him
also? Nay, 5. the (...) is one of the benefits expressly ascribed to this God
of the Universe. So Pythagoras (or whatever ancient Pythagorean is the Author
of that ancient fragment quoted by the Apud Justin. Martyr. Paraen. p. 18. Ed.
Par. sed correctius apud. Clem. Alexandr. Protrep.. p. 47. Ed. Par.
Fathers under his name.) (...), that I may not mention later Testimonies. And,
6. They take the (...) for the whole Archetypal World and the repository of all
the Divine Ideas. And they did not think its influence to be only as a Pattern
for the Father to work by, but ascribed the production also of the things to
the (...) it self. They allowed it the influence of a Didym. apud Eusebius. Pr.
Eu. L.xi. c. 23.
Seal not only to represent, but impress its own likeness. And therefore as the
Son is said to bear the character Heb. i.3.
of the Father, so we are said to bear (...) the image, not immediately of the
Father, but of the second 1 Cor. xv.49.
Adam who is the Son. And therefore among other things derived from him this of
Life is also reckoned, That Joh. v.26.
as the Father has Life in himself, so has he given to the Son to have Life in
himself; And Ver. 21.
as the Father quickens so also the Son quickens whom he will. And accordingly
as these Philosophical Authors call him (...) and (...), etc. in regard of the
(...) and (...) which we derive from him; so for the same reason they call him
(...) in regard of the Life which we derive from him also. For, in this
Philosophical language, this seems to be the true Importance of this term
(...), to signify the abstract Ideal perfections as they are in the Patterns
in contradistinction to the like perfections as they are received by the
Creatures. Which if others had observed, they would never have fallen into so
strange misunderstandings concerning the name (...) as ascribed to Christ. For
by it no more is meant than that, beatified men are called Proleg. ad D.
Stearne de Obst.
Gods in the language of that same Philosophy, so they are made Gods by
participating immediately of the Deity of the Son. But as the Sons Deity is not
Archetypal in regard of the Father, but of the Creatures, so there will nothing
hence follow so dangerous as these men apprehend, who have not acquainted
themselves with the Principles of this Philosophy, as if he should therefore
have his Deity uncommunicated from the Father. Nay, rather as the Creatures
cannot be called (...), in the language of this Philosophy, in regard of the
Son, because they are according to the Image of the Son, so, by the same
Principles, the Son cannot be called so, because he is, even as to his Divine
Person, the Image of the Father. But this only by the way to show the use of
this same Philosophy for clearing this difficulty with which others have been
so much perplexed. 7. Therefore it is yet more particularly observable, that,
by the whole Scheme of this Philosophy, the recovery from a state of Death to
this Divine Life must wholly depend on the (...). For this new Divine Life was
recovered by the awakening of the (...), by aspiring upwards, which is the
(...) so much spoken of in this Philosophy, by exercises of the intellectual
operations, and by disuse and dying to the (...). But all these things are most
properly ascribed to the (...), according to this Philosophy. I need not
instance in particulars, because themselves make application this way as often
as they speak concerning these matters.

Life to their Messiah, it was requisite that they should hold that as Messiah
he was to be (...) also. And when I consider the several Arguments made use of
by the Apostles for proving Christ to be the Messiah, from the old Testament it
self, from such Expositions as were not likely to have agreed to a pure Man,
according to the Principles of these Persons; nay, when I consider that Philo
in his Mystical Allegories of the Scripture does expound some things of the
(...) which the Apostles do by way of Argument apply to Christ as acknowledged
Characters of the true Messiah, with those Persons with whom they had to deal;
nay, when I consider that all the Spiritual benefits which were expected from a
spiritual Messiah, such as was most likely to have been owned by the Persons I
am speaking of, were not, according to their other Principles, capable of being
expected from any but the (...): I say, when I consider these things, I cannot
but think it very probable that these Persons did own indeed that the true
Messiah was to be the (...). Whence it will follow that in all regards true
Life must be expected from the true Messiah only, so that they who are
separated from the true Messiah must, for that very reason, be supposed also
from the true Life, and therefore to be in a state of Death. But then this
state of Death being proved only from Principles proper to the true Messiah,
will only by force of the consequence agree to Persons wholly separated even
from the external Profession of him, not to them who separate only from any one
of the several Parties which all agree in Profession of him, which is our
Adversaries Case at present.

in their behalf; and I confess withal that there were peculiar aggravations
in the circumstances of Apostates in the Apostles times which do not agree to
their condition. But especially I am concerned for those severe Texts which
seem not to allow of any hopes of acceptance for Lapsers, even upon condition
of a return, and a serious Repentance, which might have been more fit to have
been expected than in our Brethrens case whose circumstances are less
aggravating. But, 1. If our dissenting Brethren would allow the same candor in
expounding other Texts produced by them for their own designs, as they are
likely enough to allow here where they are so deeply concerned, they would find
the unjustifiableness of many of their pretenses. Particularly they would find
how little reason they have to look on the Discipline described in the
Scripture as a precedent for us now, when they should find most of the Officers
and Offices there mentioned occasionally, to have been fitted peculiarly to
that Age of miraculous and extraordinary effusions of the Spirit which we
cannot now pretend to; and that no part of the Scripture-History which they
make use of, comes down so low, as that either the Death of the Apostles, or
the withdrawing of those Gifts should oblige them to take care of settling an
ordinary establishment when those Extraordinaries should fail them.

Ecclesiastical History, we can hardly think that the generality of those
Seducers did so set themselves up for Christ, as directly to deny that he was
so who was so really. We cannot understand these false Christ's of any of the
Jewish Seducers. The times of Judas Galilaeus and Theudas were too early for
these writings of St. John, nay, by that time his Epistle and Gospel were
written, it is very probable that their whole Sect was extinguished; nay, it
appears to have been so from what Act. v.36, 37.
Gamaliel says concerning them in the Acts. And the times of Barcocheba and his
fellow Seducers were too late. And therefore they seem really to have been such
as were received for Christ's, even by Christians themselves. Thus Simon Iren.
L.1. adv. haer. c. 20. Simon and Dositheus. Orig. L.1. c. Cells. p. 44.
Magus pretended to have been, as the Father in the time of the Law, so the Son
in the time of the Gospel; so that they who owned him for Christ, were so far
from disowning the true Christ to be so too, as that the only reason why they
took Simon for Christ, was only because they took him for the same with him who
really was so. Indeed the Basilidians would by no means allow that he was
really Iren. L.i. c. 23.
crucified, but Simon of Cyrene in his stead. But then the reason was, because
they thought the Jews were deluded, and did not crucify that Person whom they
intended to crucify, and who had transacted the rest of the History of the
true Christ. Iren. L.i. c. 21. Eusebius. L.iii. Hist. c. 26.
Menander also pretended to be the Savior, which no doubt was then taken for a
proper attribute of the true Messiah, but being Simons Scholar, it is very
probable that he followed Simons Doctrine concerning the Person who was truly
the Messiah as to humane nature, because we do not find that he innovated in
that particular. If the Ebionites did any way derogate from the office of Jesus
as the true Christ, it was in denying him to be the eternal (...) (as the
Socinians do now) which I have already shown to have been probable, to have
been also ingredient in the notion of the true Messiah, according to the
Doctrine of those times. I need not mention Cerinthus, because his Doctrine was
the same with Ebions in this particular, if his Person were not also the same.
As for the Vid. ^ruditissimum Pearson. vind. Ignat. Part. 2. p. 6.24.
(...) they indeed did make his humane nature an appearance only, that they
might avoid the scandal of the Cross. But then whatever reality did belong to
this appearance they did not deny to belong to Jesus, much less did they deny
that Salvation which was the great benefit of the Messiah, to have been really
performed by that Jesus (for that is the absurd consequence which their
Catholic Adversaries charge upon them, but never charge them with asserting it
in express terms) and therefore their denying Jesus to be the Christ, was only
interpretatively and consequently, so far only as a true humane nature was an
essential ingredient in a true Christ.

Catholics prove their own Christ to be the true one, and from thence
immediately overthrow all the pretenses of others that pretend to that name:
the main force of the Argument consists in this, not but that the same Christ
might have appeared at several times and in several Persons, Sometimes of an
Angel, sometimes of a Man. Justin. Mart.
as themselves had acknowledged concerning his apparitions in the old
Testament, so that for all that the Catholics Christ and the Heretics might
have been the same; but that taking for granted (which all these Heretics seem
to have granted them) that Jesus was the Christ. The Question whether he
intended to appear again in the Persons of Simon, or Menander, or any of those
other Seducers, was much fitter to be decided from his own Doctrine than from
the Enthusiastical pretenses of concerned Persons? And for his Doctrine, the
notorious Tradition of the Church was a much more likely way of conveying it
than the secret informations to which the Heretics pretended; and that they
who had constantly continued under the Government and Officers appointed by
himself and his Apostles, were as certainly in his Communion as any Sect of the
Philosophers derived their Succession from their first Founder by keeping up
the Succession of his Chair: that if themselves were in Communion with him, the
others who had visibly innovated and set up themselves in opposition to them
could not be at the same time in Communion with them also. So that the
principal Argument made use of against the Heretics was the credibility of the
Church's Doctrine; and the principal expedient for securing Persons from the
danger of those errors, was to recommend their keeping close to those
Assemblies which could derive a regular Succession: And this was not only used
by Ignatius, Hegesippus, Irenaeus, Tertullian, and so downwards, but even in
the Apostolical Age it self.

separated from Christ, because the Doctrines maintained by them did really
destroy Christ, as their Doctrines are proved destructive to Christ, because
they were thought to be so by that Communion which had the best means of
knowing the mind of Christ; and their Communion is proved to be not with the
true Christ, because they had departed from the Communion of them who
undoubtedly were at first in Communion with him, and still continued so by all
the proofs by which a Succession was capable of being proved. In which way of
proceeding, it is plain that it is supposed that Communion with Christ could
not be maintained without Communion with his visible Church, and in after Ages,
without a Communion with that Church which could derive a visible Succession
from that which originally was so; I say this is supposed Antecedently to the
proof, that the Seducers were disunited from Christ, both because it was from
hence proved that their Doctrines* were destructive to the true Christ, because
the Church said they were so, and because their Communion is proved not to have
been with the true Christ because it was not with his Church. But of this I may
have more occasion to discourse more largely hereafter. I only observe at
present that they are not therefore said to have been disunited from Christ,
because they did in express terms disown him, which is the principal thing
which is urged to show how different their case was from the present case of
our Brethren.

occasion was, yet the Argumnets used by those Primitive Writers to convince
those Seducers of the dangerousness of their condition do certainly come home
to our Brethrens Case. My meaning is, they do not only prove that the Seducers
could have no Communion with Christ, because they did either expressly or
interpretatiuely deny him; but also because they had no visible Communion with
the visible Church. So I have already shown that it was a visible Association
which St. John meant 1 John i.3.
, when he exhorted them to whom he wrote to communicate with his own Party,
because he and his communicated with the Father and the Son. It seems then
there was no communicating with Christ, however Orthodox a Profession they made
of him, without a continuance in the Orthodox Communion. So the Author to the
Hebrews Heb. x.25, 26.
does not make the denying of Christ to be the true Messiah to be the willful
sin of which he there speaks so dreadfully, but the forsaking of the public
Assemblies. And the whole reasoning of St. Paul in comparing the Mystical Body
of Christ with the natural Body, does plainly suppose, that although all Grace
be derived from Christ the Mystical Head to the several Members of his Mystical
Body, as in the natural Body all the vital influences are derived from the Head
to the several Members respectively; yet there is withal the same mutual
necessity of the Members to each other for receiving these influences from the
Mystical Head, as there is in the Natural Body for receiving influences from
the Natural Head. And therefore it is impossible* in the Natural Body that any
particular Member should receive influences from the Head, if separated from
its Fellow Members, by which those influences are to be propagated to it; so it
will also be as impossible by the same Analogy of reasoning, for any Member of
the Mystical Body of Christ to receive vital influences from Christ the
Mystical Head of that Body, if separated from its Fellow Members of the same
Mystical Body. And it is observable from the Offices and Gifts there mentioned
that it must be an external Organical Body that is there spoken of, in which
only it is that those Offices and Gifts were capable of being exercised. And
from the reasoning, they must not only be the Gifts but the Graces of the
Spirit, which are most properly to be considered as vital influences, that are
thus derived. And then Persons divided from the Church must necessarily be in
the state of Death, as St. John supposes them, as necessary as it is in the
Body natural that that Member should be dead which receives no vital influences
from the Head. But these are also things which I may have occasion to discourse
more largely in my second Part, and therefore say no more concerning them at
present.

CHAP. XII. The very Case of abstaining from the Ordinances on pretense to
Perfection, seems to have been taken up, and condemned in the time of the
Apostles.
THE CONTENTS.
8. This very pretense of abstaining from the external Ordidinances under the
pretense of Perfection seems to have been taken up, even in those Primitive
Ages. Eusebius. Them. Eu. L.iii. c. 4.
The Philosophical Notions of those Ages concerning the worship of the supreme
Deity.. I. How this Hypothesis was received first into the Elective Philosophy
thence taken up by the Hellenistical Jews, and from them derived to the first
Converts to Christianity.. II. The several reasonings of the Primitive
Christians that might make them, in interest, favorable to this Hypothesis..
III. Particularly their pretending to a Mystical Priesthood might make them
less solicitous for their dependence on the literal external Priesthood.. IV.
Instances of several like mistakes of those times in reasoning from Mystical
Titles.. V. How the Genius of this Philosophy has inclined men to this way of
reasoning, wherever it has prevailed, even among our modern Enthusiasts.. VI.
Inference 1. That what the Apostles did resolve in this particular, they did
resolve with a particular design upon our Adversaries Case.. VII. That the
Prudential establishments of the Apostles are sufficiently secure.. VIII. Inf.
2. Hence may appear the insecurity of this way of arguing, in general, from
Mystical Titles to the neglect of external Observances.. IX.X. Inf. 3. It
plainly appears to have been against the design of the Legislator in the very
Case of the Jews from whom the Christians borrowed it.. XI. Inf. 4. That the
whole contrivance of things by the Apostles plainly supposes that they also did
not allow of this Plea for excusing any from the Public Ordinances.. XII. Inf.
5. The Philosophers themselves never intended this Plea for their exemption
from the Mysteries and external Rites of Initiation then used, to which the
Sacraments are answerable among Christians.. XIII, XIV. Inf. 6. The great
design of this way of arguing was to exclude themselves from paying any
external worship to the Supreme Being, and so destructive to the very
foundation of the Christian Religion.. XV. And this very rationally on the
Hypothesis then received.. XVI. But the reason of this Argument does not hold
against those Exteriors which are observed by the Christian Institution.. XVII.
It is very probable that our Adversaries Case is particularly spoken to in Heb.
x.22, 23.. XVIII.

That this very pretense of abstaining from the external Ordinances under the
pretense of Perfection seems to have been taken up, even in those Primitive
Ages. Those Philosophers who excused their neglect of all exterior worship of
the Supreme Being, by pretending that the only proper and acceptable worship of
him was that of a Vid. Testimonia Porphyr. Apollonii Tyanei, Theophrasti, apud
Eus. Pr. Eu. L.iv. c. 12, 13, 14, 15, 19, etc. Porph. ipsum. L.11. Abstinent.
and Hierocl. in Aur. Carm. Cyr. in Julia. L.1.
pure mind, a striving to be like him, a following his conduct, an expressing
his Perfections, as far as humane frailty was capable of imitating them, in
their own lives, and by that means moving all others with whom they conversed
to honorable thoughts of him, they urged their pretenses so far as to destroy
all necessity of external worship of him in public solemn Assemblies appointed
for that purpose. They pretended that the Hierocl in Aur. Carm.
minds of men were the most acceptable Temples, that an holy Soul was an Image
of him, and represented him with more advantage than any material Image could
possibly do, that good men were all Priests, that their hearts were the most
suitable Altars, and their own Persons the most grateful Sacrifices they could
offer to this Deity. That there was no need of going to certain places to
worship him, because he was everywhere; nay Senec. Ep. 41. (...). Porph. de
Abstin. apud Eusebius. Pr. Eu. L.iv.19. Extat apud. Porphyr. ipsum. L.11. Sect. 52.
within them, that there was no need of depending on particular Persons to be
Authorized by their Office, to moderate the Solemnities of his worship, because
indeed the best mind was the best Priest, and had God nearest to him, and most
favorable to his Prayers. That they who had arrived to this Perfection as to
converse immediately with the Deity himself, were so far from being advantaged,
as that they were rather prejudiced by their external Solemnities of his
worship; that they rather debased their thoughts of him, and made them less
worthy of him than they would have been in their own way of dealing with him.
That Philosophy was a properer expedient to bring the mind to this temper than
any external observations whatsoever.

elective Philosophy, which generally influenced the world at the first
appearance of Christianity; nay, it may be, at the public appearance of
Judaism it self, after the Macedonian conquests of those parts. I need not
observe how much their general interest obliged them to defend it, when they
had to deal with such Persons as objected to their neglect of paying external
worship to the Supreme Being. I need not observe farther how much the
Hellenistical Jews were generally influenced by that Systeme of the elective
Philosophy which had been by Potamon, the first Author of it, settled in the
Schools of Alexandria, which was the University where the Jews had most
interest, and was accordingly most frequented by them of the (...), I think, I
may confidently say, much more than Athens it self. And as those of that
Philosophy seemed to have endeavored to reconcile all the Sects of
Philosophers that were for Dogmatizing and Religion against their common
Enemies, the Scepticks and Epicureans, by putting Mystical senses on the
otherwise indefensible Fables of their Poets, and by that means reconciling
them with a plausible Scheme of Philosophy; so the For the way of understanding
the Scripture Allegorically, see the Testimonies of Eleazar from Aristeas, and
of Aristobulus in the same Eusebius. Pr. L.viii. c. 9, 10. which he produces for
this very purpose, c. 8. Philo and Aristobulus are produced also for this
purpose by Origin. L.iv. contra Cells p. 198. From whence it will appear that
this way of exposition was considerably antienter than our Savior, and that
the account here given was the true reason of it.
Jews, especially the Hellenists, took the same course to recommend their own
Law to the Heathens, by the same contrivance of Allegorizing it, and by that
means not only weakening Objections against the Letter of it, but reconciling
it with that very Philosophy which had obtained so great a name among the
Gentiles themselves. And we find that among the Jews themselves there were some
who were thus so extremely drawn over to the spiritual sense as even to be
inclinable to neglect the external observances of the Law. The Essenes were
very Philosophically addicted, the whole Sect of them, and accordingly had an
excessive value for the (...). Philo (...). apud Eus. L.11. Hist. c. 17. p. 55.
Rursus. (...), etc. ib. p. 57. So again describing their Assemblies: (...).
Philo (...). apud Eusebius. Pr. Eu. L.viii. c. 12.
Mystical Expositions of the Law, and the more they were exercised in them by
so much less observant they seem to have been of the ritual customs enjoined
by the Letter of it. The very Practical (...) Philo Quodomn. Sap. ^it lib. and
apud Eusebius. Pr. Eu. L.viii. c. 12.
Essenes themselves were less observant than the other Jewish Sects, but the
Theoretical Essenes seem to have exceeded them as far as they did the other
Jews in adhering to the Spiritual design, even to the neglect of the Letter of
the Law. Now this was the Sect that of all others was most inclinable to be
brought over to the Christian Religion. Especially when the Christians took
this very same method to recommend their own Doctrine to the Jews, as the Jews
had done to recommend theirs to the Philosophers, that is, when they undertook
to show that their own Religion was indeed no new one, but that very Mystical
Judaism which these Philosophical Hellenists had so much boasted of. And
accordingly we find no mention in the Histories of the first times of
Christianity, of any opposition made against the Christian Religion by the
Essenes, though we find frequent mention of the other two famous Sects, the
Pharisees and Sadduces; and soon after the very memory of them seems to have
been extinguished, very probably by reason of their unanimous conversion, not
to mention several customs then used generally by the Christians, which it is
most likely the Essenes brought over with them upon their conversion, as
Praying toward the East, etc. that I may not instance in those many other
customs common to the Christians and the Essenes, of which a plausible account
may be given how the Christians might have received them from other Originals.

Christianity were to err on this hand, to urge the Spiritual design of
Religion, even to a neglect of its external ritual observances, it is very
considerable that these very Principles seem to have had a principal influence
on their conversion, and were accordingly made use of by the first Preachers of
Christianity, to take off their Auditors from these externals, both in Judaism
and the popular Gentilism, which were inconsistent with the Spiritual nature of
the Christian Religion, and which indeed were the strongest prejudices in both
to make them averse from receiving the Gospel. Thus against the Heathen Images
the Christians ordinarily insist on those Authorities of the Philosophers, who
make Man the best and liveliest representation of the Supreme Deity, and thence
conclude that all other Images were to be rejected. So against external
Sacrifices they quote those passages of the same Philosophers that disparage
the pompous Hecatombs of the wicked, and make holy Souls acceptable with very
mean Sacrifices, or none at all; nay, indeed make the Soul it self the most
acceptable Sacrifice. The same thing might have been shown in their Disputes
against the magnificent Temples of the Jews and Heathens which the Christians
then wanted, and indeed in all their Disputes whatsoever against those external
Solemnities which were not practiced among the Christians, though generally
received among their Adversaries. Our Savior himself argues against the
frequent Washings of the Jews from the greater care they ought to have of
cleansing the inside, St. Matt. xxiii.26.
and against their superstitious observance of difference of meats from the
greater pollution they were capable of receiving from what came out of their
mouths, St. Mark vii.18.
as coming from their hearts than from any thing that only entered into it from
without; and against the confinement of the external solemn worship of God to
Jerusalem, St. Joh. iv.24.
or mount Gerizim from the Spiritual nature of God to which such a confinement
is not so agreeable, and to whom holy Souls cultivated with Spiritual
improvements are agreeable wherever they are.

then to take up such fancies as our modern Adversaries, against whom I am at
present discoursing, have taken up now. That is, their being called a Royal
Priesthood, 1 Pet. ii.5.9. Rev. i.6.
and being chosen Kings and Priests unto God, which might very probably make
them believe that the Prayer of a good man, though never so private, might be
as acceptable to God as the solemn Prayers of a Priest, if he were not
otherwise so good a man as he who prayed more privately; and that indeed
Personal Holiness gave a man a better Right to offer up these Spiritual
Sacrifices, than any Holiness of Office. This very Title given to the Jews
(from whom the Christians took it, as they did all their other Spiritual
Privileges, which they challenged and appropriated to themselves as being the
true Israelites for whom these Privileges were originally intended) had
occasioned the like misunderstanding among them. Corah's principal argument
against the confinement of the Sacerdotal office to Aaron and his Sons, was,
that all the congregation was holy as well as they. Numb. xvi.3.
But how much a more likely occasion had they of falling into this mistake upon
the first Conversions to the Christian Religion, when they knew with what
design they had been used by the Philosophers, and especially the Stoics from
whom they were taken into the Elective Systeme, purposely to deprive the
Supreme Being of all public solemnities of worship, and to advance a wise man
to that degree of Perfection, as to be able to perform all offices by himself
without any dependence on the public administrers of the vulgar Religions?
especially considering that the Converts from Gentilism were more likely to
take up these Notions from the Authorities, and to understand them in the sense
of the Philosophers, than from the Old Testament, with which we must presume
them less acquainted. Upon which supposition they must have been ignorant of
this decision given by God himself against their sentiments, even in that very
Case of Corah.

vulgar was to mistake these Mystical Titles. When they heard that every
Christian, immediately upon his becoming a Christian, was made free, we find
how forward they were to understand that their freedom must exempt them from
all Duties to their ordinary Superiors. We see thereupon how necessary the
Apostles found it upon all occasions to inculcate the Duties of Ephesians. vi.1. Col.
iii.20.
Children to their Parents, Ephesians. vi.5. Col. iii.22. 1 Timothy vi.1, 2. Tit. ii.9.
1 Pet. ii.18.
of Servants to their Masters, and of Romans xiii.1, 2, 3, etc. 1 Timothy ii.1, 2, 1
Pet. ii.13.
Subjects to their Sovereigns. We see how necessary it was to persuade them to
1 Pet. ii.13.
to submit to every humane Ordinance for Gods sake, not to 1 Timothy vi.2.
despise their Masters, because they were Brethren, and in general not to 1
Pet. ii.16.
use their Liberty for a cloak of maliciousness. When Women were told that in
Christ Jesus there was Gal. 3.28.
no difference between male and female, we then see how necessary it was to
restrain them from exercising their gifts in public, and 1 Timothy ii.12^
exercising Authority over the Man, where they presumed their own gifts to be
greater than those were of the Men over whom they exercised it; and thereupon
it seems to be that their Duty of Subjection to their Ephesians. v.22, 24. Col.
iii.18. 1 Pet. iii.1.
Husbands is so often urged on them. And when they had heard that Christ was to
1 Cor. xv.24.
put down all Authority and power, this also gave many of them occasion to be
ill affected to all Authority, and to 2 St. Pet. ii.10. Jud. 8.
speak evil of Dignities. I do not speak of the Jews mistake of our Saviors
Doctrine concerning St. Joh. viii.32, 33.
Liberty, as if he had therefore implied that they were all slaves in the
ordinary notion of the word; nor his words concerning St. Joh. ii.19, 20. St.
Matt. xxvi.61. xxvii.40. St. Mark. xiv.58. xv.29.
raising up the Temple in three days as if he had meant it of their material
Temple; nor his words concerning the St. Joh. vi.51, 52.
eating of his Body and drinking his Blood, as if he had meant them in that
barbarous sense wherein they understood them. I say, I mention not these
because they were Adversaries, and therefore willing to misunderstand him, and
withal willing to cavil, even where they did not really misunderstand him. But
the instances I have given do show how the Disciples themselves who were
willing to understand him as well as they could, or at least would never have
professed themselves to have been otherwise, were notwithstanding apt to
misunderstand their Master in such instances as these were, that none may
wonder, that (this being the familiar way of teaching in those Oriental
Countries) they could have been so strangely misunderstood by their Auditors in
a way of teaching which was so familiar to them. And certainly it was as easy
for them to collect from their being allowed the Title of Priests under the
Gospel, that they had a right to offer the Evangelical Sacrifices, and
therefore that the power of administering the Gospel Ordinances did belong to
them rather as eminently-Religious than as Authorized Persons, as it was to
collect from their being called to freedom by the Gospel, that therefore they
ought no Duty to any of their Secular Superiors. And this the rather in the
first disturbed times of the Gospel, before there was any settled establishment
of Government, and when the gifts of the Spirit were thought sufficient to
Authorize the Person so gifted to use them, till the disorders of that course
seems to have put them on a necessity of providing otherwise.

Perfection to be capable of being improved beyond the benefit of the
Sacraments. It is very well known how much that Philosophy had to do in forming
the whole establishment of the Primitive Monks, and it is observable that they,
according to the Notions they had framed concerning Spiritual Life, allowed of
this very thing, Anastas. (...).
that Men might at length out-grow the Sacraments. The like might have been
observed concerning the Popish Mystical Divinity, which is no other than an
improvement of the Pseudo-Areopagites Doctrine, as that it self is no other
than an application of the Philosophy I am speaking of to the Practice of
Christianity. And these do also teach the same thing that Persons eminent for
Perfection may, at length arrive to that pitch as not to need the Sacraments.
And even in our Modern Euthusiasts and Superordinancers I am very inclinable to
impute it to the same Original. It is indeed somewhat surprising to observe,
but he, who shall be pleased to observe, will find it true, that the
Enthusiastic style of Jacob Behmen, Henry Nicholas, and the Quakers, and such
other Enemies of Learning, such strangers to Antiquity, and to the tongues they
wrote in, should so agree with the Platonism of the elective Philosophy I am
speaking of. However it comes to pass, whether by likeness of temper, or
likeness of Spirit, or the Hypocrisy of the first Masters of these Sects who
possibly feigned themselves to be more unlearned than they were, that what
knowledge they might have occasion to show, might look more like to Inspiration,
or that they might have light on some neglected Translations of some little
things of that kind, which might have given them those little hints which might
have been sufficient for a warm brain to work upon; yet it cannot be admired
that they who had by any means light upon those Principles, should also light
on a mistake so obvious, and so very popular, and into which unwary Persons
have been always so apt to fall, pursuant to these Principles.

That our Adversaries may not think their Doctrine so singular, but may see
that as their Principles were known, and as the Consequences they draw from
them very obvious even to the Persons of those Ages themselves; so they have
reason to believe that what the Apostles did resolve on in this particular,
they did resolve with a particular design upon our Adversaries Case. And
therefore they are not to allow themselves the liberty of making conjectures
from the reason of the thing, and by that means both guessing what the Apostles
would have done, if their circumstances and pretenses had been pleaded to them,
and avoding all Arguments deduced from their Authority whilst they may think
they can pretend any disparity in their case and circumstances which the
Apostles were not obliged to take notice of in fitting their establishments for
the Age they lived in. And this observation will make the Apostles
establishment Argumentative in this Case, though we suppose them conducted
therein by no higher measures than those of ordinary Humane Prudence, as we
have reason to believe they were not in some of their Ecclesiastical
constitutions which they made, not as Apostles, providing for all future Ages,
and all possible circumstances; but as the Governors of the Church in that
present Age, and so concerned no further than for their then present
Circumstances. In what they were immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost, and in
what was desired for all Circumstances, we have reason to believe that the Holy
Ghost himself foreseeing all Cases, what was so constitueed must have been
fitted to all circumstances that should ever happen, and therefore that
whatever can be pretended now, was then foreseen and provided for, if ever it
should be likely to be of general concernment; for such things only are in
Prudence fit to be provided for in general Constitutions. But in Prudential
Constitutions made by the Apostles as Ordinary present Governors of the Church
in that present Age, there is not that reason to expect that they should have
been assisted with higher influences of the Spirit than ordinary Governors
are. And therefore they must have acquitted themselves well in such things, if
what they did was fitted to the circumstances of that Age, those of them at
least that the Apostles were acquainted with, though the constitutions
themselves had not been otherwise more infallible than those are which are made
by Ordinary Governors.

Prudence of the Apostles to have been so assisted, though not to discover any
Truth which had not been discoverable by them in the use of their natural
reasonings, yet at least to secure them from error in those reasonings, that
they should judge nothing to be true but what really was so, and was capable of
appearing to be so by virtue of those Arguments which they were capable of
discovering by their natural faculties: we may then at least conclude, that if
this pretense of Perfection for excusing the Persons so pretending from the
Ordinances, was a Case with which the Apostles were then acquainted, it is
reasonable to believe that in making their constitutions, though only of
present concernment, they did ordain what they thought fit to be ordained, even
in this case also, because, on this supposition, this Case also was of present
concernment. And then supposing further that their very Prudential
Constitutions were yet Infallibly prudent, that is, Infallibly fitted to the
Cases then foreseen; it will follow, that if the Apostles did not then think it
fit to make any allowances for such Persons pretending Perfection, the reason
must have been, because it was really unfit that any allowances should have
been made for such Pretenders. And if so, this, at least, will follow, that
this pretense alone is not even a just excuse from the Ordinances, And yet,
though the Apostles had not had any greater assistance than that of their
natural Prudence, yet certainly every truly-Pious humble Christian, who will
not so far presume as to think himself more perfect than he were, cannot choose
but pay a great respect, even to their Judgments, in the Case whose assistances
seem to have been such as that they did as well enlarge their Naturals as well
as cultivate them with Supernatural improvements. And that this was a Case very
likely to have been extant, even in the Apostles times, I have endeavored to
show by this account I have given of its Original.

To let our Brethren see the Insecurity of this way of arguing from mystical
Titles to the neglect of external observances. I have given several instances
of errors which this way of arguing brought several less-discerning Persons
into then, and which were condemned for Errors by the Apostles themselves, and
I believe even our Adversaries themselves will not doubt but that they were
Erroneous. Nay, even in the very same places where they find pious Persons
called Priests they find them called Kings too. Rev. i.6.v.10.
And can they therefore think they may take upon them the Office of Temporal
Kings as they do the Office of Priests? Will they therefore refuse Subjection
to the Ordinances of the State as they do to those of the Church? Why may they
not as well pretend to have out-grown the Political contrivances to make men
virtuous, as they pretend to have out-grown the ordinary contrivances of the
Church for that purpose? Of the two, certainly the Provisions of the Church are
much more perfect than those of the State, and therefore must require much
greater Perfection in him who will pretend to have out-grown them, and who will
also expect to be believed in such his pretenses. And then what confusion must
this bring the world to when they shall, by this means, have freed themselves
from all restraints whatsoever? when the worst men, who are usually the highest
Pretenders, shall have this Apology allowed them for all the disorders they can
make by this pretended exercise of their Liberty? When the Proudest men, who
have usually the best opinion of their own Perfection, shall, by this means, be
allowed to shake off all yokes and Superiorities, and to drive on all their
arrogant and ambitious designs under this fair pretense of asserting their
Christian Liberty.

Kingdom is not of this world; St. Joh. xviii.36.
why should not they say the same of their Priesthood too? why should they
rather be allowed to encroach on the Priesthood of the World, in presuming to
administer to themselves those Sacraments whose administration God has only
entrusted to the public Priesthood, or in presuming to free themselves from a
dependence on them, by pretending that they do not need any thing for which the
public Priesthood was ordained; than to encroach on the Kingdom of the World,
by presuming, on the same pretense, either to administer Justice to themselves
where they should need it, or in excusing themselves from any debt of Duty to
their Secular Superiors, on pretense that they need not any Protection from
them? And at present it is perfectly sufficient for my purpose to show the
weakness of these Arguments, which are the only ones they can bring for their
Assertion; and the rather so, because it is but reason to expect that all
Persons who plead exemption from standing Rules, should produce very positive
and direct proof that such an exemption was intended by the Legislator, so that
the proof will be incumbent on them, not the disproof on us. So that if they
fail in their proof of exemption, that failure alone is enough to reduce them
to the general Rules. For it is always rational to presume that all general
determinations were designed by the Legislator to include all those who were
not expressly exempted by him. At least this general Presumption concerning the
Legislators mind, is much more likely to be approved by himself as agreeable to
his own design in making those determinations, than these uncertain guesses
which these interested Persons make both concerning the singularity of their
own Case, and the Judgment which the Legislator would have made of it, if he
had thought himself obliged to take particular notice of it. But neither does
it only thus appear that the Inference which they would make from these
mystical Titles, is, in the whole kind of it, very weak for such a purpose as
they produce them for: But,

It plainly appears to have been against the design of the Legislator in the
very Case of the Jews, from whom the Christians borrowed it. I have already
observed that this Title was taken from the Old Testament, and challenged by
the Christians to themselves, only on account of their being the true Spiritual
Mystical Israel for whom those Promises were more properly designed by God,
than they were for that Israel, who had no better plea to the name of Israel
than their carnal extraction. However, considering that this Title was given
primarily to the carnal Israel as a Type, at least, of the Mystical Israel,
though intended primarily for the Mystical Israel; there is reason to believe
that it really belongs to the Mystical Israel in the same sense as it was
challenged by the carnal Israel, and as it was allowed by God himself who gave
it, in his dealings with them. And therefore if the generality of the carnal
Israel at that time did not understand their Mystical Priesthood: so as to
excuse them from dependence on the Literal Levitical Priesthood, and if it be
withal certain that God did never intend it so; nay, was so far from intending
it, as that he declared his extreme displeasure by most exemplary punishments
inflicted on them who made use of this pretense, and ventured to put it in
practice; the same things mud in reason hold as to this privilege as it is
challenged by the Mystical Israelite. But that God himself never intended that
this use should be made of this Privilege, appears plainly by the now-mentioned
instance of Corah, who made use of this very pretense for justifying his
refusal of Subjection to Aaron and his Sons, that all the Congregation was
holy, Numb. xvi.3.
whom yet God punished for making that use of it with extraordinary Society,
though the Persons who pleaded it had an inferior degree, even of Holiness of
Office, which was more than others could pretend to barely on account of that
Holiness and Royal Priesthood, which they might challenge on account of their
being Israelites. And that the holiest among them did not think themselves
excused by their Mystical Priesthood, from a dependence on the Levitical
Priesthood; nay, rather always thought their constant attendance on it one of
the most eminent exercises and instances of their Holiness, appears from the
great expense they were at for maintaining the Temple-Service, from the long
and chargeable journeys they made at whatsoever distance in the Holy Land, nay,
very frequently, even in the dispersion it self, that they might be present at
Jerusalem at the times appointed by the Law; from their great complaints in
time of exile, and their hard opinion of the state of excommunicated Persons,
and from that general Popular Notion then prevailing among them whereby they
ascribed more to the punctual observance of these external Sanctifications than
to real Holiness it self. Phil. iii.6.9.
These things were accounted the very Righteousness of the Law, and these were
the vulgar measures of Popular Holiness. But though this be abundantly
sufficient to show that this use of this Privilege cannot be justified in the
Mystical Israel, on account of their being Israel, which was never challenged
by the carnal Israel themselves, nor ever intended for them; yet to give all
possible satisfaction in this Case, it is further observable,

That the whole contrivance of things by the Apostles, plainly supposes that
they also did not allow of this plea for excusing any from the public
Ordinances. They plainly suppose that the most perfect, as well as others,
stood in need of Church-Society. They plainly formed the Church into a Body
Politic, and obliged all, the most perfect as well as others, to observe their
respective Duties, which was not done by the Philosophers who maintained our
Adversaries Notions. They plainly confine the Graces of God to the Sacraments,
that so no Persons might on any pretense of Perfection think they did not need
the Sacraments, unless they were withal so perfect as not to need the Graces
also conferred in the Sacraments. They make the influences of the Spirit
derived from Christ the Head, to particular Members by the mediation of other
Members, the same way as the vital influences are derived in the Body Natural.
They confine his influences to his Body, and make the Sacraments to be the only
ordinary means of joining or continuing a Member in that Body. They make the
casting-out of the Churches Communion the same thing as a delivering over unto
Satan, 1 Cor. v.5. 1 Timothy i.20. Vid. cap. xi.. 4, 5, 6.
and describe the condition of such Persons as very sad, that they are in the
World, in Darkness, nay, in a state of Death it self. These are all of them
other contrivances of things than they would ever have settled, if they had
allowed any Plea of Perfection whatsoever, as sufficient to excuse the
pretender to it from the External Communion of the visible Church.

even those Philosophers themselves, who allowed this Notion of Perfection, as
sufficient to excuse Persons who were endued with it from the Sacrifices and
some of those grosser ways of Worship of their Deities, which were more
suitable to popular capacities, who thought a wise man might Sacrifice as
acceptably with a little meal as others with a Hecatomb: nay, that his Prayers
might be more acceptable than the Sacrifices of others; yet never thought of
extending it to the Mysteries and forms of initiation into the more familiar
acquaintance with their Deities. These they were so far from thinking meanly
of, as that indeed they were the most perfect sort of Persons for whom they
thought them most proper. Especially the greater Mysteries, or (...), were
purposely so contrived that meaner spirited Persons might never have the
courage to undertake them. Therefore the Egyptian initiations were so
extremely severe that they thought to have terrified Pythagoras himself from
his curiosity to be acquainted with them, and Appion, Joseph. cont. Appion.
Nonn. (...) in (...) Nazianz.
the Jews great Adversary, died of his Circumcision which was only one of them.
Therefore the preparatory trials of Mithras were so many, and so rigorous, that
very many perished under them. To this end were their frightful shapes, their
showing their Images only with Torches not by daylight, their tedious and
solemn preparations, only to advance the horror of the Spectacle. Therefore
they were first expiated by all the Purgations proper in the respective Cases,
that so they might approach the Idol it self with the most exquisite Purity.
Thence the Proclamation before the Orphaicks (...), to warn all impure Persons
to beware how they ventured to approach them. And therefore they are called
(...) and are said (...), and they are principally recommended by the
Pythagoreans for the (...), which they make the highest pitch of Philosophy,
and oppose to the (...) the Purgation of the (...) which they conceived proper
for Beginners.

Primitive Christians thought the Lords supper answerable, and accordingly
spoke of it in all that sacred style which the Philosophers had used concerning
these greater Mysteries, as may be seen punctually observed, among very many
others, by the Pseudo-Areopagite. And yet even the lesser Purgative Mysteries
were not so neglected as that any Person, how perfect soever, durst presume
immediately to venture on the greater without these preliminary expiations. No
Moral Purity whatsoever was thought so great as to make these ritual Purgatious
needless to him who was desirous to initiate himself in any of their particular
Religions. The most Perfect Persons among them, and they who were thought to
approach nearest to the Purity of the gods themselves; nay* who were often
themselves called gods, in such a sense as the name required when it was
communicated to inferior Beings. As they often thought it necessary to
initiate themselves, so when they were admitted, they were not admitted on
other terms than the Ordinary Lustrations. Such were the Hercules in the
Eleusin. Scholiast. Aristoph. in Plut. Schol. in Homer. Il. Theta in Tzetzes
Lycophr. Alex. Argonauts in the Samothraclan. Apollon. Rhod. Argon. Castor and
Pollux. Plutarch. These.
Heroes, the Demetrius Policrates. Plutarch. Demetr. Adrian. Spartian.
Antoninus Capitolin.
Emperors, and the Pythagoras, Jamblich. de vita. Pyth. Chapter 16.
Philosophers. Of all which sorts there are several instances of Persons who
were initiated, and initiated in the common way; but I believe no one Precedent
can be given of any who were thought too Perfect either to need the initiation
it self, or any one external Rite with which it was ordinarily performed. At
least they were so extremely few as that no modest man can, in initiation of
such Precedents, find in his heart to reckon himself in the number. No wise
man, who thoroughly considers and understands his own interest, can venture the
loss he may suffer if he should neglect them on confidence of a thing wherein
he may so easily prove mistaken. Which will again assert the necessity of
Baptism, which in the Christian Institution was answerable to these lesser
Mysteries. But I shall not now enlarge further to show that their Sacraments
were rather thought to hold proportion to the Heathen Mysteries than their
Sacrifices, because I may possibly take an occasion to insist more largely on
it on another occasion. However at present this Observation may suffice to show
that, even pursuant to these Philosophical Notions themselves, and the
influence they might have had on the minds of the Primitive Christians, no
Perfection can be pleaded such as may excuse from the use of the Sacraments.

that the great design of pleading this Spiritual way of worship of the supreme
Being to the neglect of external Ritual-Observances was indeed to excuse
themselves from paying him any external worship at all. And indeed seems very
rational on that Hypothesis which was then commonly received concerning the
natural Philosophical reason of the worship of their ordinary Demons. Vid.
Oracula, aliaque Plutarchi and Porphyrii Testimonia apud Eusebius. L.5. Praep. Eu.
c. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16* 17.
For they conceived that the Demons commonly worshipped were not purely
Spiritual, but, at least, clothed with vehicles more or less gross according
to the several degrees of their respective excellencies. And hence they
inferred that the Demons themselves were sensibly delighted and nourished
either with the Souls or nidor of the Sacrifices offered to them. And that this
was the true reason why the different Demons were pleased with different sorts
of Sacrifices, and different sorts of Trees in their Groves, and peculiar
places and ceremonies of worship, that their vehicles were of as great
diversity of complexions as men's Bodies are, and therefore inclined them to as
great a diversity of desires; because that the same thing which was grateful to
the vehicle of one Demon would either not affect the vehicle of another, or
would prove ungrateful to it. And as they thought these vehicles to be
material, so they thought them subject to the same influences to which the
matters were subject whereof they consisted. And accordingly as all matter was
supposed to be under the dominion of (...), so they conceived these vehicles to
be also, and that they were by this means subject to the fatal influences of
the Stars, and even to the influences of Sublunary Bodies also, as herbs, and
stones, and the steams of Animals that were offered in Sacrifice to them. This
seems to have been the true Philosophical reason of all the Judicial Astrology
and Magic which were then in so good esteem with the Persons I am speaking of.

Bodily worship is suitable to the nature of the supreme Being, that is, there
is no Bodily Being that is capable of affecting a Nature so perfectly abstract
from matter as God's is with any sensible pleasure or advantage. In this regard
himself expressly disowns such a way of Worship, and that even in such a time
when he was otherwise pleased to accept of bloody Sacrifices. Think thou
that I will eat Bulls flesh, and drink the blood of Goats? Psalm. i.13.
And in that regard he immediately requires a more Spiritual kind of Worship.
For so it follows, Offer unto God thanksgiving, Ver. 14.
and pay thy vows unto the most Highest. But as this whole design of excusing
themselves from the public solemn Worship of the supreme Deity, was a thing
directly contrary to the fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion; nay,
indeed it seems to be the principal design of this Religion, to restore the
public solemn Worship of the chief God, which had before been taken from him,
and given only to inferior Demons; and this seems to have been the principal
Dispute between the Christians and the Philosophers: so our Adversaries will
have reason, when they reflect on the great unlawfulness of the design, to
distrust the Principles by which they defended it. And therefore when they
shall perceive that the tendency of this way of arguing from the Spiritual
Nature of that Worship which must be suitable to the supreme Being to the
neglect of the external Observances of his solemn Worship in public
Assemblies, aims at the overthrow of the fundamental Principles of the whole
Christian Religion, and was designed so by them who first made use of it: They
cannot choose but have a great unkindness for this way of arguing, if they have
any kindness for the Christian Religion, which is so plainly undermined by it.
And that this account of their design and Principles is true, I might refer to
Porphyries account of Sacrifices, De Abstinent. ab esu Animal.
which he gives in the name of the Pythagoreans, whose cause he principally
undertakes to defend, but which withal seems generally to have been received
into the elective Philosophy which then prevailed.

reason of this Argument will by no means hold in those exteriors which are
observed by the Christian Institution. The Sacraments are not pretended to have
any natural influence on God, but only to be means of conveying his Graces to
us. And how can it be against the Nature or decorum of a Spirit in dealing with
Beings which are not Spiritual to use means suitable to the capacities of those
Beings with whom he deals? If we conceive any commerce at all between Spiritual
and Corporal Beings, this is certainly the most likely way we can think of how
such a commerce should be maintained. Corporeal Beings are not able to converse
by means wholly Spiritual; and therefore it is absolutely necessary that if God
would be pleased to have any dealings with them, he should maintain them by
Corporeal significations. This moral use of the Sacraments, as Solemnities of
transacting the New Covenant, does rather derogate from the Perfection of God,
not from that Perfection which a Corporeal Being is capable, as it is
Corporeal. If further in the Symbols of the Heathen Mysteries there might have
been fancied something that in its own Nature might influence the vehicle of
the Soul, and more easily dispose it for receiving Spiritual influences, which
dispositions such Souls as are already perfect might not be supposed to need,
if this is not the Case in our Christian Mysteries. The Symbols here used are
such as are familiar among us, and therefore if they had any such natural
virtue, must exert it as well out of the Sacraments as in them. So that all
their influence must be wholly ascribed to the Divine appointment. And why then
should any Soul which is not so perfect but that it needs the Divine
Assistance, be yet thought so perfect as not to need those means which he has
been pleased to appoint for the conveyance of those Assistances?

Hebrews did not allude to some such fancy of some who mysticised Baptism,
possibly to the disparagement of the Literal Baptism. For having exhorted those
to whom he wrote, to draw nigh [to Christ] with a true heart in full assurance
of faith, having their hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, Heb. x.22.
as if he had been afraid that they should understand him of this Mystical
Baptism, he after adds, Ver. 23.
and having our Bodies sprinkled with pure water, let us hold fast the
Profession of our hope without wavering. That he should add the mention of this
literal Baptism, after he had already taken notice of the Mystical Baptism,
which is indeed the truly beneficial Baptism, I cannot but think was done with
particular design in an Author so accurate as this is to the Hebrews, and who
generally lays so much weight on his particular expressions. And when I
consider what he immediately infers from it, that they should hold fast the
Profession of their hope without wavering, then methinks his design seems to be
yet clearer. For plainly by their holding fast the Profession of their hope
without wavering, he means not so much an adhering to the Practice of the
Christian Duties, as to the belief and external Profession of the Christian
Religion. This was the thing that the Hebrews then were most in danger of, of
relapsing to Judaism. As to their lives, and their sincerity in what they
professed, Heb. vi.9, 10. Heb. x.25.
the Author himself gives them a very good Testimony. And soon after he shows
again what he means by it, when he persuades them not to forsake the assembling
of themselves together, that he also meant an adhering to that external
Communion wherein that hope was professed, as I have elsewhere observed. Chap.
11.. 14, 15.
Now for persuading them to keep to the external Communion of the Church, the
external Baptism was the properest Argument, because this was indeed an
external initiation into a particular visible Society, and was not so
applicable to the external Parties to which they might fall when they deserted
the Communion of the Church, as the Mystical Baptism might be pretended to be,
by them who should be seduced to a defection. This sprinkling from an evil
Conscience being a thing transacted internally, and so not capable of discovery
in it self, could not oblige to one Party more than another, at least it could
not be known to what Party it obliged any otherwise than by supposing it
confined to the external Baptism, which their senses could inform them where it
had been received. As therefore it was very agreeable to the Authors interest
to urge the external Baptism for such a purpose as this was, so it was as much
for his Adversaries interest to disparage, and, if he could, evacuate the
obligation of the external Baptism by that Argument which I have already shown
to have been then so Popular, that is, by extolling the Mystical Baptism as the
only really beneficial Baptism as to all those advantages for which Baptism was
designed. This therefore the Author seems to have been aware of, and, to
prevent any such evasion, and withal to urge his own Arguments more closely and
convictively, immediately adds this mention of this external Baptism. If this
were really the Authors meaning, then it will afford us a direct confutation of
our Adversaries Notion, at least in this particular of Baptism. The sense of
this Divine Author will then appear to be full and resolute in the case, that
this Mystical Baptism is not to be supposed separate from the external Baptism,
and that the receiving this external Baptism in the external Communion of the
Church is an obligation to all who have so received it, not to forsake the
public Assemblies of the Church whereof they are Members, as they would expect
the benefit of this Mystical Baptism, which on this supposition is so
inseparable from it; nay, that these are now as necessary for entering into
Heaven, as the external Lustrations were then in the time of the Law; for the
Priests entering into the Holy of Holies, what personal Holiness soever he might
otherwise pretend to. For to this he plainly alludes in that part of the
context which gave the whole occasion for bringing in those words of which we
are at present discoursing. And that this is really the Apostles sense, will
appear to him (who shall consider the coherence with the Considerations now
mentioned) no improbable conjecture.

CHAP. XIII. The danger of Separation proved from Heb. VI.
THE CONTENTS.
This sin of withdrawing from the public Assemblies, on any pretense
whatsoever, is highly condemned in the Scriptures, and the condition of Persons
guilty of it is described as extremely dangerous.. I. This proved from Heb. vi.
The design of the Sacred Authors in these kind of Discourses is to warn the
Persons with whom they had to deal against Lapses, not from a good Life, but
from the true Communion.. II, III. This proved particularly to be the design of
this place. Illumination put for Baptism, both because of the interest Baptism
gave them in Christ who was the true Light,. IV. And in regard of the visible
Glory which then seems to have accompanied Baptism, in which regard this Title
was likely to have been taken up rather in the Apostles Age than afterward..
V. How properly this Title was given it as a lesser Purgative Mystery. Fire the
most Purgative Element.. VI. And that by which the Purgativeness of our
Saviors Baptism had been before particularly described.. VII. The other
expressions of this Text applied to Baptism.. VIII. That separating from the
visible Communion of the Church was a breach of their Baptismal Obligations
proved from the design of the Baptism of those times. Baptism a solemnity of
admission into their Schools, and an obligation to adhere to the Master.. IX.
And not only to the first Masters, but to the lawful Successors to their
Chairs.. X. The dishonor to Christ by falling away, mentioned in the Text to
be understood only Interpretatively. How this was proper to the Case of
desertors in those times.. XI, XII. How it is applicable to our present
Adversaries.. XIII. The Punishment of this crime mentioned in the Text.. XIV.
The application of this also to our present Adversaries.. XV. What it is to
Baptize in the name of the Spirit.. XVI, XVII. What is meant by the
Impossibility to renew the Lapsers here spoken of.. XVIII. An Objection.. XIX.
Answered.. XX. Application to our Present Adversaries.. XXI, XXII.

AND Lastly, This sin of withdrawing from the public Assemblies, on any
pretense whatsoever, is highly condemned in the Scriptures, and the condition
of Persons guilty of it is described as extremely dangerous; so dangerous, as
that it can be no small matter, nor no small evidence of a great matter, that
can encourage any wise considerative Person to venture his Soul upon it. I have
already shown something of this on other occasions. In discoursing concerning
the sin unto Death, I have shown, that in St. John the dispute was between
Parties, betwixt the Party of the Church and those of the Deceivers; and that
whatever did belong to Christ was confined to his Party, and the contrary is
said of those who joined with the Deceivers: That as Christ is the Life, the
Truth and the Light, so they who join in the external Profession of him are
said to have Life, to walk in the Truth, and in the Light, and on the contrary,
that they who deserted this Party externally professing him, are therefore said
not to have the Son, nor those privileges which are only to be had by him, but
on the contrary to be in falsehood, to be in darkness, to be in the World, and
in Death, for that very reason. I have showed, that if they should be mistaken
in a matter of this nature, their very recovery it self, how penitent soever
they should prove, is described as very hazardous, so hazardous as that no
slight reasons, nor slight conveniences, can make amends for it. I have shown
that they have no Promise that their own Prayers should be heard for any
Spiritual good thing whilst they continue in that condition, nor that the
Prayers of any others should be heard in their behalf. I have shown that the
sin against the Holy Ghost, which is so usually dreadful to our Brethrens
Consciences, is most likely to be incurred by this Practice of leaving the
Communion of the Church. But I must not recapitulate what I have there
discoursed, as the several Heads under which I discoursed them gave way. I only
add some few things now which were not so naturally reducible to the former
Topics.

Heb. vi. is a Text which our Brethren find extremely afflictive to them, when
they are under anguishes of Conscience. I heartily wish they would seriously
consider how much more their separation may expose them to the danger of it,
than those uncertain guesses at the temper of their own Spirits, which
according to their way of management does usually occasion their fearful
apprehensions concerning it. I have already observed that it is the great
design of the Writer of this Epistle to secure the Hebrews, to whom he writes
it, from falling away to their old Profession of Judaism. And accordingly as
the greatest part of the Epistle is spent in Dispute, in proving the Christian
Religion true from the Notions then received amongst the Jews themselves
concerning Mystical Judaism, which he applies to the Christian Religion; so the
frequent excursions which he makes, as he has occasion, to apply the several
Parts of his Discourse, are plainly to confirm them in the visible Christian
Communion. For otherwise his whole Discourse had signified little, if they
might have had liberty of professing this Mystical Judaism, as they had done
formerly, and as he plainly supposes the Jews to do still, when he argues from
those Mystical Notions as things acknowledged by them, in the Jewish Communion.

Errors and Seducers of those times, that the design of such Discourses is not,
as our Brethren usually take it to be, to secure them from falling from a good
Life, but primarily from falling from the true Religion, and that Party wherein
the true Religion was professed* and if on such occasions, any thing be spoken
of their Lives, it is only as a good Life might secure them from Seduction, or
as their departure would occasion their living ill, either as the Doctrine of
the Seducers tended to defend an ill Life, as generally their Notions did
concerning Christian Liberty, or as their wavering and inconstancy to Par^^es
might take them off from any serious belief of any Religion at all, at least
from any vehement concern for any one Party, when the owning of it, should
engage them in sufferings, as, God knows, we see it does, by too many present
experiments in the many Divisions for which I am at present concerned. And
indeed all their pains had been needlessly employed, if our Adversaries Notion
of a Church had been intended. What need had there been to have been so
solicitous for an invisible Church consisting of Elect, which could never fail
how much soever they had neglected them? And why should they have been jealous
of them, of whose present condition they often speak, as well as themselves
could desire, if they had thought they could not fall from that Grace which
they had once received? Certainly our Brethren themselves cannot understand
these things of any other Church than a visible one, wherein these Elect
Persons were not so distinguishable from others who were not Elect, which might
engage for a solicitousness for all, when they knew not who they were that were
in danger. Besides, the Apostles Discourses do plainly suppose some to have
fallen, and that so notoriously as that others might beware of their example,
and the Persons themselves could not deny a change from what they had been
formerly. But if they might have had the benefit of their Faith and Repentance,
and their Moral invisible Dispositons in another Party, their fall could never
have been so notorious.

fall, here described, is from their Baptismal Profession, from that condition
into which they were initiated by those Fundamental Rites mentioned in the
beginning of the Chapter, particularly those external ones of Baptism and
Imposition of hands. Heb. vi.2.
And if men would but expound the Scriptures as they do other Books of the same
Antiquity, that is, explain the terms of Art in the same sense they did from
whom they were taken, and as they did for whose information they were designed,
there could be little doubt of it. The (...) or Illumination here was plainly
the very term used by the Christians in St. Justin Martyrs time for Baptism.
Ver. 4.
Nor can it be admired that the Christians should call their own Mysteries by
Mystical Titles. Apolog. 2. p. 49. D.
It cannot be thought more strange in this Sacrament than in the other. If we
be said to be all one Body, 1 Cor. x.17. 1 Cor. xii.13.
because we partake of one Bread, we are also to be baptized into one ^ody.
Besides, the Mystical way of teaching, which was so generally in use in the
Eastern Nations, the Christians proving the Truth of their Religion, as I have
said, from Mystical Judaism, plainly inclined them to use a Mystical Language
in all their writings. And among them all there is none who makes more
advantage of these Mystical Notions and Language than this Author to the
Hebrews, and it may be none who is more Critical, in observing the phrases and
terms of that Language. And if he would observe the Propriety any where, where
would it better become him than in a Subject of this Nature? The reason why
Baptism was called Illumination, was, because it ingraffed into Christ who was
the true Light. And it is very well known how constant the Writers of the New
Testament are in using this Mystical expression concerning Luke ii.32. Joh.
i.9.viii.12. Act. xiii.47. 1 John 1.5. Rev. xxi.23.
Christ, and how constant withal they are in describing our conversion to him
as a conversion from Act. xxvi.18.
darkness unto Light, as a 1 Pet. ii.9.
calling us out of darkness into this mavelous Light, etc. And what is
Baptism else but the Solemnity of this conversion? And why should we think it
strange that they should use this word in the Mystical sense, even in the
Apostles times, when we find them so constant to those Mystical Notions from
whence it plainly came to be applied to Baptism?

Holy Ghost was given in Baptism, so in the Apostles times it was usually given
with a sensible signification, and it was but necessary for the conviction of
the Infidel beholders, who might, by this means, be satisfied of the Divine
Authority by which they preached, when they saw their Promises of the Spirit so
ratified by God in a way themselves were capable of judging of. And among these
sensible significations, one of the most familiar, and which the Jews had been
most acquainted with, was that of a Shechinah, a visible glorious Light
surrounding the faces of those Persons on whom the Holy Ghost was thus pleased
to descend. Thus it was with Exodus xxxiv.30.
Moses in the Mount, and our Savior at his Baptism and on his Transfiguration,
and it is most likely that the fiery cloven tongues which sat upon the
Apostles on Pentecost were of this nature. And even among the Heathens
themselves the ignis lambens is taken notice of, which appeared on some of
their Heroes* on Virgil. Aen. 2.
Ascanius, and Live. L.i. c. 39.
Servius Tullius, and in the Samnite War on Flor.
and upon other Vid. Appian Syriac. p. 198. Ed. 1670. and ib. not. Tollii.
occasions this appearance of fire was counted lucky, as signifying a
propitious presence of the Deity. And it was usual for them to picture them as
we do our Saints with rays of Light. And why might not this visible appearance
of rays of Light on Persons newly Baptized be a very pobable occasion why
Baptism it self was called Illumination? Thence the Coronae radiatae on the
first Emperors, when they affected to be Gods.
If it was then it will be more likely that the name should have been taken up
in the Apostles own times than afterward when these Supernatural appearances
began gradually to decay, and to grow less familiar. For though several other
miracles continued to the second Century and downwards, yet there is no reason
to believe that this did, at least we have no footsteps of its appearing
ordinarily over Persons Baptized. Heb. x.32.
Besides, there is one place more wherein this same Author uses this same word
of Illumination. And whether it be necessary it should be understood so or not,
yet it cannot be denied but that it is there also conveniently intelligible of
Baptism. And indeed the former days spoken thereof do most conveniently refer
to their first initiation into the Christian Religion.

Sacrament which then prevailed, that Baptism should be called Illumination,
that Baptism was the lesser Mystery, and the proper Office of such was
understood to be Purgative rather than Perfective, (...) rather than (...),
that was the Sacred Language. And that the two Elements, which were thought
most Purgative* were fire and water, which were therefore generally used in
these Purgative Mysteries. Accordingly fire was used among the Purgative Rites
of the Initiations of Mithras, (...). Porphyr. Ep. ad Anebunt. ap. Eusebius. Pr.
Eu. L.iii. c. 4.
and of the Egyptians; and when Cores would purge a Child of its Mortality,
Nonn. (...). in Nazian. Stel. 1. Apollodor. Bibl. Seldom. de Diis Sir.
she did it with fire; and thus not only the modern Rabbis, but even the LXXII
themselves seem to have understood the Israelites making their Children pass
through the fire, of their initiatory Purgation, when they express it by the
(...), which is the proper sacred term for that purpose, which whether it were
true in this case or not, yet at least supposes that they who thus expounded
these Texts, did know that this was used in their initiations at least. in
those Eastern Countries, which we have reason to expect to have most influence
on our Christian Mysteries. And the use of brimstone in these fiery Purgations
was so very ordinary that it is conceived thence to have had the name of (...);
and (...) is used for purging, not only very frequently in the LXXII. but also
in profane Authors. And hence it was that the fire, -- (...). Theocrit. Eid.
24. v.9.
even of Hell, and of the general Conflagration were thought Purgative to the
Souls who were to pass through them, not only by the Philosophers, but by many
of the most ancient Fathers. As therefore the visible Element of Water was made
use of for purging the Body, which is the effect it is usually applied to by
the sacred Writers so it is also very probable that the Spirit when it
descended upon them, did descend in the likeness of fire, as it did upon the
Apostles at Pentecost, that is, that the Schechinah, in which it appeared, had
the resemblance of Fire.

John Baptist as the Property of our Saviors Baptism, Matt. iii.11. Luke
iii.16.
that it gives the Holy Ghost, so the Holy Ghost there given is peculiarly
characterized under the resemblance of fire. For so I understand this Baptizing
with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, to be a giving of the Holy Ghost with that
external signification of a Glory, which is called fire. I confess this is
peculiarly applied to the descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles at
Pentecost. Act. i.5.
But when I consider it as opposed to St. John's Baptism I cannot but think it
was also as ordinary then for Persons baptized by the Apostles to receive the
Spirit with this external Symbol of fire, as it was for them to want it in
other Baptisms. I need not also tell how very proper it was in the Mystical
Language of those times to call the Spirit it self by the name of fire, The
(...) in the Chaldee Oracles, the liquidus ignis in Virgil, where see Servius.
And God is described as a Being whose Soul is Truth, and his Body Fire. See
Boet. de cons. Phil. So Porphiry concerning the (...). de Abstinent. L.ii. and
ap. Eus. Pr. Eu. i.9.
and that not only by them who thought it really so, but by them who were more
Orthodox in the Philosophy of it, only because they could think of no sensible
resemblance that held a nearer proportion to the Purity of a Spirit than fire
did; and one great design of this Mystical language was to help the
imaginations of those to whom they used them to frame worthy Ideas of Spirits,
and the most suitable to their nature they were capable of, by those sensible
resemblances which were nearest to their nature. And that from this fire,
Baptism should be called Illumination, cannot be thought strange, not only
because it seems to have been really no other than an irradiation of a
lightsome glory, but because indeed in the Hellenistical idiom which was
derived from the Hebrew, the same word (...) signifies both light and fire, and
accordingly we have the fire, at which St. Peter warmed himself, Mark xiv.54.
in the Highpriests Palace, called by the name of (...).

newly baptized. Their Heb. vi.4.
tasting of the heavenly gift, seems to be the same with their partaking of the
Spirit it self which is so often said to be Joh. vii.39. Romans 5.5. 1 These. iv.8.
given by Christ, or of the (...), which, as I have said, seems in those Ages
so ordinarily to have accompanied the Spirit it self, and is called also by the
same name of Gifts. Romans xi.29.xii.6. 1 Cor. xii.1, 4, 9, 28, 30, 31.xiv.12.
Ephesians. iv.8. Heb. ii.4.
That this Gift should be called a heavenly one, cannot be thought strange, not
only because it was so really in opposition to worldly Gifts, but because the
Scripture always describes these gifts with relation to that place. And
accordingly as Christ himself is said to be the 1 Cor. xv.47
Lord from Heaven, so St. Jam. i.17.
every good and perfect gift is (...), from the Father of those Lights from
whence Baptism is called Illumination. And which yet comes more close to our
present Case, the Baptismal Regeneration is also said to be Joh. iii.3.
(...), because the Principle of Divine Life there infused is from above: And
if it were needful to give a critical account of the metaphor of Tasting, it
were easy to show how the Allegory is continued in likening the Spirit to
meat. So the (...) in St. 1 Pet. ii: 2.
Peter, and in this very Heb. v.12, 13, 14.
Author, opposed to the (...). However this word does properly signify the
first beginnings of Spiritual fruitions, as tasting is the first beginning of
eating, and so will more properly belong to Baptism than any other state of a
Christian. Their partaking of the Holy Ghost is the principal design of our
Saviors Baptism, who does not only baptize with water, but with the Holy
Ghost. Their tasting of the word of God is their partaking of that word which
is the 1 Pet. i.23, 25.
incorruptible seed of this Baptismal Regeneration, and which, to answer the
Metaphor of tasting, is also compared to meat. Matt. iv.4.
And the power of the World to come, seem plainly to be those extraordinary
Gifts of the Spirit which are called (...), and which, as I have already
observed, seem then to have been communicated to every baptized Person. And
very agreeably they are called the powers of the World to come, because Christ,
whose powers they are, is described by this same Author as Heb. ii.5, etc.
the Prince of this World to come, whom therefore such a Largess would very
properly become.

fall, here described, to be a fall from the Obligations they had undertaken in
Baptism, the Argument hence deduced to persuade them to continue in the
Churches Communion will be the same with that concerning which I have lately
discoursed on Heb. x.22, 23. But for clearing the force of it in both places,
it will not be amiss to show further that by this fall is properly meant no
other than a desertion of the external Communion of the Church. To this purpose
I consider that Baptism among the Jews was properly a Ceremony of admitting
Disciples into the School of a Rabbi. This I shall not now prove, because I
shall have occasion to do it in my Second Part. This therefore being supposed,
it will plainly follow that our Christian Baptism also does admit us, as
Scholars, to Christ as our Master and Rabbi, St. Matt. xxiii.7, 8, 10. St. Joh.
xiii.13, 14.
for so he is pleased to call himself. Now the Obligation of a Scholar, as
such, is to frequent his Masters School, and to submit to the Rules by which it
is governed. And as he ceases to be Scholar of any Master, and would then have
been thought to have deserted any Sect, either of the Rabbis or Philosophers
who had deserted the Schools wherein the Doctrine of the Sect was taught, and
the Chairs in which they sat who taught them; so we have reason in the same
way of proceeding, to presume that he leaves the Christian Profession, and
ceases to be a Scholar of Christ who leaves the School of Christ, and the Chair
wherein his Doctrine is taught, or refuses to be subject to the Constitutions
which were issued from those Chairs. I am sure Christ himself obliges his
Disciples to observe and do whatever the Scribes and Pharisees bid them do for
the very Authority of the Chair of Moses wherein they sat. Mat. xxiii.2, 3.
And so they call themselves Moses's Disciples in opposition to their being
Christ's Disciples. And accordingly the places wherein the Primitive Christians
kept their Meetings were in the form of Schools, and the Chairs of the Apostles
are mentioned and appealed to by Tertullian, Tertull. Praefer. c. 36.
and particularly the very material Chairs wherein St. James sat at
Jerusalem, Eusebius. Hist. L.vii. c. 19.
and St. John at Ephesus were preserved for some considerable time after.

Scholar due only during the principal Masters Life. The Succession was
maintained, and whosoever was lawfully and orderly placed in the Masters Chair
upon his decease, to him the Scholars were as much obliged as they had been to
the Master himself, and were as much disowned from belonging to the Sect if
they deserted the Schools then, as if they had done it while the Master was
living. Aristotle was guilty of deserting the Academical Sect for leaving the
Aeademia, and gathering Scholars to himself in the Peripatus in opposition to
those in the Academia, as well in Xinocrates and Speusippus's times, as when
Plato himself possessed the Chair. And so our Savior himself allows the same
Authority to the Scribes and Pharisees, St. Matt. xxiii.2.
because they sat in Moses's Chair, though so many Ages after, as if Moses
himself had sat there. And therefore they who now leave the Chairs and Schools
of Christ, do thereby as much cease to be his Disciples as if they had deserted
them when Christ and the Apostles were living. And if we would know who they
are who now possess the Chairs of the Apostles, the enquiry will not be
difficult if we admit their Testimony who by their living so near those times
had very good reason to know them, at least incomparably better than we have at
this distance from them. And they when the very early Heretics had given them
occasion to insist on this Topic to justify the Succession of their Doctrine
by the Succession of their Chairs, which was so early that the Succession could
not have been so soon forgotten, they, I say, unanimously make their present
Bishops Successors to the Apostles in this very office of the Chair, and prove
their Succession to them by producing Catalogues of single Persons. It
therefore Baptism oblige us to fidelity to the Chair and School of Christ, and
we fall from our Baptismal Obligation, whenever we desert that School or
refuse Subjection to the dictates of that Chair; if the Chair of Christ was
still continued in his Apostles, so that falling from their Chair is
consequently chargeable with a defection from Christ himself; if the Chairs of
the Primitive Bishops continued still the same with that of the Apostles, and
the Chairs of the present Bishops the same with those of the Primitive Bishops
on the same account of a Regular Succession, which makes any Chair the same in
later Ages as it was in the former; then it will follow, that as it was a
falling away from the Discipleship of Christ, when this Epistle to the Hebrews
was written, to leave the visible School of Christ, that is, the external
Communion of the Church then, it must, by the same parity of reason, be the
like falling away now, to leave the same external Communion of our present
Bishops.

falling away is, and how far our present Adversaries are concerned in it; I
now proceed to consider what the mischief of it is which this Author makes use
of as an Argument to deter men from it. And here are two things to be taken
notice of: the greatness of the mischief of such a state, and the difficulty of
recovering out of it. The former is only supposed, the other expressly asserted
in the Text. And both of them are so extremely considerable, as would suffice
to discourage any wise man from venturing on them without very great necessity,
and very great evidence too. A little inconvenience would not be thought little
if it were either not at all, or very hardly repairable. But what shall we say
then when the mischief is as formidable in it self, as in its being
irreparable? In the danger it self two things are observable: the greatness and
heinousness of the sin; whence is inferred the Justice of a proportionable
great punishment. The sin is said to be a crucifying to themselves of the Son
of God afresh, and a putting him to an open shame. Which are only to be
understood interpretatively, that the falling away from the Communion wherein
Christ had been professed, was interpretatively a new Crucifixion of Christ as
far as he was capable of being again crucified, not by repeating of the Jews
malice against him, but by a virtual approbation of all that had by them been
done against him, as being done deservedly. Wherein I do confess there was
something of aggravation peculiar to those Ages, and Persons, and Circumstances
which this Sacred Author had to deal with that is not so applicable to our
Adversaries Case. For them indeed to fall back to their Countrymen who had
crucified our Savior, was plainly to imply that they had committed no such
(...) or Piaculum in murdering him as might oblige them to forbear a commerce
with them, at least in Sacris, as, in those times, they thought all were bound,
to forbear any such commerce with them who were (...), till they had been
expiated. And particularly Murder was account^d such a piacular Crime,
especially when the Persons guilty had devoted themselves for it, St. Matt.
xxvii.25.
as the Jews had done in our Saviors Case, when they wished that the guilt of
his blood might light on themselves and their Children.

devoting of themselves had been of it self sufficient, according to the
Principles of those times, to contract a great (...), though there had been no
other guilt in the Case, as among the Heathens is clear in the instance of
their (...) and devota Capita, In the Case of the Decii they brought ill
success to the Enemies where they were. Live. L.viii. c. 9. L.x. c. 28. vid.
Macrob. Saturn. iii.8.
and among the Jews themselves by that notable instance of the escape Goat
instituted by God himself, who though they were not of themselves guilty of the
crimes they suffered for, but only by imprecation of the Punishments deserved
by them, were thence forward looked on as unholy, and the Persons under a Legal
uncleanness who had any thing to do with them. And, which was yet more
considerable in this Case, it was one most considerable ingredient in their
Preachings, to upbraid the Jews with the guilt of this Murder. They tell them
that they had with wicked hands crucified and slain him; Act. ii.23.
that they had crucified the Lord of Life, that they had been his Betrayers and
Murderers. Act. iii.15.vii.52. Act. v.28.
And accordingly the High Priest and the Sanhedrim tell them that they intended
to bring that man's blood upon them. And how could they, who had charged them so
heavily in this particular, ever think of returning to them, but that very
return must have been taken for a virtual recantation of these heavy
accusations? They must therefore have thought them no Murderers, and must
therefore be supposed to justify what they had done from being Murder. But
this could not be done without supposing our Lord a criminal, and guilty of
those very crimes of which he had been accused, and for which he had been
condemned by his Crucifiers. For the killing of an innocent, or even of a
guilty Person, yet not guilty of the Crimes for which he had been accused, or
not guilty of Capital Crimes, at least not such as might have deserved that
severe kind of Death which he had suffered, could not have been altogether
excused from Murder. Which must have supposed him a Blasphemer, a Deceiver and
a Rebel; for these were the Crimes of which he had been accused by his
Crucifiers. And this was indeed to Cruicifie him a-fresh, and to put him to an
open shame, in the sense now mentioned, that is, to own that he was really as
bad as the Jews took him to be, and that the pain and shamefulness of the Death
he had suffered from them (for the shame is to be referred to the kind of
suffering by the Cross, with which it is also frequently joined on other Heb.
xii.^
occasions, rather than to the shame of their disowning him; nay, this very
(...) is elsewhere ascribed to the Cross) was no more than he had deserved.
This was indeed, as the same Author elsewhere expresses it, Heb. x.29.
a trampling under feet the Son of God, that is, indeed, a showing the greatest
possible contempt of him, which is elsewhere Psalm. xci.13. Isa.
xiv.19.xxviii.3. Matt. vii.6.v.13. Rev. xi.2.
importance of that Phrase: a counting the Blood of the Covenant by which they
bad been sanctified an unholy thing, that is, indeed, so far from being fit to
expiate the sins of others, (as the Blood of the Covenant ought to do) as that
it needed expiation it self, as it must needs have done, if it had been shed
for Crimes of his own that had justly deserved it; a doing despite to the
Spirit of Grace, that is, of the Gospel, which they had received, Gal. iii.2.
not by the works of the Law, but by the Obedience of Faith, accounting that it
self an evil and deceiving Spirit, as they must needs have accounted it if it
had been given them by the means of a Deceiver.

Church does not imply their taking Christ himself for a Deceiver, but their
thinking them deceived, from whom they depart, in pretending to a Succession
from him. And therefore as far as this special aggravation of the crime is a
particular reason of the severity of the Punishment, so far I shall ingeniously
confess that I think our dissenting Brethren unconcerned in it. But then
withal it will be fit to be considered that this disparity of their Case can
only be as to the intention of the Persons, not as to the nature of the Thing.
They who in those times and circumstances deserted the School of Christ, to go
over to his professed Adversaries, must have been more sensible of this
consequence of their doing so, because the party, to which they went, did in
terms profess to believe our Lord an Impostor, which was the Principle from
which all these dreadful consequences followed. And their knowing this must
needs have been an extreme aggravation of their Crime. But as to the nature of
the thing, the Case is the same now as then. Whosoever deserts Christ's School
must necessarily imply that he is not such as he pretended to be, that is, not
so Authorized from God as himself pretended; for if they thought him so they
could never pretend any reason why they should desert him. And then all the
other consequences follow out of Course. For whoever pretends an Authority from
God when he has it not, must be supposed so wicked for doing so, as that there
is no other crime chargeable on him by his greatest Adversaries, but it may
then prove likely for him to have been guilty of it. So that in this regard the
Cases of our present Adversaries, and those of the Apostles times, would be
like that of two Persons assisting a Rebel, who should pretend a Commission
from his Prince, but falsely. The one of them, I suppose, knows the falsehood of
his pretense: the other does not; but thinks that whilst he serves him he
serves his Prince. Both of them are alike guilty of the same Crime, and both
are as real Enemies to the Royal Authority, and may do as much real mischief in
prosecuting the Rebellion: Only the Crime is not alike imputable to him who
knows what he does to be Rebellion, as to him who mistakes it for Loyalty. So
if they be as really Enemies to Christ whom our Adversaries mistake for his
Friends as they were in the Apostles times who did not so much as pretend to be
his Friends; if they really disown the Chair of Christ in disowning his Regular
Successors in that Chair, though they pretend only to disown the Men who are at
present possessed of the Chair; the Crime of deserting this Chair now will
prove as grievous as it was in the Apostles days, though it be not now so
imputable to the Persons guilty of it as it was then when they had better
information. However it will highly concern our Brethren by no means to neglect
the real guilt, whatever they may think of the imputation, if for no other
reason, yet for this, that the neglect will certainly aggravate the imputation.
Besides, that the imputation it self may prove really greater than they are
aware of.

guilt here spoken of, let us now consider the Punishment of it, from whence it
will both appear how great the guilty is, and how liable our Adversaries are to
the Punishment suitably to their proportion of the guilt. And this is rather
employed here than expressed, when it is said to be so great as to need a
Renovation. For it is hereby intimated that all they enjoyed before is so
totally lost by this fall as that nothing remained of it, and if they would
recover any of the advantages of the former state, they must recover them by a
new admission into that state, and an admission so entirely new as if they
never had been of it, so little benefit they could expect from their former
Admission, even in order to the making their second Admission more easy and
compendious. Now this Renovation it self does also refer to Baptism. So Baptism
it self is expressly called the laver of Regeneration, and of the renewing of
the Holy Ghost, Tit. iii.5.
by which we are also said to be saved. The same word (...) is used in both
places. From these things therefore it follows that the Holy Spirit of our
Master, which is his internal Teacher, which must open the understanding of his
Disciples, and make them capable of understanding his sublimer Doctrines, his
Acroamaticks, which according to the methods of Teaching in those times, were
only entrusted with those of their Scholars whom they found to be of
extraordinary capacities (which method was also punctually observed by our
Master himself,) I say, it follows that this Spirit, by which the Scripture
usually signifies all the good things of the Gospel, is so entirely lost by
this lapse of theirs from their Baptismal State, as that it is not recoverable
but by a new admission into Christ's School again, such a one as that was
whereby they at first became his Scholars. Which would be so far from fitting
them for the Mysteries of Christianity, (for which it is the great design of
this Author to persuade them to fit themselves, in this whole Chapter, that
they might be the better capable of apprehending the mystical discourse
concernig Melchizedec which occasioned this whole digression, and which he
immediately resumes in the following Chapter) as that it would only be a laying
the foundation again, a reducing to their beggarly Elements, Heb. vi.1.
as he elsewhere expresses it; as rambling Scholars who have absented
themselves from School, are usually degraded lower than they were before, upon
their return to it. But this holds more severely in learning Christianity than
in the Discipline of ordinary Schools. For because the things learned in
ordinary Schools are such as are capable of being both learned and retained by
the natural faculties of the Scholars; therefore, though their deserting one
School, and going to another, must needs put them backward in the method of the
Master whom they had deserted, yet not so backward as to oblige them, upon
their return to him again, to begin anew at his first Elements. But the
Mysteries of Christianity are suppo^ed not intelligible otherwise than by the
Spirit, nor retainable without the help of the same Spirit which at first
assisted to the understanding of them. And therefore where this Spirit is lost,
as it is plainly supposed to be lost by deserting the School, and following any
other Master besides him, all their former learning, and all the new learning
they may have since got elsewhere, must, on this supposition, signify nothing;
and therefore, they who have left the Spirit of Christ, must, upon their return
to his School, be degraded to their first Elements, and especially that of
recovering the Spirit, which they are, by this means, supposed to have lost.
This Exposition, as it will make the reasoning of the Apostle cogent, so it
will be found exactly agreeable with his whole design, as they will find who
shall be pleased to compare them.

Christ, which will as exactly reach our Adversaries Case now as it did the
Case of those Adversaries of the Apostles. For the reason given here as that
which brought this loss upon them is not so much their going over to the School
of Christ's nototorious professed Adversaries, (wherein indeed their Case was
different from that of our present dissenting Brethren) but as their leaving
the School of Christ by forsaking the Communion wherein they had received that
Baptism which could only validly initiate them into that School, and entitle
them his Disciples; which is also exactly the Case of our present Brethren. And
this very desertion of Christ's School is here supposed, not only, to be the
merit (though that were sufficient for my present design against our modern
Adversaries, who as they are, thus far at least, guilty of the same Crime in
deserting the School of Christ, so do thus far also deserve the same
punishment, that is, they do equally deserve that degree of punishment which is
proper and proportionable to this degree of guilt,) but the means on which this
loss does naturally follow, according as things are settled by Christ's own
establishment. He supposes that their falling away from Christ's School must
deprive them of his Spirit, which is his internal instruction, and so proper to
his School, and his Disciples, as any inferior means of Teaching are proper to
ordinary Schools, as well as the Teaching of the principal Master. Whoever
leaves one School to go to another, does as necessarily lose the Teaching of
the Usher as of the Master of the School which he is supposed to leave. And
therefore as our Brethren by their deserting the School of Christ are supposed,
in the way of arguing used by this Sacred Author, to lose the Title they had to
Christ as their Master, who by this means ratifies the Acts of his Successors
in his Chair, that they who are not of their School, shall not be of his, as
the same thing was observed in Successions in other Schools from whence the
precedent was taken in the first establishment of Christianity; and as it is
also necessary that they who have not Christ for their Master, must also lose
all the particular means he makes use of for communicating his instructions to
his Disciples; so necessary it is, by this way of Arguing, which this Author
proceeds on, that our present Adversaries, as they are also guilty of the same
desertion of Christ's School, should also lose this internal Teaching of the
Spirit which he makes use of for communicating his instructions to them. For
plainly the Spirit seems to have been designed to supply the Office of Christ
as a Master. And when the Holy Ghost is called a Paracletus, I cannot think the
(...), from whence he is called so, to be only comforting or exhorting, or
interceding only, but rather instructing. I am much more inclinable to think
this to be the Notion of it where the (...) is mentioned, and where the
Disciples of Antioch are said to rejoice, Act. xiii.15.xv.31.
(...), that is, for the instruction they had received from the Apostles
concerning their disobligation from the Law of Moses. I am sure this Notion of
the word is most agreeable with that account which is given of him where he is
called by this name, Joh. xvi.12, 13.
that he should teach them all things, and show them things to come, besides
the many things which our Savior had to say to them, which as yet they were
not able to bear, but should be able, when this Paracletus should come upon
them. And this seems to be the thing which this very Author had in his mind
when he observes it as the Privilege of the new Covenant that men should under
it be taught by God, St Joh. vi.45. Joel ii.28, 29. Act. ii.17, 18. 1 John
ii.20.
that is, no doubt, by this Spirit which he would then p^ur out upon all flesh.
I need not mention that St. John appeals to this Unction as that which should
teach them all things to whom he writes, and many other things which might have
been observed from other passages of Scripture.

Baptizing in the name of the Spirit, because Baptism did admit Scholars to the
School of the Spirit. For as our Savior himself professes that the Doctrine
preached by him was not his, St. Joh. xvi.v.14, 15.
but his Fathers that sent him, which will very justly entitle the Father to
the Title of a Master in the School we are speaking of; so he withal tells us
of the Spirit whom he designed to send, that he should take of Christ's (no
doubt of his Doctrine, as he immediately says, that whatever the Father has is
his, and he had elsewhere told us that it was his Doctrine which he had
received from the Father) and show it unto them. So that Baptism in the name of
the three Persons, will imply an admitting Disciples, not as the ordinary
Baptisms of those times did pretend to do, only to some eminent men who were to
be the Masters of the Sect to which Baptism did admit them, but to God himself
in all the three Persons, who yet were not to be taken for three Masters, but
one. For, as our Savior by preaching his Fathers Doctrine is said to glorify
his Father, in owning him as the original Master; so the Spirit, by inculcating
the Doctrine of the Son is said to glorify the Sun by still owning the Son as
the Master of those instructions which were thus inculcated by him. And as the
Son's receiving his Doctrine from his Father does not derogate from his
enjoining the Title of a Master also, so neither will the same reason of the
Spirits receiving his Doctrine from the Son hinder him also from the same Title
of a Master. And this I take indeed to be the useful reason why it is so
frequently inculcated by our Savior that he and his Father were Joh.
x.30.xvii.11, 22.
one, and by St. 1 John v.7.
John that these three are one: not so much to prevent any danger of
Polytheism, for that was a thing the Jews, to whom he preached, were not so
much in danger of; nor to prevent any scandal that the Jews might have taken up
against the Christian Religion as if it had by this means countenanced a thing
to which they were so averse: (for it might have been shown that this Notion of
the Trinity was not new to them, and that our Savior asserted nothing more
concerning it than what had been asserted by their most eminent Hellenistical
Doctors, and during our Saviors own Life time he did not speak things so
clearly in this matter as his Apostles did afterward) but to prevent all
danger of taking them for three Masters, and under that pretense erecting three
Schools, and making Divisions and Emulations among their Scholars, which they
were otherwise very likely to have done in consequence to the Notions then
current concerning these Baptismal forms. And accordingly the Gnostics, who,
by living nearer to those times, had better means than we have now, of knowing
the meaning of the Forms and Customs, when they Baptized into the name of the
Mother of all, Iren. L. 1. c. 18.
seem also to have owned that Mother for their Mistress on account of those
Seeds by her infused into them, by which they pretended to come by the (...),
that knowledge of Mysteries they boasted of. And if this were so, it was very
agreeable that they who had thus deserted Christ's School should also be
deprived of the Instructions they might have received, not only from Christ
himself, but also from the Holy Spirit, who was to preach nothing to them but
what he had received from Christ.

Spirit is called by the name of Christ himself. I shall elsewhere have
occasion to produce instances, and therefore shall forbear them now. I only
observe at present that if this be so, the Mastership of the Spirit is no other
than the Mastership of Christ. And so indeed it should seem, that the Spirit is
to Christ as the Shechinah was to God in the Tabernacle and the Temple, and
accordingly these Shechinahs, or visible appearances, are more frequently
ascribed to the Spirit than to any other Person of the Trinity. And indeed,
when the Spirit is called the Spirit of Glory and of Christ, it seems to be
called so, as being, indeed it self, the Glory by which Christ manifests
himself in the Soul. As therefore God himself was said to be present with the
Israelites when his Shechinah was present with them, and as he is said to
remove his presence when that was withdrawn or removed from them; so, according
to this way of explication, wheresoever the Spirit of Christ is present, Christ
himself will be present also. And therefore, if they who desert his School must
thereby lose the presence and Mastership of Christ, they must by necessary
consequence lose his Spirit also. Now the deserting of the School of Christ I
have already shown to concern our present Adversaries as nearly as it did them
who lived in the times of the Apostles.

impossibility of renewing such Lapsers as are here spoken of to Repentance.
And here it will be convenient to show, 1. What is meant by renewing them to
Repentance. And then, 2. What is meant by the impossibility of it. As to the
former, we have already seen that the fall here described is a fall from their
Baptismal state, and therefore the renewing them implying a putting them in the
same state wherein they were before; the renewing here spoken of will be most
obviously intelligible of a restitution of them to the state of their Baptism.
And not to lay any stress on the Critical importance of this term Renovation, I
have also shown that Renovation of the Spirit is peculiarly ascribed to
Baptism, though it be given there to Persons who never had it before, as it is
a Renovation of that Spirit which Adam had in his Innocence, and we might all
have had from him if he had continued in his Innocence. And that the Renovation
here described is said to be to Repentance, that also very well agrees with
this Notion of our being hereby restored to the state of Baptism. For
Repentance and Baptism are always joined together, Act. ii.38.
Repent, and be baptized every one of you, says St. Peter. And it seems to have
been the design of the common Baptisms there used, to expiate them from their
former impurities as well as to admit them to a purer way of living for the
future. So St. John Baptist before his Baptism preaches Repentance, and he
charges those who were baptized by him to bring forth fruits worthy of
Repentance. And the same was the design of the lesser Mysteries among the
Heathens, to which Baptism was thought answerable among the Christians. They
were Purgative, as the greater were Perfective. These things therefore being
thus supposed, both these terms of Renovation, and renewing to Repentance, will
be conveniently intelligible of Baptism it self. And so the force of the
Argument will be, that a Restoration to their Baptismal state, that is, their
being again admitted as Christ's Scholars, and so the entitling them to the
privileges of Christ's School, among others, that of the internal instructions
of the Spirit, is not regularly to be expected without a repetition of their
Baptism it self, because that is the Ceremony of admission into it, so that as
they who were not at first baptized were never Christ's Disciples, so they who
cannot be baptized the second time, are not capable of becoming Disciples a
second time on supposition of a Relapse. But Christ's Institution admits of only
one Baptism. Whence the Author might infer the same Argument for the difficulty
of the restitution of Lapsers to the Church Communion here, as he does in the
tenth Chapter. As he there infers that they who had their sins once forgiven
them upon their coming to Christ, on account of his Sacrifice being offered for
them, could not expect that they be a second time forgiven if they fell away
from their first state which entitled them to forgiveness, because the
Sacrifice of Christ is not like that of the Law, repeated often, but offered up
once, and that for ever; so here, Christ having instituted but one Baptism, by
which men are to be admitted into his School, they who forfeit the benefit of
their first admission by deserting the School, can never expect the benefit of
a Second. And if remission of sins be the effects of this Baptism which is here
described as a renewing to Repentance, it will then follow, that they who
cannot be admitted to a new Baptism, must, on that account, be excluded from
those hopes, which a second Baptism might have given them, of the remission of
their sins. If this Exposition be admitted for the true sense of this Author,
then the impossibility will be understood strictly and properly, that as it is
really unpossible for them to get a second Baptism, so it will be also
impossible to gain that Renovation which cannot be expected without it.

Baptism, here is another Ceremony of admitting Disciples mentioned in the
Text, that is, Heb. vi.2.
imposition of hands, which was not thought so uniterable as Baptism was: And
that this might supply all the defects of a second Baptism to Persons who had
forfeited their interest in the first, by forsaking the Discipleship into which
they had been admitted by it: That this was thought to have all the virtue of
Baptism; that it made them Disciples of the School of Christ, according to the
customs of the Schools of those times; that it gave them the Holy Spirit, and
that more properly than Baptism it self; for the Samaritans received the
Spirit, not by the Baptism of St. Philip, but by the impositions of the hands
of St. Peter, and St. John; that it was also a means of remitting sins, and was
accordingly practiced in the reconciliation of Penitents. That this was the
very Ceremony made use of by the Church in the reconciliation of Penitents for
all the ends now mentioned, in opposition to the Novatians: That this Divine
Author does suppose that the foundation may be laid again, Ver. 1.
when he so disswades the Persons to whom he writes from running the hazard of
it, and therefore cannot suppose a restitution of Lapsers to their Baptismal
state so impossible as is here supposed; That he seems plainly to suppose this
as his own sense, and not only as the sense of those with whom he had to deal,
when the reason he insists on to dissuade them from this hazard, is only that
they would thereby lose so much of the progress they had already made to
Perfection by suffering themselves to be by this means reduced to their first
beginnings: That their sailing thereby in point of Perfection, is sufficient
for the Authors design in this whole Chapter, to show how much they would
thereby unfit themselves for that strong meat which he makes proper for perfect
Persons (that is for the (...) in both senses, as (...) signifies a Person full
grown in opposition to the (...), for whom milk was more proper; and as it
signifies a Person come to a nearer familiarity with the Deity in the Mystical
style, for it was to such that the Mysteries were communicated, and they were
only such who were capable of being benefited by them, in opposition to the
(...), to those who had only been purged from the (...)) when they should by
this means degrade themselves from the (...) to the very first Cathartick
Mysteries, and if they were Children who had need of milk, they must then be
reduced to the imperfection of newborn Babes; and that if the thing may be
done, that is, if Persons who have forfeited their Baptismal state may be again
restored to it, it is no great matter how they come to be restored, whether by
another Baptism, or only by imposition of hands; whether to the same degree of
Perfection they had attained to before, or whether only to an inferior.

Lapsing from their Baptismal Obligations, might not expect a new Baptism, yet
they might be restored gradually to the state in which they were before they
fell; and that this Restitution by imposition of hands, though less entire and
slower than that of Baptism, yet might at length prove the same way beneficial
to the Persons thus restored. What the Church has thought in this matter, even
since the opposition to the Novatians, is abundantly sufficient for my design.
If our Brethren did believe now, as they did then, that in Baptism all former
sins were entirely remitted in a moment without any further satisfaction than
their Covenant there undertaken, that they would not commit them for the
future, but that the restitution by imposition of hands, after a Lapse from
their Baptismal state, was not to be obtained but by a course of long and
severe Penances; for several Crimes for several years according to the
Penitential Canons then in force, for some not till the time of their Deaths,
if even then it self; if they did believe that the sin of Schism was of as
piacular a nature as they believed it then, (of which in my second Part, Conc.
Elibertin.
) and thought themselves obliged upon their return from it to grieve and humble
themselves for having ever been guilty of it as Moses and Maximus, and other
holy Persons of St. Cyprians Age did: The very impossibility of being restored
by a second Baptism, and their being consequently obliged to endeavor a
Reconciliation by a way so much more tedious and rigorous as this was of the
imposition of hands, would have been taken for Considerations so weighty as
that very few things else would be thought sufficient to contervail them. Even
this hazard of their Salvation by their Separation from Christ's School, would,
by the Principles already proved, oblige them rather to submit to all unsinful
impositions of his Chair than they would suffer themselves to be exposed to so
apparent hazard, by being cast out of that School, much more, rather than they
would themselves willingly desert it.

Baptism is not expressly here named, but the renewing to Repentance, by what
means soever that were to be expected of those which had been mentioned before,
among which this of Imposition of hands was one, and that the force of the
Argument rather lies in this, that there is but one solemn admission into
Christ's School allowed of, when I consider that the Imposition of hands here
spoken of is as naturally intelligible of that Imposition of hands which
accompanied Baptism, as of any other which might afterward be made use of for
the recovery of those who had fallen from their Baptismal Integrity, and it is
much more certain that the Holy Ghost should be given by that Imposition of
hands which accompanied the Sacrament instituted by Christ for this very
purpose, that they might thereby receive the Holy Ghost, than by that
imposition of hands which had nothing more to encourage those who received it,
that they should receive the effect designed by it, besides that general power
which Christ had given the Apostles and their Successors of giving the Holy
Ghost to such as they thought fit to receive him by that Ceremony of imposition
of hands; when I consider that the very denial of the repetition of the
Solemnity of the first reception, which was as well by Baptism, as by
imposition of hands, looks like so designed a discouragement of Persons who
were afterward to be admitted by imposition of hands alone, as if the later
admission were a thing by no means pleasing to God, but only indulged by him
for the hardness of men's hearts, as Polygamy and Concubinate of old, and as the
Eastern Church did in the Case of second Marriages to which they denied the
sacred Solemnities which had been observed in the first; when I consider this
Text in conjunction with several other Parallel ones in this Epistle, where
this same Author speaks his mind in the same Case, that what is here said
concerning the impossibility to be renewed, is elsewhere expressed by a denial
of any further Sacrifice to be expected by Persons in this Condition, and by
their finding no place for Repentance as Esau did not, though they should, as
he did, seek it carefully, and that with tears: These things, I say, being thus
considered and allowed for, though I dare not altogether discourage such
Lapsers as are received by imposition of hands without Baptism from hoping to
receive the effect designed on account of the general Commission given to the
Apostles and their Successors of giving the Holy Ghost by the imposition of
their hands, as well out of Baptism as in it; yet truly, I cannot but think
that God himself intended to exclude such Persons from much of the comfort of
their reception, by excluding them from a repetition of those Solemnities by
which they were received at first, and by making no particular express Promise
to ratify such imposition of hands, besides his general obligation to ratify
the Prudential Acts of Persons Authorized by him. And possibly it might be his
design to exclude such Persons from so valid a Legal Plea to the Covenant, and
leave them only to the (...), the Chancery of it, which yet might in the event
oblige God, though the Persons restored by it might want much of the conviction
here which might assure them that it should indeed oblige God. This, as it
would be the most agreeable with the Politics of Government, as on the one
side to encourage none to venture on the state that should need such a
restitution as this is, without an extreme, and a very real necessity; so on
the other side, not to drive those, who, through humane frailty should be
reduced to it, to utter despair: so indeed, all things considered, I am apt to
think that it will prove most likely to be the real design of this sacred
Author. I know indeed that the word (...) is elsewhere taken in the Scripture
for that which is not simply impossible, but externally difficult. So our
Savior himself says in one place, that it is impossible for a rich man to be
saved, but in another does only imply that it is extremely hard for them to be
saved, and it was impossible that a Prophet should perish out of Jerusalem,
only because it was very unlikely to fall out so, considering the hardness of
the hearts of the inhabitants of that City. But though this were sufficient for
my present purpose, yet considering the things now mentioned, I can hardly
think it so meant here.

Restitution is not so much grounded on the crucifying to themselves the Son of
God, and putting him to an open shame, (at least, not as this was the peculiar
aggravation of the Apostates of that Age, as this was not only employed by
leaving his School as a false Doctor, but expressly asserted in regard of the
Party to whom they went, who did indeed expressly assert it) but rather on the
no provision God had made for the reception of such as should return after such
an Apostasy; and the Justice of God in making no such provision for them, on
account of these aggravations. Otherwise, if God had pleased, why should it be
impossible for him to forgive a second Crucifixion when he had actually
forgiven a first? Why should it be impossible for him to forgive an
interpretative Crucifixion, when he had already forgiven a real one? The plain
reason therefore must have been that God had instituted no Ordinary means with
a design for their reception, and that, in this regard, it was impossible it
should be done because it was indeed impossible in the course of Ordinary
means. But then the reason given is not to show why it should be impossible to
God himself, but why God might make it impossible, in the sense now mentioned,
by providing no means how it should be done. And can our present Adversaries
then plead any thing which may allow them better hopes than the Apostates of
that Age, of being received again. Can they now pretend better than they could
then to a reiteration of their Baptism? Was it just for God to make no
provision for their recovery after that aggravation of an interpretative
Crucifixion of Christ in regard of the Party to which they joined themselves
upon their desertion? And is it not also just (for the other was only just not
Obligatory) for him to inflict the same Punishment in regard of the
interpretative Crucifixion of Christ, which we have shown our present
Adversaries to be guilty of, in the desertion it self? Can they show any thing
peculiar in the Christian Religion why Lapsers to Judaism should not be
received again into the Christian Communion, rather than the Lapsers into any
other Sect? Nay, is not Baptism equally denied to the Penitents who return from
other Sects as from them? and are they not received and reconciled upon their
Repentance, by the Absolution of the Church as familiarly as other Sectaries?
And if it were only on account of the general establishment of one only Baptism
that they were then discouraged to hope for a reconciliation, Why should not
our present Adversaries think themselves as much concerned in that as the
Primitive Apostates to Judaism.

CHAP. XIV. Separation from the Church proved to be a sin against the Holy
Ghost.
THE CONTENTS.
danger of the sin of Separation, and the difficulty of its pardonableness, are
very prudent and lawful reasons for bearing with a lesser sin that is more
easily pardonable.. I, II. What is meant by grieving God's Spirit, and how it
comes to be unpardonable.. III, IV. Two influences of the Spirit resisted by
the Israelites.. V. This applied to the state of the Gospel. How the Christians
were likely to understand these things according to the Mystical way of
expounding the Old Testament which prevailed among them.. VI. Our Savior used
herein a way of speaking notorious to the Jews.. VII. Grieving the Spirit the
same with the grieving of Christ.. VIII. 1. As to the Testimony which the
Spirit gave him by Miracles.. IX. How our Savior's threatening was fulfilled..
X. The sin against the Holy Ghost a resisting of the Gospel Dispensation.. XI.
2. Murdering of the Prophets, a sin against the Holy Ghost, as he is
particularly a Spirit of Prophesy.. XII. This particularly applied to our
Savior, and the state of the Gospel.. XIII. 3. Resisting the influences of the
Holy Ghost in us. Applied to the Jews.. XIV. To the Christians.. XV. According
to the Hellenistical Philosophy.. XVI, XVII, XVIII. 4. Resisting the Government
of the Church which was then ordered by the Spirit.. XIX. Separation from the
Canonical Assemblies of the Church a sin against the Holy Ghost.. XX.
Concerning the Punishment of this sin against the Holy Ghost, and the way of
arguing used by the Writers of the New Testament from Old Testament
Precedents.. XXI, XXII.

ANOTHER sin that our Brethren are usually troubled with when they are under
any anguish of Conscience, is that against the Holy Ghost, concerning the
irremissibility whereof the expressions are indeed very dreadful. If therefore
they be in danger of the guilt of this by their falling away from the Communion
of the Church, this I presume, themselves will account such as ought not to he
ventured on, but on very great, and very real necessity; not on so mean
accounts, and so little probabilities, as those are whereby they usually defend
their Separation. And if the fear of a little sin in obeying their Superiors be
taken for so just a reason to excuse their disobedience to their Superiors; and
not only their disobedience, but their resistance, and Separation from them;
they certainly, when they shall find that by their suffering themselves to be
cut off from the Church, and much more by their voluntary separating themselves
from their Superiors rather than they will pay them the obedience which is due
unto them, they shall bring themselves into the danger of being guilty of a sin
incomparably greater in it self, and more difficultly pardonable than that is,
which themselves can fear they should prove guilty of by their obedience; this
will certainly oblige them in all Prudence, when they find themselves put upon
the necessity of a venture, to venture on a lesser evil rather than a greater,
and to account that evil no evil at all, at least not such as shall be imputed
to them as an evil, when they find themselves forced upon it by the unhappy
necessity of so hard a choice. I know it is a Plea of late much insisted on by
them, that even the appearance of a sin, nay, the suspicion of it, is
sufficient to excuse them from the otherwise lawful commands of their Superiors
as long as their private Consciences cannot free themselves from that
Suspicion. And this pretense would have indeed a greater appearance of Truth,
if their Obedience to their Superiors were indeed as indifferent a thing as
they suppose it to be when they make this pretense to excuse themselves from
it. No doubt a suspicion of sins, especially if that suspicion be thought
probable by the Person who is under the suspicion, is sufficient to excuse him
from a performance otherwise indifferent.

they should suppose a sin in both Cases, on the one side the sin of doing the
things required from them, and on the other the sin of disobedience to their
Superiors, and dividing the Church of Christ. And then no doubt they would not
scruple but the securest resolutions of their Consciences in such a Case would
be to choose that which were likely to prove less sinful and more pardonable.
Nay, when themselves say that in this Case of probable evidence, or at least of
the appearance of such probable evidence, their disobedience can be no sin, it
can only be on this account that they can pretend it, that their Duty to obey
God in such an instance is greater than their Duty of obedience to their
Superiors, if indeed they own them as Superiors, and acknowledge any Duty to
them. If therefore it may appear on the contrary, that the sin they are in
danger of by dividing themselves from the Church is greater, and less
pardonable than the sin they would incur by submitting, or at least by paying
passive Obedience to a seemingly sinful imposition; if they may be convinced
that the sin of setting up or countenancing opposite Conventicles is greater
and more difficulty pardonable than the sin of wearing a Surplice, or kneeling
at the Sacrament, etc. Then by the Rules of their own reasoning it will follow
that these instances, which otherwise had been sinful, are notwithstanding in
this Case no sins at all, and therefore can be no sufficient reason to excuse
their Separation from being sinful. And that this is so, as I have proved
already, so I now proceed to show particularly from this Topic of the sin
against the Holy Ghost, which I presume themselves will not deny to be a sin
both greater and more difficultly pardonable than any of those which they
pretend to excuse their Separation from being sinful.

sin, which seems hitherto to have been so little understood, I consider that
it is usual in the Old Testament, when it is to express a provocation of God of
the highest kind, to express it by a commotion of mind suitable to that which
is in men, when they are extremely angry. And therefore as in little Angers in
men, though they be violent for the time, yet they soon pass away, and leave no
great disturbance on the mind of him that is angry; but in great ones the very
mind is disordered, and so the transports become more lasting as well as more
vehement, and the Person who is supposed to be so angry, is also made by it
more implacable, and less capable of accepting any terms of reconciliation; so
the Scripture represents the Anger of God himself. That the anger of men was
thus expressed according to the form of speaking used in those Countries, we
have instances, not only in our Savior St. Joh. xi.33. (...). Joh. xiii.21.
when he is said (...), but in Psalm. cvi.33. So Dan. ii.3. vii.13. Job vii.11.
xxi.4. Psalm. lxxvii.3. cxlii 3.
Moses in the Old Testament it self, who is said to have been provoked in his
Spirit when he spoke unadvisedly with his lips. That it is hence also applied
to God instances may be seen in Genesis vi.6.
Genesis, and Is. lxiii.10.
elsewhere. And generally whenever this expression is used God immediately
resolves on some severe temporal Punishment to be inflicted on the Persons who
had thus provoked him, and that so peremptorily as that even their Penitence it
self should not prevail with him to change his resolution. Then he makes his
Decree, and sometimes confirms it with an Oath. Thus in Genesis Genesis vi.3.
when he had resolved that his Spirit should no longer strive with them, he
immediately resolves that their days should be an hundred and twenty years,
that is, that that should be the respite he would allow them before the deluge.
And elsewhere when his Spirit is said to be grieved, then follows the mention
of the judgment which elsewhere he inflicted on them who had so provoked him.
And above all other sins for which God is said to be thus angry after the Law
was settled, Idolatry is by Maimonides observed to be the only one. Mor. Nev.
Part. i. cap. 36.
And that we have seen in Deuteronomy to have been so described, not as a
violation of a single Precept only, but as a breach of the whole Covenant. And
it is very observable further, that whatever this might mean in the literal and
immediate sense, according to the custom of the like (...) on other occasions
ascribed to God, yet the Hellenistical Jews who Allegorized their Law, and who
had the Notion of this Spirit of God as a subsistent Being, and frequently take
for less occasions than this was of bringing in their Allegorical senses, were
very likely to ascribe these passages to this Spirit, as a distinct subsistent
Being. And indeed these other two subsistences of the Son and Spirit are so
described in the New Testament, and in the passages of the Old applied to them
by the most ancient Fathers, no doubt from the Cabalistical Mystical
Expositions then received among the Hellenistical Jews, as that it could be no
great violence to apply them this way, on supposition that a Mystical sense was
to be allowed besides the Literal, which was a supposition that seems to have
been generally approved by these Hellenistical Jews of whom I am now
discoursing. Thus as the Son is taken for that intrinsic Wisdom of the Father
in the Proverbs, which he is said to have possessed from the beginning, Prove.
viii.22.
and which the Fathers do accordingly make it as necessary that he should have
possessed it from the beginning as that he should have been wise from the
beginning; so the Holy Spirit is by the Apostle made as intimate to God as the
Spirit of a man is to a man. For so he argues: 1 Cor. ii.11.
Who knows the secrets of a man but the Spirit of a man which is in him. Even
so no man knows the things of God, but the Spirit of God. As Properly
therefore as the Spirit of a man is said to be grieved and disturbed when the
man himself is grieved and disturbed, so properly this subsistent Being may be
said to be grieved and disturbed when the Spirit of God is said to be so. And
as when a man is said to be excessively grieved it is all to one purpose
whether we say that he himself is grieved, or that his Spirit is so, because
the grief of the man is supposed to be in his Spirit; so also, by the rule of
the same proportion, when God is said to be excessively grieved, we are to
understand all those places of a grieving of his Spirit as properly* as if it
had been expressly mentioned.

God is pleased to express himself as if he were under the same transport of
humor as men are when they are in those Passions. Thus in the Parable of the
unjust Judge, he is supposed to hear the Prayers of his People, as well to avoid
the trouble of being wearied by them, Luke xviii.5.
as for the reason of the thing it self. And particularly in this very Case of
great provocation of his Spirit he is described as if he suffered the same
transports as revengeful Persons do when they are under the like disturbances.
Thus as revengeful Persons ease themselves of their revengeful humor by
executing their desired revenge; Isa. i.24.
so God is said to ease him of his Adversaries, to ease himself of this
disturbance of his Spirit by inflicting that punishment on them which they had
so justly deserved from him. And in the dramatick way of acting these Passions,
which is so familiar with the Prophets, he is described as implacable and as
much bent upon revenge, and delighted in it, as revengeful Persons are when
they are under the like disturbance. No doubt his meaning is thereby to put us
in the same expectations from him as we should naturally have from a revengeful
Person under his highest transports; and to assure us, that though he himself
felt no such transports as are there described, yet he intends to deal with
Persons so threatened by him, exactly as such Persons would do who really felt
such transports. And therefore as such Persons who are so disturbed by great
provocations, at length resolve to relieve themselves by executing their
desired revenge, and when they have done so, resolve also that no Prayers of
their Adversaries shall appease them, but that they will for the future as much
insult over their mi^eries as they have hitherto pitied them; the like dealing
we have reason to fear from God when his Spirit is the same way provoked. And
this seems to be the most natural account how this sin against the Holy Ghost
comes to be unpardonable.

Spirit of God, that without us, in miraculous performances, and that within us
in secret emotions of our own Spirit. And in both these influences, when
resisted, God is said to have been provoked even under the Old Testament, and
when provoked, did generally resolve on some severe Punishment, which he did
accordingly execute most punctually, without any revocation of his Decrees on
whatsoever address that might have been made by the Persons threatened by him.
Of the former we have an instance in the Case of the Israelites in the
wilderness, which I the rather take notice of because it is an instance
produced for this very purpose by the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. iii.4.
who does most insist on this sin of any of the New Testament Writers. Now in
their Case they had seen the miracles which God had done in Egypt, besides
those many more which they had experienced, and on which they continually
subsisted during the time of their travel in the Wilderness. And yet after all
these instances, they continually questioned the presence and Providence of God
among them, and put him to new experiments, and seemed as little concerned for
what was past, as if they had never known them. This was the thing that, at
last, Psalm. xcv.11. Heb. iii.17, 18.
so provoked God, that he swore, those who had seen those things, and were so
little benefited by them, should never enter into his rest, that is, into the
Land of Promise, which he accordingly performed with that severity that not one
of that Generation, except Caleb and Joshua, who had not been guilty like the
rest, Genesis vi.
entered into Canaan. An instance of the other we have in that of Genesis. For
the Spirit which had striven with them, and which God threatens that it should
no longer dwell with them, seems most naturally intelligible of the Spirit
within them, which accordingly the Ancients suppose to have been taken taken
away from them who had resisted it. And this instance was also punished with a
certain and prefixed vengeance. 1 Pet. iii.18, 19, 20.iv.6. 2 Pet. ii.5.
And it is urged to this purpose by St. Peter.

Gospel, it is again to be remembered what I have elsewhere observed, that is
the great design of the Apostles to reconcile Christianity with this
Cabalistical Mystical Scheme of Notions which then prevailed among the
Hellenists, as it seems to have been the great design of them who introduced
that Scheme among the Jews, thereby to reconcile their Law with that Scheme of
Elective Philosophy which then prevailed among the Dogmatical Philosophers who
were withal favorable to Religion. And indeed of the two they were more
favorable to these Mystical Expositions of the Scripture than to the Literal
themselves, as indeed all were who were for the Mystical, because they thought
the Mystical was principally designed by God himself. And therefore we find how
slight occasions Philo and the Alexandrians who follow him, take for
overthrowing the Literal sense. But the Primitive Christians were above all
others, concerned in interest, to advance these Mystical senses, because it was
indeed from them that they derived the most substantial Proofs of their whole
Religion against those Adversaries with whom they had then to deal, as may be
seen in the generality of the Arguments they make use of throughout the whole
New Testament. And therefore seeing this Notion of the Spirit for a subsistent
Being was, at least, received among them, they must have been most likely to
understand all those passages of the Old Testament wherein the Spirit of God is
said to be grieved, of this Spirit of which I am now discoursing.

Prudence of our Savior's Argument against the Jews with whom he was then
dealing when he introduced this mention of the sin against the Holy Ghost.
Certainly he would never have warned them of a sin which they had neither
understood what it was, nor was he himself pleased to inform them. For to what
purpose had such a warning been? How could they avoid the sin if they knew if
not? And why should they be warned of it if not with a design that they might
avoid it? And sure he would not have argued against Adversaries on Principles
so far from being granted by them as that they did not understand them. Nay, if
they had proceeded on new discoveries of the Gospel, not the Jews only, but
even the Disciples themselves had not understood them, so ignorant even they
were as yet of the Gospel Mysteries. Nor was there the same reason why he
should speak obscurely here as there was in other things which he usually
concealed in Parables. It was not any thing that was of future concern only to
them as those were which were then timely enough known by them when they were
accomplished. But the avoiding of so great and dangerous a sin as this, was a
thing of very great and present concernment. And certainly so gracious and
indulgent a Master as he was would not have kept them ignorant of it. And
accordingly we do not find that they asked any more Questions, or made any
further cavils concerning this as they usually did concerning other things
which they did not understand. Supposing therefore, as upon these
considerations, it is most reasonable to suppose that our Savior spoke to them
in a Language with which they were already well acquainted from the Old
Testament, or at least, from the LXX Translation of it, I conceive the account
now given from thence most probable how they were likely to understand these
expressions.

this sin of the Jews in the Wilderness, which proved so fatal to them is often
mentioned in the New Testament as the Precedent of the like sin under the
Gospel, so to make it more exactly parallel, they are said to have tempted
Christ in it. Neither let us tempt Christ as some of them also tempted him, and
were destroyed by Serpents. 1 Cor. x.9.
Here I consider that it is Christ only in his Divine Person who could have
been tempted by them in the Wilderness. 1 Cor. x.9.
His humane nature was only prefigured in the brazen Serpent, and was not
capable of being tempted by them. Now how often is it that his Divine Nature in
opposition to his human Nature is called the Spirit? It was the Holy Spirit
that came upon the Blessed Virgin when she conceived him, which the Fathers
usually understand of this Spirit. Luke i.35.
It was by the eternal Spirit that he offered himself, certainly by his
Divinity that he offered himself in his humanity. Heb. ix.14.
It is the great Mystery of godliness that he was manifested in the flesh, 1 Timothy iii 16. 1 Pet. iii.18. (...) in this sense Luke xvii.33. Act. vii.19.
and justified in the Spirit. He was put to death in the flesh, and quickened
in the Spirit, that is, did not die as to his Divinity, for so (...) signifies
to save alive as well as to make alive. Which exactly agrees with what we have
elsewhere observed that the Spirit is it self called Christ. And what can be
more agreeable to the design of these places where this sin is mentioned by our
Savior, than this, all things being considered? As in the places now produced
the flesh and Spirit are joined together and opposed, so in these places the
Son of man and the Holy Ghost are the same way opposed. Not that I think that
our Blessed Savior took his own Divinity for granted in dealing with the Jews,
or that he proceeded on the supposition of his being anointed with the Spirit,
and with the fullness of it, any otherwise than as it was capable of appearing
to them, that he was so the same way as the Holy Ghost appeared to them in the
Wilderness as an assistant of Moses, that is, by as stupendous Miracles as had
ever been performed by Moses himself.

Miracles performed by Moses, their obstinate refusal of conviction by those
Miracles was not taken only for a contempt of Moses, who was a frail man like
themselves, as Moses himself had often told them, Who are we that ye murmur
against us? Your murmuring is not against us, but against God. Exodus xvi.7.
And if the Lord make a new thing, etc. then shall ye know that these men have
offended, not us, but the Lord; and was accordingly resented by God himself,
Numb. xvi.30.
and punished as a contempt of his Holy Spirit, by whom those Miracles had been
performed; so our Savior giving the same evidence of his Mission as Moses had
done, they had reason to expect that God would also resent the contempt of
those Miracles, not as an affront offered only to the Son of man, as he seemed
to them, but as an affront to the Holy Ghost, by whose power alone his Miracles
were performable as well as those of Moses. And as it was not every lighter
affront to the Holy Ghost himself that had been thus punished in the Israelites
in the Wilderness with an irrevocable sentence, but a high degree of
provocation of him; so our Savior had particular reason to warn them to beware
of that high degree. For what could be a greater provocation to the Holy
Spirit, than to call him an evil one? Yet this was the thing the Jews were
likely to be guilty of in ascribing the Miracles themselves that were performed
by our Savior, to Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils, if they still* persisted
in it after our Savior had warned them that the Holy Ghost would resent such
injuries as offered to himself. And therefore though their affronts against our
Savior, as the Son of Man, had been no more severely punishable than those
against Moses had been, (considering only his Person as a Man, though an
excellent and good one,) which had never brought those capital Punishments upon
their Forefathers in the Wilderness, as Moses himself had often warned them
who suffered under them; yet their hard Speeches against the Holy Ghost, (for
that is the meaning of blaspheming him,) might expect not only a capital
Punishment in this World, like that of their Forefathers in the Wilderness,
but also in the World to come, which was a thing they had not formerly been so
generally acquainted with, but was a Revelation reserved for the coming of the
Messiah, who was the Prince of the World to come, and proper to the times of
the Gospel, as the Author to the Hebrews tells them. So that if the Gospel
which he preached to them should prove true, as the Miracles he did in
confirmation of it proved it true* they must expect to suffer for sins
committed against this Dispensation, not only in this, but in the other World,
because these sufferings in the other World were a principal Discovery of the
Gospel.

Savior was punctually executed on them who persisted in their obstinacy
notwithstanding his warning, by a Punishment, not only in the other World, but
even in this, every way as remarkable as that was of the destruction of their
Forefathers in the Wilderness, that is, in the destruction of their Temple and
City, and soon after in the dispersion and exile of their whole Nation from
that beloved Canaan which their Forefathers in the Wilderness thought
themselves so unhappy for because they did not live to see and enjoy it. And if
it were necessary to make a Notion of a Punishment in the other World which
might also be National, as their Punishment in this World now mentioned was,
and as that was also of that generation of their Forefathers which perished in
the Wilderness; I should take it to be the depriving them of the Privileges
they had formerly enjoyed on account of Gods Covenant with them, that they
should be no more Gods People, that they should have no more interest in the
Promises of God, and that special Providence of his which, on that account, had
been formerly so watchful over them, that they should lose their interest in
the true Messiah, which was the principal Promise without which the performance
of all other Promises, as they expected them, had been little significant to
them. These were Punishments of the other World, as it was expected by them
under the Messiah. And these things they afterward suffered for this very
fault of resisting and blaspheming those mighty influences of the Spirit
whereby the Gospel was recommended to them by the Apostles, as they now did on
the same way of recommendation of it used by our Lord himself. This I take for
a clear and easy and intelligible account of what the Evangelists tell us
concerning this whole matter.

sin against the Holy Ghost is a resisting the Gospel Dispensation for which
the Holy Ghost is pleased so eminently to concern himself. For this is that
which has peculiar to it self the concerns of the other World, of which the
Messiah was expected to be the Prince. And accordingly resisting this
Dispensation is elsewhere usually characterized as a resisting of the Holy
Ghost. So in the Case of Ananius and Sapphira who had consecrated a Possession
to the service of the Church, Act. v 3.9.
but kept back part of it, St. Peter charges them with lying to the Holy Ghost,
and agreeing to tempt the Spirit of the Lord. Act. vii.51.
So St. Stephen: Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do
always resist the Holy Ghost; as your Forefathers did, so do you How their
Forefathers had resisted the Holy Ghost he had before shown in the whole
Chapter, exactly agreeably with the account I have given of it, concerning
their frequent Lapses in the Wilderness, and elsewhere, notwithstanding the
many Miracles God had been pleased to do for their conviction. And their
present resisting the Holy Ghost at that time is plainly their perverse
behavior against St. Stephens Preaching, Act. vi.8.
notwithstanding that also had been confirmed to them by many signs and great
Miracles. Heb. x.29.
So falling away from the Church Assemblies, is, in the Author to the Hebrews,
a doing despite to the Spirit of Grace. So St. Paul tells the Thessalonians,
that he that despised the injunctions of the Apostles, of which he had been
speaking, despised not men, 1 These. iv.8.
but God, who had also given them his holy Spirit. Therefore he entreats the
Ephesians that they would not grieve the holy Spirit by which they had been
sealed to the day of Redemption. Ephesians. iv 30.
And as this Office of performing Miracles is still ascribed to the Holy Ghost,
so our Savior, in regard of the Miracles performed by him, Act. x.38.
is said to have been anointed with the Holy Ghost, and with power which
enabled him to heal all those who were under the power of the Devil. And so all
those who are said to have preached the Gospel with that power with which we
see it was preached in the History of the Acts, are still described as Persons
full of the Holy Ghost. Therefore we find so often mention of the demonstration
of the Spirit, 1 Cor. ii.4.
and of the Testimony of the Spirit given to the Gospel, which plainly infer,
that whoever resists the Gospel so demonstrated and testified, must necessarily
reflect on the wisdom and veracity of the Spirit himself. And that these things
are so frequently mentioned on all occasions, seems plainly to have been with
design to give men warning of the greatness and dangerousness of the sin they
were likely to prove guilty of in resisting the evidence of the Gospel, which
was the same that our Savior had in warning the Jews of it in the Gospels.
This may suffice to show in general that a resisting of the Gospel Dispensation
is a resisting of the Spirit and that particularly on this first account, as it
is a resisting of the Miracles done by the Spirit in confirmation of the Gospel.

resisting of the Spirit with which the Jews are also expressly charged was
their resisting and murdering the Prophets, and particularly; with reference to
the Gospel, in murdering of their Savior himself. This St. Stephen charges on
them immediately after the words now mentioned, as instances how they had
resisted the Holy Ghost, and how they still continued to resist him. Act.
vii.52.
Which of the Prophets (says he) have not your Fathers persecuted? and they
slew them, who foretold of the coming of the Just one, of whom you have now
been the betrayers and murderers. The persecuting therefore and killing of the
Prophets, was that resisting of the Holy Ghost who had spoken by those
Prophets, of which their Fathers had been guilty, and their own murdering the
Just one himself, who was also a Prophet, Luke xxiv.19. 2 Chro. xxxvi.15, 16,
17, etc. Jorem. xxv.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.
mighty in word and deed, was the instance of their doing like their Fore
fathers. And this is often taken notice of in the Old Testament as a reason of
Gods dealing so severely with their Forefathers, and of his giving them up at
last to those Judgments by which he intended to punish their undutiful
behavior. And our Savior himself takes notice of it, as the particular reason
why Jerusalem should be destroyed, because she had killed the Prophets, and
stoned them that had been sent to her. Matt. xxiii.37. Ver. 34.
And among the Prophets he reckons those whom he designed himself to send to
them. So also in the Parable of the King who let out his Vineyard to the
unfaithful Husbandmen, he first mentions the several sending of the Servants,
Matt. xxi.41. Mark xii.9. Luke xx.16.
but when he tells of their murdering the Son, there he concludes as the utmost
trial of his Prince's patience, and makes him immediately resolve cruelly to
destroy those wicked men. And this seems also to have been the gradation which
was observed by the Author to the Hebrews, Heb. i.1.
that whereas God had spoken to their Forefathers in sundry times, and in
diverse manners by the Prophets, he had now in those last days spoken to them by
his Son; which they were therefore to look on as the last trial, and which, if
they neglected, they could expect no relief by any other Dispensation, nor
delay of the threatened vengeance, this being the highest degree of provocation.
This seems exactly to agree with the whole reasoning of that Epistle. And it
very well agrees with the Notion of the unpardonableness of the sin I am
speaking of.

sin against the Holy Ghost as he is the Spirit of Prophecy is peculiarly
threatened in that Law which is understood to promise a Succession of Prophets.
For so the words run: A A Prophet will I raise unto them out of the midst of
their Brethren, Deuteronomy. xviii.18, 19.
like unto thee, and I will put my words into his mouth that he may speak
whatsoever I shall command him. And it shall come to pass, that whoever shall
not hearken unto my words which be shall speak in my name, I will require it of
him. Maimonid. Fundam. Leg. Cap. ix.. 4.
The Punishment here threatened, the Jews themselves understand to be a capital
one, which is as far from any relief or hopes of pardon as any expression used
concerning the Punishment of this sin against the Holy Ghost implies that to
be. But this place will appear yet more apposite to our purpose when it is
considered, that however a Succession of Prophets may be secondarily employed,
yet the words express but one, and that one Prophet is as expressly applied in
the New Testament, Act. iii.22.vii.37. Abarbin. de Pen. Excis.
to our Savior. And what is here said to be God's requiring it at their hands,
is there called a destroying out of their People, which as it rather implies
the Punishment of Excision, as they call it, which was rather to be expected
from God himself than to be inflicted by the Civil Magistrate, and as it
thereby resembles the Shammatha, the turning them over to God's own Judgment at
his coming, which, as I have said, was inflicted on desperate Offenders, and as
it is, like the expression of the XII Tables, Tull. de Legib.
which for the most piacular Offenses allotted no other Punishment but this: Si
secus farit, Deus ipse vindex esto; so it exactly agrees with the account which
the New Testament gives of the Punishment of those who should prove refractory
to the Gospel, 1 These. i.8, 9.ii.8.
that they are reserved to that flaming fire in which Christ was to be expected
to appear at his coming, and for which St. Jude says they were (...), in regard
of those many passages of the (...), Jud. 4.
Old Testament which were thus applied by the Christians of those times,
besides the Prophecy of Enoch so applied by himself. And among the rest this
passage was so applied by St. Peter. And this later Exposition, as it is more
Mystical, 2 St. Pet. iii.7.
so it is, in that regard, more agreeable to the Genius of the Christians of
those Ages.

sin against the Holy Ghost, proper to the Gospel Dispensation also, is our
resisting his influences in us. This was the sin of the Old World which brought
God to a final resolution that he would destroy man, whom he had made, Genesis
vi.7. Ver. 3.
from off the face of the Earth, and to prefix a certain time within which he
would perform what he had threatened, which was the way to make his Decree
concerning it irrevocable. They had striven against his Spirit, Ver. 3.
and he therefore resolved that it should no longer strive with them. And this
instance is the more remarkable, because this is proposed as an Example of what
should befall those under the Gospel who should follow the Example of the
disobedience of those who lived in those ancient times, 2 Pet. ii.5.iii.5, 6, 7.
that as their refractoriness to those good motions brought upon that Age of
the World an Epidemical Judgment of Water, so the like refractoriness to the
like good motions under the Gospel should bring down an Epidemical Judgment
also, but a more dreadful one than that was, even one of fire. And this was
also a sin very naturally agreeable to the Gospel Dispensation, and withal
very peculiar to it. For as all they who are Christ's have this Spirit, (for
the Apostle plainly tells us that they who have not his Spirit are none of his,
Romans viii.9.
) so on the contrary, none but they who are Christ's are supposed to have this
Spirit. The Gentiles are supposed to be without God in the World. Ephesians. ii.12.
Gal. iii.2. Jude 19.
The Jews are not supposed to get it by the works of the Law, but by the
hearing of Faith, and for Apostates they are supposed sensual, and not to have
the Spirit, how much soever, they pretend to it. This having God so very near
them, Deuteronomy. iv.7.
was the Privilege of Israel above all other Nations, but not now of the
carnal, but the Mystical Israel. Maimonid. Mor. Nev. P. iii. c. 17, 18.
Now it is a Rule among the Jews, that Providentia sequitur Intellectum, so
that they only who partake of understanding, and especially of this Divine
degree of it of which the Spirit is Author, do also partake of this care of
Providence, and that differently, according to the different degrees whereby
they partake of this understanding. And it is indeed by this Principle, that
they give an account of the singular Providence of God over them above all
other Nations: That because all other Nations are supposed to partake only of
the (...) which is supposed to be only a material passive degree of
understanding, therefore they are supposed subject to the material influences
of the Stars, and to the Angels of the Orbs, to whom those influences are
supposed to belong. But because every Israelite as an Israelite has the
Shechinah, partakers of the (...), of the breath of God, because they have
Souls of a nobler extraction, made of the dust of the throne of Glory, as it is
expressed in their Mystical Language, because they partake of it in that
eminent degree as to be a Nation of Prophets as no other Nation is supposed to
be; Cozri.
thence it is that God who cannot choose but be concerned for his Spirit,
cannot, on that same account, avoid being concerned for them, and that with a
degree of care suitable to those eminent influences enjoyed by them above any
other Nation. For they suppose Prophets to be under a more peculiar care of
Providence, even than other ordinary men.

Christians, that is, the Mystical Israel, are, in the Scripture, supposed to
succeed them in this very Privilege of their being all Prophets. And it is from
this peculiar Privilege, which they were supposed to enjoy above all other
Nations, and this peculiar Right to Providence above them, that they give an
account of the severity of God's dealings with them above all others, that even
little neglects were punished more rigorously in them than the great and
notorious contempts of other Nations. Cozri. Amos iii.2.
You have I known of all the Nations, says God, therefore will I punish you.
And accordingly God gives it as a reason of his severe dealings, that he is an
Holy God, purer of eyes than to behold iniquity, and that they must therefore
be a Holy People, Habbak. i.13. Lev. xix.2.xx.7. 1 Pet. i.15, 16. Lev. xi.44,
45. Lev. x.3. Act. xvii.30.
not indulge themselves in those liberties, which he might have born with in
the Gentiles, but would not forbear in them; that he would be sanctified by all
them who drew so near to him as they were permitted to do. Which agrees exactly
with the condition of things as they are described under the New Testament*
where God is said to work at the times of ignorance, 1 Pet. iv.17, 18.
but to begin his Judgments at his own house, to deal so severely with them, as
that the righteous should scarcely be saved; and that therefore God expected
that they who were come over to him, should do more than others, that they must
not allow themselves the liberty of living in the 1 These. iv.5.
concupiscences of the Gentiles, and following their former 1 Pet. i.18. Ephesians.
ii.3.iv.22.
vain conversation, but behave themselves for the future according to the
decorum Ephesians. v.3. Phil. i.27. 1 Timothy ii.10. Tit. ii.3.
of Saints. The most rigorous Punishments we then read of were those that
immediately related to the places of God's peculiar presence. Even the meanest
irreverences to that, though of Persons otherwise well meaning, were punished
Capitally and Exemplarily. Such were the Cases of the 1 Samuel vi.19.
Bethshemites, 2 Samuel vi.7.
Vzz^h, Lev. x.1, ^.
Nadab and Abihu. Now this is applied by the Apostle himself to ordinary
Christians, that because they have the same 1 Pet. iv.14.
Spirit of Glory, (no doubt with relation to the visible Glory* which
consecrated those places) resting on them and abiding 1 John ii.14.
in them, their Bodies 1 Cor. iv.19.
are to be treated as Temples of the Holy Ghost and therefore sins against
their Bodies now must as much redound to the dishonor of their Holy Ghost as
the profanation of his Temple would have done them, and might accordingly
expect as severe a Punishment. And the reason of the thing will require it. For
when we consider the Holy Ghost as a living and abiding Principle residing in
us, we must suppose every wilful sin we commit as done in as peculiar a
presence of his as that was which consecrated those Holy places, but this
special aggravation besides, that our sins now are not only done presumptuoussy
in his presence as those were then, but also in resistance of his contrary
motions and influences in every particular act of Guilt. Which is an
aggravation proper only to the Mystical Israelites, that is, to Christians, who
because they alone can be supposed under the care of the Holy Ghost in every
particular act they do, who have him as a living and abiding Principle, can
therefore only be supposed to resist him in every particular deliberate Guilt.

modern Jews, but also to those of the Hellenistical Philosophy when then
obtained in the times of the Apostles. They also thought that in the golden
Age, as long as the Divine seed continued among men, that is as long as they
lived (...), so long the Gods themselves appeared and conversed familiarly with
men, till the degeneration of men's lives to Irascible first, and then to the
Concupiscible degree of the Souls, by degrees exiled them back to Heaven again,
so that Astraea was the last of them that staid below. Yet she also departed at
last according as the provocations of men grew more and more intolerable. And
it is observable that this was made to be the Age of the Giants, who in the
Poets Mystical way of expressing things are said to have fought against the
Gods themselves, as it seems most probable, for resisting these Divine
influences which are then supposed to have been so familiar. And these Giants
are not only supposed to have brought the deluge, but to have been cast into
Tartarus, and so to have been punished in the World to come, as well as in
this, for their great impleties. I need not observe how exactly these things
agree with the Notions of the Hellenists and the Primitive Christians
concerning the old World that strove with God's Spirit, and were therefore
destroyed by the Deluge. The sense of the Hellenists appears sufficiently from
the Translation of Genesis VI. and Job. And the account of these things in Philo
and Josephus. The sense of the Primitive Christians from the (...) in St.
Peter, from the Sibylline Oracles, 2 Pet. ii.4. and Bogan. Praef. ad Dickinson.
Delph. Ph^ni^iss. and Winder. de vit. functor. statu.
the Book of Enoch, and all that followed it, as I think the Fathers did
unanimously for the first three Centuries. They all give the same account, and
in the same language, as the Heathens do concerning their Giants which perished
in the Deluge of Deucalion, according to them who make the Deluge of Deucalion
as general an one as that of Noah was. And I have already noted how the New
Testament compares the sin of the Apostates from the Gospel with the sin of
those who perished in the old World, and makes the Punishment by fire which
should be inflicted for the sin of these, exactly answerable to the Punishment
by the Deluge which those suffered for a guilt of the like nature. But if we
will Critically distinguish the (...) of the Angels on the Deluge which was
said to come on those who were born out of the blood of those Giants; yet the
Parallel will yet hold more exactly in this Case. For this instance of these
Angels who are said (...) in St. Peter, and are therefore answerable to the
Giants in the Poets, given as a Precedent what these desertors of the Gospel
were to expect. And accordingly Enoch's Prophecy which, in all likelihood, was
spoken expressly concerning these Giants, yet applied by St. Jude to the
Apostate Christians. (...). Jude 14. Ver. 13.
And the blackness of darkness which was reserved for those Christian
Apostates, (...), or the (...) in our Savior, seems plainly the same with the
(...) of the Giants, which is described in the Poets as the lowest part of
Hell, Hesiod. Theog.
(...). By which way of Explication, as their Punishment is made the same with
that of the Giants, and that is the severest imaginable, the very depth of
Hell, which is therefore as severe as can be thought of for the sin against the
Holy Ghost; so their sin must be supposed of the same nature too. And therefore
their resisting these motions of the Spirit which they had received by the
Gospel, must, in proportion, be supposed to be the same fighting against God,
of which the Giants were guilty, which is also as great a guilt, and as
properly ascribed to the Spirit, as any one can conceive that to be which is
called the sin against the Holy Ghost.

Christianity was a restoring men to that Divine seed which those before the
Deluge enjoyed till they lost it by their misdemeanors, and therefore
consequently that it must expose men to the guilt of sinning against the Spirit
as they did, appears from Justin Martyr's making that living (...) to be the
same thing with being a Christian, from Constantines's applying all the Eclogue
of Virgil, where he describes the return of the golden Age, according to the
Principles of Hesiod and Plato, to the state of Christianity, from their making
the Spirit to be a Divine Nature as that was then, and their supposing it to
make us the Sons of God, as Plato calls them (...) who lived then. Nay, so far
did the Primitive Christians follow this Philosophical Hypothesis as that
several of them thought the souls of men derived from the Stars as they did,
and that the (...) was the restitution of them to the Stars from whence they
had descended, if not their (...) and coalition with the fontal (...) from
which they had been derived to the Stars themselves. However it appears that
according to this Notion concerning Christianity, they must have conceived
Christians to have been under a peculiar care of Providence in regard of these
communications of Intellectual influences, as the Jews suppose themselves to
be. And accordingly the Hellenistical Philosophers made this to be the image of
God exactly as the Scripture does, and made the following of the suggestions of
this good Demon to be the following of God himself, and must therefore make
the resisting it to be a resisting of God also. So the Pythagorean verses wish
that men would know the Demon they enjoy, and indeed they derive the
influences of the supreme Being by this concatenation of Spiritual Beings in
the several parts of the World, so that the several influences are to be taken
for God's, because it is from him that they originally proceed, by which means
also the contempt of them will also reflect on God himself. How they are thus
contrived that this may follow may be seen in Apuleius and in Philo's
Explication of Jacob's Ladder. Apul. de Deo Socratis. Philo. Hierocl. de
Provident. Fragm. apud Phot. Biblioth. number. 251.
And indeed there are who make the very Notion of (...) to be properly taken,
from the care of this (...) within us, rather than from that whereby the World
is governed in general. But the passage of Seneca, an Author of the Apostles
Age is very considerable to our purpose, where he tells us that a holy Spirit,
which he calls a God, is in us, and that he deals with us as we deal with him,
if we deal ill with, exactly as the Psalmist, with the perfect man thou shall
be perfect, Psalm. xviii.26 2 Samuel xxii.27
but with the froward thou shall learn frowardness. Besides this there is also
another way, according to the Platonical Hypothesis, how this participation of
the Spirit may entitle us to the special Providence of God. And that is, that
as long as men were good God kept the Government of the World in his own hands,
but as they degenerated, so he was thought to leave it to (...) and (...) and
(...), as if he then took no further notice of it. I might have shown how this
Notion seems also to have been taken up by the Primitive Christians; See Hackw.
Apol. for Provid. Act. xvii.30. Act. xiv.16. Luke i.68, 78.
that this was the reason why they thought the World to have decayed, that for
the time past, (...), he took no notice of the man's of men, but suffered them
to walk on in their own ways, that he had now looked down from Heaven, and
visited his People. And possibly this might have been the reason why they
expected the end of the World, that is, of that Iron Age of it, and waited for
a new heaven, 2 Pet. iii.13.
and a new Earth wherein righteousness was to dwell. For the Golden Age was
immediately to succeed the Iron. And the reason that made the Golden Age so
happy was that the (...), Epinomid and apu Eusebius. Pr. Eu. L.xi. c.16.
as Plato calls him, was to take the Government into his own hand And therefore
seeing Christ, whom they took for this (...) had the Government of all things
now committed to him by his Father, it was very reasonable for them suddenly to
expect those happy times, which, according to this Hypothesis, were consequent
to such a Government. This seems to have b^^n really the thoughts of the Author
of the Sibylline Oracles, and the Emperor Constantine in expounding the
Eclogue of Virgil to this purpose. And this must also make the sins committed
under the Government of Christ to reflect upon him, and would consequently
concern him more particularly to take care to see them punished according to
their desert.

particular Laws, by this constitution of things, be so great a sin, and in
which the Spirit is so concerned to see them punished who are guilty of that
violation; what shall we say of casting off the Legislative Power it self, and
disowning the Power which necessarily requires Subjection to Subordinate
Governors as well as to the Supreme? What of not only neglecting to perform
the Conditions of it, but casting off their Baptismal Covenant it self by which
they were obliged to perform those Conditions? What of dispossessing the Spirit
of his interest in them, not only by frequent grieving and provoking him in
acting contrary to his Suggestions, but also by a wilful neglect of those means
which himself had appointed for continuing his possession of them? These are
certainly Crimes of the highest nature, and most severely punishable by the
Principles of Government. And yet of these they were certainly guilty, who, in
the Apostles times, at least, deserted the external Communion of the visible
Church. This will more particularly appear if we consider,

Government of the Church in that Age was Theocratical. All the Officers of the
Church were invested in their Office by the Holy Ghost himself. He it was who
qualified them for their Offices by his extraordinary supernatural gifts. Ephesians.
iv.11.
He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and
Teachers. And he it was who empowered them to exercise those Gifts by noting
the very particular Persons, who were to be empowered, to them who had the
Authority of committing that Power to them, either by giving their Ordainers
the Gift of discerning Spirits, or by signifying his pleasure to them, either
by appointments, as when he was consulted by Lots; or without appointment, by
some sensible appearance relating to them, as he did also afterward in the
Cases of Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem, and Fabian of Rome. It was he
therefore that made the Bishops of the Church. And so for all the
Ecclesiastical Offices, they were then generally performed by peculiar
Inspirations, 1 Cor. 14.
their Praying, their Prophesying, their celebrating the office of the
Eucharist, their Spiritual Songs and Hymns, their very Interpretation of what
had been by others delivered in strange tongues. In the very Prudential
management of their affairs they had also particular directions from the
Spirit. Act. xiii.2.4. viii.29. x.19. xi.28, 29. xvi.6, 7, 10. xviii.9. xix.21.
xx.23. xxi.4, 11. xxvii.22, 24.
He usually told them where they should Preach, and where they should not; who
were particularly to be chosen out for the employment he had for them, and what
should be the success of their undertaking. And if, in this regard, it had been
a fighting Act. v.38.
against God for even the Pharisees themselves to venture to oppose themselves
to the Apostles; how could it have been less than a rebelling against the same
God, the Spirit, for their own followers to have deserted them? This I take
notice of that none may think that the Author to the Hebrews should speak so
severely against the desertors of their public Assemblies. And though indeed
the extraordinary manifestations of the Spirit be now ceased; nay, and several
also of those extraordinary qualifications which were necessary for that Age
peculiarly, and could not then be gotten by the Persons who wanted them for the
discharge of their Office in the use of ordinary means; yet as long as the Holy
Ghost is the Governor of the Church, that is, indeed as long as Christ himself
is so who governs by the Holy Ghost as the Shechinah of his Throne of Glory, by
which he is pleased to presentiate himself; so long even the subordinate
Governors must be presumed to be Authorized by him. For it is an inseparable
Royalty of the supreme Governor to have the nomination of subordinate
Governors, either by himself, or by his Laws. And where the nomination is made
of the Persons by the Laws it is always to be presumed as much the Act of the
supreme Governor, as if it had been performed by him in his own Person, and
will as strictly oblige Subjects to Obedience to them; and will make their
resistance as properly a disowning of the supreme Authority. The King does not
concern himself in Person in the nomination of every inferior Officer, nay,
many times knows not what is done by others in his name. Yet the resisting of
such Persons who are Legally invested in their Office, the Law looks on as a
resistance to the Royal Authority it self. And though it may be lawful in some
instances to deny them active Obedience, when they require it in Cases wherein
the Law who gave them their Power, gave them no power to require it; yet, even
in those Cases, to gather Parties against them, and to disown dependence on
them, and to separate from them, would also be taken for a Rebellion against
the supreme Authority wherever it is. Passive Obedience must be paid to them
where Active cannot, and upon no pretense of recourse to the supreme Prince can
be denied them without a violation of the Authority of that Prince to whom they
pretend to have recourse. Nor is this only necessary by the Principles of
secular Government, much less of that only which is proper to our Kingdom. It
is absolutely necessary by the Principles of Government as it, relates to a
visible Society, without this no external Society can be maintained. And even
in the reason of the thing, what a man does by his substitute is the same thing
in Law as if it had been done by his own Person. If therefore the supreme
Authority delegate his Power by Legal Rules settled by him, as such a
Delegation is properly his Act, and therefore properly obliges him; so the
Power so delegated is his also, and the resistance made against it does
properly affront him in his own Authority. This I note to show that our
Adversaries present opposition to Persons Legally Authorized by the Holy Ghost,
according to the Rules settled by him for maintaining a Succession must be a
Rebellion against the Holy Ghost himself, though such subordinate Governors
should prove mistaken, and though they received no other gifts by their
Ordination for the discharge of their Office, but their bare Office alone. And
yet the Church has always thought that even such Gifts were given them at their
Ordination. But that not being necessary for my present design, I shall not now
enlarge on it.

sins against the Gospel Dispensation are very properly sins against the Holy
Ghost. If were easy now to show further that a separation from the Canonical
Assemblies of the Church is a sin against the Gospel Dispensation. I say,
against the Dispensation it self, and not only against particular Provisions of
it. It is an interpretative disowning Christ for our Master, when we leave his
School and his Chair. It is a disowning his Royal Authority, when we resist his
subordinate Governors who have succeeded Canonically according to the Rules by
him established for Succession. It is a violation of that Peace which it was
the great design of his Death to settle among us; and of that Unity of the
Spirit, which I have shown to be necessary for deriving the influences of the
Spirit to particular Members. It is a violation of our Baptismal Promise and
Covenant, when we cut our selves off from being Members of that Society of
which we professed our selves Members in our Baptism. Most of these Arguments I
have shown to have been made use of by the Apostles themselves. And undoubtedly
the charges, if true, will strike at the Gospel Dispensation.

Punishment assigned by the sacred Writers for this great sin. And the way of
reasoning used by them in applying the instances of the Old Testament to this
purpose; I consider that the Authors who were then for the Mystical Expositions
of the Old Testament (as we have seen that the Christians both by their Genius
and their interest were for these Mystical Expositions) those Authors, I say,
supposed that even the Historical parts of it were not delivered by the sacred
Writers purely for the sake of the Histories themselves, but with relation to
future Ages wherein they might be useful, and yet more especially, with
relation to the times of the Messiah. Now on this supposition, it was not
proper for them to mention any Histories but such as were designed for
Precedents* even to Posterity when Circumstances should prove exactly the same.
Nor was this only supposed to have been designed by the sacred Writers
themselves, but also by the Holy Ghost by whom they were inspired; nay, by him
rather than by the Writers, and these Mystical secondary applications were
thought more principally disigned by him than the concernment of the Original
History as to the Persons who were at first concerned in it. So that on this
supposition it was as rational even to ground Arguments for present
Expectations on those past Histories, how Personal soever they might otherwise
seem in their Original design, as no man doubts but it is rational to plead
Precedents in our ordinary Courts, because they were at first designed for that
very purpose. But more especially this was rational in the ^imes of the
Messiah, because the whole Old Testament was thought to have a pecular regard
to those times. Thus it was as rational for the Author to the Hebrews to apply
the Promise made to Joshua, Heb. xiii.5.
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, to the Christian Hebrews to whom he
wrote, as it was for Jushua to whom it was made to apply if to himself,
because, according to this supposition, it was more principally designed by God
himself for them than for him, and indeed for him no otherwise than as his was
to be a leading Case. And this will give an account of the reasonableness and
Prudence of many of the like reasonings from the Histories of the Old Testament
thus applied in the New, And that they did really proceed on this supposition
St. Paul himself assures us, when after he had reckoned up several of the
Judgments that befell Apostates in those times, he tells us, 1 Cor. x.11.
All these things happened to them as examples, and were written for our
instruction upon whom the ends of the Worlds are come. And though all the New
Testament Writers use this way of reasoning, yet none more frequently than St.
Paul.

reason and the Prudence of such reasonings, at least ad homines, in regard of
the Persons for whose conviction they were designed, so the Authority of the
sacred Writers themselves who used them are sufficient to assure us that the
applications are really true and solid. And this will assure us of the Truth of
all those things which are necessary for the Parity of the Case: for on this
depends the application of this kind of Argument, that the consequent of the
Old Testament Instance may then be expected when that instance is a Precedent,
that is, when the Case to be ruled by it is exactly like it. And therefore, 1.
This must plainly suppose that the sin against which the Apostle writes, is
exactly of the same nature and the same degree of Guilt with those produced by
them from the Old Testament. And therefore the sin of Apostates from the
Christian Religion, must, in this regard, be supposed as criminal as that of
the Angels, and the old World, and the Sodomites, and the Israelites in the
Wilderness: so that if one be against the Holy Ghost, the other must be so too.
And therefore the same proofs which prove the Old Testament-sins to have been
against the Holy Ghost, must prove the New Testament-sins too have been so too,
and on the contrary whatever proves the New Testament-sins to have been against
the Holy Ghost, must also prove that the Old Testament-sins were so also: so
that, on this supposal, each of them will afford the other a mutual
confirmation. And, 2. As the sins are supposed equally grievous, so the
Punishments must be supposed too. For indeed the very design of this Argument
in the New Testament is from the equal Guilt of the sins to infer an equal
grievousness of the Punishments to be inflicted for those sins. And therefore
the Punishment to be feared by Apostates from the Gospel Dispensation must, in
this way of reasoning, be supposed to be as grievous as any of the instances
now mentioned. And they are certainly of the highest kind. And, 3. I can hardly
think but that what the Apostles, on occasion of their mentioning the Old
Testament-instances, are pleased peculiarly to remark, that they meant to note
as an instance wherein they thought them Parallel. And therefore in Esau's Case
it being peculiarly noted that he found no place for Repentance though he
sought it carefully and with tears, Heb. xii.17.
I suppose the Author meant that they who should desert the Christian Religion,
as he did, our Worldly considerations should expect to find the same difficulty
of being admitted, even upon Repentance, as he did. And 4. That this Mystical
way of Arguing requires something suitable in the other World to what the Old
Testament sinners suffered in this, which will beget a further dreadful
aggravation of their Case who sin against the Gospel Dispensation, if the
Punishment of these must be as grievous in the other World proportionably as
the Punishment of those was in this, that is, if it must be in the most
afflictive part and degree of Hell it self. And, 5. That what is spoken
primarily of Nations and public Bodies, are yet not confined to them, but
applicable also to particular Persons. For indeed the Apostles design in these
Discourses is levelled also against particular Persons. Heb. xii.15, 16,
17.iii.12.
Now for the National sentence concerning the whole generation which was to
perish in the Wilderness, except Caleb and Joshua, it was punctually executed,
though several of the Persons might probably have repented. And God having
sworn their destruction, it is not probable that the sentence had been
reversible as to particular Persons, even upon their Repentance. Moses and
Aaron themselves found it not so, though, no doubt, they were sorry for the
sins which excluded them from the promised Land. And the sin of the Jews
against the Holy Ghost, of which our Savior speaks, as it was punished in this
World and in the other, in the sense already explained; so there are no hopes
that those Punishments should ever be reversed though they should repent. That
is, there are no hopes that upon their Repentance, either their Nation, or
their Religion as appropriated to their Nation, should ever be restored to
them. But if they be saved, it must be by their coming over to Christianity.
And if the Case of Persons now lapsing from the Communion of the Church be only
such a one as may shorten their Personal day of Grace; if this sin more than
any other tend to the shortening of it; if when it is, at last, finished, Gods
Decre concerning it be as irrevocable as it was in these National Punishments;
if it may provoke him now again to swear, as he did then, that they shall never
enter into his rest, as the Author to the Hebrews plainly supposes it may;
these are Considerations sufficiently disheartning any from depending on any
hopes of a recovery. And this sin of separating, at least, of setting up
opposite Societies, being a sin of so very heinous a nature, and so very hardly
remissible, none of the sins they supposed they should be guilty of by
continuing in the Communion of the Church, or at least, by not dividing from
it, can be comparable to it. And therefore, by the forementioned Rule of
Prudence, it will be much safer for them to avoid this than any other sin they
can suspect by continuing in the Canonical Communion.

CHAP. XV. Salvation is not ordinarily to be expected without Baptism.
THE CONTENTS.
2. Directly, That Salvation is not ordinarily to be expected without
Sacraments.. I. This proved, 1. Concerning Baptism. 1. By those Texts which
imply the dependence of our Salvation on Baptism. 1. Such as speak of the
Graces of Baptism.. II. 1. The Spirit of God is said to be given in Baptism,
and so given at that he who is not Baptized cannot be supposed to have it..
III. The Spirit it self is absolutely necessary to Salvation, as to his actual
influences.. IV. As to his constant presence as a living and abiding
Principle.. V. That the Spirit is first given in Baptism. This proved from our
new Birth's being ascribed to our Baptism.. VI. It is safe to argue from
Metaphorical Expressions in a matter of this Nature, St. Joh. 3.5. considered..
VII. Water to be understood in this place Literally.. VIII. These words might
relate to our Savior's Baptism.. IX. The Objection concerning the supposed
parallel place of Baptizing with the Holy Ghost and with Fire.. X. The Fire
here spoken of a material fire, and contradistinct to the Holy Ghost.. XI. Our
Savior's baptizing with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, as well applicable to
our Savior's ordinary Baptism, as to that of the Apostles at Pentecost.. XII.
The true reason why this descent of the Holy Ghost in Pentecost, is called a
Baptism, was, because it was a consummation of their former Baptism by Water,.
XIII. The reason why this part of their Baptism was deferred so long.. XIV.
Other instances wherein the Holy Ghost was given distinctly from the Baptism by
Water.. XV, XVI, XVII. Our Savior alluded herein to the Jewish Notions
concerning Baptismal Regeneration.. XVIII. What the Rabbinical Notions are..
XIX. How agreeable to the Doctrine of the New Testament.. XX. The Notions of
the Hellenistical Jews, and of the Philosophers.. XXI, XXII, XXIII. How
imitated by our Savior.. XXIV. An Objection.. XXV. Answered.. XXVI, XXVII, 2.
Grace of Baptism, Forgiveness of sins.. XXVIII, XXIX, XXX. That unbaptized
Persons cannot be supposed to have received the benefits of the washing of the
blood of Christ, or of the Mystical Baptism, proved from two things. 1. That
all who would be Christians are obliged to receive the Baptism by Water.. XXXI.
2. That every one who comes to Baptism is supposed to continue till then under
the guilt of his sins.. XXXII, XXXIII, XXXIV, XXXV. (2.) The same dependence of
Salvation on Baptism proved from those Texts which speak of the Privileges of
Baptism.. XXXVI. The same thing proved, ( 2.) From those Texts which expressly
ascribe our Salvation to our Baptism.. XXXVII A sum of the Argument from 1 Pet.
iii.21.. XXXVIII. From other Texts.. XXXIX. The Application.. XL.

I Have hitherto proved Exclusively, that the Grace conferred in the Sacraments
is not to be had otherwise than by the Sacraments, particularly not by those
two Popular Means by which Ordinary Persons think to obtain it, that is, not by
Preaching of the Word and Prayer. I now proceed, 2. To prove directly, that the
Grace conferred in the Sacraments is such as does suppose the Persons to whom
it is not giv^^ in an Vnsalvable Condition. Which will prove that the Grace
here given is really necessary to Salvation. Both which put together will fully
amount to the thing which I design to prove under this Head, That Salvation is
not ordinarily to be expected without an external participation of the
Sacraments,

Sacraments: 1. Concerning Baptism; and, 2. Concerning the Lords Supper. 1.
Concerning Baptism. And this two ways: 1. By those Texts which imply the
dependence of our Salvation on our Baptism; and 2. By those which expressly
ascribe Salvation to it. The former I shall again consider in two regards: in
regard of the Graces, and in regard of the Privileges of Baptism. He that
wants either of these cannot be supposed to be in a salvable Condition. 1. Not
he who wants the Graces. Those are two: the Spirit of God, and Forgiveness of
sins. And without either of these the Gospel assures no man of Salvation.

the Spirit of God is said to be given in Baptism, and so given, as that he who
is not Baptized cannot be supposed to have it. Tit. iii.5.
This appears in that Baptism is called the laver of Regeneration, and of the
renewing of the Holy Ghost; that our Savior himself tells Nicodemus, Joh.
iii.5.
That except a man be born of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God; that it is made the Property of our Saviors Baptism, that
whereas St. John baptized with Water only, Matt. iii.11. Mark i.8. Luke iii.16.
Joh. i.33. Act. 1.5.xi.16. Act. ii.38.
(and then much more reason we have to believe that that was the only effect of
the Pharisees Baptism), our Savior was also to baptize with the Holy Ghost,
and with fire. And therefore St. Peter exhorts his Auditors to Repent, but not
only so, but also to be baptized for the Remission of sins that they might
receive the Holy Ghost. And when St. Paul would give the Holy Ghost to them,
Act. xix.5, 6.
who had before been baptized with St. John's Baptism, he does it by first
baptizing them in the name of Jesus; and then it follows, that when he had laid
his hands on them, the Holy Ghost came upon them. And that appeared by this
sensible sign, which then usually accompanied it, that they spoke with tongues,
and prophesied.

Spirit is absolutely necessary to Salvation. I suppose our Adversaries
themselves will not think it necessary that I bestow much time in proving
without this that Grace cannot be had, which is absolutely necessary both to
prevent sin, and perform any thing which may be acceptable to God for our
Salvation. Without this they cannot make those Prayers which may be grateful to
him. The supplication of the Spirit, the Praying in the Holy Ghost is that
alone which can hope for success. It is he who helps our infirmities. For, Jude
20.
as the Apostle tells us, We know not what to pray for as we ought, Romans
viii.26, 27.
but it is the Spirit who intercedes for us with groans which cannot be
uttered. And he who searches the hearts knows the mind of the Spirit, who
intercedes with God for the Saints. And he who has not the Spirit of Christ is
none of his, and every one has the Spirit who is not a Roprobate, whence it
plainly follows, that whoever wants it is a Reprobate, at least so long as he
wants it. But thus much I suppose our dissenting Brethren themselves will not
deny.

actual influences of the Spirit which are common to wicked men as well as
good, are necessary to Salvation, but also his constant presence in us as a
living and abiding Principle. This alone is that presence of the Spirit which
can only sanctify us. Neither Nebuchadnezzar, nor Pharaoh, nor Caiaphas, were
the holier for the good motions they received, but rather the unholier for
having resisted them. Nay, these actual motions are communicable to Heathens
themselves who are not capable of so much as a Federal Holiness. Heb. xii.14.
And yet without Holiness no man shall see the Lord. This only is that presence
of the Spirit which makes Christ himself present in us, as I have elsewhere
shown; and they who have not Christ formed and born in them, cannot be said to
be in Christ, and consequently can have no Legal Actual Title to all that
Christ has done and suffered for them. This is only that presence of the Spirit
which communicates to us the influences of the Divine Life, that is, to the
Mystical Body of Christ, as the Animal and vital influences are to the Natural
Body, to derive all those influences from the Head which are necessary for
enlivening the particular Members. And therefore they who have not the Spirit
in this sense, cannot have the Son of God who is our Life, cannot partake of
any vital influences from him. And they who do not, are certainly in a state of
Spiritual Death. This also I suppose our Brethren will not deny when they are
thus warned of it, and shall impartially consider it. If therefore this
presence of the Spirit be first given in Baptism, so that they who have it not
given them here must be supposed not to have it at all; this will be sufficient
to show that this Sacrament is ordinarily necessary to Salvation.

born again plainly implies that we here begin our Spiritual Life as we began
our Natural Life at our first Birth. For it is only the first beginning of Life
that is called a Birth. We cannot say that Lazarus was born again when he was
restored to the Life which he formerly had. Much less can we say that they are
born again who are only recovered from a swounding fit. And accordingly no
recovery of the Spirit, after it had been once had before, can be properly
called a Regeneration, though it had been as totally extinguished as all
influences of the Natural Life were in Lazarus.

Metaphorical expressions in a matter of this nature. They are indeed the most
proper and suitable for a Mystical style as that is also most proper for
Sacraments which are Mysteries. If there be no arguing from these Metaphorical
expressions there can be none from those which are most natural. And certainly
the reasonings must prove yet weaker which are inferred from those which are
less natural; so that if these inferences be not allowed, none can be so. And
indeed the very design of this Mystical language is to express something
Spiritual, which cannot be so well understood, yet answerable to the sensible
thing primarily imported, which is better understood. But then especially this
reasoning is safest when the similitude is most obvious, and most naturally
suitable to the Allegory, as this of Birth is to the Divine Life so often
spoken of, and this of the beginning of Life is most natural to the Notion of a
Birth. And certainly when he who is not thus born again of water and the Spirit
is supposed incapable of entering into the Kingdom of God, he must necessarily
be supposed destitute of the Spirit before he is thus born to it. Besides, when
St. John Baptist makes it proper to our Savior to baptize with the Holy Ghost,
what ordinary way could there be supposed how any should come by the Holy Ghost
but by our Savior's Baptism? And that our Savior's Baptism employed the
Baptism of Water as well as of the Spirit, and that his Baptism with the Spirit
was not ordinarily separable from his Baptism with Water, appears plainly from
St. John, Joh. iii.5.
where it is as plainly said of him who is not born again of Water that he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, as it is said of him who is not born
again of the Spirit.

Mystical sense of the Water here mentioned. But it is a certain Rule of St.
Augustine, L. iii. de Doctr. Chr. c. 16.
that the literal sense is never to be forsaken unless it imply some evident
inconvenience. Nay, this Rule has always been so sacredly observed by prudent
Mystical Expositors themselves, a^ that it is their general custom to confute
the literal sense before they offer at any Mystical. But what absurdity can our
Adversaries pretend in our present Case? Can they say that our sense is not
more obvious, and natural, and of a more primary signification than theirs? was
it not the design of the imposers of this term that Baptism should signify the
Baptism of Water only? And did it not from hence come to signify the Baptism
of the Spirit only, as that came to be thought consequent to the other? was not
this the sense commonly understood and practiced by the Jews when they baptized
their Proselytes? when did they ever think only of giving the Spirit alone as
to his cleansing virtue without the Baptism of Water? And how was it therefore
likely that they should ever understand our Savior in such a sense as this is?
or that he would mean it in such a sense as he knew them never likely to
understand him in? If he had, why should he wonder so that Nicodemus a Master
in Israel should not understand him when he spoke in a language so unusual in
Israel?

Savior's own Baptism, because it was not yet instituted? If this were so,
then there was much greater reason that his words should have been understood
in the ordinary sense when even himself had not as yet instituted a Precedent
of an extraordinary. They had then no other Water-Baptisms to which they could
suppose him to allude, but their own and St. John Baptists. And they were both
with material Water. But how do they know that our Savior's Baptism was not
then instituted? The words of St. Matt. xxviii.19. were certainly no new
institution of this Sacrament, but only an enlargement of his former
commission, that they should not hence-forward confine their Baptism, only to
Jerusalem and Judea, but extend it to all Nations, and that they should not
observe it as a temporary Sanction proper to that Age, but should continue it
for ever. Joh. 4.1, 2. and 3.22.
Otherwise we know that before that our Savior did by his Disciples baptize
Proselytes in great numbers, even in greater than St. John Baptist himself. But
neither is this former mention of it intimated to have been his first beginning
of that Practice. Nay, he is rather said by this time to have grown famous for
it, which could hardly have been if it had not been taken up some considerable
time before. And yet even this was before St. John's imprisonment which fell
out in the first year of our Savior's Preaching, Act. i.22.x.37.
which is still noted to have begun with his Baptism by St. John. And therefore
in all likelihood he must have begun this Practice of baptizing Disciples very
early, and early enough for this speech of his to Nicodemus. And why not as
soon as he began to gather Disciples in his own name? seeing this was the form
of making Disciples then in use, and therefore unless he had used it, they
would not so probably have understood it to have been his design to gather any
Disciples at all.

Precedent that is pretended for this unnatural Mystical sense of Water is that
of baptizing with the Holy Ghost and with fire. Matt. iii.11.
Where they suppose the fire must be Mystically understood for the like
cleansing virtue of fire signified to be in the Spirit, whereby it cleanses us
from our corruptions as fire does metals from their dross. Mal. iii.2.
Which is also a Metaphor used frequently concerning God in the Old Testament.
Now that this mention of fire must be meant Mystically, may therefore be
conceived, both because there was then no practice of baptizing with material
fire, to which our Savior could be supposed to allude (for I do not know
whether the modern Abissine Practice be worth taking notice of,) and because it
is by our Savior himself expounded of his sending the Holy Ghost on his
Disciples on Pentecost, Act. i.5.
where at least the descent of the Holy Ghost upon them is called a Baptism,
though it was without material Water.

fire may be given to the Holy Ghost both for the reason here mentioned, and
for others which I have mentioned elsewhere. Joh. iii.5.
But why must it be meant of the Holy Ghost here, where it is expressly joined
with him by a Copulative as a thing distinct from him? Is it because the
substantive joined with a Copulative may be resolved, by an Hendiadis, into an
Adjective, as pateris libamus and auro in Virgil, for pateris aureis. This will
indeed show it possible that the words may bear such a sense where the
connection requires that they should do so. But how does that prove that that is
their sense here? It is certainly no very natural sense to understand them in;
and there should be the same exigency proved from the coherence, as there in
Virgil, before Virgil's instance can be made a Precedent. But they will appear
plainly distinct if we refer them to our Saviors own exposition of them in the
Acts. Act. i.5.
There we plainly find the Fire mentioned to have been distinct from the Holy
Ghost, and to have been no Mystical, but a material one, 2.3, 4.
such as spectators were able to discern. And why then should not the Water
which is here joined with the Holy Ghost, be material too? And what other
material Water is there of which we can so conveniently understand it as of
that of which we are now discoursing?

Holy Ghost in Pentecost in opposition to his ordinary descent in the ordinary
administration of Baptism with material Water, that is certainly a confinement
very far from our Saviors mind. Act. xix.2, 3, 4, 5.
St. Paul who undoubtedly knew his mind incomparably better than we do, does
plainly expound these words of St. John the Baptist of the Holy Ghost, which
was to be expected in our Savior's ordinary Baptism. And the same way St.
Peter understood them in the Case of Cornelius, Act. x.44, 45, 46, 47.
when from their having the Baptism of the Holy Ghost he presently infers their
Title to our Savior's ordinary Baptism by material Water. And in this latter
Case they of the Circumcision were amazed to see the Holy Ghost poured out upon
them before their Baptism by material Water, Ver. 45.
a sign that it was a very rare Case, and such as had never been observed in
all the Baptisms they had hitherto been acquainted with, and yet those had been
at several times, and of several Thousands. And I am apt to think that their
ordinary Baptisms were as much by Fire as the Holy Ghost, in regard to the
lightsome Shechinah which overshadowed the Persons then baptized, as that was
of the Apostles themselves at Pentecost. My reasons I have else where
mentioned, and shall not now repeat them.

Baptism by the Holy Ghost on Pentecost be therefore only called a Baptism,
because it was only a consummation of that Baptism which they had formerly
received at their first admission into their Discipleship to our Savior by
material Water? Then certainly the consequence will not hold, either that the
infusion of the Holy Ghost is alone called Baptism, but only to imply that it
had relation to the water Baptism formerly received by them; and much less that
it is called water, in regard of that Mystical Analogy which it has to water.
And that this was really the Case it is very reasonable to believe. Wherever
the Water Baptism is mentioned elsewhere in conjunction with the Spirit, it is
never so mentioned as to exclude material water, but plainly to include it, and
that even where this Mystical quality it self is also mentioned. So in the
Epistle to the Hebrew, Heb. x.22, 23.
Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our Bodies washed with clean
water. So in St. Peter, 1 Pet. iii.21.
The like figure whereunto Baptism also now saves us, not the putting away of
the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God. So in
the Epistle to the Ephesians, Ephesians. v.26.
That he might sanctify it [the Church] purifying it with the washing of water
in the word.

Apostles Baptism should be deferred to this Assembly of theirs on Pentecost,
because the Holy Ghost was not to be given till our Saviors Resurrection. So
our Savior himself expressly tells us, It is expedient for you that I go away.
If I go not away the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I go away, Joh.
xvi.7.
I will send him unto you. And when he had elsewhere said, Joh. vii.38.
He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water. The Evangelist does thereupon remark, This spoke
he of the Spirit, which they that believe should receive; for the Holy Spirit
was not yet given, v.39.
because Jesus was not glorified. Possibly the reason why he was deferred till
then might be, because the Spirit was to succeed Christ in his Office of a
Master, (as I have elsewhere discoursed) which could not so properly be done
according to the Laws of Succession in Schools then obteining, till the Chair
was empty by the removal or decease of the former Master. And if the Holy Ghost
was not given them on their believing before, then their having it at Pentecost
was absolutely necessary for completing their Baptism, according to the Notion
of our Saviors Baptism, whose Property it was to give the Holy Ghost. And then
even that Baptism it self adequately taken did include the Baptism with
material water, if not when the Holy Ghost was given, yet before, which amounts
to the same purpose.

AND that this maybe thought the less strange, it is very observable, that not
only in this Case, which did particularly require it for the reason now
mentioned, but also in several others, the Holy Ghost it self was given at some
distance after Baptism. Act. viii.12.
So in the conversion of the Samaritans by St. Philip, he himself baptized them
who had converted them. But St. Peter and St. John were afterward sent to them
to pray for them, v.14, 15, 16, 17.
and to lay their hands upon them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost. And
the reason is expressly given, Ver. 16.
That as yet he was fallen upon none of them, but that they had only been
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. So also in the now mentioned case of
the Ephesians who had already been baptized with St. John's Baptism, St Paul
again baptized them in the name of the Lord Jesus. Act. xix.5, 6.
But yet they received not the Holy Ghost, till he had also laid his hands upon
them. I know indeed in both instances, the effects of the Holy Ghost's coming
upon them were extraordinary. But it is not thence to be concluded that this
giving of the Holy Ghost was only with relation to an extraordinary sort of
influence. For these extraordinary manifestations did in those times so
ordinarily accompany his presence on any account, as I have elsewhere observed,
as that it was ordinary for them to argue not only positively that he was
indeed given where he appeared to be so by those extraordinary manifestations;
but also that he was not given where no such manifestations appeared. For that
seems to have been the reason why they inferred that he had not fallen on the
Samaritans upon their Baptism by St. Philip.

Confirmation to have been only a Supplement of Baptism. Mr. Daille.
Whether it was taken only for a Supplement of it, or not; yet certainly in
doubtful Cases it was taken for a Supplement. The Authors observation in the
Case now mentioned of the Samaritans, that the Holy Ghost had not as yet fallen
on any of them, but that they had been only baptized, seems, methinks, to imply
that it was ordinarily expected that in Baptism he should fall upon them
without any further office of the Ministry. And so it should seem that then
they had recourse to the Apostles and Apostolical Persons to whom our Savior
himself had given the power of giving the Holy Ghost by the imposition of their
hands in a way of Human Ministry, when they found that he did not descend
immediately upon Baptism, and concluded that he did not descend on them because
he did not manifest his presence by any sensible appearance.

Baptism which might prove valid for ought they knew. However the federal Right
to the Holy Ghost being given in Baptism, and the Holy Ghost it self being
ordinarily given together with the Right to him without any further office of
the ordinary Ministry, and the signification of the new birth and illumination
being represented in Baptism; and it being agreeable to the nature of a
Sacrament to confer the Grace signified in it; and the office of imposition of
hands generally going along with it where it was thought necessary; and usually
being reckoned as a part of it rather than as a distinct office; it cannot be
admired that Baptism should be supposed to confer the Holy Ghost, though he
were not immediately conferred upon that part of the office of Baptism by water
always. Which will be a clear account how the descent of the Holy Ghost upon
the Apostles in Pentecost might be called a Baptism as indeed a part and
consummation of their former Water Baptism. So far it will be, on this
supposition, from excluding even material water from the very Notion of Baptism
in which it is called Baptism. Though for my present purpose I am not so much
concerned whether Baptism do immediately confer the Holy Ghost, as whether
unbaptized Persons be by any means capable of receiving him. But they can have
no relief by this supposition of his being conferred by this imposition of
hands, because they are not capable of that Imposition it self till they be
baptized.

Savior in this place does plainly allude to that Notion of Baptismal
Regeneration which prevailed among the Jews from whom our Savior borrowed the
very custom of Baptism. This appears from our Saviors admiring that Nicodemus
being a Master in Israel should not understand his Discourse upon this Subject.
This could not be in regard of the clearness of what he had said on that
occasion. He could not on that account upbraid him with any dullness of
apprehension for not knowing his meaning. For he had only mentioned the thing
without the addition of any thing that might look like an explication of it.
And therefore certainly he must have supposed it to have been a term familiar
among them; and upon this account might very justly admire that he being a
Master in Israel, whose office it was to instruct others concerning it, should
be so backward in understanding it himself. And the rather so, because this was
not a Doctrine reserved for Persons of greater proficiency and maturer
understandings, Heb. vi.2.
but belonged to the Doctrine of Baptisms mentioned also as it should seem in
allusion to the Hebrew Notions by the Author of the Epistle to them, which
accordingly he there also calls the first principles of the Oracles of God. And
therefore it seems to have been one of those first Instructions which were at
first communicated to their Catechumens before their admission to Baptism. And
then it was very justly admirable that he should have been ignorant of such a
Doctrine. If this were the true state of the Case, it will then follow that
they were the Jewish Notions of Baptismal Regeneration to which our Savior
here alluded.

modern Rabbis deserve herein to be credited in delivering the sense of their
Predecessors, as I confess I am not very confident of them in many other
things, then it will be plain that this Baptismal Regeneration is really such
as does not agree to Persons unbaptised, and which withal will suppose such
Persons to whom it does not agree incapable of an interest in the future World,
which is the very term by which they express that which our Savior here calls
the Kingdom of Heaven. These two things put together will fully amount to that
sense of our Saviors words for which I am at present concerned. And that this
is plainly their sense will appear from their whole Hypothesis, which is
certainly a much surer way of knowing the sense of any party than that, which
is commonly used, of particular testimonies. Now as they suppose themselves
alone to have an interest in the other World, so the reason why they suppose
it, is, because they pretend alone to have another Soul distinct from others,
which, being naturally immortal, makes them thereby capable of such an
interest. Vid. Seldom. de Success. in bon. des. cap. 26.
And this they suppose infused into their Proselytes of Justice immediately
upon their Baptism, by which they are admitted to this Proselytism. And, that
the change made hereupon may not be only taken for a change of qualities, they
plainly say that they are not afterward the same Persons they were before; and
therefore, that, if before they were related to any, henceforward that relation
ceases, and that they may thereupon marry with them, though within prohibited
degrees, if there remain no other impediment on account of their difference in
Religion. And upon this same account they say that if a Proselyte die before he
has begotten an Israelite, he has no heir at all, because all his former
Relations cease, even those of his natural Sons which were begotten before his
Proselytism. Now by this Hypothesis it is plainly supposed that before his
Proselytism he wanted this new Soul; because so long they acknowledge his
natural Relations to hold, which all fail as soon as this new Soul is infused
into him. I know the Jews do, on other occasions, call new moral dispositions
by the name of a new Soul, Buxtorf. Synag. Jud.
as when they tell us of the Sabatical Soul, which they make necessary for the
observation of their Sabbath. But the effects now mentioned in Law concerning
Marriages and Inheritances, and their conceiving that it is this new Soul alone
which is immortal, and intitles them to an interest in the other World, do sure
in this Case argue that they think the change Substantial.

Hypothesis is to the Doctrine of the New Testament, 1 These. v.23.
that this does also plainly distinguish the Notions of Soul and Spirit: that
it makes the Soul derived from the first Adam, 1 Cor. xv.45.49.
and accounts us to bear the image of the first Adam by the Soul which we
receive from him, and accordingly to bear the image also of the second Adam by
the Spirit which we receive from him: that the Soul we receive from the first
Adam is only a living Soul, but the Spirit which we receive from the second
Adam only is a quickening Spirit: that as we are in Adam, Ver. 22.
that is, as we bear his image by the Soul received from him, we all dye (that
is, at least, as to the death of the Body of which he was there discoursing) so
as we are in the second Adam we shall all be made alive, that is, also as to
the Resurrection of the Body, of which he was there discoursing, that is, at
least, with such a Resurrection as can make us capable of inheriting eternal
Life, as it is usual in the Scripture to speak of that 1 Cor. xv.42, 43, 44.
St. Joh. vi.39, 40, 44, 54.
Resurrection as if it were indeed the only Resurrection (so that by these
degrees if we cannot have eternal Life without such a Resurrection as this is,
nor such a Resurrection without the Spirit, nor the Spirit without Baptism; it
plainly follows that we cannot have eternal Life without Baptism) that this
Spirit is the seed 1 Pet. i.23. 1 John iii.9.
of God, and a 2 Pet. i.4.
Divine nature, which are also expressions intimating a more than moral change.
I might also have shown how very agreeable this same Hypothesis was to the
sentiments of the Primitive Writers, and of how very great use it might prove
for giving an intelligible account of some of the most difficult Controversies
which have perplexed Christendom. And indeed it was very likely that if this
were a Privilege then challenged by the Jews to the carnal Israel, it would be
challenged by Christians to themselves as being the Spiritual Israel, as I have
already observed. And that even the modern Jews have not innovated in these
Notions, as certainly they have in others, from the sense of their
Predecessors, I am therefore the more inclinable to believe: because they could
have so little ground for them from the Peripatetick Philosophy as explained by
the Arabians, which we may plainly perceive to have been that from whence they
derived most of their Innovations.

Hellenistical Philosophy were generally received by the Jews of that Age, and
withal were more likely to be alluded to by our Savior, whose design it was to
gain the Heathens, whose Philosophy that was as well as the Jews; I think it
will be the most likely way for discovering the sense of this and the like
Scriptures, to show the meaning of them by the Principles of that Philosophy,
especially as it is explained in terms of that Philosophy, and in some things
received by the Jews themselves. Paemandr. c. 3.17.
The (...) (...) is a term expressly used by the Author who goes under the name
of Trismegistus, who, if he were really a Christian, as I believe really he
was, yet seems, at least, to have personated the Person whose name he was
pleased to assume, and consequently in him to have personated the Egyptian
Philosophy, as I am apt to think many others did for the same purpose, when I
consider the great number of Books pretended in Jamblichus to have been written
under the name of Hermes. de Myster. Aegyptior.
And accordingly this Practice was imitated by those other Sects of the
Philosophers who were Travelers, and who took up their Notions rather from
Tradition than from their own Discourse. So Plato, when he would give an
account of the Principles of Socrates or Timaeus brings them in discoursing in
their own words. And though Pythagoras himself is said to have written nothing,
yet the Golden Verses, and other things, quoted by the Ancients, bear his name.
And very probably the same account may serve for the Orphaicks, that they were
also designed by the several Authors to express the sense of Orpheus, and the
Principles of the Religion introduced by him. And I believe several of those
Ancient works which at present bear false Titles, were first inscribed with
those Titles by the Authors for this very reason without any design of imposing
on the World. As therefore, on these accounts, it will appear probable, that
the Author intended to deliver the Principles of the Egyptian Philosophy,
which pretended to Hermes as its first Author; so it is very probable also that
he meant that Scheme of it which prevailed in his own time at Alexandria, which
was the Elective made up of the several Sects that agreed in opposition to the
Scepticks and Atheists. And I need not warn how much that School influenced the
World in that age, and how very likely it was therefore to be alluded to in the
New Testament which supposed its Readers imbued with those Principles.

heaven from whence it came is called a new Birth. So Porphyry tells us that
the descent of the Soul into this World is represented by the Bees and Honey in
Homer's description of the Antrum Nympharum, as emblems of the first
generation; de Antr. Nymph. p. 259, 260.
and yet withal that the Nectar, the drink of the gods was made of honey to
show that this same resemblance very well fitted the return or second birth of
the Soul also. And in all likelihood it was from this signification of honey
with the Mystical Philosophers, that it was given by the Christians to new
baptized Persons, and that so early as that this Practice is mentioned in that
very ancient Epistle which is ascribed to Barnabas. Vid Voss. Not. in Barnab.
Milk and Honey were both of them used to infants in their first birth, and so
were very fit according to the Mystical Philosophy, which was of great use then
for bringing many over to Christianity, and so must needs have been supposed
true by them who on this account received it where it was not corrected by
express Revelation. And by this passage of Porphiry it appears that these same
Philosophers took it for a fit Symbol of the second birth also. Nor did the
Egyptians only express this Notion of the Souls return to Heaven by the name
of a second birth. Tertullian uses also the word Regeneration concerning them,
and the worshippers of Mithras, a Religion that then very much prevailed among
the Mystical Philosophers, Tertull. de Baptism. c. 5. vid. etiam. c. 40.
and other celebrated Mysteries. Viduis aquis sibi mentiuntur. Nam and sacris
quibusdam per lavacrum initiantur, Isidis alicujus aut Mithrae. Ipsos etiam
Deos suos Lavationibus efferunt. Ceterum villas, domos, templa, totasque urbes
aspergine circumlatae aquae expiant passim. Certe Ludis Apollinaribus and
Eleusiniis [so Rigaltius for Pelusis in other Editions, and certainly much
better] tinguntur, Idque se in Regenerationem and impunitatem perjuriorum
suorum agere praesumunt. Where it is very remarkable that this Regeneration is
ascribed to their very washing, very agreeably to what Numenius (...). Antr
Nymph. p. 256. Which is the more remarkable, because several of the Fathers
apply this passage in Genesis to the Spirit received in Baptism. Tertul. de
Baptism. c. 4. Whence it seems very probable that Numenius, as well as they,
had this Exposition from the Jewish Hellenistical Expositors.
tells us from Genesis i.3. that the Spirit (from which this new Life is derived)
is seated on the Waters. And the same thing is said more particularly
concerning the Egyptian Mysteries by Apuleius. Metam. xi. p. 267.
Nam and inferum claustra, and salutis tutelam in manu Deae positam, ipsamque
traditionem ad instar voluntariae mortis [this answers our dying in Baptism]
and precariae salutis celebrari; quippe cum transactis vitae temporibus, jam in
ipso vitae limine constitutos, quis tamen tu^o possint magna Religionis
committi silentia, 1 Cor. iv.15.
numen Deae soleat eligere, and sua Providentia quodammodo renatos ad novae
reponere rursus salutis curricula. So Apuleius. Accordingly he calls Mithras
the Priest who had initiated him his Parent. Complexus Mithram Sacerdotem and
meum jam Parentem, p. 279. as St. Paul does for the same reason call himself
the Father of those who had been converted by him. And it was very agreeable
for them to speak thus. For as the Scripture speaks of the Life after
conversion as a new Life, so it does therein only allude to the style of the
Philosophers who make the (...), the 2 Pet. i.^.
escaping from the corruption of the World, to be a recovery of a new Life So
Plato himself Et Porph. Antr. Nymph. p. 256, 257.
applies the passage of Heraclitus, that we live the death of those who are in
the other world, and die their Life. And Hierocles (...). Hierocl. in Aur.
Carm. p. 13, 4.
makes the Souls of men to be mortal gods, in opposition to the (...),
mentioned in the Golden Verses, for this very reason, because they sometimes
die that blessed Divine Life by falling away from God, as they recover that
Life again by returning back to him. And Porphyry de Antr. Nymph. p. 264.
speaking of Souls from the Slavery of their first Nativity, says that they do
(...). And it might have been shown that they also make the (...) to be that
winging of their minds, the (...) as they call it in opposition to the (...),
by which they are made capable of ascending upwards, and consequently of
escaping the load of their grosser vehicles and so of recovering this Divine
Life. And accordingly the very name of (...) is ascribed to him by Simplicius
(...). Simpl. in sin. Com. in Epic^et.
in that excellent Prayer of his with which he concludes his Commentary on
Epictetus, which is worth the Readers perusal for this purpose. And that it is
by the Spirit that this Government is administered, appears from Spiritu vero
agitantur sive gubernantur omnes in mundo species, unaquaeque secundum naturam
suam a Deo distributam sibi. Trisn. Asclep. ex interp. Apul.
Apuleius.

Hypothesis together, they will fully amount to the account the Scripture gives
of Christ as the (...), so much of it at least as we are at present concerned
for. 1. The new Life will consist in conjunction with the (...), to whom they
also ascribe it as the Scripture does; 2. This (...) exerts his enlivening
power in us by the Spirit, as the Scripture tells us Christ does, so that they
who have not this Spirit cannot partake of this Life; 3. The first infusion of
the Spirit is that which first enables us to ascend, and so to exercise any act
of this new Life, and therefore is most properly called the new birth; and
therefore they who have not yet received the Spirit as a principle of
Regeneration cannot be supposed to have received it at all, and therefore must
be supposed destitute of it; and by these Principles cannot be supposed capable
of ascending into Heaven, because this is the wing by which they are enabled to
ascend thither. 4. This infusion of the Spirit as a Principle of Regeneration
was expected in those Baptisms* which were then received in the commonly
received Mysteries of that Age, and accordingly the partaking in those
Mysteries was particularly recommended by Pythagoras, for this purpose of
Philosophy. And, 5. That we may not admire that Baptism which was only a
Ceremony of admitting Disciples should also be made a Mystery, and as such a
one made use of for communicating those spiritual influences which were usually
expected in Mysteries; this was also frequent among the Philosophers of those
times, especially the Pythagoraeans, from whom the Essenes seem to have
borrowed many things, as the Christians did from the Essenes, to suit the way
of instructing their Scholars to the customs of their usual Mysteries.
Therefore Pythagoras (...). Jamblich. vit. Pyth. c. 17. vid. etiam c. 23.
had his Acroamaticks as well as his Exotericks; which were only communicated
to those of maturer understandings. Therefore he concealed the secrets of his
Philosophy in Symbols, which was also a sacred term proper to the Mysteries.
Therefore he tried his Disciples with an exercise of silence, as they did those
who were to be admitted to the greater Mysteries, and allotted the same time,
that is, five years for that trial, which was the time ordinarily prefixed for
the Mysteries.

Savior himself, who had his Mysteries which they who were without the
Exotericks were by no means to know, and such also which were not to be
communicated to his own Disciples Matt. xiii.11. Mark iv.11. Luke viii.10.
till they had arrived to a considerable degree of improvement, and that he
calls these the Mysteries Mark iv.33. Joh. xvi.12.
of the Kingdom; nor how the Author to the Hebrews Heb. v.11.12, 13, 14.
seems also to allude to the same Practice. And if those teachers had had the
same power of the Spirit as our Savior had, and as those Gods were conceived
to have, in honor of whom those Mysteries were instituted; no doubt they would
have made their own admission of Disciples like the public Mysteries in that
very regard of the Spiritual benefits to be communicated by them. These things
must, at least, show how the converts of that Age were likely to understand our
Saviors design in this particular, by allusion to their own customs, to which
they must, on these Principles, be supposed likely to believe that he did
intend really to allude. And if our Savior must have meant them in the sense
they were, on these terms, likely to understand him in, as I have elsewhere
proved it most probable that he must; then this must have been our Savior's
meaning also. And if so, then it will appear plainly that this Spiritual Life
cannot be supposed in any who are not thus regenerated; and that this
Regeneration is the first participation of the Spiritual Life, as those
Baptisms from which the pattern of our Christian Baptism was taken, were the
first initiations into the School of a Master, or into the familiarity of the
gods to whose Mysteries they were supposed to belong.

not regenerated, at least as long as our Savior was pleased to continue his
bodily presence among them, if the Spirit which they received at Pentecost was
that which they were to expect in our Saviors Baptism as it was his peculiar
privilege to baptize with the Holy Ghost. For if the Holy Ghost given by virtue
of Baptism be a Principle of Regeneration, and if they who have not received
this Principle of Regeneration, cannot be supposed capable of the benefit of
Regeneration by any other means; nay, if Regeneration imply the first
participation of this Principle; then it will follow that they were not
regenerate till Pentecost, and therefore that till then they had not the Holy
Ghost given them as a Principle of Life; and consequently were so long in a
state of Death, and in an unsalvable condition, if the actual participation of
the Spirit be absolutely necessary to Salvation as I have proved it to be.

Baptism be now the ordinary means of Salvation, whether it were so then or no.
Several of the things by which it comes to be an ordinary means of Salvation
are such as depend upon Christ's arbitrary pleasure, as both that the Spirit
should be given them in Baptism, and that the Spirit there given should be a
principle of Regeneration, and that they who had not this Spirit as a
regenerating Principle should not be taken for his. And therefore he might very
well decypher his own Baptism to Nicodemus, as to the effects which should
ordinarily belong to it, when it should attain its full force, and might at
present signify that without such a Baptism as his own was, in opposition to
that which was used among the Jews, (which should really give that Spirit which
they only pretended to give) they should not be capable of an interest in the
Kingdom of God, that is, in their apprehensions in the Kingdom of the Messiah
so much expected by them as Israelites, which would be a very rational
inducement, to him even at present to partake of that Baptism, and by it to
inlist himself in the number of our Savior's Disciples, when he should by that
means best secure his interest in that Kingdom. For this it was sufficient that
it was not to be expected by Circumcision, nor by any other Baptism that might
stand in competition with the Baptism of our Savior, that from them alone it
could not be expected, either at present, or for the future; but that from his
own they might expect it for the future as soon as it should prove necessary.
But considering that these were things depending on his own pleasure, he might
give and confine these benefits to his own Baptism at what time himself should
please.

Spirit. Either he, who was himself the Life, might communicate his own
influences by ways best known to himself without the Spirit, (and indeed this
seems to have been much of their Case when he implies the presence of the
Spirit not to be necessary whilst himself was among them, as it should be
afterward) or he might supply the want of the Spirit as a constant vital
Principle by frequent actual influences; or if he had not thought fit to give
it to them during their lives, if any of them should not have lived to
Pentecost, he might then have given them it when it should prove necessary for
their entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, without any breach of his general
resolution of not sending the Spirit till Pentecost, though his Providence so
contrived the matter that none of them were driven to this exigence. Only Judas
died within that period; and he had forfeited the interest which his Baptism by
water had given him in this Promise of his Spirit by his misdemeanors after
his Baptism. However the matter was, it is certain that their Case was not so
advantageous to them then as it was after they had received the Spirit, when
our Savior tells them that it was expedient for them that he should go away
from them, St. Joh. xvi.7.
thereby implying plainly how more advantageous the Spirit should be which they
were to receive upon his departure, than his own presence it self; and besides
was singular, and such as cannot be made a Precedent by our present Brethren.
They cannot pretend any such resolution of our Savior not to give the Spirit
constantly with his Baptism, which might oblige him to make other provisions
for those who receive his Baptism when their failing of it is not imputable to
any neglect on their part, but to his own resolution. Nor can they pretend any
such supplement of it as the presence of our Savior was, which when it was
withdrawn, our Savior himself then thought it necessary immediately to fulfill
the Promise he had made to them offending the Spirit to them. Our Brethren live
at present under actual and settled establishments, and where they can come by
them by any diligence or unsinful condescensions on their own part* they have
reason to expect either to stand or fall by them.

Saviors Baptism is forgiveness of sins. And this is also frequently ascribed
to it in the Scripture. So Annanias to St. Paul: Arise and be baptized, Act.
xxii.16.
and wash away thy sins. 1 Cor. vi.11.
So St. Paul himself to the Corinthians after having mentioned several sins, he
adds, Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified. So St.
Peter, Repent, Act. ii.38.
and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission
of sins, Ver. 37.
of that sin particularly for which they had been pricked to the heart, Ver.
23, 36. Ephesians. v.26, 27.
their crucifying of our Savior. So Christ is said to sanctify and cleanse
his Church with the washing of water by the word, That he might present it to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: but
that it should be holy and without blemish. So in the forementioned passage to
the Hebrews both those effects of Baptism are joined together, Heb. x.22.
the sprinkling of our hearts from an evil conscience, that is, from a
consciousness of sin, as well as that of washing our bodies with pure water.

sins is in an unsalvable condition, and therefore that this Grace is such as
is absolutely necessary for Salvation, and consequently that all those means
must be also necessary without which this Grace cannot be obtained. For the
Scripture plainly supposes that all have sinned, Romans iii.23.iv.6, 7.
and fallen short of the glory of God. And therefore there can be no hopes, at
present, of recovering that glory by innocence, but by forgiveness of those
sins of which the Scripture supposes us all guilty. If therefore it may appear
that all Persons unbaptised are under the guilt of sin till they be baptized,
it will plainly follow that they are relievable from that guilt by any other
means but Baptism. For if there were any other means antecedent to Baptism
whereby sin might be remitted; then such Persons as might make use of those
means might be freed from their sins antecedently to Baptism, and so could not,
when they come to be baptized, be supposed under any such guilt. This will
bring the proof home to the Negative, for which I am, at present principally
concerned. For my design at present is not hereby to prove that Baptism is a
means of obtaining forgiveness of sins, but that it is the only ordinary means
of obtaining that forgiveness. For from hence alone it will clearly follow that
it will be necessary for every one to be baptized who desires that forgiveness.

washing from our sins either to the blood of Christ, or to the Spiritual
Mystical part of the Sacrament. I do not at present doubt but that it is the
blood of Jesus which cleanses us from all sins, 1 John i.7. 1 Pet. iii.21.
and that it is not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer
of a good conscience which saves us. Our present concernment is only to know
whether the merit of this blood be not applied by Baptism, or whether this
Mystical influence of Baptism on the Spirit be not ordinarily confined to this
external Baptism by water? If this be the truth in both Cases, then it will
plainly follow that he who continues unbaptized, cannot, whilst he continues
so, expect any relief either from the blood of Christ, or from this Spiritual
Mystical part of Baptism, that may encourage them to defer this Baptism by
water. Though indeed the ill consequence of the contrary suppositions, to the
destroying all rational obligation to Baptism, were enough to convince our
Brethren who would thoroughly and impartially consider it, of the falsehood of
these Suppositions. For if, on the only moral Duties of faith and repentance,
the blood of Christ might be expected to wash us from our sins, what need could
there be of Baptism? For with these they suppose the blood of Christ will do it
alone without Baptism. And without them Baptism it self will never do it, And
the same consequence will follow from the other supposition. For who would ever
desire the Baptism of water, if, without it he might be secured of this
Mystical Baptism of the Spirit?

unbaptized Persons cannot be supposed to have received the benefit of this
washing of the blood of Christ, or of this Mystical Baptism, will appear from
these two Considerations: that all who would be Christians are obliged to
receive even the Baptism of water; and that all who come to this Baptism are
supposed under the guilt of sin. From both these put together it will plainly
appear that no unbaptized Persons can be supposed to have had their sins
remitted to them by any other provision antecedent to Baptism. That all that
would be Christians are obliged to receive this Baptism even by water, may
appear from hence, that it is indeed by this that they are made Christians, as
the name Christian signifies any thing of privilege; that it is by this that
they are admitted to the Covenant of Christ, that it is by this they become
Disciples of Christ, and are admitted into his School, according to the
Practice of Baptism in that Age when it was first introduced into Christianity,
that this is, at least, the Legal Solemnity of making a Christian, and that
none can be a Christian in such a sense as to have a Title to the Legal
Privileges of that name without a participation of the Legal Solemnities of
becoming one. Unless therefore we can suppose any to be Christians, in the
sense now explained, who are neither in Covenant with Christ, nor are Disciples
of his School, we cannot suppose them capable of becoming such without Baptism.
And if this were the ordinary way of admitting and making Christians, in this
sense, in the first Age of Christianity, we cannot be satisfied that they can
be made so now, otherwise, unless God have either instituted another way, or
expressly declared his relaxation of this. But neither of these are so much as
pretended by our Adversaries. As for the reasons of the thing, not to take
notice of the particular weakness of that which is capable of being produced
for them, this great exception lies against this whole way of arguing, that it
is very incompetent in matters of this nature that depend on Gods arbitrary
pleasure.

Baptism is supposed to continue under the guilt of his sins, appears plainly
from the Texts now mentioned. It was one of the principal things required to be
professed by them, St. Cyprian. Ep.
Credis Remissam Peccatorum: That was the Language of the Affricans. And that
it was not the forgiveness of sin in general, but as it related to the
particular sins of the Persons to be baptized, that was thus professed by them,
appears also from the customs of the Baptisms of that Age. Matt. iii.6. Mark
i.5.
In St. John's Baptism they confessed their sins. And these lesser Mysteries by
Water among the Heathens, to which I have already observed that Baptism was
answerable among the Christians, were principally designed rather for the
Purgative and expiatory part, as the greater were for the Perfective part, of
these Divine communications. Therefore it is that Repentance is still joined
with Baptism. Acts ii.38. Heb. vi.1, 2.
Repent and be baptized every one of you. And so the Doctrine of Repentance
from dead works is joined with the Doctrine of Baptisms, and accordingly
reckoned with them among the Principles of the Christian Religion. And
therefore baptized Persons are said to wash away their sins in the places now
produced. But why should they repent who have all those sins already forgiven
them for which they should repent? Why should they come to the Sacrament of
expiation who are under no guilt that can need expiation? Why should they wash
who are already clean?

Authorities against those Adversaries with whom I am at present dealing, I
might have shown that not only the Affrican Fathers, but the whole Church which
condemned the Pelagians proceeded on this Principle, that it was impossible
that any unbaptized Person could be innocent, or have his guilt remitted to
him, when they proved the sinfulness and dangerous estate of Infants from their
need of Baptism. Which must by so much proceed more forcibly in the Case of
Adults by how much the confession of sins required from them is more express
than that which is required from Infants. But none can doubt that those Fathers
and Councils, who appeared in that Controversy had dreadful apprehensions
concerning the danger of unbaptized Persons, so that it is hard to expect that
our Brethren would submit to be tried by them. And yet methinks those of Mr.
Calvin's persuasion should not altogether slight these Authorities which on
other occasions they are so apt to magnify, and in those very same Disputes
wherein they magnify them. I confess where a thing may be useful for many
ends, they who need it not for one subordinate end may still be obliged to make
use of it, if the principal end do still continue necessary. But in our present
Case it is very observable that this expiation of sin is the principal thing
represented, and therefore the principal benefit to be expected in this
Sacrament. The washing of the Body with water seems plainly chosen for the very
purpose of signifying the Mystical washing of the Soul. And this being the
nature of Mysteries to perform that Mystical benefit to the Soul which they
represent to the eyes of the Body, this expiation of sin must be the Spiritual
benefit for which it was principally instituted. And therefore they who need it
not for this end must be supposed not to need it for the end for which it was
principally instituted. And it is hard to conceive how they who want it not for
its principal end can notwithstanding be obliged to receive it for a
subordinate one.

BESIDES they who should receive it without any need of its expiatory virtue
must needs be guilty of a false signification in doing so. They must at least
signify themselves to be unclean, though they be not so, if they desire this
Mystical washing. And can God oblige them to such an untrue signification by
their Actions any more than he can to falsehood in words? We see how the false
signification of Circumcision obliged Christians to forbear the use of it, when
it was taken for an obligation to the whole Law. And yet the Mystical
Circumcision which was immediately signified by it was still as suitable to the
state of Christianity as it had been to the state of the Jews, seeing these
challenged the name of Israel, and of the true seed of Abraham in the Mystical
sense, which was also supposed to be a sense more principally designed by God
than the Literal it self was. And how can it then be lawful for such Persons to
be baptized, who can with so very little veracity comply with the natural and
immediate signification of Baptism.

Savior was circumcised by the Jews, and baptized by St. John the Baptist
without any Mystical Uncircumcision or sins that might be repented of. But the
plain reason was because the Jews had as yet no conviction of the singularity
of his Case, and it was not as yet seasonable for him to plead it, in which
regards he might as well in this Case, as he did in others, comply with their
misunderstandings, for a time. But if there were any other means provided by
which Persons might obtain forgiveness of their sins antecedently to Baptism;
Nay, if there were means whereby particular Persons might be assured that they
had received it; how could it be either expected by Governors, or submitted to
by such Persons who are already expiated, and knew themselves to be so, and
could make this appear to the satisfaction of others with as great evidence as
Baptism it self could have been able to afford them? I say, how could it be
expected that such Persons as these should signify a falsehood so disparaging
the means by which they had been expiated, if there had been any such? And
either of these sufficiently serves my purpose, either that there are no other
means of applying this washing of the blood of Christ, or of this Mystical
Baptism of the Soul antecedently to the Baptism by Water, or that at least
there are no means whereby Persons concerned may be so well assured of this
application as they can by Water Baptism. This later, if granted, will make the
Sacrament, even the external Symbol of it, as necessary to them as I am
concerned it should be. So much for the Graces of Baptism.

the privileges of Baptism are also such as must needs suppose the Person who
wants them in an unsalvable Condition. Gal. iii.27.
As many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Where we plainly
see that Baptism is the means of putting on Christ, and of being in him. Which
is very different from the Notions commonly received among our Nonconforming
Brethren. vid. 1 Cor. vi.3.
And by the expression of being baptized into Christ, it seems plainly to be
employed that by Baptism we come to belong to Christ as they who were baptized
into Moses were by being so made Disciples of Moses, 1 Cor. x.2.
and got an interest in the Polity established by him. So also by one Spirit we
are all baptized into one Body. 1 Cor. xii.13.
It is the Body of Christ he had been discoursing of: And here he tells us that
it is by partaking in one Spirit that we come to be reputed one body, as we
count all those members to belong to one natural body which all communicate in
the same vital influences; and that it is by that Spirit which we receive in
our Baptism that we come to communicate in one Spirit. For, as I said before,
this Mystical Baptism being only called Baptism in a secondary regard, as it
has relation to the Baptism of Water, no other reception of the Spirit can be
so properly called a Baptism as this which accompanies the Baptism of Water.
The same Spirit, when it is signified in relation to another way of receiving
it, is spoken of in the same Allegory to which it alludes. As we are said to
drink of it when it is spoken of as received in the Lords Supper, where we
drink the Element by which it is communicated to us, as it follows immediately
in the same verse. So we are said to be buried and raised, Romans vi.4. Col.
ii.12.
and quickened with him in Baptism, according to the nature of Mysteries which
are supposed really to confer those Spiritual benefits which are signified by
them. And therefore as we do here signify the Death and Resurrection of
Christ; so we are, by this way of arguing, made partakers also of the merits of
his Death and Resurrection. And if these be privileges of Baptism, I believe
our dissenting Brethren themselves will not doubt but they are absolutely
necessary to Salvation, and that they who want them must also want necessaries
for Salvation. For they will not pretend that they who are not in Christ, who
have not put him on, who are not of his Body, nor partake of the influences of
his Spirit, who have not the merit of his Death and Resurrection, are in a
secure or comfortable condition. And yet this is supposed to be the condition
of unbaptized Persons, when they are supposed to be first changed into a
contrary condition by their Baptism. Even this external Right which this
external participation of the Water, if it were not a means of conveying the
blessings signified by it (as certainly it is, if the Sacrament be complete
according to the design of a Sacrament) yet it is at least a means without
which we cannot be so well assured of our Right.

Salvation it self is expressly ascribed to our Baptism. So St. Peter, The like
figure whereunto Baptism also now saves us, 1 Pet. iii.21.
not the putting off the filth of the flesh, but the examination of a good
conscience as to God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. So I think the Text
may be translated more agreeably to the sense of the Original than as we have
it in our common Translation. By the examination of a good Conscience, I only
mean the solemn stipulation of Baptism. Which, as other stipulations also were
in those times, was transacted by way of Question and Answer, and the great
efficacy of Baptism was conceived to depend on the sincerity of the Answer made
to the Ministers Interrogatories, that is, in their meaning heartily as they
pretended. Cyrill. Hieros. Catech.
Now the comparison between Noah's being saved by the Ark and our being saved
by Baptism, seems to consist in this, that as they who were in the Ark escaped
out of the water by which all the rest perished who were not in it (that Notion
will very well agree to the words (...), as the like Phrase of (...) is used in
St. Paul, 1 Cor. iii.15.) so in Baptism when we rise out of the Water we escape
out of that Mystical destruction which we suppose to have befallen the Enemies
of our Salvation when we descended under it. And this Salvation of Baptism is
very properly ascribed to the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. For as our going
under the Water represents the Death and Burial of Christ, and does not only
represent it, but apply it to us as if it were our own, and as if we made one
Person with him, and by applying it to us, produces in us a like Mystical Death
to the Worldly Life, (as in this Mystical way of arguing from Archetypal to
Ectypal Beings so frequently used in the Scripture in allusion to the Platonic
Notions then received among the Hellenists, the Archetypes are supposed to be
not only like Copies in imitation whereof the resemblances in the Ectypa were
made, but as Seals to produce their own similitudes, as Seals do by application
to the wax, in regard whereof we are said in Baptism to be dead with Christ,
and to be buried with him, and to be planted with him, Romans vi.4, 5.
to be (...), in the likeness of his Death;) So, I say, by the same way of
arguing, our rising out of the water represents the Resurrection of Christ, and
does not only represent, but apply the merits and efficacy of his Resurrection
to us, so that it must produce in us a like signature, ((...) is the Platonical
term,) first of a Mystical Resurrection from sin and a worldly Life, and then
of our corporal Resurrection from the grave. And this consequence holds so
firmly, that if Christ himself be risen, it is absolutely necessary that they
rise also to whom the Power of his Resurrection is thus Mystically applied, as
appears from the Apostles reasoning in 1 Cor. xv.

Salvation here spoken of consists in our Participation of the first and second
Resurrection. And that is a Notion as high as our Brethren themselves can
desire to see proved, that it is confined to Baptism; And, 2. That all our
hopes of Salvation in this sense, that is, all our hopes of an interest in the
first or second Resurrection, depend on the Resurrection of Christ, and our
interest in it; 3. That our whole interest in Christ's Resurrection is derived
from our Baptism. And this in two regards, 1. As our Title to rising with him
is grounded on our being first like him in his Death and Burial. So the Apostle
argues, If we be planted with him in the likeness of his Death, Romans vi.5.
we shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection. And, If we dye with
Christ, we believe that we shall also reign with him. Ver. 8. 2 Timothy ii.11.
But it is in Baptism that the same Apostle in the same place tells us, that we
dye with him. Therefore it is in Baptism also that we receive our Title to his
Resurrection. For this also answers the Type, that as Christ was first to
suffer before he was to enter into his glory, so we must not fail of being like
him in the one, Luke xxiv.26.
if we desire to be like him in the other. And, 2. As the Resurrection of
Christ is it self immediately applied to us in Baptism. (1.) Christ's
Resurrection does not influence us, so as to cause a like Resurrection in us
but as it is Mystically applied to us. (2.) It is not Mystically applied to us,
but by a sensible representation of it. 3. This sensible representation it self
cannot apply it unless it be by virtue of signs of Gods own institution. For it
is he alone who can make the application effectual as to the influence required
from the Archetype for impressing its own likeness. And that he will make the
application effectual cannot be expected from him by any other means than those
of his own institution. And, 4. Baptism is the only sensible representative
appointed by God for this purpose. I know Persons already baptized are also
said to die with Christ when they suffer for him: But this is never spoken of
Persons unbaptized. And if we speak of Christ's Death, not as only represented,
but as applied with its influences, that can only be assured to us by express
Promises which may assure us of his actual pleasure: And those can only be
expected with signs with his own institution. But when men are at first
engraffed into Christ by these means of his own appointment, it cannot then be
thought strange, that, by virtue of that, all their other likenesses to Christ
should be reckoned for the performances of Christ himself.

Salvation is ascribed to Baptism. So in the forementioned passage, Tit. iii.5.
According to his mercy he has SAVED us by the washing of Regeneration and
renewing of the Holy Ghost. And when St. Peter had advised his Auditors, to
SAVE themselves from that untoward generation, Act. ii.40.
the event shows by what means it was that he intended that they should be
saved. For so it follows, Then they that received his word, gladly,
(particularly this last word) were BAPTIZED. Ver. 41.
So in the ultimate institution of this Sacrament, He that believes and is
BAPTIZED shall be SAVED, Mark xvi.16.
but he that believes not shall be damned. Where our Brethren do strangely
misunderstand the omission of Baptism in the latter part of the sentence, as if
the meaning were to imply that only want of belief, not want of Baptism, should
be charged on any for their damnation. But there is not the least reason for
this consequence. For though Baptism had been as necessary to Salvation as we
conceive it to be, yet there had been no need of mentioning it here, seeing he
who does not believe cannot be capable of Baptism, and therefore must be
responsible as well for want of Baptism as of faith, and therefore the desert
of the sentence of Damnation may be grounded on both, yet so as that there is
no need of mentioning any more than the want of belief, because the whole guilt
of the want of Baptism in that Case is to be charged on the want of faith as
the cause of it. But whatever may be thought of the actual damnation of Persons
who inevitably want it, yet when our Savior reckons it among the requisites of
Salvation; certainly the least he could mean by it, is, that he would not
encourage any to be confident of his Salvation on his belief alone, if he
wanted Baptism. Which will at least make Baptism necessary as an ordinary means
of assurance of Salvation, if not as a means of Salvation it self. And this
necessity of it for our assurance of Salvation is alone sufficient for my
purpose. I might also reduce to this Topic the passage of St. John. But
because I have already prevented my self concerning it, Joh. iii.5.
I say no more of it at present.

Baptism be thus necessary to Salvation, thus much, at least, will follow, that
they who want the benefit of Baptism must want the benefit of Salvation, unless
this want be supplied by other means as available for this purpose as Baptism
it self. But that there are no such other means ordinarily to be expected
antecedently to Baptism, appears from hence, that it is reckoned as the
ordinary effect of Baptism, and men are then said to be saved when they are
baptized, which must certainly suppose them before Baptism out of the ordinary
way of Salvation. And this is the rather credible, because it is not spoken of
Particular Persons as considered in particular circumstances, but generally as
the benefit presumed to be needed by all that come to it.

CHAP. XVI. Salvation not ordinarily to be expected without external
Communicating in the Lord's Supper.
THE CONTENTS.
Premised.. I. 1. That this dependence on the Episcopal Communion for a valid
Baptism will alone suffice, so far, for my purpose, as to discourage the
perpetuating any opposite Communion.. II, III, IV. Inference 1. That, if this
were granted, even the absteining of Pious Persons from the Lawful Communion
would be very rare.. V. Inf. 2. That even those few Pious Persons, who, after
all diligence used to inform themselves, and all lawful Condescensions, could
not submit to the terms of the lawful Communion, would yet never perpetuate so
much as their Non-Communion.. VI, VII. 2. Premisal, That it cannot be expected
that this Sacrament of the Lords Supper should be as necessary as that of
Baptism.. VIII. The necessity of the Lord's Supper to Salvation proved from the
Mystical style by which this whole matter is expressed in the Scripture. And
that by these degrees: 1. The Life of particular Members of the Mystical Body
of Christ is in the Scripture supposed to depend on a constant repetition of
influences from the common vital Principle, as the Life of particular Members
in the Body Natural does.. IX. 2. The Scripture also supposes the Life of
particular Members to depend as much on their conjunction with the whole
Mystical Body, in order to their receiving these repeated Influences, as the
Life of particular Members in the Natural Body depends on their conjunction
with the whole natural Body.. X. 3. The Church, with which it was supposed so
necessary for particular Members to be united in order to their participation
of this Spiritual Life, is plainly supposed to be the Church in this World, and
that visible Society of them which joined in the same public exercises of
Religion in that Age when these things were written.. XI, XII. 4. The Reasons
used by the Sacred Writers for this purpose are such as concern the Church as a
Church, and so as suitable to the latter Ages of the Church as those earlier
ones wherein they were first used.. XIII. 5. In order to this Mystical Union
with the Church it is absolutely necessary, as far as an ordinary means can be
so, that we partake of the Lords Supper. This proved from 1 Cor. x.17.. XIV.
The same thing proved from the true design of the Eucharist rightly explained.
This done by these degrees. 1. The design of our Savior seems to have been the
Mystical (...) so much spoken of in the Philosophy then received as the
peculiar Office of the (...). 2. In this Union the reason of our being in
Christ is his being in us. 3. Two things, according to the Scripture, to be
distinguished in Christ, his Flesh and Spirit, and in both regards we are
concerned that he be united to us.. XV. 4. There are very material reasons why
our Savior should require this Bodily Union in contradidistinction to the
Spiritual, viz. The benefits which our Bodies in contradistinction to our
Spirits may receive by it. 1. That by this Corporal Union with Christ we may be
made sensible of the Interest he has in our Bodies, and of our obligation to
serve him with our Bodies, and to abstein from those sins which are seated in
the Body. The great necessity of this in that Age.. XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX.
2. That by this means they might be assured of the Resurrection of their
Bodies.. XXI. 5. Therefore, according to the Practices and Conceptions then
prevailing, the Eucharist was the most proper means whereby this Bodily Union
with Christ could have been contrived, whether it be considered, 1. As a
Sacrifice. And that either as an ordinary Sacrifice.. XXII, XXIII, XXIV. Or as
a Federal Sacrifice.. XXV. Or, 2. As a Mystery, and this of the greatest sort.
The likeness between the design of the Heathen Mysteries and of the Blessed
Sacrament. The Mysteries were Commemorative, and that generally of the
sufferings of their Gods.. XXVI. They were performed by external Symbols.
Particularly Bread was a Sacred Symbol of Unity. Observed in the Rites of
Mithras, among the Pythagoraeans.. XXVII, XXVIII. In the ancient way of
Marriage by Confarreation, and in Truces.. XXIX. And among the Jews.. XXX. The
Mysteries designed particularly for the good of the Soul, and that in the state
of Separation.. XXXI. In the Mysteries they were obliged to Confession of sins,
and to undertake new Rules of living well.. XXXII. In the Mysteries it was
usual to change the names of the things used in them without any thought of a
change of Nature.. XXXIII. 6. Upon these Principles, and according to the
nature of these Mystical contrivances, this Bodily Union may very well be
supposed to be made by our Saviors changing the name of Bread into that of his
own Body.. XXXIV, XXXV, XXXVI.

I HAVE hitherto shown that the Grace conveyed in Baptism is necessary to
Salvation, and that it is confined to the external Sacrament of Baptism as the
only ordinary means appointed whereby we may receive it. I now proceed to prove
the same thing concerning the other Sacrament, that of the Lords Supper. But
before I set upon this, it will be convenient to promise two things.

THAT this dependence on the Episcopal Communion for a valid Baptism will alone
suffice, so far, for my purpose, as to discourage the perpetuating any opposite
Communion. All those Arguments which prove the Eucharist necessary will much
more prove Baptism necessary, without which the Eucharist cannot be had,
though, on the contrary, Baptism might be necessary if the Eucharist were not
so. Besides, that our Adversaries themselves are more sensible of the necessity
of Baptism than they are of the necessity of the Eucharist, if not for
Salvation it self absolutely, yet at least for our comfort and assurance of it.
If therefore the validity of Baptism it self depend on the Authority of him who
administers it, and this Authority cannot be had without Episcopal Ordination,
thus much at least will follow, that valid Baptism can only be expected in the
Episcopal Communion. Whence it will follow, that the true Notion of a Church
must also be confined to the Episcopal Communion. Though a multitude invisibly
united in the belief of the Christian Doctrines may be called a Church in a
sense wherein that word is ordinarily used by our Adversaries for the Church of
the Elect, that is, of Elect also in their ordinary Notion of that word, for
the Elect according to God's secret undiscernable purpose; yet understanding a
Church for an external Body Politic united among themselves by a visible
confederation, and as it is a privileged Society, of whose privileges we may
assure our selves by being Members of it, and of whose Membership we can best
assure our selves, and as it is the seat of visible Discipline; none can think
that a Multitude of unbaptized Persons, how penitent or believing soever, can
make up such a Church as this is. Yet this is the sense of the Church of which
it can be any comfort to any that he is a Member of it. And this is the sense
which is principally concerned in this present dispute.

confine his Graces to his Sacraments. Admit it were so. But can they therefore
say that whole Multitudes of Persons depending on Gods extraordinary favors
can make up that privileged Society which we call a Church? or can they say
that such Multitudes as these may have all the ordinary means of Salvation
though they want the Sacraments? If so, what obligation can there be to receive
the Sacraments at all, when men may enjoy all the ordinary means of Salvation
without them, and be withal assured that they do enjoy them? But indeed the
Sacraments are the visible constituents of such a Society as this is. Baptism
is the solemn admission of Members into the Church. And how can Multitudes make
up a Church who were never admitted into it? How can they make a complete
Church who have no Power of admitting new Members? At least how can they secure
succession, and continue to be a Church, without this Power of admitting new
Members? The result therefore of this Discourse will be, that if these
Principles hold true, that they can never so much as abstein from the Episcopal
Communion for any conditions required from them which are not more intolerable
than the want of all Church Society, and of the comfort of the Ordinances. And
if this comfort be so great as our Adversaries themselves do usually confess it
to be, there can be but few cases which can even excuse this forbearance of
Communion.

Impositions should prove so unlawful as to be greater mischiefs to him who
should submit to them than could be recompensed by the advantage of the
Communion, yet even in this Case he ought also to abstein from all opposite
Communion. For on this supposition their Baptism will be no Baptism, nor
consequently can the Members admitted by their Baptism be true Church Members,
which if they be not, no number of them, how great soever, can ever make a
Church. And then all they act as a Church, that is, by any Authority pretended
to be derived from God, must not only prove a perfect Nullity, that is, infer
no obligation on God to perform those Spiritual benefits, which, if validly
administered, they would have obliged him to perform; but be also a Crime highly
punishable by the Principles of Government, even the usurping an Authority
which had never been Legally committed to them. And then though the supposed
unlawfulness of the Imposition might excuse them, whose consciences were so
persuaded that the Impositions were unlawful, from that Communion which could
not be had without such Impositions; yet it could never excuse them for
venturing the guilt of a sin, and especially of a sin of so heinous a nature as
that is of abetting, as well as of assuming, an usurped Authority. And
therefore the safest way for such Persons would be to abstein from all
Communion till they may recover that by lawful complyances which had been lost
by having unlawful ones expected from them, and in the mean time to observe
punctually the Moral Duties, which all acknowledge eternally obligatory, of
Faith and Repentance, till God shall be pleased to restore them to lawful means
of enjoying the Rituals of Religion.

even the absteining of Pious Persons from the lawful Communion would be very
rare. For nothing would oblige such to abstein, but such compliances as would
be more mischievous than the lawful Communion could be beneficial. And to such
Persons who had experienced and relished the comfort of the Ordinances, very
few things would appear so mischievous as a deprivation of those comforts which
they had enjoyed in these Ordinances. This therefore would oblige all such
Persons to all sincere endeavors after such Information as might bring them to
the sentiments of their Superiors; and withal would take them off from all
haughtiness and willfullness of humor, so that nothing would be able to keep
off such Persons from compliance but the true importance of the Cause. And they
who were willing to yield and to receive better information, nay, very heartily
and sincerely desirous of it, that they might thereby obtain the comfort of
Ordinances so much valued by them, could not frequently fail of so much
conviction as might suffice for Peace, if it did not bring them altogether to
the sense of their superiors.

even those few pious Persons who after all diligence used to inform
themselves, and all lawful condescendence, could not submit to the terms of the
lawful Communion, would yet never perpetuate so much as their Non-Communion.
For as long as they formed no Parties, nor joined with any which were already
formed, their differences must naturally extinguish with their Persons, which
would, at least, secure the Churches Communion entire for the next generation.
And this must also be a great comfort to such Persons that they could thus
reconcile their duty to God with the Peace of the Church, and at once secure
themselves from the sin of compliance, and from the great mischief, at least,
if it should not prove to be a sin, of being accessory to Ecclesiastical
division. This, sure, would be the Case if men were thus far convinced, and
were withal as truly humble and sincere and conscientious in this matter as
they pretend to be.

Peace and Government, as that I cannot think but God would take care to secure
them if he ever intended any preservation of either of them. And in this regard
this Doctrine seems rather agreeable to the mind of God, because it does so
effectually secure them. This premisal may suffice to warn the Reader how
sufficient this is for my purpose, that Baptism, at least, is such a means
without which Salvation cannot ordinarily be expected, and that the Episcopal
Communion is necessary for securing a valid Baptism. Whence it will follow that
though we had not that evidence of the like necessity of the Eucharist as we
have of the necessity of Baptism, yet our Cause were not like to suffer for
want of it.

That it cannot be expected that this Sacrament of the Lords Supper should be
as necessary as that of Baptism. I know some of the Ancients who understand the
passage of St. Joh. vi. of the Lord's Supper, inferred thence that it was as
necessary for the Salvation, even of Infants, as Baptism it self was. But I
have not now to do with those who are of that opinion. And as I dare not
undertake to defend it; so I do not conceive my self obliged to do so by any
concernment of my present design. I cannot but think that the benefit conferred
in Baptism, of forgiveness of former sins, and the infusion of the Holy Ghost,
are sufficient for Salvation so long as Persons continue in that Spiritual
strength and purity which they had in Baptism. I am sure our own Church thinks
so, Rubr. at the end of the Office of public Baptism of Infants.
and I think it might easily have been proved that the antienter Ages of the
Primitive Church, those of them, at least, which passed before the Pelagian
Controversies, were of the same mind. And if we judge of it by allusion to the
customs of the Heathen Mysteries (from whence, as I said, the Copy of the
Christian Sacraments seems to have been taken) they were so far from thinking
the greater Mysteries absolutely necessary for him who had already been
initiated in the lesser, as that they usually prescribed a certain time before
he who had received the less was capable of the greater. Five years is commonly
supposed to have been the Period prefixed for that purpose, at least to the
making an (...), for which a years space was requisite even after their
receiving the greater Mysteries. And it was taken for a great irregularity in
the Case of Demetrius Poliorcetes that he was permitted to partake of both
Mysteries at one time. Plutarch. Demetr.
And the Lord's Supper, wherein Christ's suffering is so represented to our
eyes, and which was professedly instituted by Christ for that purpose, that it
might perform the office of the Heathen Images, as the opposers of Images
argued against the Patrons of them, seems at once to exhibit all the (...)
which the Christian Religion could admit of, as well as the greater Mysteries
themselves. For my purpose it is sufficient that it be necessary for continuing
the Salvability of Adults who have lost their Baptismal strength and Purity, if
they would continue and grow strong and ripe in that new Life which they have
received in their Baptism. None who survives his Baptism for any considerable
while can think himself unconcerned in this Case as thus stated. And therefore
if this may be proved, that it is necessary for the Salvation of such Persons
as these are; this will as much oblige such Persons to receive the Lords Supper
often, and consequently to submit to all unsinful Impositions that may be
required from them as Conditions on which they may be admitted to receive it,
as they were at first obliged to get themselves baptized, and to submit to all
such unsinful conditions required by them who had alone the power of baptizing
them.

Mystical style wherein this whole matter is expressed in the Scripture, that
is, if they will be pleased to continue the Allegory of Life, and the Analogy
between the natural Body and the Mystical Body of Christ, so far, at least, as
the sacred Writers themselves are pleased to continue it. And sure that cannot
be thought presumptuous. To this purpose, it is observable, 1. That this
Analogy between the Natural Body and the Mystical Body of Christ is continued
in this, that no Member in the Mystical Body can continue in that Spiritual
Life of which it partakes by being a Member of that Mystical Body, without a
constant repetition of those vital influences by which it was first enlivened,
any more than a Member of the Natural Body can continue its Natural Life
without a continual new supply of those vital influences from the head by which
this Natural Life is maintained. And therefore as it is certain that that
Member which wants this continuation of vital influences does certainly decay,
and by degrees lose that Natural Life which is maintained by those influences,
though it be impossible to determine the certain Period wherein it shall die;
so it is, by the same proportion of reasoning, as certain that he who has not
new influences from Christ continued to him, is in a dying condition,
notwithstanding the Principle of new Life received by him in his Baptism. If
therefore the Eucharist be the same way an ordinary means of continuing this
new Life, as Baptism was of receiving it, that is, of communicating those new
vital supplies from Christ the Head of this Mystical Body, as Baptism was of
the first infusion of this vital Principle; it will be as necessary for those
Adults, of whom we are speaking, who survive their Baptism, as Baptism it self
was to them when they first received it.

likeness between the Natural Body and the Mystical Body of Christ, that as it
is impossible for any particular Member in the Natural Body to derive any vital
influences from the Head unless it continue in conjunction with the whole Body;
so it is as impossible for any particular Member in the Mystical Body of Christ
to derive the influences of Spiritual Life from Christ who is the Head of that
Mystical Body any longer than it is united with the whole Mystical Body. This
appears plainly from that particular of this comparison, that, as, in the
Natural Body, Members have their distinct situation, some of them at a distance
from the Head, and they who are so receive their vital influences, though from
the Head, yet not immediately, but by the vessels through which they are
communicated, and by the influence of the nearer parts, so that these vital
influences are maintained and continued in the particular Members as well by
their mutual influences on each other as by the common influences which they
all receive from the Head; so there are also supposed the like conveyances in
the Mystical Body, and the like distinction of offices in the Members of it by
which they become necessary to each other, as the Head is necessary to them
all. And this argument is purposely urged by the Apostle himself to let
particular Christians understand their obligation to keep united with one
another in order to their receiving vital influences from the Head. And by the
nature of the comparison here used it is plainly supposed that the advantage
which the Members may expect from the mutual intercourse of each others gifts,
whilst they are united to each other in external Communion, is not only
extrinsecal by moving and exercising the good Principle within them, but
necessary intrinsecally for the preservation of that Spiritual Life which they
are already supposed to enjoy, as the Members in the Natural Body do not only
lose the advantage of a sprightful vigorous Life, but of Life it self, by an
interruption of their communication with each other. And this is employed in the
similitude of the Vine, where our Savior expressly warns his Apostles, Joh.
xv.4.
that, as a branch cannot bear fruit of it self except it continue in the Vine,
so neither could they except they abided in him. Where it is plain that Christ
is not understood Personally but Mystically, when they are supposed capable of
abiding in him. And this Mystical way of speaking is so familiar with St. John,
as well as our Savior, as that it cannot be thought strange that he should
thus express himself.

Church with which it was supposed so necessary for particular Members to be
united in order to their participation of the influences of Spiritual Life is
plainly supposed to be the Church in this World, and that visible Society of
them which joined in the same public exercises of Religion in that Age when
these things were written. This appears plainly from all the Apostle says
concerning this Church of which he there speaks. They were plainly an organized
Body, consisting of Governors as well as Governed, which were all qualified
for their offices by Gifts of the Spirit, 1 Cor. xii.28, 29. Ephesians. iv.11.
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, which were all only
useful for the Church in this World, and only for their benefit as united in
Assemblies, these Gifts being generally of that nature as that others were more
concerned in them than they who had them. Their Gifts were also of the same
kind, and many of them more principally designed for the edification of
Believers than the conviction of Infidels. Such were the gifts of 1 Cor.
xiii.2.xiv.2.
knowing Mysteries, Interpretation 1 Cor. xii.10.xiv.26.
of Tongues, of 1 Cor. xi.4, 5.xiii.9.xiv.1, 3, 4, 5.22, 24, 31, 39. Romans
xii.6. 1 These. v.20.
Prophesying and 1 Cor. xiv.14, 15.
Praying, especially of that office of the Eucharist, 1 Cor. xiv.16.
where the Idiot had his set part assigned him, and was to answer Amen. These
were the very employments of the Synaxes in that Age. And therefore certainly
the Church, thus united by such Gifts and Offices of the Spirit, must needs
have been that Body of them which joined in the celebration of their public
Assemblies, and considered under that very Notion as they were united in those
Assemblies, for which alone these Gifts and Offices were useful. And plainly
the Apostles design being, as I have elsewhere observed, in all these
Discourses to prevent the falling away of the Persons to whom he writes, either
to Judaism or Gentilism, or any of the Heresies which then began to appear,
there could be nothing more apposite to this purpose than to persuade them to
keep to this external Body as united by the celebration of the same public
Assemblies whereby they were visibly and notoriously distinguished from those
erroneous Societies; and nothing more disagreeable than our Adversaries Notion
of a multitude, not a body of Elect, not distinguishable from others by such
notorious Characters as might be prudently useful by way of Argument.

Vine used by our Savior was the same which had been used concerning the
carnal Israel in the Old Testament, Psalm. lxxx.8, 14, 15. Isa. v.1, 7.xxvii.2.
Jer. ii.21. Ezekiel. xix.10. Hos. x.1.
and therefore very fitly applied to the Spiritual and Mystical Israel in the
New, according to that way of arguing which is so universally observed by the
sacred Writers of the New Testament. And then considering that the Christians
made the Spiritual Israel a Society in the same sense wherein the carnal Israel
had been so before, nay, allowed of something suitable to those very means by
which they were confederated into a Society. Instead of Circumcision they
continued not only the Mystical Circumcision of the heart, but Baptism which
had been a means taken up by the Jews before the Preaching of the Christian
Religion, and which they thought more countenanced by the Prophets who had
foretold the state of Christianity than Circumcision it self was, and withal
thought it more agreeable to the more Spiritual nature of the Christian
Religion in comparison of the Jewish. And so for Sacrifices, though they
rejected the bloody ones which they also thought discountenanced by those same
Prophesies which had predicted the state of Mystical Judaism, yet they allowed
a Mystical Melchisedechian Sacrifice, not only of the Morals of Religion, but
also under those very Elements and Symbols which they supposed predicted and
Typified in those fame Writers who had spoken so disparagingly of the bloody
Sacrifices. Yet still these means of confederation, though they were indeed
more agreeable to the nature of a Spiritual Religion than those among the Jews,
were still external, and therefore as proper for confederating an external
Society as those were in the room of which they succeeded.

external Communion of the Church in that Age wherein they wrote; yet the
reasons used by them for this purpose are such as concern the Church as a
Church, and so as suitable to the later Ages of the Church as those earlier
ones wherein they were first used. Indeed if the Argument used to prove their
obligation to continue in the external Communion of the Church had been this,
that they could not otherwise partake of the miraculous (...) and
manifestations of the Spirit; than as those Gifts and manifestations were
proper to that Age, so the Argument would lose its force in succeeding Ages
which could not pretend to those Gifts and manifestations. But when I consider
that those Gifts and manifestations, in that Age, did generally accompany the
Graces of the Spirit, and that therefore it is no good Argument to conclude,
that the Spirit was only given for extraordinary purposes, because he was
pleased to manifest himself by Gifts and Appearances that were indeed
extraordinary: when I consider that it is the Spirit as a Principle of
Spiritual Life, of which they are supposed to be deprived by falling away from
that external Communion; nay, as a Principle of Spiritual Life to themselves:
when I consider that the Church being called Christ, they are supposed to lose
their interest in Christ and all his saving Graces by separating from the
Communion of the Church, to lose their interest in his Redemption, to lose
their interest in him by losing his Spirit which whosoever has not is none of
his; when I consider that, by falling away from their Baptismal Obligations,
they are supposed to have forfeited all the advantages of their Baptism, their
illumination, their tasting of the heavenly gift, their participation of the
Holy Ghost, their tasting of the good Word of God and of the Powers of the
World to come, and so to have forfeited them as to need Renovation as entire as
if they never had enjoyed them; nay, to have forfeited their whole interest in
the New Covenant, which sure respects the Graces of the Spirit more principally
than his Gifts: I say when I consider these things, I cannot but think that the
Graces here spoken of on these occasions are as well the Graces properly so
called as the Gifts of the Spirit, those of them which are to be ordinarily
expected in all Ages, as those which were proper to that, those of them which
are absolutely necessary for Salvation, as well as those which were only more
convenient for the more advantageous procurement of Salvation. And sure we have
reason to expect, as, that these ordinary necessary Graces of the Spirit should
be continued to these later Ages wherein they are still as necessary as they
were at first, so that they should be continued in the same means of conveyance
by which they were communicated at first. And we have the rather reason to
expect that they should be continued by the same means of conveyance, because
if they be continued at all, especially if they be continued by way of a
Covenant which may afford such a right as may be Legally challenged, it must be
continued by virtue of those same Provisions which were then made, there being
no others pretended since, nor indeed to be ever expected for the future. And
therefore if, in those times, these Graces of the Spirit could not have been
expected out of the external Communion of the Church, it must follow, by the
same proportion of reasoning, that they are not to be expected now, nor for
ever.

Mystical participation of this Grace, (which is not otherwise to be expected
than by these Mystical means by which God himself has designed its conveyance)
it is absolutely necessary, as far as an ordinary means can be so, that we
partake of the Lord's Supper. This plainly appears from the Principles now
mentioned. 1 Cor. x.17.
For we being many are one Bread, and one Body: For we are all partakers of one
Bread. Where it is plain, 1. From the coherence, that the Bread here spoken of
is no other than that which we receive in the Lords Supper. 2. That the reason
why we are said to partake of one Bread, is, because it is said to be broken
before we receive it, so that all are supposed to communicate of the same loaf.
3. That by our communicating in this one Bread which must therefore be broken
before we can communicate in it, we are in a Mystical sense said to be one
Bread, as I have observed that Mysteries, especially those of Divine
appointment, do not only signify, but also cause, the things signified by
them. And, 4. That because this ^read is also called the Body of Christ,
therefore our partaking of this one Bread [(...) is the word properly used
concerning it when it is spoken of as meat] is our (...), our Communion, or
rather Communication in this Body. And, 5. That it hence follows, by the same
Rule of Mystical reasoning, that we are said to be one Body, because we do
communicate in one Body, as we were said to be one Bread by our partaking of
one Bread. This plainly shows that all the advantage which we are to expect
from Christ by being Members of his Mystical Political Body the Church, is to
be derived from our communicating in the Lords Supper, because it is by this
Communion that we become Members of this Mystical Political Body. But it
further appears, from the reasoning of the Apostle in this place, how it is
that we are hereby made one Body, which will very much conduce to the clearing
of the Argument deduced from it, and for showing the necessity of our becoming
Members of this Body. 6. Therefore it is also further clear that the one Body
of which we are made Members by communicating in this one Bread is no other
than Christ's Body. This appears from the words immediately preceding: 1 Cor.
x.16.
The Bread which we break is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? and
besides from the reasoning as I have now explained it. For the reason why we
come to be made one Body by our partaking of one Bread being plainly the words
of Institution in which Christ has called that Bread of which we partake his
Body, it plainly appears that the Body of which we partake by this Bread is no
other than his Body, and that his Personal Natural one. This plainly appears,
because the Body of which he speaks when he calls the Eucharistical Bread, his
Body, is plainly that which he says was broken for us, according to St. Paul in
this Epistle, and which was given for us according to St. Luke. 1 Cor. xi.24.
Luke xxii.19.
But this cannot be understood of the Mystical, but only of his Personal Body.
The consequence whereof will be, that the whole Church becomes one Body
Mystical of Christ by this participation of his Personal and Natural Body in
the Lords Supper.

present purpose, but for preventing many popular misunderstandings in this
matter, particularly that of Transubstantiation, and because the things I have
to say on this Subject are such, as, at least, I have not seen observed by
others, I hope it may prove not an altogether ungrateful divertisement to the
Reader, to endeavor an explication of this Mysterious contrivance, which yet I
intend to dispatch with as much brevity as the Argument will permit. 1.
Therefore, the great design of Christ plainly appears to have been that
Mystical (...) so much spoken of in the Mystical Philosophy of that Age, and
spoken of as the peculiar office of the (...). This St. Paul himself speaks of
elsewhere that he came to make all one. Ephesians. ii.14, 15, 16.
And our Savior makes this the great design of his Prayer for his Disciples,
That they all may be one as thou, Joh. xvii.21. See Ver. 11, 22, 23. Joh. xi.52.
Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the
World may believe that thou have sent me. So St. John expresses the end of our
Saviors death to have been that he might gather together in ONE the Children
of God which were scattered. 2. This Union is expressed according to the way
usual in the Scriptures to express the whole by an enumeration of particulars
by his being in us and our being in him, and indeed by this later only as a
consequence of the former; so that the very reason why we are said to be in
him, is, because he is first supposed to be in us. And the true reason of this
consequence seems to be that cautious way then taken up of speaking concerning
God, that they would not allow him to be in any thing for fear of the
confinement which weak imaginations might fancy from such a way of speaking. To
correct this error of the imagination, they invented contradictory ways of
speaking concerning him. Porphyr. Sent. 40. ex sententia (...).
They made him (...), and yet (...)^ Every^where in regard of the dependence of
things on him, and yet no where in regard of confinement. Of which kind this
way of speaking also is, that he is in us in regard of his influence on us, and
we in him, in regard of the independence of his influences, and the immensity
of his presence. 3. Therefore the Scripture speaking of Christ, does
distinguish him under two considerations, as to his flesh wherein he suffered,
and as to his Spirit by which he was raised and glorified. Luke xxiv.26. Phil.
ii.8, 9.
And it is observable that the raising and glorifying of Christ in the Spirit
are grounded on his first having suffered in the flesh. Accordingly our Union
with him is expressed in both regards, not only that we are made one Spirit
with him, but that we must become one Body Ephesians. iv.4.
with him also. And as his Body in opposition to the Spirit is called his
flesh, Col. i.22. 1 Timothy* iii.16. 1 Pet. iii.18. 1 John iv.2, 3. 2 John 7.
so we are also said to be one Ephesians. v.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.
flesh with him the same way as married Persons are, on account of that
institution; made one flesh, as Eve was from Adam, flesh of his flesh, and bone
of his bone, in allusion whereunto we are also said to be Members of his Body,
of his flesh, and of his bones. Which is a clear account of the (...) in
Ignatius, (...). Ignat. ad Magn. p. 10. Ed. Usser. 1646. (...). ib. p. 15.
the fleshly as well as the Spiritual Union with, and similitude to Christ,
which hence appears to have been very agreeable to the Notions of those times.
So far it is from being an Argument against the genuineness of those Epistles
as Blondell makes it, because he did not understand those Principles. I do not
at present intend to discourse of our Union with Christ in Spirit, because I
may hereafter have occasion to do it when I shall explain the true notion of
our Union and Communion with him. All that I shall now observe concerning it is
only this, that though our Union to Christ in Spirit be indeed the most
immediately beneficial Union without which our fleshly Union could be of little
or no advantage to us; yet that this fleshly Union is more immediately
necessary to us, because without it we can expect no interest in his Spiritual
Union. For as his own sufferings in the flesh entitled him to the glory of the
Spirit, so plainly this very instance of likeness is thus applied by the
Apostle, that we must first be like him in his sufferings that we may expect to
be like him in the glory of his Resurrection. Besides the Allegory of this
Mystical language holds exactly to my purpose, that as in the Natural Body no
Member can expect to partake of the Spirits and other vital influences of the
whole Body that is not first united to it carnally, so none can expect this
Union with Christ in the Spirit, which is answerable to those vital influences
in the Natural Body, till he be first united to him in the body and flesh.

bodily Union with him in order to our participation of Spiritual influences,
it is further observable, 4. That there are very material reasons why our
Savior should require this bodily Union in contradistinction to the Union of
the Spirit, I mean such reasons as concern the Body in contradistinction to the
Spirit; that is the benefits which the Body in contradistinction to the Spirit,
might expect by this corporal, but Mystical Union with Christ's Body. One was,
that, by this Corporal Union with Christ, we may be made sensible of the
interest he has in our Body as well as our Souls, and therefore of our
obligation to serve him also with our Bodies, and to abstein from those carnal
sins which had their seat in the Body. This was particularly necessary for the
misunderstandings of that Age wherein this Sacrament was first instituted, and
for whose use it was peculiarly contrived. They had been inured to believe that
the Body was no part of the Man, but only a troublesome load and prison of the
Soul. Whence it naturally followed, that what care was had of the Body would
not be on any account of respect to the Body it self, but for the Souls sake,
as far as that might suffer by the impurity of the Body. But for that they were
not very solicitous. For several of those who were Philosophically disposed,
especially of those with whom the Apostles had to deal, were so far from
thinking that the Soul was like to suffer by any impurity of the Body, as that
they rather thought that several bodily pollutions did rather contribute
accidentally to the purity of the Soul, in as much as they might possess it
with a greater abhorrence of the Body, and a greater inclination of leaving it,
which might be increased it by the resistance it met with in it.

Mysteries which were then celebrated as most effectual means of purging the
Soul, not only by the vulgar, Nay, it is Juvenals observation concerning all
the Mysteries of those times, that they were all performed with obscenity. Quo
non prostat f^mian templo? Sat. ix.24. vid. Min. Felic. Octav. p. 237.237, 249.
and Not.
but even the Philosophers themselves, those of Succoth Benoth and Thamuz or
Adonis, and Baal Peor or Priapus among the Converts of Palestine, and of the
Orphaick, Egyptian and Eleusinian among those of the dispersion. These were
the famous Mysteries that were known to these Persons, and as long as these
were supposed conducive to the purity of the Soul, they must have been
encouraged to the greatest bodily impurities, as the most likely means of
obteining the greatest Spiritual purity.

Purity of the Body, because they took it self to be the greatest Principle of
impurity. All pollution and filth of the Soul was supposed derived from matter,
and therefore they who endeavored to be pure endeavored also to free
themselves from all adhesions of the Body. And the contrary impure Demon, the
evil Principle, was taken for the Lord of matter, and was thought to have power
over them who did partake of matter as long as they did partake of it on
account of their partaking of it. So that, on this supposition, the taking any
care of their Body, or showing any respect to it, was so far from the freeing
themselves from impurity, as that it must have been taken for the most likely
means of involving them deeper in it. Eunap. in vit. Porph.
Therefore it was that Porphyry, on hearing Plotinus's Lectures, grew so much
out of love with his being a Man, that is, so far as a Body was necessary to
the constitution of a Man, as that he thought of starving himself out of his
Body. Porph. vit. Plotin.
Therefore also Plotinus was so ashamed of his Body, as that he would by no
means endure that any Picture should be taken of it, when that favor was
desired from him by his friends. Thus in Trismegistus, when the (...) comes to
holy minds, one effect among others is said to be that (...). Poem. c. 1.
And accordingly he makes it a requisite for Baptism, where, according to him
this (...) is received, to hate the Body. (...). ib. c. 4.
And if this had been granted them, that the Body it self was such a Principle
of pollution to the Spirit, how could they be solicitous for preserving it from
such pollutions as were only capable of being transacted in the Body? How could
they think themselves concerned to preserve that pure, which was it self
supposed to be nothing but a pollution?

Apostles had to deal, plainly appears from hence that the Principles on which
they depend were generally owned by the Heretics of that Age. They generally
took the God of this world for a distinct coeternal contrary Principle to the
God of Heaven, They also took this World for his peculiar Province, and thought
themselves obnoxious to his influences as long as they were in it. They thought
it also the proper employment of the Angels of this World to tie their Souls to
terrestrial Bodies, and consequently that the best way of freeing themselves
from subjection to them was to free themselves from that tie. They thought that
their Bodies were the creatures of this contrary wicked Principle; and
therefore that Marriage which was intended for the purgation of Bodies was an
intention of the Devil, and accordingly that Adam was damned for introducing
the first precedent of the exercise of it, though it was with his own wife. And
accordingly we find these greatest pretenders to the Spirit to be withal
charged with the most abominable pollutions of the flesh, 2 Pet. ii.10. Jud. 8.
and that they accordingly performed the Christian Mysteries, as much of them
as they were pleased to retain, with the same obscenity which had before been
practiced among the Heathens. The particulars cannot be mentioned without
immodesty. On this account it is that we have so many exhortations to those
whom the Apostles would secure from those seducers, that they would purify
themselves in the flesh as well as the Spirit, 2 Cor. vii.1. Romans xii.1.
and that they would offer up their Bodies as well as their Souls, as a living
and a reasonable Sacrifice, and that their whole Man might be kept unblamable,
1 These. v.23.
their Bodies as well as their Souls and Spirits.

Purity and Reformation which was intended by the Christian Religion, to oblige
them particularly to Purity of their Bodies in contradistinction to the purity
of the Spirit, because, whilst these Principles were believed, they who were
never so desirous of Spiritual Purity must have been at least negligent of this
Purity of the Body, if they had not utterly given themselves up to carnal
Impurities, on the account now mentioned. And considering that it was a
Principle granted among them that they were obliged to purify that part which
belonged to God, and their only pretense for neglecting the like Purity of the
Body was that they conceived it not to belong to him, but to an adverse Being
whom they were neither so obliged to please, nor, if they would please him, was
it so probable that he would be pleased with Purity: what could be a properer
means to convince them of their mistake in this particular, and to oblige them
to Corporal Purity, than to persuade them to give up their Bodies, as well as
their Souls, to Christ, and to give him an interest in them by a particular and
distinct Donation? And accordingly this was the way which was observed, and
this is the Argument professedly made use of by the Apostle for this purpose: 1
Cor. vi.15.
Know ye not that your Bodies are the Members of Christ? shall I then take the
Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an harlot? Ver. 19, 20.
God forbid. And, What? Know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and are not your own? For ye are
bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your Body and in your Spirits,
which are Gods. And because it was by the filthiness of the Heathen Mysteries
that their Bodies had been defiled, therefore it was very proper and agreeable
to the honor of the Christian Religion that they should be obliged to this
Purity of their Bodies more distinctly and particularly in the Christian
Mysteries.

united to Christ bodily as well as spiritually. That was that by this means
they might be assured of the Resurrection of their Bodies. This was the Article
of the Christian Religion, on which, above all others, the comfort and
encouragement of new Christians principally depended, and which was indeed the
principal inducement to them to undertake all the other Duties of the Christian
Religion; and which notwithstanding met with the most difficult reception of
all others; and wherein God was therefore pleased to give the greatest
Assurance for the satisfaction of Persons concerned. And particularly the
Argument used for this purpose is this, that Christ is risen. 1 Cor. xv.12.
Whence it is inferred as a necessary consequence that we must rise also. And
this is plainly so inferred, as if it were impossible that one could be true
unless the other were so too. And it is urged both ways: Negatively, Ver. 14,
17.
if Christ be not risen, all Preaching is in vain, our Faith is also vain, we
are yet in our sins. We have only hopes in this Life, and, Ver. 19.
in regard of the little enjoyment we can pretend to here, are become, of all
men, most miserable. And if he be risen, he is risen as the first fruits, and
as the Head. Ver. 20, 2^.
And as the whole Harvest is consecrated in the first fruits, and the whole
Body is concerned in what befalls the Head; so it is supposed impossible that
he can have risen, but that we must thereby gain a Title to a Resurrection. We,
as Members, are said already to have risen, and to have sat down in Heavenly
places, because he who is our Head has already done both. And he, as our Head,
is supposed incapable of a complete Resurrection unless we rise also who are
his Members. Now this benefit being such as only properly belongs to our Body,
therefore the force of this consequence must be grounded on this supposition,
that our Bodies are his Members as well as our Spirits. And our Bodies must the
same way be united to his Body by partaking of his Body, as we are made one
Spirit with him by deriving from that fullness of the Spirit which properly
agrees to him as he is our Head. And accordingly this participation of his Body
in the Eucharist is urged by the Fathers as the greatest assurance of our hope,
that we shall also partake with him in his Resurrection. To return therefore to
my method.

receive his Body in order to our being made one Body with him, I now proceed
to show how this is is performed in the Eucharist, very suitably to the common
Practices and Conceptions of that Age wherein this Sacrament was first
instituted. 5. Therefore, according to these Practices and Conceptions, the
Eucharist was the most proper means whereby this bodily Union with Christ could
have been contrived, whether we consider it as a participation of that one
Sacrifice of Christ, or whether we consider it as a Mystery. If we consider it
as a Sacrifice, (I mean Eucharistical) that was plainly the way then commonly
in use of maintaining a Communion with their received Deities. (...) is the
word made use of by the Apostle in this place, The Bread which we break is it
not the Communion of the Body of Christ? 1 Cor. x.16.
And it afterward came to be the term of Art by which the Christians expressed
their sentiments in this matter. And it is also applied by him to express the
commerce supposed to be maintained with the Deities by the Sacrifices then
commonly received. So concerning the Sacrifices of the carnal Israel in stead
whereof the Eucharist succeeded with the Mystical Israel, Ver. 18.
Behold Israel after the flesh: Are not they which eat of the Sacrifices,
partakers of the Altar? And concerning the Gentile Sacrifices: Ver. 20.
I would not that ye should have fellowship with Devils. (...) is the word used
in both places, in the one for partaking, in the other for having fellowship.

Heathen Notions then commonly received concerning Sacrifices, Porph. 11. de
Abst.. 42. Jul. Firmic. Matern. de error. proph. Relig. Orig. cont. Cells. L.
iii. p. 128, 133. Celsus ipse apud eund. Orig. L. viii. p. 417.
they supposed the Demons who required Sacrifices not to be pure Spirits, but
to have grosser vehicles by which they were supposed capable of receiving
sensible pleasure and benefit by the Sacrifices. On this account they thought
the nidor of the Sacrifices, but especially the Souls of them, so suitable to
their natures, especially when themselves had the liberty of prescribing them,
who best knew what was suitable to themselves, as that they could insinuate
themselves into the Sacrifices by means of these subtler vehicles, and
consequently convey themselves into the Bodies of their Votaries. Therefore the
Christians thought all who had communicated in these Sacrifices possessed by
those Devils to whom they had been offered. And as, among the Heathens
themselves, they, who were haunted by the Furies, upon the commission of any
piacular crime, were excluded from all their other Sacrifices to Demons, whom
they took for good ones, till they were expiated by means of Purgation allowed
among them as proper for that purpose; so the Christians, who thought all the
public Deities then worshipped to be ill Demons, allowed none to partake of
their own Mystical Sacrifices till they were first expiated either by Baptism
or the office of Exorcizing, and that the Devils whom they supposed them to
have received by their communication in those Sacrifices, had been first cast
out of their former possession.

Old Testament times among the Idolaters of those times, and that the Jews,
were from hence inclinable to apply the same fancies to their own God, when
they found that he required the same way of worship by Sacrifices as the
Heathen Deities did, Psalm. ^.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Isa. i.13.
seems plainly to appear from Gods expostulations with them in this matter,
when they thought to excuse themselves for the omission of their Duty on
account of the obligations they put on him by offering Sacrifices to him. And
hence the Fathers conclude that the Sacrifices of the Old Testament were only
of Secondary Intentions; that, because God wanted them not, he would never have
required them, if he had not found them already taken up in honor of them to
whom they did not so properly belong. In this regard, he could not be so
properly said to institute, as to translate them to their proper object, that
if men could not be broken of this way by which they had been used to express
their honor to the Deity, they might, at least be induced to pay that honor,
however expressed to that Deity to which the honor was properly due. And if
this were his design, then certainly it was his meaning to convey the same
Divine influences to the Jews by the Sacrifices used among them, as the
Gentiles had been used to expect from their own Sacrifices, from which they had
incomparably less appearing reason to expect them; and withal to convey the
same influences to the Christians who were the Mystical Israel by their
Mystical Sacrifice, which the carnal Jews expected by their bloody frequent
Sacrifices. And therefore, by these Principles, whatever participation of the
Deity is to be expected in the Christian Religion, is most properly to be
expected in the Sacrifice allowed by it. It is very true, that, in the
Eucharist, as it is the Body of Christ, and none other, which is received, so
it is the Sacrifice of Christ which was Sacrificed by the breaking of that
Body, and none other that is here represented; and as true that that Sacrifice
is represented only, not repeated in the Eucharist. Yet this representation is
supposed as really to apply the merit and virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ, as
if it had been really repeated, and the Communicants had feasted on the
Sacrifice it self. There is a (...) of the same nature at the Table of the
Lord, 1 Cor. x.21.
as at the Table of Devils. And at the Table of Devils the Sacrifices
themselves were really feasted on; and therefore its participation of Divine
influences in the Eucharist must be supposed as real as in them.

Mystical Sacrifice of the Eucharist be considered further, not barely as an
ordinary Sacrifice, but as an (...) a Federal Sacrifice, by which the New
Covenant is established with every worthy Communicant, according to the custom
generally observed in those times of confirming Covenants with Sacrifice, nay,
according to the way observed by God himself in that Old Covenant it self in
the room of which this New Covenant was substituted; Exodus xxiv.8. Heb. ix.19,
20.
there will then be greater reason to expect these Divine influences and
Communications for which we are here supposed to Covenant. For in all Covenants
so much is to be expected in hand immediately upon making the Covenant as is
necessary for making us capable of a Title to the remainder, which we are to
expect at the time appointed, and upon performance of Conditions. So the
earnests are given in hand, and the obligation of Sureties is taken
immediately. Now of this nature is the benefit of which I am speaking. Our
bodily and Spiritual Union with Christ is that which alone gives us an interest
in his Person, and it is our interest in his Person on which our Title is
grounded to all the consequent advantages which we are to expect from his
Person. Now there were two Sacrifices observed of this kind in the Old Covenant
from whence the Pattern is taken for the New. One was that whereby the Covenant
was, in general, established with his People, Exodus xxiv.8. to which the
Apostle alludes, Heb. ix.19, 20. Another was applicatory, by which particular
Persons were admitted into the Body of that People with whom God had
established his Covenant. Such a Sacrifice repeated anew for every particular
Person that was to be admitted to their Covenant the Jews reckon among the
requisites of Proselytism. Now both these are united in this Sacrifice of the
Eucharist. The Sacrifice on which the New Covenant is established is that of
our Savior on the Cross, as is largely shown by the Author to the Hebrews.
Heb. ix.
Accordingly whereunto his Blood there shed is called the blood of the Covenant
by which we are sanctified, Heb. x.29.
in opposition to the blood of Bulls and Goats, by which the Old Covenant was
established which could not sanctify, Heb. ix.12, 13.
and the blood of the everlasting Covenant in opposition to that Covenant which
was to have an end. Now this Sacrifice not being repeatable, according to the
Doctrine of the same Author, because it was perfect, and yet no other Sacrifice
being capable of performing the Office of it; therefore the only applicatory
Sacrifice consistent with the Gospel-state can only be a repeated commemoration
of that same perfect Sacrifice. Yet so that this repeated commemoration must be
applicatory, that is, that it must apply the virtue of that Sacrifice as really
as if it had been repeated.

Sacrament, if it be considered, 2. Under the Notion of a Mystery, and that of
the greater sort, nay, of the highest degree, even of this sort, as it is an
(...), which was the most intimate admission to a familiarity with the Deity in
honor of whom these Mysteries are instituted. For what favor might not be
expected by so familiar Favorites? And the (...) being the favor aimed at by
the Persons who were initiated, where could it be more properly and fitly
performed than here where they expected it? and indeed why should we think they
would have expected it, if they had not understood it to have been the design
of their Gods in instituting these Mysteries? And if so, then it must have been
most likely to have been also the design of our Savior in those Rites which he
instituted for the (...) of the Religion introduced by him. And all things
considered, there could not have been a more convenient means thought of. The
Union it self is plainly called Mystical, Ephesians. v.32.
and particularly this Union between Christ and the Church, as it holds
proportion to that of married Persons, and yet more particularly as one
instance of this proportion is this, that it makes Christ and the Church one
flesh, as the Husband and Wife are made so by the Matrimonial. This is a great
Mystery, and therefore no where more fitly transacted than in the greatest of
the Christian Mysteries. And indeed there are so many things in this Sacrament
suited to the then received (...), that it is hard to conceive but that the
Union here designed should be also made in a way suitable to them. The
Mysteries were generally commemorative, and commemorative of the sufferings of
their Gods. So were those of Thamuz of the death of Adonis, those of Osiris of
his being torn in pieces by Typhon, those of Orpheus which were taken from
Egypt, and were then in commemoration of the sufferings of the same Osiris,
but which he did celebrate under another name of the Theban Bacchus, which was
more likely to endear them to the Greeks, and the famous Eleusinian of the
sufferings and lamentations of Ceres for the loss of Proserpine, those of the
Phrygian Mother for the loss of Atys. And in this regard the Representation of
Christ's sufferings in the Eucharist is much more likely to have been instituted
in imitation of the Mysteries, than of any thing then received among the Jews,
than of any of their commemorations in the Passover, whether of their own hard
service in Egypt, or of the killing of the Paschal. Lamb, and much more than
of the Commemoration of their Postcoenium, none of which had any relation to
the sufferings of the Deity it self.

Mystical Commemorations were generally performed by external Symbols,
Casaubon. and Salmas. in Spartiani Adrianum. c. 13. Guther. de vet. Jure Pont.
L. 1. c. 25. 1 Cor. xi.25.
the giving and receiving whereof were called (...) and (...) in the sacred
language of Mysteries, which are also the very terms used by St. Paul in this
matter, (...), as indeed the very name of Symbol is also a term of this Sacred
Mystical language. And the very Symbol of Bread was, as Justin Martyr tells us,
made use of in the Rites of Mithras. After mention made of the institution of
the Eucharist by our Savior, he adds, (...). And Tertullian, Et si adhuc
memini, Mithra signat illic in frontibus milites suos, celebrat and panis
oblationem, etc. And among the Pythagoraeans, who so much endeavored to
imitate the Mysteries, and who had so much condescendence showed them among the
Essenes, as the Essenes had among the Christians, this very Symbol of the loaf
was made use of, as it should seem for the very same design of uniting, as it
was among the Christians. The words of Laertius are very considerable to this
purpose, where he reckons it among the Symbols of that great man, L. viii. in
vit. Pythagor. p. 222. Ed. Londin.
(...). I cannot but think with Giraldus, In Symbol. Pythag.
that the Christians were here meant by the name of (...). And I wonder that
Aldobr. in loc. Laertii.
Aldobrandinus should think it so strange that they should be called so.
Testimonies are obvious. I shall only produce some few. This is the name by
which St. John is styled by Amelius apud Eusebius. Pr. Eu. xi.19. Theodoret.
Therap. 11. Cyril. in Jul. L. viii.
Amelius. Thus Porph. apud Eus. Hist. Eccl. vi.19.
Porphyry concerning Origin, (...), by which he expresses his pretended
conversion to Christianity. And I am very apt to believe that it is the
Christians whom the same Porphyry means in his Books de Porph. de Abstin. L.
i.. 42. p. 35. Ed. Cant.
Abstinentia, where he also charges some Barbarians, as he calls them, with
taking a liberty of eating all sorts of meats, on this pretense, as he
expresses it in the words himself had heard from them. (...). Wherein he
afterward intimates that they defended themselves by pretending to (...).
Liberty. These are almost the words, for certain the sense, and Arguments,
used by the sacred St. Matt. xv.18. Mark vii.18, 20.
Writers themselves in this very matter. Which I the rather mark that it may
appear with what Adversaries Porphyry had to do in that undertaking. And if it
were necessary to multiply testimonies to this purpose, many more might have
been produced from the Adversaries and Patrons of the Christians in that Age
wherein Laertius wrote, from St. Justin Martyr, Tatianus, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Theophilus Antiochenus, and Celsus: from all those who writing against the
Heathens, call them Greeks, (...). Cells. apud* Orig. L. i. p. 5.
and who defend themselves by Patronizing the cause of the Barbarians, and
showing that the Greeks themselves were beholden to the Barbarians for all
useful kinds of knowledge. What imaginable reason is there that they should so
eagerly concern themselves in this cause, if themselves had not been upbraided
with this name?

Heathens to see their Greek Ancestors robbed of the glory of their Antiquity
and their Inventions, and to see the despised Barbarians adorned with their
spoils. This seems in earnest to have been one of the greatest provocations of
Plutarch against Herodotus, that Herodotus had been too ingenuous in his
acknowledgments in this matter. (...).
And possibly that great Reader might have seen the Apologies of Quadratus and
Aristides to the Emperor Adrian, Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. iv.3.
who might very probably have insisted on this Argument which we find so very
ordinary in the later Apologists, not now to mention what he might have seen
upon this Subject in Josephus against Appion and others of the Hellenistical
Jews. Nay, the design of Laertius himself in his Preface, seems to have been
directly levelled against what the Christian Apologists had produced in this
Argument. There he endeavors, though very weak (...)* to assert the Invention
of Philosophy to the Greeks. He endeavors to weaken the challenge made for
Orpheus the Thracian on acaccount of the wickedness of his Fables concerning
the gods which he could not think worthy the name of Philosophy. (...). p. 2.
En Pugionem vere plumbeum. Casaub. in loc. (...). Ib. Orat. adv. Graec. Jos.
cont. Appion. In Aristotele.
And he is an instance frequently given by the Apologists. So he also magnifies
the Antiquity and Philosophy of Musaeus and Linus, which are two of those who
are mentioned by Tatianus as Writers among the Greeks before Homer, though it
should seem that in Josephus's time Homer was thought the ancientest. Which
will the rather make it suspicious that this was a pretense invented in the
time of Laertius against the later Apologists of the Christians only. So that
it cannot be thought strange that Laertius should call the Christians
Barbarians, against whom he was so eagerly concerned in this very dispute
wherein the Christians opposed the Barbarians against them. And though the
Phrase (...) do not prove him a Christian, yet sure it must at least prove him
conversant in Hellenistical Writers, it is so peculiar an idiom of his style.
And his last words (...), seem to give a clear account why the Assemblies of
the Primitive Christians were called Synaxes, because their meeting together in
those times is usually expressed to be for the breaking of this Bread. It is
certain that this was then the principal employment of those Assemblies. And it
is very observable that, as it was the principal design of those sacred
Assemblies to effect as well as signify this Mystical Union between the
Members of their Assemblies, so this was the word by which the Greeks signified
this Union. That the Pythagoraeans used it concerning their (...) we are here
assured by Laertius. That the Jews also used it the same way, seems plain from
the name of Synagogue, as their Assemblies are called by the Hellenists. And
for the Christians, besides the name of Synaxes, Christ himself expresses the
Union he was to make by this very word, (...). St. John xi.52.

Symbol of Unity Bread was reputed among the Ancients. Particularly it is
observable in the way of Marriage by Confarreation, which is the more
remarkable to our purpose, because this Matrimonial Unity is by the Apostle
himself compared to the Unity between Christ and his Church. In Fragm. Titulor.
ex ejus corpore Excerptor.
Now this Marriage by Confarreation is thus described by Vlpian: Far
convenitur in manum certis verbis, and testibus december praesentibus, and solenni
sacrificio facto, in quo panis farreu^ adhibetur. I do not know whether the
Bridal Cake may not have risen from this very ancient custom. For that it was
not observed among the Romans only we are assured from Curtius, who makes
Alexander the Great observe this custom in marrying Roxana, and that patrio
more, bread being reputed among the Macedonians for the sanctissimum coeuntium
pignus. And as by Confarreation this Matrimonial Unity was made, L. iv.
so by Diffarreation it was dissolved. So we are taught by Festus: Diffarreatio
genus erat Sacrificii quo inter virum and mulierem fiebat dissolutio: dicta
diffarreatio quod fieret farreo libo adhibito. And though this way of Marriage
by Confarreation was by degrees growing out of use in the time of Tiberius*
Tacit. L. iv.
yet it plainly appears to have been the most formal solemn way of Marriage*
and most creditable to them who had used it. For only they were permitted to
stand Candidates for the Office of the Flamen Dialis who were begotten of such
Marriages. By which it appears to have been a sacred as well as a civil Symbol
of Unity, which made it more suitable to the design to which it was applied in
the Christian Religion. Nor was it only made use of for Marriages, but also in
Leagues among Enemies, whom it was specially designed to reconcile and Unite.
The mola salsa, from whence the name of Immolation, and the (...) as they were
the most ancient kinds of Sacrifice, so in Homer they are particularly used in
Truces. And as upon this account of uniting Enemies Bread is a very suitable
Symbol for the design of the Eucharist; so among all the Sacrifices made use of
for this purpose, Ex Theophrasto, ut videtur, Porphyr. ii. de Abst.. 6, 15, 16,
17. Hierocl. in Aur. Pythag. Carm. p. 26.
none was better thought of by the Enemies of bloody Sacrifices, which might
extremely recommend it to the Primitive Converts to Christianity, who had been
so much beholden to those Writers in their Disputes both against the Jews and
Heathens. Which same observation might have been applied to the use of Wine
which was used for the same purpose from the same Antiquity, and with the same
general approbation in their Libations.

Jews to have been as ancient as they are pretended, there would be an easy
account of the same use of these Elements among the Jews to which they are
applied by the Christians. Besides the Postcoenium from whence many learned men
conceive this Sacrament to have been borrowed; besides the meat and drink
offerings exactly answerable to the mola salsa and Libations of the Heathens: I
say, besides these their other usages of Bread as they are described by
Buxtorf, are so like those of the Eucharistical Bread according to the design
of the Christian Religion, as that, if they were ancient, one would verily
think that they must needs have been regarded in the institution of the
Eucharist. Synag. Jud. c. 12.
In him we find that, in their ordinary meals bread is the first thing with
which the Table is to be furnished, and that it must receive a particular
Benediction there mentioned, by which we may understand that more than a civil
use of it is intended; that this Bread, (whether a whole loaf or a part only)
must be taken into the hands of the Master of the Family, and that he must give
it an incision, exactly answerable to that of the (...) in the Greek
Consecration: Goar in Miss. S. Chrysostom. n. 30.
that he must not yet cut it thorough; nay, that it is a nefas to do so till
the Consecration, like the custom of the Pythagoraeans and the Primitive
Christians already mentioned; that after Consecration, he must first break
himself the piece where he had made the Incision, and eat it in silence,
otherwise the Prayer of Consecration must be repeated; (by which we see what a
sacred thing they make of it.) That afterward it is he who breaks it to the
rest of the company, and lays it before them, which they are to receive with
their own hands, as it was also the most ancient practice to do so in the Lords
Supper; Cl. Alex. Strom. i.
that the bread is consecrated by repeating a benediction over it exactly as
the Evangelists and St. Paul are observed to express their (...) in one place
by (...) in another. In this benediction he covers the Bread with both his
hands, and they who are at the Table with him answer Amen, which are the
practices observed in the Eucharist, and that anciently. And as it should seem
in regard of this sacred use of the Bread, they are, even to superstition,
scrupulous that no particles of the Bread be lost, and pretend that there is an
Angel appointed for this purpose, whom they call Nabel, whose Office it is to
make him poor who is guilty of it. I need not mention how careful our Savior
was that nothing should be lost. Tertull. de Coron. Mil. Orig. in Levit.
It is also certain that the Primitive Christians were very scrupulous in this
particular. The like Solemnity is observed in blessing the Wine, and that both
before and after meal, but especially after. This is called (...), the (...) in
St Paul. 1 Cor. x.16.
And to this the guests are also to answer Amen, as before. Methinks this gives
an easy account why the Primitive Christians communicated every day in the
ordinary Synaxes, when so much of their Original from whence they derived their
observation of this Sacrament, was, among them from whom they derived it, thus
constantly observed in their daily meals. But besides this observation in their
daily meals, there is also much resemblance in their unleavened bread which
they make against the Passover. The Sacredness and Solemnity in making,
blessing, and distributing it, Idem Buxtorf. ibid. c. 17, 18.
and the several Cups of Wine which are to accompany it with the same
ceremoniousness, may be read in the place. I only at present observe their
substituting the several parts for the several orders represented in the whole.
For they make three cakes, one to represent the Chief Priest, the second the
Tribe of Levi, the third the whole People of Israel. Which the several parties
of Christians have seemed to imitate, the Latins dividing it into three parts,
the Greeks into four, Goar. in Miss. S. Chrysostom. n. 163.
the Muzarabes into nine, according to the several orders they were pleased to
represent.

Mysteries and the Sacrament, and wherein their being like is most remarkable
for my purpose, is that they are both designed principally and ultimately, for
the good of the Soul. That the Mysteries were so is that which possibly our
Brethren may be desirous to see proved. So De Mathem. Platon. c. 1. p. 18, 19.
(...).
Theou Smyrnaeus, where he compares the design of the Platonic Philosophy with
that of the received Mysteries, he does it in five Particulars, whereof the
fifth is a familiarity with God, and happiness. So In Bacchis.
Euripides: (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
And this it is which Apuleius Apul. Met. L.xi.
calls the inexpressible pleausre which he enjoyed upon his (...). Paucis
dehinc ibidem commoratus diebus, inexplicabili voluptate simulacri Divini
fruebar irremunerabili quippe beneficio pigueratus. For undoubtedly this
pleasure could not have been from the bare Statues, but from the Deities who
were presentiated by them. So also In Ran^s Chor.
Aristophanes expresses the happiness of initiated Persons. (...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
And this happiness of the Soul designed in the Mysteries is yet more agreeable
to that designed in the Sacrament, because they were thought most peculiarly
beneficial to it in the time of Death and in the state of Separation. So it was
believed among them on the credit of an (...). Plato Phaedon.
old Tradition, that they who departed this life uninitiated, should stick in
the dirt (as they expres^ed it) but that they who departed purged and initiated
should dwell with the Gods. So In Eleusin.
Aristides: (...). And In Fragm. ap. Stob. Sermon. 119.
Themistius alludes hereunto: (...). And Decontemnenda morte.
Cydonius: (...). And Laert. L.vi.
Diogenes, when being advised that he would be initiated before his Death:
(...). To the same purpose Antholog. l. 28. In Panegyric. Plutarch. Laconic.
Apophthegm. p. 224.
Crinagoras: (...)
(...).
And Isocrates concerning the Eleusinian (...). And this occasioned the jest of
Leotychidas the Lacedaemonian. When Philip the Priest of the Orphaick Mysteries
told him (...), when yet himself was a very poor man; Leotychidas asked him,
why he did not then die immediately that he might give over bemoaning his
Infelicity and Poverty. Therefore it was that Hercules and Bacchus were so
solicitous to be initiated before their descent into Hell, Author Axi^chi.
because of the peculiar virtue ascribed to these Mysteries in this particular.
And the Mysteries themselves in Apuleius are thought equivalent to a voluntary
death, Metam. xi.
and the inferum claustra, and the returning from them to the World is called a
new Birth, for it was still thought proper for these Mysteries as it is for the
Sacrament, to effect the things they signified. Accordingly they allotted the
most honorable places in (...) to such as were initiated. So the Scholiast of
Aristophanes: (...). Laertius: in Ran.
(...). in Diogen.
And the Author of Axiochus: (...).

Lord's Supper we are first to examine our selves before we presume to eat of
that Bread and drink of that Cup; so there was also a confession of sins
required from Persons at their initiation, especially of the greatest of them.
So in the Samothracian Mysteries, the Question was asked of Antalcidas, (...);
of Lysander, Plutarch. Lacon. Apop^^* p. 217. p. 229. p. 236.
(...); of another, (...). The like we find also in some modern accounts both
of the East and the West Indies. Accordingly in some of them there were
significations from the Gods whether they had dealt ingenuously in their
Confessions, as in those now-mentioned of the Indians, and in others in
Porphyry from Bardesanes, and in the Antrum Tropbonii. In lib. de Styge.
Exactly as God was also pleased to discover the truth of those Eucharistical
Examinations in those primitive times, by inflicting Death or Diseases on such
as presumed to venture on the Christian Mysteries with impure Consciences, And
though the Gods did not always discover their displeasure against offenders in
this way, yet they were always under such apprehensions of their doing so, as
that it was thought to require great purity of Conscience from them who might
venture on them, and to argue great innocence in them who did so. Therefore so
many trials and preparations before to discourage all who were not extremely
confident. Therefore so many and so importunate disswasions not to run the
hazard, as we find in the Case of Apuleius. Metam. xi.
Therefore it was taken for such an Argument of innocence in the Person that he
durst venture on such a trial wherein the Gods themselves were to give
testimony of his innocence, as we find it used in the Case of M. Antoninus.
Capitolin. in Anton.
Nor were they only here to purge themselves of their former guilt, but they
were also to undertake new obligations of better behavior for the future. They
seem to have been called initia for that very reason, because they were indeed
to be the beginnings of a new Life. De. Legib. lib. ii.
Tullies words seems to imply so: Initiaque ut appellantur, ita revera
Principia vitae cognovimus; neque solum cum laetitia vivendi rationem
accepimus, and etiam cum spe meliore moriendi. The same thing also appears from
other testimonies produced for this purpose by Meursius. Eleusin. c. 17.
So that in all regards the design of the Mysteries is extremely like that of
the Blessed Sacrament.

Mysteries to change the names of those ordinary things which were made use of
by them, without the least thinking of any change of nature, only that they
might speaking of holy things in a peculiar and holy style, Concerning
Pythagoras, Porphyrius vit. Pythag. p. 199. qui alia habet exempla. De
Abstinent. L.iv.. 16. p. 165.
Aristotle. (...). Porphyry as^ures us of the like custom o^ the change of
names in the Rites of Mithras. (...) [nisi potius (...) cum Kirchero (...). In
the same Rites the Adytum was called (...), as witness the same Porphyr. de
Aniro Nymph. p. 254, 263.
Porphyry, and Dialog. cum Tryph. 296. B. 304. A.
Justin Martyr. So in the same honey Porphy. Ant. Nymph. p. 260.
was given instead of water, and a ib. p. 261.
Crater instead of a fountain. So in the Eleusinian the Priestesses of Ceres
were called ib. p. 261. vid. Meurs.
Melissae or Bees, the Hierophanta Elcusin. c. 16.
Demiurgus, or the Maker of the World. And the Gods themselves had such names
given them as none can think were given them for any other than Mystical
reasons. Porph. de Abst. L.iv.. 16.
Diana was called a Lioness, the Sun a Bull, a Lion, a Dragon, a Hawk, Hecate a
Horse, a Bull, a Lioness and a Bitch. If any would have more instances he may
find great plenty in the elaborate Collections of Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom.
v.
and thereby put themselves in mind of another more solemn behavior to them
then than when they were considered as divested of those advantages they had
for challenging reverence on account of there Consecration. On which supposition
it will appear how rational it was for our Savior to change the name of Bread
into that of his Body though he had no more thoughts of changing the nature of
Bread then they had who used the like changes of names in those Mysteries from
whence he was pleased to take his pattern. And I do not know whether St. Paul
might not have had this in his mind when he blames the unworthy Communicants
among the Corinthians, that they did not (...) distinguish the Bread which they
received in the Eucharist from common Bread, when they were so sufficiently
warned of it by the sacred name by which it was called, that is, by the name of
Christ's Body. And lastly these sacred words were thought operative, I do not
mean, nor did they mean, for the change of the nature, but for performing the
Benefit Mystically signified under those Representations. This was the Doctrine
of the Platonists, Plato in Cra^ylo. Orig. cont. Cells. L.1. p. 18, 19, 20.
and generally of those who dealt in these Mysteries, that words signified by
nature, which they especially thought true of those words which were introduced
by their Gods who were acquainted with the natures of things, and conveyed by
Tradition from those who were the Sons of the Gods, as they called those who
lived in the first Ages. And of this sort was all the sacred language which was
used in their Mysteries. Plato in Tim.
Now the very design of this opinion seems to have been purposely to assert the
Magical force of those words in their Mysteries, which were generally Magical.
And they accordingly thought this efficacy so peculiar to those words, Ita
Origin. ib. and alii. Seldom. in Eutych. Not.
that they would lose their virtue if they were translated into another
language. If the modern Jews were to be heeded for the sense of their
Ancestors, they also were against translating any of the forms prescribed by
the Law, excepting those forms which were absolutely necessary to be understood
by the Persons concerned in them. Nor is it to be thought strange that our
Savior should make use of the same means for conveying the good Spirit which
they had also designed for good Spirits, though, through their mistakes it so
fell out that only evil Spirits insinuated themselves by them. Especially
considering that this efficacy was not asserted on those dishonorable
Principles to the nature of good Spirits, as it was among the Heathens: Not on
account of any natural influence the pronunciation of such words might have on
the things signified by them, but purely in regard of his own institution. It
is certain that he did actually comply in things of as great consequence as
this can be of, when it is thus explained.

Principles, and according to the nature of these Mystical contrivances, this
Bodily Union may very well be supposed to be made by our Saviors changing the
name of Bread into that of his own Body. For this change of the name is enough
to make our participation of the Bread the same thing, in a Legal sense, with a
participation of his Body. This Legal sense is perfectly sufficient for a Legal
conveyance, both to give him an interest in our Bodies, and to derive a title
from him for the Resurrection of our Bodies, if his Body be raised. This
substitution of names is on other accounts obligatory in Law, but, as it has
appeared, it is peculiarly the proper way of obligation in Mysteries. But that
it does not require any change in the nature of the Elements appears plainly
from hence, that the change of the Bread into Christ's Body is clearly designed
to make a like change in our Bodies, that they may also, by partaking of the
Bread, become Christ's Body. And therefore there can be no necessity that the
Bread should be Christ's Body in a higher sense than our Bodies are made to be
so by our participation of the Bread. If therefore our Bodies may be made
Christ's Body, as to all material purposes for which we are concerned that our
Bodies should be his Body; if they be made his Body in such a sense as to
challenge all the privileges of his natural Body, so that whatever befalls our
Body may be said to agree to his, and, on the contrary, that what agrees to him
cannot be said to agree to his Body completely, unless our Bodies do also
partake of it; if we may have this intimate identical participation of that
very individual Body of his that suffered on the Cross, without any
Transubstantiation of our Bodies into the Body of Christ; I do not see why the
Bread may not be also called Christ's Body, to as real purposes of making our
Bodies to become Christ's Body, without Transubstantiation. For it is to be
considered, that this change of our Bodies is not only the end of the change of
the Bread, by which it must therefore be most rational to judge of this change
which is made in the Bread, but indeed the only thing that can be beneficial to
us. If our Bodies be not made Christ's Body in the sense now explained, what are
we the better that the Bread is made so? And if our Bodies may be made Christ's
Body in the sense we are concerned it should be so, that we may challenge the
Privileges now mentioned, whether the nature of the Bread be changed or no, I
cannot understand how we are concerned that it should be changed in it^ nature.

name of Bread is sufficient to make it Christ's Body, as to all real intents
and purposes of the Sacrament; so by our partaking of this one Bread we first
become one Bread, certainly not by being Transubstantiated into the Bread, much
less by being all of us Transubstantiated into the nature of that individual
loaf from whence we all communicate; but by this Legal way of judging of which
I have been speaking. And thence follows the second Consequence, That as by
partaking of one Bread in the natural sense we are all made one Bread, so, by
partaking of the same Bread, as the name of Christ's individual natural Body is
ascribed to it, we all are made one Body, that is, that individual natural Body
of Christ, which cannot be understood in any other sense than as by partaking
of one Bread we are all made one Bread, that is, in the same sense of Legal
estimation. However, to return to my first design, it appears plainly from this
whole Hypothesis, that our being made one Bread is the ordinary means, at
least, whereby we are made one Body. Whence it will follow that they who fail
of their being made one Bread, after their Baptism, do, according to the same
proportion wherein they fail of it, fail also of their interest in that one
Body. If they separate themselves entirely from the means of obtaining it, they
must, by the same Legal way of estimation, be supposed to discontinue their
Membership of that one Body as they were made one Body by partaking of it. If
they discontinue their receiving that Bread where they have means of obteining
it, this very discontinuing is a proportionable losing their interest in the
Body. As a branch of a tree, if it receive not constant supplies of sap from
the root, must gradually die and cease at length to be a branch, though it can
no more be told punctually in what moment the vegetative Life ceases in such a
branch, than it can be told precisely how long a time of abstinence from the
Sacraments does deprive the Person guilty of that abstinence of his Spiritual
Life. And that the loss of this Spiritual Life wherein none can have an
interest without an interest in the Mystical Body which is enlivened by it, and
the loss of this title to this blessed Resurrection of our Bodies themselves,
are losses of things necessary to Salvation, will not, I believe, be denied by
our Adversaries themselves.

Saviors contrivance of this matter, according to that way of signification
which is proper and natural to Mysteries, because he has given us his Body
under such Elements as are to be taken by us by way of nourishment. Certainly
his meaning must have been that those Elements should, in a Mystical way, serve
for the same purpose for preserving our interest in the Body Mystical as our
natural nourishment does preserve our natural Bodies. And therefore as our
natural Bodies cannot be preserved long without natural nourishment, because
they are supposed to be in such a constant course of decay as must in a short
time destroy them, if their decay be not repaired by the new supplies which
they receive by their nourishment; so neither is it ordinarily to be expected
that our interest in the Mystical Body of Christ can long continue without new
supplies of Mystical nourishment. If Mystical nourishment were not as
ordinarily necessary for preserving our interest in this Body-Mystical, as
natural nourishment is for preserving our natural Bodies, I do not understand
why our Savior would have been so solicitous for providing means of Mystical
nourishment, and that under the very Notion of nourishment. And if it be, then
certainly it must be as impossible long to preserve our interest in the
Mystical Body without this Mystical nourishment; as it is to preserve our
natural Bodies without perpetual new supplies of natural nourishment.

CHAP. XVII. The necessity of the Lord's Supper for Salvation proved from St.
Joh. VI.
THE CONTENTS.
Savior spoke these words with relation to the Sacrament which he was to
institute.. I. It is probable that St. John also understood and designed them
so.. II. Being so understood they agree very well with the account of the
design of this Sacrament already given.. III. The meaning of the signs expected
from Prophets.. IV Manna the sign of Moses, which our Savior designed to
imitate in giving the Bread here spoken of.. V. An account from the
Hellenistical Philosophy of those times how the Bread given by our Savior is
called the true Bread.. VI, VII. Mystical Manna understood by Philo of the
LTHGOS.. VIII. The Bread given by our Savior bodily as well as Mystical.. IX.
The way of reasoning in the New Testament from Mystical Expositions of the
Old.. X. The Prudence of this way of reasoning.. XI. The course this way of
reasoning obliged them to in proving the Christian Sacraments.. XII, XIII. The
Ideal Manna communicated to us by the Eucharistical Bread.. XIV. The consequent
danger of wanting this Eucharistical Bread.. XV. The Usefulness of the method
here proposed for understanding this, and many like, places in the New
Testament. Submission to Superiors.. XVI.

AND though I know that the Eucharist was not yet instituted when our Savior
had that Mystical discourse in St. John VI. yet withal I cannot but think that
our Savior intended even then to warn them of the necessity of a Corporal as
well as Spiritual Union with himself, and to give them such an account of it,
as, though they did not understand it at present, yet they should when they
should be fitted for understanding it, and when it should be fulfilled. I know
it was usual among the wisemen of those parts in their Mystical Discourses to
represent wisdom under the Metaphor of meat. But to represent it under the
Metaphor of man's flesh, nay, of his own flesh who was then discoursing with
them, sounded so unusual and harsh to his Auditors, who understood him
literally, as that we find they were not able to bear it. And certainly he
would not have used so offensive an Allegory, if he had not designed a greater
advantage by it afterward than he enjoyed by it at present. And though he
usually explained to his Disciples in private what he discoursed in Parables to
the Multitude, yet that was as they were able to bear it; Mark iv.33.
and with some things he did not think it fit to acquaint them during his
Corporal presence among them. Particularly we find him cautious in acquainting
them with his Death, and the ignominious circumstances of it, which was a thing
so contrary to their received Notions concerning the Messiah, as that it would
have weakened his general Authority among them, on which the credit of the
particulars proposed by him did all depend, if they had been acquainted with
them before they had first been prepared by exercise to endure the scandal of a
suffering Messiah. Yet this had been necessary to have been known by them
before they could thoroughly understand his design in these words, supposing
they were meant with relation to the Eucharist; which may serve for a just
account why he did not speak more plainly concerning it than he did then, even
to his own Disciples. Besides we have elsewhere examples where it is expressly
noted that his Discourses had express relation to things to be fulfilled
afterward, St. Joh. ii.22. Luke xxiv.8.
and to be understood by his Disciples when they were fulfilled, and not
before, that we may not admire at his doing so in this matter.

Savior did hereby prepare them that they might, by degrees, understand their
obligation to a Corporal Union with him, and of partaking of that Bread which
he should afterward appoint as an ordinary means of effecting that Union; so
it is also very probable that the Apostle did also design it for the use of the
separaters of that Age wherein he wrote his Gospel, to let them also understand
their obligation to keep that Communion, Ep. ad Ephesians. p. 3.
wherein this Bread of God, as Ignatius soon after tells us, is only to be had,
concerning which our Savior had spoken so great things before his institution
of it. Any one who considerately reads his whole Gospel may observe, that those
things which were added by him above what had been written by the other
Gospels, especially the Doctrinal part of them, are generally such things
whereby his Readers might be convinced of their obligation to adhere to him in
opposition to the Antichrists which then appeared, that is, certainly, to that
Society which was visibly united in an external profession of adherence to him,
in opposition to those many other visible Societies which were also visibly
united in an external profession of adherence to his Rivals and Adversaries.
And many of the same things produced in this case are also insisted on in his
Epistle which was professedly written on this Subject, and with more particular
regard to this very case. Nor certainly could he have chosen a more apposite
Argument for this purpose than this was, what our Saviors design was in
instituting the Eucharist.

Eucharist, agrees exactly well with the account I have now been giving
concerning it from other Scriptures. I said that the great use of this fleshly
Union with Christ was principally to secure us of the Resurrection of our
Bodies. Accordingly he frequently mentions the Resurrection here, Joh. vi.39,
40, 44.v.58.
and that as a particular benefit of this eating the Eucharistical Bread. So he
tells them, This is the Bread which descended from Heaven; not as your Fathers
did eat the Manna and are dead, he that eats this Bread shall live for ever.
Where by living for ever must certainly be meant the life of the Body when it
is opposed to that bodily death which befell their Fathers after their eating
the Manna in the Wilderness. I said that our title to the Resurrection of our
Bodies was immediately grounded on our partaking of his flesh. This is also our
Saviors doctrine in this place. Ver. 54.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal Life, and I will
raise him up at the last day. And to this purpose he calls his flesh meat
indeed and his blood drink indeed, Ver. 55.
because it does perform the office of meat and drink to more effectual purpose
than any worldly meat and drink does. The office of meat and drink is to
preserve Life which the worldly meat and drink do only for a time, but these
for ever. I said that this partaking of his flesh united us to him; And so says
also our Savior himself, He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, Ver. 56.
abides in me, and I in him. This mutual abiding in each other are the terms
whereby this Apostle usually explains their being one with each other, and that
in the Person of our Savior himself. And I have given them the glory which
thou gave me, Joh. xvii.22, 23.
that they may be One as we are One, I in them, and thou in me, that they may
be made perfect in One. I said that by this participation of Bread we partake
also of his flesh. Joh. vi.51.
So also says our Savior, The Bread which I will give is my flesh, which I
will give for the Life of the world. And it is very observable that when he
speaks of the Bread which himself was to give, he still speaks in the future,
which will make it much more likely that he should mean it of the Sacrament
which he had not as yet instituted, than of his Doctrine which he was
delivering to them at that present.

Bread is plainly spoken of in this whole Chapter with allusion to the Manna
given by Moses. For when our Savior had told them that this was the work of
God, Ver. 29.
that they should believe on him whom he had sent, the Jews answer him again,
What sign do thou that we may see it and believe thee? What do thou do? For
thus it had been the custom of Prophets, Exodus iv.1.8, 9.
to confirm their Mission by some extraordinary sign. So Moses had two signs
given him to convince the Israelites that God had indeed appeared to him. So
the Prophet who cried against the Altar of Jeroboam, 1 King. xiii.3, 5.
gave a sign the same day, saying, This is the sign which the Lord has spoken,
Behold, the Altar shall be rent, and the ashes that are upon it shall be poured
out. So in the contests between Jeremiah and the false Prophets that were his
rivals, Jer. xx.6.xxviii.15, 16, 17.xxix.21, 22, 31, 32.
he confirms the truth of his own Mission, and the falsehood of theirs, by
predictions of judgments which should befall the false Prophets; and by the
course prescribed for knowing a false Prophet by the events not answering his
Prediction, Deuteronomy. xviii.21, 22.xiii.1, 2, 3.
or however that he should not be believed though it should have proved
answerable, if he endeavored to seduce them to Idolatry; it plainly appears,
both that signs were the usual means for distinguishing true Prophets from
false ones, and that these signs were generally predictions, by which it will
be easy to understand the reason of that which has puzzled so many Expositors,
why the Jews, when they had seen so many miracles performed by our Savior,
should yet demand a sign from him, because no miracles were counted signs, but
such as were done purposely in proof of his Mission, and vouched by him for
such before their performance, and which afterward in the events punctually
answered their Predictions.

NOW the signs themselves alleged in proof of Moses's Mission was that of his
foretelling the descent of the Manna, Joh. vi.31. Exodus xvi.4, 15.
which is called Bread from Heaven, and Bread which God had given them. And
therefore our Savior immediately lays hold on this very instance for proof of
his own Mission, and accordingly promises that he also would give them Bread,
and such Bread as had descended from Heaven as the Manna had done. But with
this advantage, Joh. vi.32, 33.
that the Bread which he would give them de future (else it had not been a
Prediction, and consequently not a sign, at least not like that of Moses who
foretold the descent of the Manna before it came to pass) should be his own
flesh, which he would give for the life of the World. Exodus xvi.4. Joh. vi.51.
St. Matt. xxvi.26. Mark xiv.22. Luke xxii.19. 1 Cor. xi.23, 24.
And where can we find this Prediction so probably fulfilled as it is in the
Eucharist, where there is also Bread given us which is called his Body, and
that Body which was broken for us? And what reason is there so likely why this
Apostle should speak so little of this Sacrament afterward, in the place which
had been so proper for it, at the time of its institution, as because he had
discoursed so largely concerning it here?

Savior did herein allude to the Israelites murmuring after flesh, after they
had their wills in the Manna. So they complained then: Numb. xi.6.
And now our Soul is dried away: there is nothing at all besides this Manna
before our eyes. So that our Saviors allusion might be that the Bread which he
would give them should be by so much more satisfactory than Manna, by how much
it should prevent their murmuring for flesh, which Manna did not, that is, that
it should serve for flesh as well as Bread. I rather think that his design was
to show how it should come to pass that the Bread which he would give them
should come by that advantage above Manna, that the Life maintained by it
should be immortal, not mortal only, as that was which was maintained by the
Manna; that is, that by this Bread our Bodies should become his, and
consequently that it should be as impossible that our Bodies should be detained
by the chains of Death, Act. ii.24.
as St. Peter tells us that it was impossible that the Body of our Savior
could be so detained. And when he therefore calls this Bread the true Bread
from Heaven in opposition to the Bread of Moses, I am apt to think that it was
meant according to the usual meaning of this Mystical way of arguing. It is
sufficiently clear from Philo, that the Platonical Ideas were received by the
Hellenistical Jews, (...). p. 3, 4, 5. (...). p. 169. Philo. (...). p. 5. ex
Numino, Didymo, Philone, Clemente Alexandrino, Eusebius. Pr. Eu. xi.22, 23, 24, 25.
especially by those of them who were for expounding the Scripture Mystically,
and that these Ideas were by them, as well as the Platonists, placed in Heaven,
and particularly in the (...), and that those Ideas were the only Truth, and
that all other resemblances of them were only Vid. Viger. not. ad Eusebius. Praep.
p. 528. D. 845. D.
(...) derived from them only as impressions from the Seal, and therefore were
not the true things themselves, but only the appearances of them.

Primitive Christians in the great use they made of Mystical Judaism for their
purpose, to show that all the externals of the Law were only Ectypal
resemblances of those original Archetypal Ideas which were reserved in Christ
as being that (...) in whom the Platonists and the Mysticizing Jews themselves
placed their Ideas, and that they were reserved with him in Heaven before his
descent on earth. So the Priests of the Law are said to have served (...), Heb.
viii.5.
to the example and shadow of heavenly things. Which is proved from that same
place from whence Philo also proves these Heavenly Exemplars, and from whence
Justin Martyr supposes Plato himself to have borrowed them. Justin. Paraenet.
p. 28, 29. Exodus xxv.40. Heb. ix.1. Ver. 9. Heb. ix.23, 24.
For see that thou make all things according to the pattern showed thee in the
mount. So the worldly Sanctuary (in opposition to the heavenly) which was only
a figure for the time present. So the holy places made with hands are called
(...), the patterns of things in the Heavens, and (...), the figures of the
true, to which are opposed the heavenly things and Heaven it self. So the Law
is said to have had (...), Heb. x.1.
a shadow of good things to come, but not (...), not the very image of the
things. Heb. viii.2.
So in opposition to the earthly Tabernacle there is the heavenly, which is
called the true Tabernacle. And Christ, as he is the (...), so, he is said to
be the truth very frequently, Joh. xiv.1.
especially by St John, who of all the New Testament Writers seems to have been
most punctually observant of this Mystical style; and whoever would know the
Truth indeed must know it as it is in Jesus. Ephesians. iv.21.


Manna must also have been understood Mystically; and the rather so, Psalm.
lxxviii.26.
because the Psalmist calls it the Bread of Angels, who could not, according to
the Hellenistical Hypothesis of Philosophy then received, be supposed capable
of partaking of material Bread. And accordingly our Savior when he would prove
himself to be no Spirit, he does it by eating: S. Luke xxiv.41, 42, 43.
and the Apostles, who were witnesses of his Resurrection, when they would urge
their own Testimony more unexceptionably in that matter, this is the most
convictive evidence on which they insist, that, even after his Resurrection,
they had eaten and drunk with him, Act. x.41.
a plain sign that they took it for a Principle granted them by those against
whom they reasoned, that Spirits could not eat and drink. And this is the
reason why Philo, who takes up Mystical senses many times upon less
considerable exceptions against the Letter than this is, does grant a Philo
(...). p. 176. E. (...). And else where, (...) (he speaks concerning the Manna)
-- (...). p. 470. And elsewhere he again makes it come from Heaven. p. 449.
Mystical Manna, and places it in the (...), which comes exactly home to our
Saviors reasoning; and shows the prudence and cogency of it, at least as to
this part of his Discourse, that he was the true Bread of which the Corporal
Manna, which had been eaten by their Fathers in the Wilderness, was only a Type
and resemblance. For supposing the Adversaries with whom he had then to deal to
have been of Philo's mind (as plainly Philo, in most of his Allegories, does
not pretend himself to be an inventer, but a deliverer of the Traditions of
those who had studied Allegories; and whoever compares his not only with
Clemens and Origin, who succeeded him in the School of Alexandria, and in the
way of Allegorizing, but also with the Scripture it self, will find that they
did not take that liberty that some may conceive, but kept constant to one way
of Allegory, though, I confess, they sometimes give several Allegorical
Expositions of the same Scriptures) I say, supposing that they granted that the
(...) was the Archetypal Manna, he had nothing more to convince them of in
order to the proving that he was the true Bread, but only that he was the
(...), which was to appear from those many Credentials which he afterward
produced of his being so.

Saviors purpose, and might very probably have been part of his design; but I
cannot think that it was the whole of it. For the benefit here spoken of is
plainly corporal, and not such as could agree to the Angels, viz. the intitling
their Bodies to a Resurrection unto bliss, as I have already observed. If it
had been otherwise, the reason given by him, why this Bread should make their
Bodies immortal, had been very improper. For what relation had flesh to the
food of Angels? How could they receive nourishment from it, or be made immortal
by it? Nay indeed what need was there of proving that the Archetypal Manna
should make its receivers immortal, seeing that, by the Hypothesis then
received, all Archetypal ^eings were supposed to be immortal? Or, if he would
be pleased needlessly to put himself to that trouble, yet why should he make
use of so unlikely an Argument for proving it? They know not of any flesh that
was to be immortal. At least they were much better assured that all Archetypal
Beings were immortal than that any flesh was so. And therefore how could the
immortality of his own flesh pass with them for an Argument of the immortality
of this Archetypal Bread? I cannot therefore but think that the Bread here
spoken of immediately was material Bread and food for their Bodies, as Manna
had been to their Fathers, and therefore the immortality and a Title to a
Resurrection, could not be so confidently presumed to be an effect of it but
that it would need proof. And for this the immortality of Christ's Body, whose
name was by himself given to the Eucharistical Bread, was indeed a most proper
proof, and that which was accordingly taken up by the Christians themselves.
Only I confess it was an Argument supposing the Truth of the Christian
Religion, Mystery of the Kingdom, as our Savior elsewhere speaks, Matt.
xiii.13.
and therefore, according to the method then observed in Mysteries, unfit to be
communicated to Enemies, nay, even not to the Sons of the Kingdom themselves,
Matt. viii.12.xiii.38.
till they had first attained to a sufficient degree of Purity and maturity of
judgment for understanding them, which was timely enough when he should
afterward institute this Sacrament. They might then remember that he had
spoken to this purpose, and they would be better prepared to receive the harsh
and unexpected unwelcom news of his Death with the less danger of being
scandalized at it, when they received it by degrees. And it is observable that,
at this time, the principal part of his Authority were his own Disciples. For
that was the event of this Mystical discourse, Joh. vi.66.
that many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him: That we may
not admire that he should on such an occasion make use of such Arguments as
presupposed the Truth of the Christian Religion.

Christians themselves, and the connection it had with the Notions then
received; it is further observable, that besides these Mystical Expositions of
the Old Testament, which were then received by the Jews, concerning such things
in the Christian Religion which they were capable of foreseeing by those
Notions of the New Covenant, and the state of things under the Messiah, which
then prevailed even among them, there were also others relating to the positive
and arbitrary Revelations of the Gospel, of which they could have no distinct
knowledge before those Revelations. For the great design of the Primitive
Christians being to show that their Religion was indeed no real innovation from
Judaism, but only that Mystical state of it which was described in those
writings which were received by the Jews themselves, and which was also allowed
by them to have Mystical senses besides the Literal, and such Mystical senses
as could not, in strict reasoning, be necessary Arguments of the Writers mind
to a pertinacious Adversary, but might serve for prudent intimations for a mind
prepared and willing to receive conviction, which is the disposition the
Christians also do always require in a person qualified to judge of their
Religion; they accordingly show that even such things as these which might seem
to have the least foundation in the Letter of the Law, were yet designed by it,
according to this way of expounding it Mystically. Thus, as the land of Canaan
was a type of Heaven, so they supposed that the changing of the name of him who
was to bring them into Canaan from Oshea to Jesus was not done without very
particular design. And indeed these Mysticizing Jews had already granted them
that the change of names was indeed made generally with Mysterious designs.
Philo (...).
And very many of their Allegories are grounded on those names, and the
Criticisms of them. And this so exactly fitting the name of our Savior, it is
no wonder that it was produced by the Justin. M. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 300, 328,
340. Tertull. c. Jud. c. 9. p. 219. c. Marc. iii.16.iv.7, 13. Cl. Al. Protr.
and Paed. l. 7. Eus. Pr. Eu. iv.17.
Primitive Christians as a proof that his very name was expressly foretold
under that dispensation. Very many of the like instances might have been
produced from the primitive Writers concerning the particulars of our Saviors
History which they thus showed to have been thus prefigured in the Old
Testament, though not expressly mentioned in it. Thus the veil over Moses's
face proves that the Jews should not understand the Gospel when it should be
preached to them. And Ishmael's mocking Isaac proved that the Jews who were
born after the flesh should persecute the Christians who were born after the
Spirit. And the Israelites cloud prefigured the Christian Baptism. So the
Author to the Hebrews, who from the burning of the carcasses of the Sacrifices
without the camp concludes that therefore our Savior was also to suffer
without the gate of Jerusalem. Heb. xiii.11, 12.


precarious as some may conceive, especially considering the times whereof I am
now discoursing, as certainly they ought to be considered by him who would judge
prudently and solidly in a matter of this nature. Strom. v.
Clemens Alexandrinus has at large proved that this Mystical way of shadowing
things by things and obscure intimations of words, were generally allowed of by
all the Religions and Mysteries and Philosophy then extant, and especially by
the Eastern wisdom, as the most proper way for the Gods to converse with men
by. And there can be no greater ambiguity charged on this way than what is also
common, not only to the Heathen Oracles, but even to the Symbolical
representations which were in ordinary use among the Jewish Prophets
themselves. Besides the reason of these concealments held here as well as in
other Cases, that none but Persons not curious nor litigious, nor indisposed
with worldly Passions and prejudices might understand them, but that others
might fall into the snares which they justly deserved to fall into in regard of
the misdemeanors they were guilty of which deserved Punishment, and the little
diligence used by them to avoid it. This is the reason our Savior himself
gives of his using Parables to the Multitude. And indeed this way of Parables
must needs be granted to be as uncertain to those who had them not particularly
expounded to them, as this way of Mystical reasoning. But particularly
Historical matters had a reason why they should not be too expressly and
particularly foretold, both that the Prediction might not hinder the Persons
concerned from engaging on the event, and that after it was come to pass it
might then be understood the rather to proceed from God, by how much it was the
less foreseen by second Causes. And none doubted but that many Prophesies might
be certainly understood when they were fulfilled, which were not understood
before. Besides in general they had certain Arguments of Miracles and such
extrinsick evidence to assure them that the state of Christianity was that
state of Mystical Judaism so generally spoken of by the ancient Prophets,
besides the certainer accommodation of some of the clearest Predictions which
might assure them of thus much, that this was the time when the less clear ones
were to be fulfilled also. So that thus much being granted that all the
Predictions of God whether by words or shadows were then to be fulfilled, it
followed thence, that where the accommodation between the Prediction and the
event was clear, that was the very sense which God intended should come to pass.

Primitive Christians did actually use this way of reasoning, and that the
multitude of such accommodations whereby it appeared that every thing which
then befell the Novel Converts to Christianity was either predicted or
prefigured in the Old Testament, was not only a very great inducement with many
of them to receive the Christian Religion, but the only Apology they had to
vindicate that Religion from the charge of innovation with which it was
aspersed by the Jews: And particularly the Sacraments were of that consequence
as indeed would need a particular proof. For if Mystical Judaism required no
external Solemnities of worship, we must suppose them ready to enquire why
these externals were required. If by our Saviors Authority alone, then it
would not look like a part of Mystical Judaism when no part of the Jewish
Scriptures could be alleged in favor of it. But if Mystical Judaism did
indeed require these Solemnities, then they would object against the abrogation
of Circumcision and Sacrifices which had formerly been so expressly required by
the Law, as an abrogation of Judaism, not as an introducing a more Spiritual
Notion of it.

Christians did both show that literal Circumcision and Sacrifices had been
disapproved in the Old Testament it self, and that their own Rituals had been
predicted or prefigured as proper to that state of Mystical Judaism which they
endeavored to introduce. Particularly as to prefiguration, Baptism they
supposed to have been prefigured in the cloud of the Israelites, in which they
are said to have been baptized into Moses, that is, were made Disciples unto
Moses, as by Christ's Baptism men are admitted to be Disciples to Christ, 1 Cor.
x.2.
and in the water of the deluge by which those who were in the Ark were saved,
1 Pet. iii.21. 1 Cor. x.4. That of Melchizedec. Clem. Alex. Strom. iv. prope
fin. Cyprian. Ep. 62. ad Caecilium. Eusebius. Them. Eu. v.3.
to which our Baptism is expressly called an Antitype. And the rock which
followed them, the Bread of Melchizedeck whom they took for a Type of Christ,
and this Manna in the Wilderness were taken for prefigurations of the
Eucharist, and these later two, even as to the Element of Bread, that even in
that Christ might appear to have innovated nothing, but to have done that which
God had long before designed that it should be done by him. And considering how
necessary these things were for that great design of the Apostles, we have
reason to look on them not barely as Arguments ad bomines, but as real Truths
requisite for the satisfaction of the Christians themselves, as well as for the
conviction of their Adversaries. And considering withal their close connection
with this great design of the Apostles in their Controversies with the Jews, we
have reason to suppose that these were the sense of the Apostles themselves, in
whose times principally it was that these Controversies with the Jews were
debated, and in whose times the ordinary Converts from Judaism were most likely
to desire satisfaction in those particulars. Which will make these Mystical
Expositions of the most ancient Fathers much more considerable than they are
commonly esteemed, if not for the solidity of the Expositions themselves, yet
at least for the credit of the first conversion to Christianity, and of the
Apostles, who, for the propagation of the Christian Religion, thought it so
necessary to insist on these Expositions. And this prefiguration of the
Eucharist by the Manna, being so necessary for the Apostles design to defend
the institution of the Eucharist from the charge of innovation, and so early
insisted on by the Primitive Christians, we have very just reason to suppose
that it came from the Apostles, though we could not trace it in their writings.
At least we have reason to believe that it was the meaning of our Savior and
the Apostle in this place, where on other accounts it appears so likely to have
been so.

Eucharistical Bread the Ideal Manna is communicated to us. And as all
particular derivations from the Ideas can perform nothing but by virtue of the
impressions which they are supposed to receive from the Ideas themselves, but
it is impossible that any derivation can be as efficacious as the Original; so
it will be also, on the same Principles, ordinarily impossible that the want of
this Ideal Manna thus communicated to us by the Eucharist can be any other way
supplied. And as immortality, (that is, a happy immortality to which the
Scripture does frequently appropriate the name of immortality,) does, on the
same Hypothesis, only agree to these Ideal Prototypes themselves, not to any
resemblances derived from them; so this immortality of our Body, and our
consequent Title to the Resurrection of our Body resulting from it, can only be
expected from our participation of the Eucharistical Bread, if that be the only
ordinary means appointed for our participation of this Archetypal Manna.

Joh. VI. has relation to the Eucharist at least, as it was to be instituted by
him for the future, nothing can be more plain than that which I am at present
concerned for, the great mischief men have ordinarily reason to fear when they
are deprived of the Eucharist. So our Savior tells them, Verily, verily, Joh.
vi.53.
I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you. And the flesh here spoken of was immediately
before made the Bread, that Archetypal Manna which he was to give them, The
Bread which I will give is my flesh. Ver. 51.
Which two attributes of Bread and Flesh ascribed to the same thing are not so
naturally capable of being ascribed to any thing else as they are to this
Eucharistical Bread of which I am now speaking. God grant that our dissenting
Brethren may be as sensible of the consequence of this Discourse as they are
concerned in it.

the necessity of valid Baptism as an ordinary means for Salvation is to my
design; Chap. 15.
so really I conceive the things here delivered of that very great importance
for preventing and correcting Popular errors in a Subject of this nature, and
so very necessary for assuring any of the sense of Mystical Scriptures, as that
I could not be confident even of commonly- received Expositions of Scripture,
till I had examined them by this Method of enquiring into the nature of
Mysteries, as they were then received, and the Peculiarities of speech that
were used in them. As for the common way of explaining them (either by the
Literal signification of the words where the absurdities following thereon are
tolerable, and sometimes where they are not; or where the absurdities are so
sensibly intolerable as to force them from a Literal Exposition, yet still not
to consider them as terms of Art, but only to take the most obvious
Metaphorical signification that may suit the design of the Context, whereas
some peculiar Metaphorical signification is proper to them when they are
considered as terms of Art) though the Propositions be true by which they
express their Expositions, yet the means they use for deducing those
Propositions from such Texts are so uncertain, as that I can by no means
believe them true as Expositions; and therefore cannot assure my self of the
Truth of such Propositions when their Truth depended on their being true
Expositions of those places from whence they had been deduced. And therefore I
conceived my self obliged to make use of the now-mentioned Method as well to
assure my self of some Popular Truths, as for the conviction of popular
mistakes. For certainly whoever would use the Popular way of expounding any
Book whatsoever consisting of terms of Art without regard to the Art to which
those terms belonged, could expect no other than frequent mistakes; nay, it
would be a rare accident, if he ever hit on the true sense of the Author, and
must rather be imputable to the luckiness of the event than any wise
contrivance of his own design. But much more it must be so when the design of
the Art it self is to use terms in significations as remote as may be from the
commonly- received ones, purposely that none but worthy and industrious Persons
might understand them. This was the case of Mysteries. And therefore certainly
the surest account of such Mystical Scriptures is to be had by enquiring into
the nature of the Mysteries then received, and the peculiarity of style that
was used in them, especially when withal the Subject spoken of was also
Mystical, which is the Case of the Sacraments. However I do most heartily
submit what I have written, that may look like a Paradox, either on this or any
other Subject, to the judgment, not only of my Superiors in the first place,
but also of any other truly pious, judicious and candid Readers. And I am the
rather timorous of being very positive in matters of this nature, because they*
are many of them so now to the Age we live in.

CHAP. XVIII. The validity of the Sacraments depends on the Authority of the
Persons by whom they are administered.
THE CONTENTS.
2. THE validity of the Sacraments depends on the Authority of the Persons by
whom they are administered. This Assertion explained.. I, II, III, IV. Proved by
these degrees. 1. The Spiritual Advantages of the Sacraments are not
immediately conveyed in the external participation of them.. V, VI. 2. The
reason of this holds not only in Acts of Authority, that no Authority can be
derived from God, unless the Persons pretending in his Name to give it be
Authorized by him to give it, but also in deeds of Gift.. VII. 3. There is much
less reason to expect that God should perform what is done in his Name by such
Unauthorized Persons than to expect it from the Ordinary Governors.. VIII. 4.
The Case we are now speaking of is such as where it does not oblige him to
performance, will oblige God to punish such Usurpers of his Authority.. IX. It
will oblige him as a private Person.. X. It will oblige him as a Governor..
XI. The heinousness of sins against Authority.. XII. An inference by way of
Application.. XIII. 5. All these Reasons will particularly hold in those places
where these Usurpations are in danger of proving injurious to the Rights, even
of Subordinate Governors, that is, in a place already possessed.. XIV. How God
as Supreme Governor is concerned for the honor of the Supreme visible
Governors.. XV, XVI. This honor due to inferior Governors impossible to be
preserved if Subjects be allowed the liberty of setting up opposite Societies,
as often as they are of another mind, and of perpetuating such disorders by the
validity of what they do in such their Usurpations.. XVII, XVIII. It is
inconsistent with Government that Subjects should be allowed to refuse their
Duty in Case of inevidence against a Presumptive Title. This proved in two
Particulars:. XIX. 1. It is necessary for the security of visible Government,
as such, that a Presumptive Title be not rejected but on very evident proofs to
the contrary,. XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII, XXIV, XXV. 2. The failures of this
Presumptive Title in those who were at present possessed of the Government
cannot justify the like Usurpation in them who should discover it.. XXVI. It
cannot secure their doings from a Nullity.. XXVII. It cannot secure their
Persons from a Crime which may oblige God to take the uttermost advantage which
the Legal Invalidity of their proceedings might afford him.. XXVIII. The Case
proposed concerning the assuming an Authority to administer the Sacraments in a
desolate Island. How impertinent this is to our Adversaries Case, and therefore
how little temptation we have to be partial in answering it.. XXIX. Answer..
XXX. Their Persons could not be excused from Presumption.. XXXI. Their
proceedings could not be secured from Nullity.. XXXII.

that the validity of the Sacraments depends on the Authority of the Persons by
whom they are administered. I mean, that the benefit of such Sacraments cannot
be expected even by Communicants, in other regards, worthy, in respect of the
moral Dispositions, for unworthy Communicants cannot expect it even then when
they are administered validly. None doubts of this, and I am not at present
concerned for it.

valid Administration, I do not mean an accurately justifiable Administration
in regard of all Circumstances attending it. It is not every little
Circumstance, that, if it fail, does disanul a proceeding, otherwise Legal, but
only a substantial defect in point of Power. He who wants this Power acts
invalidly, so as to oblige to nothing, how punctual soever he may have been in
the observation of all Legal Circumstances. The receiver is not the better for
what is given him by such a Person, and the Law will not secure him any Right
in such a Donative. But he who has the power, if he fail in a Circumstance not
essential to the thing, may himself be to blame for his failure, nay, may be
obnoxious to the Laws for it. But he who receives from him what he had power to
give him is not responsible for his Personal faults, but has a just Title to
the thing conferred by him, and such as will be secured to him by the Law by
which he is empowered to give it to him.

invalid Administration I mean such a one only as is performed by him who has
no Legal Power of administering the Sacraments. From such a one the Communicant
now described may indeed receive the external Symbols, but God is not obliged
by any act of his to confer the Spiritual benefits signified and intended to be
Legally conveyed by those Symbols. And it is from God that these Spiritual
benefits are to be received, if they be received at all.

validity I mean such a one as may be known and judged of by the Communicant.
That he who receives the Symbols from him whom he knows to have no Legal power
of administering them, or whom he might know not to have that power by such
Rules as all Societies take care of for deriving Power to Succession, and which
withal they all take care that they should be notorious to all, even the
meanest capacities who use their diligence to know them, (as all are certainly
obliged to do when their Practice is concerned in knowing them,) for the
preventing Usurpations of Power, and all the consequent mischiefs which
Societies must suffer from such Usurpations; I mean, that such a Communicant,
who (by these means as they are contrived for the settlement of Christian
Societies as Christians) can know that he from whom he receives these Symbols,
was never Legally invested with a Power of administering them, can never
rationally expect that God should second such a Ministry by making good the
Spiritual benefits which are Symbolically conveyed by this Ministry: And that
he who knows this, or may know it, by the means now mentioned, cannot
rationally look on it otherwise than as a perfect Nullity, obliging God to
nothing, and therefore cannot enjoy any rational solid comfort from such
Ordinances. This I may therefore dispatch the more briefly now, because several
of the Principles requisite for proving it have been already discoursed on
other occasions. Such as those are I shall only lay together for clearing the
present Consequence.

Spiritual advantages of the Sacraments are not immediately conveyed in the
external participation of them. And all Laws make a real difference between
these two sorts of conveyances, when the thing it self is immediately conveyed,
and when only a Right to it is conveyed by which the Receiver may recover it
from him who has it in possession. For example, he who is actually put in
possession of a piece of Land by him who has no Authority to give him
possession, does however continue in possession till he be again Legally
dispossessed. And the Nullity of such a Givers act does not appear in the
immediate effect, but only in this, that, because he can confer no Legal Right,
therefore he cannot secure the Possession he has given whenever the Law shall
take notice of what he has done. But he who has the same Land conveyed to him
only by promises before witnesses, or by Instruments, or even by earnest, is
not as yet put in Possession of the Land it self, but is still left to the Law
to recover the possession of the Land so conveyed, from him who is as yet
possessed of it. And if the Promise, or Instrument, or Earnest be given by such
a Person who has no Legal Power to give them, the Nullity of such a grant is
such as will never be likely so much as to gain him an actual Possession.

Sacraments. The Act of the Minister does not give possession of the Spiritual
benefits of them; but the giving of the Symbols by the Minister confers a Legal
Right, and obliges God to put well-disposed Communicants in actual possession
of those Spiritual Graces, where the Symbols themselves are validly
administered, that is, where the Person who administers has received a Power
from God of acting in his name in their administration. But on the contrary,
where the Person who gives the Symbols is not empowered by God to act in his
Name in giving them, as they cannot convey the thing it self, so neither can
they any Right to it from God. They cannot oblige God to perform what is
further to be done by him but by Acting in his Name; nor can any Acting in his
Name oblige him, but that which is by his own appointment. So that such a Gift
as this is can have no effect in Law, seeing it confers neither the Right nor
the Possession of the thing designed by it. Which is that I mean by a perfect
Nullity.

reason of this does hold not only in Acts of Authority, that no Authority can
be derived from God unless the Persons pretending in his name to give it be
Authorized by him to give it, (...) but also in Deeds of Gifts. None can oblige
God in a Legal way to give that which it is only in his Power to give, without
Power received from him to Act in his Name, in obliging him to such a Gift, so
that their Gift may, in a Legal way of estimation, be counted his, and as his
oblige him to performance: This is no more in Gods Case than what is thought
just and reasonable in the Gifts of the meanest private Persons. Even such are
not obliged by the Acts of others, unless they have first Authorized them to
Act in their name by express Procuration. This I note that our Adversaries may
see that our present reason will hold whether we do as yet suppose the Church
to be a Body Politic, or not; and therefore, though we should not suppose that
God acted herein by way of Authority, nor that the Persons empowered by him
received any more Jurisdiction over the Church as a Society than those private
Persons do receive when they are Authorized also by private Persons to make
Legal conveyances and to undertake Legal obligations in their behalf; and
withal to let them see that though as yet they granted no more Authority in the
Administrators of the Sacraments than what is necessary for a Legal conveyance
of a Gift, yet that will oblige others to depend on them in order to the
obteining of that Gift, which will easily infer an Authority of Jurisdiction.

less reason to expect that God should perform what is done in his Name by such
unauthorized Persons, than to expect it from ordinary Governors. Ordinary
Governors may be imposed on either to think they have made Promises where they
have not, or may be overswayed with kindness to the Usurpers Persons, or to the
Persons to whom the conveyance was made, or by the exigency of their affairs,
or by some other unaccountable mistake or humor. But God cannot be obliged by
any thing but certain reason, nor be mistaken in judging any thing reasonable
when it is not, nor swayed by any partial affection to do what he does not judge
reasonable. And therefore we cannot hope that God will ever think himself
obliged by that which is not really sufficient to infer a Legal obligation. Nor
can we expect from him that he should be acted by fondness or any other
unaccountable unreasonable affection, to do what he is not obliged to do.

performance, will oblige him to punish such Usurpers of his Authority. This it
will do in several regards: whether we consider it as an Act of private injury
to God himself, as far as he is capable of receiving such a private injury; or
whether we consider it as an injury to his Government, and as a mischievous
Precedent for the Society for which he is concerned as a Governor.

IF we consider it on a private account, as far as it is possible for us by
consideration to divest God of the public Person he bears in this matter; yet
even so it must be a great injury to him, as it would be to any other private
Person for any to presume to Act in his Name, and to engage his Credit for
performance of their Actings in his Name without his Authority. Though the
thing were never so agreeable to his will, yet even private Persons would think
themselves obliged in Prudence, not only to revenge themselves of such Usurpers
where no Law obliged them to the contrary, (which is Gods Case) but also to
refuse to stand to such Obligations purposely that they might discountenance
the Usurpation. And it is to be remembered that what were only injurious, though
in a very high degree, when considered with regard to a private Person, does,
when it is considered with relation to God, put on an aggravation of a higher
nature, of being also impious and sacrilegious.

God is considered thus as a private Person, he is in reason to be supposed
more at liberty to forgive what is injurious to him only on such a private
account, than when he is considered as a Governor. Though every one be at
liberty to forgive injuries against himself, yet he is not in reason supposed
to be at the same liberty to forgive injuries and mischiefs against others,
whom he is, by his Office, obliged to secure from injuries. If we therefore
consider God as a Governor, so the whole Society for which he is concerned
must suffer by such Usurpations of his Authority. This will leave it at the
liberty of every bold pretender, to impose what burdens and commands he pleases
on the Subjects if he may be allowed to pretend to the Supreme Authority
without any dreadful apprehensions of being severely accountable for doing so.
This must needs overthrow all the Authority of inferior Subordinate
Governors, when they may be controlled by pretended countermands from the
Supreme, and countermands derived by such undiscernible evidences as that they
never can distinguish between real countermands and such as are only pretended.
For by this means they may be resisted as often as their Subjects are pleased
to pretend a countermand, which may be as often as they are unwilling to
observe their Duty. And considering that the practicableness of the Supreme
Government it self depends on the Authority of Subordinate Governors, who are
peculiarly entrusted with the execution of the Injunctions of the Supreme, so
that the Supreme never executes any thing but by them, this will oblige the
Supreme Government in interest to look on the ordinary contempt of inferior
Governors as tending to the dissolution of its own Authority. Besides even
personal injuries to Magistrates are always taken for affronts to the whole
Societies, when they relate to them as invested with Majesty, as certainly this
does for any to usurp an Authority as from God, which has not been entrusted to
him.

Authority, (whatever men may think of them who are concerned to disparage them
for the alleviation of their own guilt) are of much more heinous consequence
than the violation of any particular Laws, because indeed they reach that from
whence the obligation of all particular Laws is derived; and which, if once
destroyed, will bring in an impunity for the violation of all particular Laws,
at least such an impunity in this World as is all which wicked men regard. And
as on this account all Societies whatsoever have agreed in making the Crimes
against Majesty most heinous and unpardonable by the Fundamental Principles of
Societies (as they have also agreed in making this particular offense of
pretending falsely to the Authority of the Supreme Magistrate to be a crime
against Majesty) so it must receive its degrees of aggravation from the
greatness of the Majesty against whom the crime is committed, and the greatness
of the Society for which he is concerned. In the Roman Empire Treason against
the Emperor had been much more heinous than Treason against Herod, or any of
those inferior Kings who were Subject to the Emperor, and of whose Empire
Herod's Kingdom was a less considerable part. By which rules of aggravation no
offense can exceed this which is committed against God, not only in regard of
his office of governing the World, but in regard of this part of his office
which he values as the dearest, that is, the Government of Souls.

greatness of this crime is, not only to show what obligations do thence follow
for God, not only not to pardon, but to punish it in those who are really
guilty of it; but also to let them who are concerned see, upon how difficult
terms they must expect to be cleared of this guilt, and secured from the actual
infliction of that Punishment to which they have rendered themselves obnoxious
by it. For it is to be expected that where the mischief following on a mistake
is greater, there the evidence which may encourage any to the Practice of what
is like to prove so dangerous, if he should prove mistaken, ought also to be
very great proportionably. So that our Adversaries cannot expect that even
their good meaning should go so far to excuse them here as they might where the
mistake were of less dangerous consequence. For where the the mistake is
dangerous, it is very just and necessary for the good of the public, that
Persons be obliged to consider the Security as well as the Truth of such
Propositions in order to their Practice; and where the danger is not only of a
Temporal mischief, but of a mischief in point of Conscience, there it is fit
that such a mischief should be taken as a motive of Conscience, as well as the
Truth or Falsehood of the Propositions themselves, so that he be more severely
accountable, who, on insufficient inducements, ventures to practice a
Proposition which is not only false but mischievous, than he, who, on the same
inducements, should venture to practice one which were only false. And
according as this mischief is greater, so the contrary evidence ought to be
greater too, that it may countervail this mischief, when this mischief is
considered in Conscience, as a reason of such Practice. And as it is fit that
the Practiser of such dangerous Propositions should be obliged to take in the
reasons which may prove them dangerous, as well as those which may prove them
true; so it is fit that he be also obliged to the utmost diligence in procuring
Information, and the utmost sincerity in following conviction, before he
venture on such a Practice. This is also as necessary for the public as the
other. But it cannot so conveniently be done as by making him afterward more
severely responsible for his failings in either regard here, than he should
have been in matter of lesser concernment.

Reasons will particularly hold in those places where these Usurpations are in
danger of proving injurious to the Rights, even of Subordinate Governors, that
is, where this Liberty is taken in a place already settled under Ecclesiastical
Government; especially where the Persons pretending to the Possession of that
Government have those Presumptions in favor of their Possession, which ought
not to be rejected without very solid proofs to the contrary.

Supreme Government is in interest obliged to maintain the honor of
Subordinate Governors, as it tenders the execution of its Laws in this Life,
which is peculiarly the office of Subordinate Governors. And this obligation
increases according as the Subordinate Governors approach nearer to the
Supreme. Even among Subordinate Governors themselves, the Supreme is more
concerned for the Superior than for the Inferior; not only as that distance is
necessary for preserving the Sacredness of the Supreme, but also because its
own Authority is in the most ample manner communicated to the Superior among
Subordinate Governors. And ordinary experience shows that they who have
already despised so many degrees of distance, as to resist the Supreme among
the Subordinates, cannot be thought scrupulous of one degree more, from
resisting him to proceed further to the resistance of the Supreme of all.

Subordinates themselves it is the interest of Government that the Presumption
lie on the side of Governors, especially then when even such Subordinate
Governors profess themselves dissatisfied with the pretense, and recourse
cannot be had to the Supreme Governor to know his mind in the Case. The
concealments which have been used by some Princes to conciliate a greater
veneration to their Majesty, has been so far from diminishing as that it has
always made the Authority of their appearing Officers more absolute and
arbitrary. And accordingly the Authority of Governors of Provinces is always
allowed greater than that of those where the access is easier to the Princes
Person. But where the recourse is not to be had at all, where the falsehood of
such Pretenders cannot be discovered in this Life, (as that is the Church's
Case) there it must follow, that the allowing such Precedents must overthrow
the possibility of all visible Government in this Life. And therefore God will
be so far concerned to see that no resistance be made against the Supreme
visible Governors of his Church in this Life, on such pretenses as these, as
he is concerned that any Government be at all practiced in this Life.

honor which is due to inferior Governors, if Subjects be allowed a Liberty,
as often as they are of another mind, to set up another Society in opposition
to them, and to be able to perpetuate such their disorders by the validity of
what they do in such their Usurpations. Nor can it be fit that Subjects be
allowed to judge in doubtful Cases of their Governors failings and acting
against the design of the Supreme Governor, especially where recourse cannot
be had to the Supreme Governor himself for determining their difference. It is
certainly inconsistent with the safety of Societies in general, to have any
differences that shall not be capable of a decision in this Life. They may
indeed judge with a Judgment of private discretion, and for the security of
their own Souls, even from what they think sinful. But to allow them a Liberty
in such Cases, to set up opposite Societies, is certainly destructive to all
Government.

Governors, who have truly a title to govern, a power of admitting Members
into their respective Societies, or of ejecting them out of them, but purposely
to make them hereby responsible for all the Members of their Societies, when
none could be so without their consent? How could the Angels, in the
Revelations, have been otherwise charged with the misdemeanors of particular
Members of their Churches, unless it had been in their power either to have
reformed them, or to have cut them off from being Members? But this will be
impossible if unauthorized Persons may be allowed, in matters so disputable as
not to be capable of a Decision in this Life, to set up opposite Societies, and
to admit Members into them within the Jurisdiction of their Subordinate
Governor, yet without their Governors consent; and if withal God should so
far second their Usurpations as to account their Churches valid Churches, and
their Members valid Members, and well entitled to the Legal privileges of such
Societies; and to oblige the Church Governors, within whose Jurisdiction, and
without whose consent, they had been made Members, to account them so too. When
they would thus have Members obtruded on them without their own consent, and
when their own rebellious Members might upon their departure or exclusion from
them be allowed to erect themselves into a Society independent on them, it were
very hard that they should be made responsible for either of them.

inconsistent with Government that Subjects should be allowed this Liberty of
erecting opposite Societies to their Subordinate Governors, on their own
judgments in matters disputable; but also that, upon their own unsatisfiedness
with their title to govern them, they should be allowed to refuse the payment
of their Duty to them, especially when they have on their side all the
presumptions of an actual possession, and so far to refuse it as to erect or
abete a Government opposite to them. There are two things in this Case wherein
God will, in reason, be obliged for the security of visible Government, to
discountenance and invalidate such proceedings. 1. That it is for the necessary
security of visible Government that a presumptive title be not rejected but on
very evident proof^ to the contrary. 2. That in case this presumptive title
should fail in the present possessors of the power of Government, yet that
would give no title to the discoverers of that failure, and therefore cannot
justify their proceedings on presumption of such a title from Usurpation; and
that, even in this Case, there is no reason to expect that God should supply in
equity what they cannot justify by a Legal claim.

It is necessary for the security of visible Government, as such, that a
presumptive title be not rejected but on very evident proofs to the contrary.
By a presumptive title I mean such a one as the first Innovators found settled
when they began their Innovations; especially if they themselves had formerly
submitted to it, and found all who might pretend competition with it,
submitting to it also; nay, if they found it unanimously received without any
accountable appearance of force or fraud in the first Originals of it. This was
plainly the Case of our Dissenters in relation to Episcopal Government, from
which they made their Separation. They cannot so much as pretend any other
place where any other form of Government had been derived in a Succession from
the Apostles to those times. They can mention no place where the Bishops were
not actually possessed of their Power with the consent and submission of the
Presbyters themselves; nay, and the people also, and indeed of all those who
may be pretended to have been injured by them, and who had therefore been
concerned to interrupt the peaceableness of the prescription, which might, in
time, go far to legitimate their enjoyments, before so long a time might pass
them as might serve for a prescription. All Laws of all Societies do presume in
favor of such a title.

presumption, yet so it self, it is the interest of all Government, that want
of evidence of its original Right be not allowed alone for a sufficient reason
for any to call the Justice of it in Question, at least not so far to question
it as to venture to oppose it in practice. It is otherwise Morally impossible
that any Government should pass unquestionable to many successions, and by how
much the more men usually think it better grounded by its long continuance, it
must indeed be more liable to exception, if the inevidence of its original
Right be allowed to be a just exception against it. Length of time will either
obliterate the original Records, or make them accidentally obscure in things
wherein they were very clear when they were first written, by making
alterations in the Tongue and Customs and Opinions of the Age then alluded to.
Which changes, though they be insensible in the particular degrees by which
they were made, yet it cannot be expected otherwise but that they must grow
extremely considerable in the process of a long time. In this regard it is for
the interest of all Societies whatsoever, that want of evidence be not allowed
for sufficient to question any part of the challenge of the present supreme
visible Governors of the Societies, without very evident proof to the contrary.

agreeable to Gods will, that when God was founding a Society which was to
continue through all ages of the World, he should make the conveyance of
Authority in it to depend on such means as should be Morally impossible to be
so conveyed; or that the right of Government should in course grow more
questionable in those times, which should need its being more unquestionable,
when both Subjects would grow more unruly, and a coercive power should be
therefore more necessary than it was at first when they were of themselves more
dutifully disposed; and when withal, the ordinary Governors should want those
extraordinary Credentials which recommended the Authority of the Apostles and
Apostolical Ages. Yet this very presumption, if it hold, will overthrow all
that our Adversaries can say to clear themselves from the guilt of Schism. They
cannot say that the Scripture forbad them the use of their Authority in things
indifferent, but only that it does not appear to them, that it allowed them to
use it.

inevidence be not allowable, by the fundamental principles of Government, to
question any part of the Authority in those who are truly invested with it; yet
why, will they say, may not the inevidence of particular Persons, being
lawfully invested in the right of Government, excuse us from duty to such
Persons concerning whom it does not appear that they are our lawful Governors?
This will serve their purpose. For they need not be solicitous concerning their
Duty to Government, if they may be excused from Duty to all Persons pretending
to a right to govern them; and there will be no Persons to whom they will be
obliged to pay any Duty, if this inevidence of the Legal manner of their coming
by their Office, may be allowed as sufficient to excuse them from their Duty.
For this the Scripture will not do, but it will be further necessary to be
acquainted with the History of every particular Persons Ordination, and not
only of all in this Age, but of all in all the Ages which might have passed
between this and that of the Apostles, especially of all those Persons in each
of them from whom our present Orders are derived. But this is a thing which no
Records are kept of; nor if any had been kept, are we secure of their
conveyance to us at such a distance in an ordinary way; or do we think
Providence obliged to secure them to us by an extraordinary one. It must
therefore be granted further, by those Principles whereby the conveyance of any
Government to Posterity is secured, that no inevidence of this kind can excuse
Subjects from their Duty, even to present Governors; especially when it is
otherwise known in general, that if the Canons and Constitutions of the Church
were observed, the Persons ordained, according to such Canons, must have been
validly ordained; and that all the Ordained, as well as the Ordainers, were
obliged in interest to have the Canons observed, without which they must have
weakened their title to the benefits and Privileges of their Orders so
uncanonically received.

presumptions on which the Successions of all Government, and all the Authority
of future Governors in the several Ages of Succession do subsist, and which no
Society allows to be questionable in the Case of any particular Governor
without particular express proof of a failure in his particular Case. Mat.
xxiii.2, 3.
And certainly the Scribes and Pharisees, who, in our Saviors time, sat in
Moses's Chair, and are therefore supposed by him to have the Authority of
Moses, could not possibly make out their Succession, at that distance, and
after so many revolutions of their state, and so great miscarriage both of
their Discipline and Records which must needs have been occasioned by those
Revolutions, by greater assurances than these are.

real failures in it. But as God only can know them, so I cannot but think him
obliged both by his Covenant for the Graces conveyed in the Sacraments, and by
his design of establishing Government through all Ages of Succession, to supply
those failures. For I have shown that in Covenanting he is in reason obliged to
condescend to such Rules as may be equal between him and them with whom he is
pleased to enter into Covenant. But it is not equal that he should be
disobliged, when, by all ways of trial of which the Creatures are capable, they
have reason to think him obliged. And besides the Person guilty of such a
mistake as this, is not guilty of any thing which it is the interest of
Government in general that it should be punished. He neither has any reason to
make him suspect that he arrogates to himself any Power in Gods name, which he
has not reason to believe was given him by them who were by God himself
entrusted to give it to him. Nor in case he should prove mistaken, can his
mistake prove injurious to any other, who cannot be supposed to be possessed of
any other, and therefore not of a better title than himself. So that God cannot
be obliged, by the Principles of Government in general, to vacate what he does
in favor of a better title. But, where, on the contrary, the mistake must
prove injurious to those who are at present possessed of the right of
Government, if they should prove mistaken (which is plainly the Case of our
Adversaries who separate Congregations in places which they found at first
possessed by Episcopal Jurisdiction) God is not only not obliged to ratify
what they do in his Name without Authority derived from him; but he is also
obliged, by the fundamental Principles of Government, to disanul it in favor
to those who have really received Authority from him, how good soever their
meaning may have been, and how far soever that may go to the excusing of their
Persons.

want of evidence might go further than I have proved it can, to the excusing
of their Subjects from their Duty to them; yet it had been well our Adversaries
would have considered, 2. How far this can go to excuse their own Sacriledg in
usurping that Authority, which, on this account, they have denied to their
Superiors. What if their Superiors had no just ^itle to it? This might indeed
excuse them from Subjection, but certainly can never excuse them, if they prove
guilty of the same Usurpation for which they blamed their present Superiors. It
might excuse them for separating, but never could for erecting opposite
Societies and for presuming to exercise a sacred Authority in them which never
was given them. It could neither secure such doings from a Nullity, nor excuse
their Persons from a very great Crime. And the former consideration will free
God from all obligation to second them; but the later will oblige him to punish
them, and, at least, to disanul such proceedings.

IT cannot secure their doings from a Nullity. For what if their Superiors have
no title? Must it therefore follow that they have one? What can they pretend to
overthrow the Authority of their Superiors but will proceed more forcibly to
overthrow their own? Can they say, they are not satisfied of the several stages
by which Authority has been derived to their Superiors from those who were at
first possessed of it? And can they give others any better satisfaction
concerning their own title to Authority? Is a presumptive title fallible, at
last, when it is to be conveyed through so many Ages before it can come at us?
And must not their title be much more unsatisfactory, which as it must be
derived through as many Ages as ours, and is every way as liable to
miscarriage, so withal it wants this presumption in favor of it, which I have
shown how obligatory it is to God himself to second it on the general
Principles of Government? And indeed, on these Principles, how can they derive
any Divine Authority but from men whose title to give it them was justly
questionable? And if they thought these exceptions so considerable as to excuse
themselves from Duty to their own Superiors, why should they not be as
considerable to excuse their own Subjects from Duty to themselves? If to avoid
this they pretend an immediate call from God: the Question will not be whether
such a Call might empower them; but whether by the Principles of Government it
be not absolutely necessary for them to produce their Credentials before others
can, in reason, think themselves obliged in Conscience to submit to them, or
can have any reason to hope for any validity in what they do on pretense of
that Authority. And where are those Credentials? They do not pretend to
extraordinary ones. And for ordinary ones to be derived by the Ministry of men
and through many Successions, they neither can show them, nor do they admit
them to be satisfactory. And it were then very fit to be considered, whether
pretending to be sent without Credentials, where God is so obliged, by the
Principles of Government, to give Credentials to those who are really sent by
him, it be not a very just and prudent suspicion that their pretense to a
Mission is really false, when it does not come confirmed with such Credentials?

BUT neither can this pretense excuse their Persons from a crime, which may
justly provoke God to take the uttermost advantage which the Legal invalidity
of their proceedings might afford him, nay, such a crime as will oblige him, by
the Principles of Government, actually to take that advantage. As upon these
Principles they overthrow all possibility of deriving a Legal title to
themselves as well as others; so for them to assume a title, when they have no
right to it, is a crime punishable in the highest degree, by the Principles of
Government And yet there are peculiar aggravations in the Case of such Persons
which must make them less excusable than others. They are the introducers of a
bad title; and it is much harder for such to be mistaken than for them who only
abet a bad title when it is introduced. It is hardly possible for such to be
ignorant of the means by which they come by it, or of the insufficiency of
those means for deriving it to them. They make disorders and confound
Discipline by the ways they use to set up their own ways, which must needs make
them the more responsible, if they should prove mistaken. Nay, the sinfulness
of usurping an Authority is a crime they charge others with, and that upon such
Principles as must not only overthrow their own Authority, but let them see the
Nullity of it, if they did but act with that equity and impartiality which they
pretend to. And it was a particular aggravation of the sentence pronounced
against the Servant in the Gospel, that he was condemned out of his own mouth.
And yet the Case, of which I am speaking, is such as needs not this way of
defense. Where only the offending Person is concerned in the Consequence of his
offense, God may be as indulgent as he pleases in yielding of his own right to
punish him: But where others also are wronged by it, and especially his
subordinate Governors, though he may still pardon them the guilt, yet to
confirm their proceedings as valid would be injurious to those on whose
Authority they have encroached, and therefore is not fit to be granted them, on
any account, by the Principles of Government.

that assuming of Authority to administer the Sacraments which is practiced in
places which are already under a settled Jurisdiction. If it be demanded
further, what is to be thought concerning the like assuming of Authority to
administer Sacraments in places destitute of Government; I must first warn our
Brethren that this is none of their Case, nor can it in the least contribute to
excuse them; that, if in the Case it self they may think me severe, they may
yet see how little I am obliged to be so by any exigence of my Cause. No doubt
in a desolate Island men that were cast upon it might unite into a Body
Politic, and choose their form of Government and their Governors, because
there is none who can pretend a present right over them, none whom they may be
in danger of injuring, if they should prove mistaken. But no pretense either of
mal-administration, or of a suspicious title, where there were no visible
Competitor who could pretend a better, could excuse the same Persons, if
returning to a place already possessed, they should attempt the same thing,
where it could not be attempted without certain disturbance, and without danger
of injuring others. Nor would it be an irregularity only, but a Nullity also,
if they should there presume it, where, though it were uncertain whose right it
were to Govern, yet withal this were certain that it was none of theirs. And
as in Seculars, so in the Sacraments, it might be also very possible that
administrations of them might be valid there, though they should prove perfect
Nullities in the places where our dissenting Brethren are concerned for them.

how little the interest of my Cause obliges me to be partial, I confess I do
not see, how, even in this Case, they could excuse themselves from Usurpation,
who should presume to administer the Sacraments without a lawful Call to
administer them. I do not think they would be guilty of any injury to men who
had the lawful power of calling them; nor do I think their Precedent in such a
Case of any ill consequence to Government, especially not to any visible
Governor, if it were only practiced in such a Case as that were, and were not
persisted in when they might have opportunity of obteining a lawful Call from
them who had a lawful power to call them; nor consequently do I think God under
the obligation now mentioned, either to disanul their doings, or to punish them
for them, for establishment of the Authority of any Superiors which had been
invaded by them. But in reference to God, I do not really understand how to
excuse their Persons from presumption, or to secure their proceedings from a
Legal Nullity.

I DO not know how to excuse their Persons from presumption, in presuming to
act in his Name without any power received from him to do so, to make Promises,
and enter into obligations wherein they will concern him as a Party, and to
think to oblige him without any leave received from him. Nor can they really
pretend themselves forced to use such means by any necessity whatsoever. They
may indeed be reduced to a necessity of wanting the Ordinances, and they have
reason to believe themselves actually reduced to that necessity, when they
cannot have them without the sin of Usurpation. But no necessity can oblige
them to venture on the guilt of that, or any other sin that they may obtein
them. And though such a necessity as this is, when they cannot procure the
Sacraments by any compliances whatsoever, much less by unsinful ones, may make
their Case in equity relievable without the Sacraments, if they do observe the
moral Duties of Religion; yet the presuming to assume an Authority without
leave to do so, is so far from gaining them the Legal advantage of Sacraments
so administered, as that it is the most likely way to forfeit their title to the
equity of it, when they use sinful means of coming by it. I have elsewhere
observed the example of Saul to this purpose, who had certainly fared better,
if, in the absence of Samuel, he had only made use of those Moral Duties, which
even Laics may use without danger of Usurpation, than he did by presuming to
offer Sacrifice without a lawful Authority to do so.

NOR do I see how, even in that Case, such Usurpation can be secured from a
Legal Nullity. For as long as they have no Authority from God to act in his
Name, no Law whatsoever can oblige him to performance, though there had
otherwise no injury been offered to him by the usurping his Authority. For
freeing him from all obligation to performance it suffices that the Covenant
and Promises made in his name were none of his acts, and no Law will take them
for his Acts, if they were made without his Authority. And this consideration
might, in prudence, make it advisable, in such a Case, to forbear the
Sacraments, and only to practice the Moral Duties of Religion, when, besides
the sin they would be in danger of in presuming to administer them without
Authority, they could expect, in that Case, no more of the benefit of them with
them, than without them. Without them they might expect the benefit of the
Covenant and Promises of them in equity. And with them they could not
strengthen their title to them by adding further a Legal obligation.

CHAP. XIX. The Authority of administering the Sacraments must be derived from
God.
THE CONTENTS.
3. NO other Ministers have this Authority of administering the Sacraments, but
only they who receive their Orders in the Episcopal Communion. This proved by
several degrees.. I. 1. The Authority of administering the Sacraments must be
derived from God. Explained.. II. The importance of this Proposition.. III.
Though this were not proved, yet our Adversaries Practices are unjustifiable by
the Principles of Government in general.. IV. As they were at first
unjustifiable by the Principles of Government, so they can plead nothing which
may make that justifiable now which was then unjustifiable. They cannot plead a
lawful prescription.. V. If they could, yet this Proposition will cut them off
from pleading it against God.. VI, VII, VIII. The Proposition proved, 1. From
the reason of the thing.. IX. This performed by two degrees. (1.) It is God
alone that has the right of disposing the Spiritual benefits here conveyed.. X,
XI, XII. The reason of the Adversaries mistakes.. XIII. (2.) It is none but he
that can give Possession of them.. XIV. 2. From the actual establishment of
God. No such Authority actually conferred upon the People.. XV, XVI, XVI. The
weakness of the Argument from bare Primitive Precedent for proving a right
conferred shown from the many condescensions of those times, and the Prudence
of the Reasons that required them.. XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII, XXIV,
XXV. The unreasonableness of this way of Arguing.. XXVI. There were then
circumstances proper to that Age which required particular condescension..
XXVII. Though the Negative Argument be not good, yet the Positive is, that the
actual claim of Governors then is a good presumption that they had a right to
the Power so claimed by them.. XXVIII. Persons extraordinarily-gifted at length
made subject to the ordinary Governors of the Church.. XXIX, XXX, XXXI. This
derivation of Power rather from Governors than from the People, agreeable to
those Precedents whom the Primitive Christians were most likely to imitate..
XXXII, XXXIII, XXXIV, XXXV. A way proposed for accommodating the several
Interests concerned, in Ordination according to the Practice of those times..
XXXVI, XXXVII. The Apostles unlikely to confer this right of Government on the
People, if left by God to their own Liberty, according to the Notions which
then prevailed among the Christians.. XXXVIII. Remarks tending to the
satisfaction of the Lovers of Truth and Peace: 1. This way of arguing from the
actual establishments of God, as it is much more modest, so it is also more
secure for finding out the right of Government, than any conjectures we can
make from the reason of the thing.. XXXIX, XL. 2. Though the People had this
inherent right of Government originally, yet it cannot exclude a right of God
who may, when he pleases, resume this right into his own hands,. XLI. 3. If the
People ever had such a right originally, yet all that has been done since for
alienating that right which could be done.. XLII.

no other Ministers have this Authority of Administering the Sacraments, but
only they who receive their Orders in the Episcopal Communion. This I shall
endeavor to prove by these Degrees. 1. That the Authority of Administering the
Sacraments must be derived from God; 2. That though it be derived from him, yet
it is not so derived without the mediation of those men to whom it was at first
committed; 3. That it cannot be so derived from those men to whom it was at
first committed without a continued Succession of Persons orderly receiving
Authority from those who had Authority to give it them from those first times
of the Apostles to ours at present. 4. That this Authority is to be expected no
where now, but in the Episcopal Communion.

THE Authority of administering the Sacraments must be derived from God. I do
not only mean that it must be derived from God as all other things as well as
Authorities, are derived from him, who is not only the Supreme Prince, but the
first Cause of all things. Nor do I mean only that it must be from God the same
way as all other, even Secular Authority must be derived from him, at least
Providentially, though the Power of Government were originally never so much at
the disposal of the Persons to be governed. For whatever the Creature has
originally the disposal of, it must be supposed at first derived from God. But
yet, in a way of Providence God does also frequently dispose of Governments,
which had been otherwise in the Creatures liberty to dispose of, as in those
rights which are gotten by just Conquest and Prescription, where the rights of
Government are certainly disposed of by Providence without any possible
pretense of consent in the Persons obliged to submit to it. For the right of
the Creature, wherever it has any, is not to be understood so as to derogate
from the right of God to dispose of them as he pleases, whatever right they
have, as it must necessarily be derived from him, if it be indeed any right at
all; so that derivation does not rob him of any of that which he had before. It
is to be understood, not Privatively, as they say, but Accumulatively. My
meaning therefore is, that this Power of administering the Sacraments must be so
derived from God, not as to exclude the mediation of such men who have received
it in a Succession from him, but so as to exclude all right originally derived
from the Creature, as far as the Creature is capable of such a right originally
in contradistinction to God. That is, that no men have a right to Government in
Ecclesiastical affairs but by a particular donation from God, not by virtue of
that general right which God has given every one, by his general Providence, to
take care of himself, and which therefore every individual Person may for
himself, and much more whole Multitudes may, by common consent commit to others.

Ordinations, and all Administrations of the Sacraments, derived from any
Multitudes or Persons on account of their general right of governing
themselves, without an express donation from God, are not only irregular, but
invalid, and such as can neither, in Conscience, oblige any Subjects to submit
to them, nor encourage any, who are otherwise willing to submit, to expect any
benefit from them. And my design in proving this Proposition, is, particularly
to oppose, not the Independents only, but those others also, who, by the
badness of their Cause, have been forced upon their Principles, and do assert a
power in the mutinous Communalty to legitimate the Calling of those Pastors
which they have been pleased to set up for themselves, in opposition to their
original Superiors, on what account soever they assert it to them, besides this
of an express donation, (which I do not know that any yet have pretended to)
whether in regard of that intrinsic right every one is supposed to have for
his own Government in Spirituals, where he is not expressly imposed on by
positive Provisions, though withal he have not that intrinsic right either
confirmed or enlarged by any such Provisions; or in regard of their Election,
according to them who conceive the Elect only capable of constituting a Church,
and that according to the popular Notion of that word of Election.

first Dividers of the several Parties to have been guilty of Schism. For if
any other form of Government be lawful in the Church besides Democracy, that
is, indeed, if it be in the Power of the Multitude to alienate their own Power
by their own Act (and if they cannot, it is impossible that the Supreme
Government can be any other than Democratical) certainly the first dividers
could have no pretense for legitimating their proceedings by any consent of the
Multitude. For the Multitude themselves had then done all they could do to
divest themselves of this right, if originally they had any. They lived in a
Peaceable Subjection to their Governors; they challenged no Authority over
them; they had reserved no Power to themselves to meet together in any
Assemblies that might be capable of exercising an external Jurisdiction, and
without this it is impossible to understand any limitation in their granted
Submission. As therefore in civil Government, where there is greater
probability for ascribing much to the Multitude in regard of their original
dominion over themselves, at least as to the first constitution of it; yet
where the Multitude have given this power out of their own hands, whether to a
Person, or a Body, they may certainly, as well as others, be obliged to stand
to their compacts, when they have once made them, though they were not at first
obliged to make them. And if so, it will not only be a Usurpation for
themselves to resume those rights which they are thus supposed to have disposed
of, but will also cause a Nullity in what is done by them pursuant to that
Usurpation; and much rather it must have the same effects in them who challenge
these rights only in the name of the Multitude.

Seculars, and where this original right of the People may be more plausibly
pretended, that which originally was no right; nay, is still confessed to have
been none, may yet in process of time become one, on account of that
Prescription, which by the Law of Nations and their common interest (not to
mention the tacit consent of the Parties concerned, which usually accompanies
Prescription) ought to be allowed a Power to determine differences, and
especially concerning the Supreme Power, which must otherwise become
undeterminable, because they are incapable of a competent Judge that may
determine them. On which Principles, though the first Dividers had been guilty
of Schism, yet it might have been possible that their present Successors might
have been innocent of it, supposing that their Prescription had been such as
had been requisite by that Law which gives a Legal force to Prescription, that
is, that it had been long enough, and peaceable, that is, particularly with
regard to those who were concerned in the injury which was done at the first
Division, that is, that the Bishops had given some Argument, if not of their
approbation, yet at least of their consent. Though I cannot but withal warn
that I do not know how to clear our dissenting Brethrens practices from the
charge of Schism, even by this Topic of Prescription it self. For among us
they never yet had that peaceableness of possession which might amount to a
Legal Prescription. The Bishops whose Authority they at first invaded have ever
since asserted their own Authority against them, and, have continued their
claim to the same Jurisdiction of which they found them at first possessed. The
Independents in America can only excuse themselves from any injury done to
Governors, in regard of the Jurisdiction of the place they live in. But they
themselves, though they were, on these Principles, allowed a right to erect
themselves into a Body Politic, could not yet be excused for breaking off
their correspondence with Episcopal Jurisdictions. But this will concern Schism
in another Notion from that of which I am at present discoursing.

Authority of administering the Sacraments must be derived from God, this will
exclude all pretense of Prescription in this Case. By the Rules of all
Politics there lies no Prescription in favor of the Subject against the
Supreme Government; and though by the Law of Nations there may be Prescription
for deciding the rights of several Independent Polities, in regard of each
other; yet in reference to God they are all Subjects, and so can never
prescribe against his right, by those Rules of equity which are the foundations
of all Ecclesiastical Society. These inferior rights are to be measured by the
public interest; and it may be presumed to be the mind of God that lesser
interests give way to greater, whence it will follow that it is very fit and
just, that the interests of Subjects give way to the interest of Governors,
and that the interests of particular Governors give way to the common
interests of mankind. It is fit that particular Governors, though absolute and
independent, should rather lose their real right than that mankind should
perpetually be disturbed, and the right of all Government exposed to perpetual
uncertainties, which must needs follow, if Prescription may not be allowed a
just right for determining differences of this nature. Nay, this is so very
just and reasonable, as that it is generally more for the interest than the
prejudice even of those who suffer by it, and therefore must in reason be
acknowledged, even by themselves, for the most equal Rule of proceeding with
Powers of an equal order. Even they themselves would lose more by the weakening
of their title to all the Authorities and Jurisdictions possessed by them, if
Prescription were not sufficient to legitimate a title, otherwise not only bad,
but known to be so, than they could reap advantage by their gains from others
who can plead Prescription against them. Without this, very few, if any, titles
could be thought secure. And how great and perpetual a dissatisfaction must
this be to the Possessors of any titles, if they could never be secure of the
right of their possessions?

divine title. There can be no reason of public interest so weighty as to make
it fit that God should suffer the loss of any known right for it. At least
there can none appear so to us as that we can have reason to conclude that it
is his will that his own interest should give way to it, where he has not
revealed it to be his pleasure to yield his interest to it. And it cannot be
right unless it be agreeable to the Divine will, nor can we know it to be
right, unless we know it to be so agreeable. Nor does he receive such
advantages by this Rule of Prescription as might, in any reason or equity,
oblige him to submit to the inconveniences of it. Neither his title, nor its
evidence to us, receives a right or confirmation from Prescription; but as soon
as we know any thing to be his right, we cannot think it capable of being
infringed by any whatsoever practices of his Creatures to the contrary. Nor
does he stand in any such need of any external assistance for the recovery of
any of his rights, as might oblige him to submit to any common Rules which
might in any Case prove prejudicial to any of his rights, in order to the
procuring that Assistance.

reason obliging him to wave any right on any pretense of Prescription
whatsoever; so, in the reason of the thing; we cannot conceive how any Creature
can gain a right in process of time which was not good at first, especially
where there is no reason to ascribe any virtue to these implicit compacts for
the security of the common interest which may convey a right. Nor can we
conceive, in this case, how that which was once the right of God can cease to
be so without a deed of Gift. So that if this be proved, that this right of
administering the Sacraments is originally Gods right, and that they who first
made the Separation invaded it without any Authority derived from God to
administer them, this will prove a Nullity, not only in the Acts of the first
Dividers, but in all the Orders and Ordinances which have been since derived
from them, and on which all their pretensions to the name and privileges of a
Church must be founded, if they have any solid foundation at all.

Authority of administering the Sacraments must be derived from God, and from
him alone, in opposition to all origination from Men, as I have now explained
it; I shall endeavor to prove both from the reason of the thing, and from the
actual institution of God. 1. From the reason of the thing. To this purpose it
is to be remembered that the great end of instituting the Sacraments being the
conveyance of the Spiritual benefits designed by the Sacraments, this is the
difference between Sacraments administered with Authority and those which are
not so administered, that by this administration of them with Authority these
benefits are conveyed which cannot be expected where they are administered
without Authority. And therefore he only has the power of giving this Authority
who has the power of ratifying what is done in his name by Persons so
Authorized by him, that is, who has the original Right of disposing of the
benefits so conveyed. But it is God alone who has the right of disposing of
these Spiritual benefits conveyed in the Sacrament, and no Creature can pretend
to it by any of those rights with which God has invested it by his general
Rules of Providence antecedently to actual Revelation. And this as to both
regards, both as to the right, and as to the possession of the benefits here
conveyed. If the Multitude can neither dispose of the right of these benefits,
nor without the right, put the Person, to whom they would pretend to give
right, in possession of them; then certainly they can have no pretense of a
power of ratifying what should be done by Persons Authorized by them, nor
consequently can they have any power of giving them any lawful Authority which
is perfectly unintelligible without a lawful power of ratification. And that no
creature has any right to dispose of either of these things, and that God alone
has the power to dispose of them, will easily appear in discussing the
particulars, which because I have had occasion to touch formerly, I hope I may
be allowed to dispatch at present with the greater brevity, and the rather
because I conceive them so clear as that I do not foresee any thing
considerable that our Adversaries themselves can object against them, when they
shall be pleased thoroughly to consider what may be said against them on this
Argument.

God alone, not any Creature, that has the right of disposing of the Spiritual
benefits here conveyed. It is be alone that can forgive sins, or regenerate, or
give the Holy Spirit, or apply the Mystical benefits of Christ's death and
passion. He alone can unite us to Christ, and it is his judgment of us, as one
Body and Spirit with Christ, which intitles us to all the consequential
benefits of that Union. These are the essential designs of the Sacraments,
without which they would be very little significant, and to these the Multitude
cannot lay any plausible claim. And if our Brethren would but be as well
pleased to consider the Ministers as conveyers of these benefits to men, as
they are pleased to consider them as they are representatives of men, whose
Petitions are by them offered to God; certainly they could not think it in
their power, in regard of any natural inherent right, to make promises of
things which are not in their power, or to empower representatives to act in
their name in making such promises. And if they would but consider the nature
of a Covenant, and the Ministers as common representatives of both parties of
this Covenant of God in some things, as well as of the people in others; though
they might think themselves at liberty to name their own representatives, yet
they could not but think it presumptuous to assume a right of imposing
representatives on God, beside the Rules of his own appointment. They could
not, in reason, think God obliged to ratify such presumptuous proceedings.

Jews, who had always been brought up under a Theocracy, the right of
Government was thought grounded on the Spirit of Government. Thus the seventy
Elders derived Moses Authority by their partaking of his Spirit. So Joshua,
Saul and David were the same way inaugurated by the Spirit of God which came
upon them. This was the thing intended to be signified by their material
Unction, the conveyance of this Spirit of Government as the Mystical Unction.
Psalm. xlv.7 Luke iv.18.
Accordingly whereunto the Spirit alone without material Oil is called Oil. And
the very power of Christ is derived from his being Mystically anointed with
the Holy Ghost. Which is by so much the more to be expected under the state of
the Gospel, because the power it self is purely Spiritual, and in relation to
the other World. And accordingly when our Savior empowered his Apostles* it
was by breathing on them, and giving them the Holy Ghost. Joh. xx.22. Act.
viii.18.
And as the Apostles gave the Holy Ghost by the imposition of their hands, so
it was by that Ceremony that they conveyed the Ecclesiastical power. 2 Timothy i.6.
And though the extraordinary manifestations that then accompanied this gift
have long since ceased, yet the reason of the gift it self does still continue.
Still the administration of the Government of Christ is performed by his
Spirit. Still our participation of Christ is by partaking of his Spirit, and if
his Authority was derived from his Unction, then they who would partake of his
Authority must partake of his Unction too. And still the presence of the Spirit
is as necessary to support the burden of Government as ever. And therefore the
Multitude can have no inherent right to dispose of the Government, because they
have none to dispose of the Spirit on which that right is grounded.

parts of the Office of the Ministry depends on their being representatives of
God rather than on their being representatives of the People; that this is it
that gives Authority to their Preaching, that it is the word of God which is
preached by them, and that they are appointed by God himself to preach that
word; that this is it which obliges God to perform what they promise in his
name; that they are Authorized to make those Promises, and to make them in his
name; that this is it which may encourage them to expect those excitations and
assistances which accompany the Preaching of the word, when it is preached by a
lawful Authority; that the validity of all they do as Ministers, and as
Governors of a Body Politic depends on this, that they are Authorized by him
who has made the Church a Body Politic, and endowed it with privileges; that
the acceptableness even of their public solemn Prayers in the name of the
Multitude, does not so much depend on their being appointed by the Multitude to
be their representatives, as on their being made by God masters of requests,
and as the Persons whom he has declared himself pleased particularly to accept:
If, I say, they had considered these things, certainly they could not have
thought themselves to have a right of disposing of the office of the Ministry,
for their interest in things belonging to that office which are of smaller
importance, when their interest does so evidently fail in matters of the
greatest consequence, and which are withal so essential to the office. They
could not think that because they can easily choose a Person to Preach, and
Pray, and administer Sacraments for them, therefore they could also give them
that which might give them Authority for Preaching, or make their Prayers
acceptable, or confer a valid title to the benefits expected by the Sacrament.

benefits which depend on the Divine appointment. And when they have thus left
them nothing but what they may do, though they had no other Authority than what
men are able give them, it cannot be thought strange that they should think
their proceedings valid, though ratified only by a Humane Authority. Certainly
men may Preach and Pray as movingly, as to all natural Arts of insinuation,
they may express themselves as fluently and properly, and pronounce as
pathetically by their natural endowments without a Divine Authority, as others
can with a Divine Authority, if they want those natural endowments. And they
may administer the Sacraments with a solemnity as affecting, and the Sacraments
so administered by them may as naturally resemble the things which they were
designed to signify; and all the Devotion which may naturally be derived
either from the warmth or fluency of speaking, or the gravity of the
administration, or the natural representation of the Mysteries commemorated in
the Sacraments; and all the Grace which may be expected by Persons so devoutly
disposed, as we may suppose the Persons to be, of whom we are now speaking, and
especially which may be expected by them, on our Adversaries Principles, if the
Grace be given either as a natural improvement of those Acts of Devotion, on
the same natural account as other Acts do naturally either produce or confirm
habitual inclinations to the like Acts, or purely as rewards in point of
generosity, without any regard to a promise, or a Covenant, or a ratification
of Persons Authorized, or any thing that might oblige God in a Legal way. All
these benefits, I say, of these Ministeries may equally be expected from
Persons who have no Divine Authority as from those who have. And therefore it
cannot be admired that Persons, who allow no further benefits of their Ministry
should think a Humane Authority for the designation of their Persons sufficient
for all the effects of their Ministry. But if they had but thought how the
whole real benefit of their Ministry does depend on the lawfulness of their
Call to it, and upon the lawfulness of their Call from none other but God
himself; they must needs have been prompted to another judgment in this matter
pursuant to these measures.

God can confer the right to the Spiritual benefits here received, so neither,
2. Can any but he put any in possession of them. I shall not now repeat what I
have said elsewhere concerning this. I only observe it at present, to show that
all that men can do in this matter can have no effect that can possibly entitle
their actings to the name of Authority, when they can neither give the title
nor the possession of the benefits conveyed by these Ordinances. And though
they could have enjoyed possession for a while, yet, alas! what could that
signify for their comfort, when they know that righteous judgment will at
length prevail? And then their past enjoyments will be so far from being
reckoned to their advantage, as that the Usurpation of them for a time will be
an aggravation of their guilt. Their very enjoyment of the Elements themselves
will then prove a great mischief, if they have enjoyed them sacrilegiously,
though such an enjoyment was never capable of affording any solid advantage.
All that I would therefore infer at present is, that all the Authority which
any Creature can pretend to, in a matter of this nature, must be derived from
God, and derived from him by a positive and express donation, or by that
contrivance of things under the state of the Gospel which he has been pleased
actually to observe. Which will oblige all who are desirous to inform
themselves solidly herein, rather to enquire into the establishments of God
than to trust their own conjectural reasonings concerning them antecedently to
Revelation, what they think fit to have been observed by him, and what they
think themselves would have done, if they had had the management of his design.

actual establishment of God, to show, that as the Multitude cannot challenge
this right of administering the Sacraments by any Original inherent right, so
neither can they by any actual donation. And this is so plain as that our
Adversaries themselves do not, that I know of, pretend to any Text where any
such a gift is expressly mentioned. How will they therefore pretend otherwise to
know Gods mind in such a thing as this is, which so entirely depends on his
arbitrary pleasure? Will they plead primitive precedent for it? But we never
find our Savior pleading any Authority, though strictly examined by the Jews
concerning his Authority, besides that of his Father. Joh. xx.21.
And as his Father sent him so he sent his Apostles, who are always described
as Persons sent by God himself, not by any Humane Authority. So they are said
neither to have been of men nor by men. Gal. i.1. Ephesians. iv.11. 2 Cor. v.20.
They are reckoned among the gifts of Christ upon his ascending up on high.
They are called Ambassadors for God and in Christ's stead. And it has always
been reckoned among the Prerogatives of Majesty to have the sending of his own
Ambassadors. Nay, it was counted so peculiar a property of an Apostle to be
sent by God himself, as that St. Paul insists on it as an Argument to vindicate
his own Apostleship against the false Apostles who quarelled at it, Gal. i.11,
12. 1 Cor. ix.1.
that he had received nothing from the other Apostles themselves, and that
himself had seen our Lord, that he might receive his Authority from him. Thus
far therefore there appears no Precedent of any Authority either received from
the Multitude, or given to the Multitude by Christ himself, who as yet alone
had power to give it.

Adversaries themselves will pretend that the Apostles received their Authority
from the People. Yet so unwary they are in their arguing for the Authority of
the People, as that they produce such Proofs as must conclude this, if any
thing. If the Peoples Expostulation with St. Peter concerning his baptizing of
Cornelius, had been an Act of proper Jurisdiction, it must have been an
exercise of Jurisdiction over St. Peter himself. And if so, they must in reason
be supposed to have had some power of punishing him, either by deposing him
from his office, or by suspending him from the exercise of it, or at least by
Authoritative withdrawing from him, yet so as still to continue in the same
good condition wherein they were before, which can hardly be understood without
a weakening of his Apostolical office. For no proper Jurisdiction can be
understood without a proportionably proper power of inflicting punishment in
case of misdemeanour. And if they will not own this, that the People had a
Power over the Apostles, they must at least let go all their proofs which prove
this, if they prove any thing: Which will extremely streighten them in their
pretended Scripture Precedents. For wherever they find the People doing any
thing without the Apostles, (which is the only Case wherein they could show the
proper extent of their own Authority) they will find the Apostles themselves
concerned, which must therefore oblige them to understand such actings not to
have been by way of Jurisdiction, but of Expostulation.

Authority was given to the Multitude? By whom was it given to them, who had a
just Power of giving it them? Was it afterward given them by the Apostles, who
had hitherto held it independently of them? If so, it were well our Brethren
would remember to insist only on such Proofs as are later than the date wherein
they think it was given them, and on such Proofs which speak more home to their
design than those which are antienter than those times wherein themselves
conceive this conveyance to have been made, and which they must therefore
acknowledge unconclusive. But so far were the Apostles from giving away that
Power to the Multitude which they had never received from them, as that we find
generally the Ordinations mentioned in the Scriptures performed either by
themselves, or by Persons Authorized as themselves were, either by God himself,
or by them, not by the People. Tit. i.5. Act. xiv.23. Act. vi.
They ordained Elders in every City. By them the order of Deacons was
instituted, and the Persons promoted to the Order. They visited whole
Countries, and settled and confirmed the Churches; they constituted what
Officers, and gave them what degrees, and prescribed what Rules of Government
they pleased, according to their own Prudence, and the suggestions of the Holy
Ghost, without consulting the Authority of any others, which they could not
have done, if they had either acknowledged any self originated Power in the
People, or immediately given them that power which themselves had received
immediately from God. It cannot possibly be understood how the Rules of a
Democratical Government could ever have permitted them to act so arbitrarily,
as it is plain they did in those first beginnings of Christianity.

prudent reasons proper for those times, which might prevail with the Apostles
to desire the Peoples consent in the administration of their Government, though
the obliging validity of what was done had not depended on their Authority. The
Church was then a Body linked together only by an awe of Conscience, not by any
other external coercion. And though now, that the truth of Christianity, and
the Authority of the Apostles, are sufficiently confirmed, all are obliged to
submit to the Rules prescribed by them, as they would secure their happiness,
(which will not leave them to that Liberty, nor consequently entitle them to
that right in the Government before they submit to it, as our Brethren fancy)
yet before this conviction had prevailed on the minds of men it could not have
been prudent for them to exercise the utmost extent of that Authority which did
really belong to them. Our Adversaries themselves will at least acknowledge the
Apostles to have been infallible, whence it will follow that their word alone
ought to have been taken in Controversies then started, at least where there
appeared not evident reason to the contrary. But we plainly find, that even
themselves durst not venture their Authority on so hard a trial. Even in
probable things we do not find that they required their Auditors assent without
such reasons as the matter would afford, that is, at least, without probable
ones. And generally we find them so laying the stress of their persuasion on
those reasons, as if their Authority had been no reason at all. Therefore in
the Controversy concerning Circumcision, Act. xv. the Elders and the Multitude
convened together with the Apostles to give their judgment concerning it, and
that in a Case which was to be decided by the Holy Ghost. But what need had
there been of all that trouble, if the Apostles Authority alone had been
sufficient for this decision? The Holy Ghost spoke by the Apostles alone. And
could the whole Synod, after all their diligence in enquiring and debating the
Truth in that matter, pretend to any greater Authority? Was it likely that the
ordinary Presbyters, much more that the Laity themselves, should have had any
thing revealed to them which had been concealed from the very Apostles? But we
find the whole matter debated by reasons and rational applications of the
Mystical sense of the Old Testament, as if no new revelation had been pretended.

Peter concerning his Preaching to Cornelius, and with St. Paul concerning his
Preaching against the obligation of the Ceremonial Law. The lawfulness of
Preaching to the Gentiles, and of forbearing the externals of the Law were both
of them points of Doctrine. And must we therefore conclude that the Apostles
had no just Authority to oblige them to believe particular Doctrines on account
of the Revelation made to themselves, because they were contradicted in such
Doctrines, when contrary to the present sense of those to whom they were
proposed, and because they were pleased to condescend to give an account of
themselves and their Doctrines upon such contradiction? Nay, their Master
himself was very wary in proposing any thing, not only to the promiscuous
Multitude, but even to themselves, that might seem harsh and unlikely to them,
till they were first thoroughly possessed with a Reverence for the Authority,
and till that might pass with them for a stronger Argument for their belief
than all their seeming unlikelihoods for disbelieving them. Therefore he also
was pleased to condescend to a rational defense of his Paradoxes. Yet none will
therefore think it rational to infer that he had not* even then, a sufficient
Authority to oblige them to believe what he said without particular reasonings;
nay, none can therefore think that he had not, even then, given sufficient
conviction of the Justice of his claim to such an Authority by the many
Miracles he had done before them.

first Age the Apostles were so wary of engaging their Authority, even for the
belief of Doctrines; why should we think it strange that they should have been
yet more wary of engaging it for matters of Government? Why should we think it
strange, that they should in these things also condescend to reason the Case
with dissenters, and use all the rational inducements that might prevail with
them to perform willingly the things required from them, though, as to the
reason of things, they had been as little obliged to it as they were to give an
account of their Doctrines, or to stand to their judgments concerning those
reasons, when their own Authority so evidenced was a much stronger reason than
any of them all? especially considering that their Authority for Doctrines was
indeed the only true and solid foundation for their Authority in Government. If
the Religion should not prove true, (and it could not be true, if when it
wholly derived its credit from Revelations made to the Apostles, those same
Apostles might have been convinced of a mistake in any one particular by them
pretended to be a Revelation) all the pretenses of Salvation to be obtained by
joining themselves to that Society, and all claim to Authority over any Member
of this Society, in order to his being a Member of it, being grounded on the
advantages men may hope for by becoming Members of such a Society, must fail
together with it. Besides that the Administration of Government was of much
less consequence, in those first times when there were but few to be governed,
than the general interest of Religion. And when Converts were very good and
sincere, and ready of themselves to perform their Duty as soon as they might
understand that it was their Duty, there was much less need of coercive Acts of
Government than afterward. And yet without coercion it is not so easy to
distinguish the true right of Government from the condescensions of good and
prudent Governors.

other reasons proper to that Age very powerful to incline them to a
condescension from their just rights. It was some considerable time before the
Christians made an open secession from the Jewish Synagogues, of which they had
been formerly Members. I do not know whether they did it at all till they were
forced to it, either by the Jewish Excommunications, or till the Jews by their
obstinate refusal of the Gospel were thought to deprive themselves of their
pretensions to the Mystical Israel. It does not appear that they set up any
distinct Government in the places converted by them, till St. Paul began it,
after the Jews had behaved themselves very perversely at Antioch of Pisidia.
There it was that he first used that fatal Ceremony of rejecting them, Act.
xiii.51.
by casting off the dust of his feet against them, and pronounced that fatal
sentence against them, Lo, we turn unto the Gentiles. Till then they generally
assembled in the same Synagogues, they observed the same Festivals, Verse 46.
and kept close to the same Legal Ceremonies, and walked orderly in all things
according to the Customs received from the Fathers, as St. James expresses it.
But after this we read of their ordeining Elders in every City. And the reason
of the thing seems to have required it. For we plainly find that the carnal
Israel were understood to have had the first title to the Privileges of the
Mystical Israel, till they had forfeited their title, and God was pleased to
take the advantage of the forfeiture by pronouncing the Sentence against them.
And while this was so, the ordinary Government of the Church was permitted to
the Jewish Synagogues, and their Rulers of them; and the Apostles exercised no
other distinct Authority than what was allowed to Prophets by the Rules of the
Synagogue it self, and what was absolutely necessary for mainteining themselves
independently on them, if the Principles possessed by them should cause an
actual breach. So that this whole time was a state of constant Prudential
condescension. And yet certainly none can conclude that no more Power did, of
right, belong to them, than what was, in Prudence, fit to be exercised by them
in this condition. None can think that the Commission of Christ, by which he
sent them in as ample a form as himself had been sent in by the Father,
extended no farther than to such things as were fit to be performed by them,
supposing that they were willing to condescend in these circumstances.

condescending was the multitude of supernatural gifts wherewith that Age
abounded, and the extraordinary course that was then observed by the Spirit in
dispensing them. They were not only given to Persons Authorized upon their call
to Authority, but were generally granted to new and zealous Converts upon their
Baptism. They were also such as were given them, not so much for the sakes of
the Persons who had them, as for the edification which the Church might be
capable of receiving by them; so that their very receiving them was an
interpretative Call to use them, and that in their public Synaxes, and was
thought to be so by the Persons who had received them; and both they themselves
and others, who were convinced that they really had them, were externally
fearful of the guilt of resisting, and much more of quenching that Spirit which
was the Author of them, (and they thought they should contract this guilt by
endeavoring to suppress them,) which I have shown that that Age took for a
guilt of the highest nature. It is very well known how great a Liberty was
indulged by the Jews to true Prophets. That extraordinary Call was thought
sufficient to excuse them, not only from the provisional constitutions of the
standing Government, (especially where they confirmed their Mission by signs,
as these generally did,) but also from most of the commands of the Law it self.
I do not know whether any command was excepted, save that of Idolatry, and the
perpetual obligation of their Law, and every precept of it. Otherwise a Prophet
might require the breach of any one precept, that of Idolatry excepted, so it
were but for a time; and this seems to have been the sense of the Jews of that
Age, if we may trust the modern Jews for the sense of their Ancestors.
Maimonid. Fund. Leg. c. 9.
And I need not warn how much the new Converts to Christianity were then
generally possessed with the Notions of the Jews whom they had deserted.

Corinthians* which the Apostles were at length necessitated to reform by the
exercise of Government; but it was late before they attempted it, not till the
disorders grew intolerable, and then they proceeded by slow degrees, so hard it
was to prevail on the contrary pretensions. When St. Paul's first Epistle to the
Corinthians was written, many of the Prophets spoke at the same time, as it
should seem the Apostles and their companions did on the day of Pentecost, the
Women also prophesied, and that publicly in the Church, and they who had the
gift of Tongues, exercised it in the public also, without Interpeters, and
behaved themselves so extravagantly, as that the Apostle himself tells them
that an unbeliever coming among them would think them all mad. These notorious
and great disorders in their Synaxes make me apt to think that, at that time at
least, they had no visible Government at all among them. Which conjecture
seems, methinks, the more likely because the Apostle in the address of this
Epistle takes no notice of the Bishops and Deacons, as he does elsewhere, where
there were any, and as it was the general custom of those times in writing to
Bodies to make their address particularly to the heads of the Bodies, where
there were such; and because he blames the Corinthians for not mourning that
the incestuous Person might be taken from among them, which they needed not to
have done, if themselves had power of exercising Discipline upon him; and
because he expressly empowers them to meet together with his Spirit, both for
the Excommunication and Absolution of the incestuous Corinthian, and ratifies
their proceedings in that matter with his own approbation, that to whomsoever
they forgave any thing he forgave it also.

Eucharist is mentioned among them, I am to suspect that it was not performed
by ordinary Presbyters, but by Persons extraordinarily inspired, who undertook
that part of the Ecclesiastical Office, as they did others also, by virtue of
this extraordinary Call. This I take to be the meaning of the Apostle in the
xivth. Chapter. 1 Cor. xiv.16.
Otherwise when thou blessest with the Spirit, how shall he that supplieth the
place of the unlearned say Amen at thy giving of thanks? Apol. 2. Matt.
xxv^.26. Mark xiv.22. Luke xxii.19. 1 Cor. xi.24. Matt. xxvi.27. Mark xiv.23. 1
Cor. x.16.
The (...) was in Justin Martyrs time a term of Art for this Sacrament; and the
(...) or blessing, is used Synonymously with it. (...) in St. Matthew and St.
Mark, is the same with (...) in St. Luke and St. Paul; and (...) in St. Matthew
and St. Mark is expressed by the (...) in St. Paul. And in Justins time Amen
was answered in that Office by the People, just as we here find that it was
answered by him that supplied the place of the unlearned. And by the
expectation of this answer of the People to it, and by the other offices with
which it was joined, it seems rather to have been a part of the Ecclesiastical
office, than otherwise. If it had not been part of the Ecclesiastical Office,
how had the unlearned been obliged to say Amen to it? How had he been obliged
to use an Interpreter in it for the edification of the Church? For that the
Apostle seems plainly to mean in that whole Chapter by doing any thing in the
Spirit, the doing the same thing in an unknown tongue, which they who were
supposed to do it without the Spirit did in a tongue commonly understood. Thus
it is most accurately opposed to the doing a thing with understanding.

exercise of Government, where there was no other settlement but these
occasional extraordinary Dictates of the Spirit to uncertain Members, but even
after the settlement of certain known Ecclesiastical Officers. It is certain
that this same Church of Corinth had such Officers when St. Clement wrote his
Epistle to them. And yet even then they, who were guilty of the Schism which
occasioned his writing that Epistle, were encouraged to resist their Superiors
by their pretensions to these gifts, and that notwithstanding the Apostle
himself had so long before warned them of the obligation of such Persons
themselves to submit to order, and the constitution of Officers among them had
plainly enough signified his mind, that he intended them for Judges of those
Rules which were requisite for order. At least this reason of condescension
lasted so long, if not as these gifts lasted, yet till the Apostles Authority
was generally received without control; and till the Apostles had declared
their judgments expressly in this matter, that even these extraordinary gifts
should be under the restraint of the ordinary Governors of the Church; and
till this their declaration had reached the cognizance of the whole Church
universally; and till men had withal some respite given them for wearing out
gradually their preconceived opinions to the contrary, as we find that Rule of
Prudence generally observed by the Apostles to allow them respit in such Cases.
These reasons will, at least, concern those times of which the Scripture
History gives us an account, and will therefore concern all the Text by them
insisted on in those times.

condescension in those times, that our Brethren may understand the
unreasonableness of the way they have hitherto insisted on for knowing the
original extent of Ecclesiastical Authority. For if the Apostles were of
themselves so careful to condescend to the weaknesses of their new Converts, if
withal there were then so many reasonble inducements to persuade them to this
condescension; it must then be reasonable to expect that their actual practice
must have fallen short of their just right, and therefore that their way of
arguing from the nonappearance of a precedent then, to deny a right now, is in
it self extremely weak, though we had all the Records of that Age which we have
lost, which would certainly have acquainted us with many precedents which have
now miscarried for want of them. Especially considering withal that it is
purely matter of fact which they here insist on, no express approbation of that
power of the People, not the least conveyance of any power to them, but only
such a conuivance at it as we might very reasonably expect that the exigency of
their affairs might have extorted from them without any direct approbation.
This is most certainly the way to deprive Successors of all those branches of
power the exercise whereof they then thought fit to forbear. And certainly it
is not ingenuous to make condescension an Argument against right. Themselves do
not think it equal to make St. Paul's precedent of serving the Corinthians
without any contribution of theirs, 1 Cor. ix.12, 18.
nay, laboring with his hands for a livelihood, an argument against either his
or his Successors titles to a competent maintenance. And what if the commands
of those times may indeed give Rules to all succeeding generations? Does it
therefore follow that their Histories must do so too? Were there no peculiar
circumstances proper to that Age? no accommodations suited to those peculiar
circumstances? no Prudential Provisions of the Apostles as Ecclesiastical
Governors as well as Revelations by them as Apostles? Our Adversaries
themselves, when they consider it, cannot be so mistaken as to think they were
not. And why then should they make the very actions of that Age precedents for
all succeeding ones in all variety of circumstances?

true as, that it has plainly appeared, that there were indeed circumstances
extraordinary which might hinder the practice of Government in that Age, which
yet because they were indeed extraordinary, and have long since failed, can be
no Arguments against the right or the exercise of those same branches of
Government in ours. Then Officers were sent extraordinarily from God without
the Ministry or mediation of men, and together with their extraordinary Call
had their extraordinary Credentials too. But now none are called immediately
but by the Ministry of those who have derived their Call from God in a
Succession. And sure they cannot think but that they, who have no other title
to a Divine Call, but what they derive from men Authorized by God to call them,
must needs be obliged to a more entire dependence on those Superiors from whom
they receive their Call, than they who were never beholden to them for their
Authority. And while some had really this extraordinary Call, more were at
liberty to pretend to it, and could not easily or suddenly be discovered, all
their Credentials not being of equal evidence, which doubtfulness alone must
weaken the exercise of Authority. Then ordinary Superiors knew not but that
their Prudential restraints might clash with Divine Inspiration. For the Spirit
was free, as to choose what Persons he pleased for Prophets, so to reveal what
he pleased to Persons chosen by him, and sometimes he revealed to one Prophet
that which he concealed from another, 1 Cor. xiv.30.
though otherwise greater than him to whom he revealed it. And is there any
reason to confine our present Superiors now, when there are either no pretenses
to these extraordinary Inspirations of their Subjects, or at least no plausible
pretenses to any extraordinary Credentials which might convince Superiors of
the truth of their pretenses to other things? Their extraordinary Calls then
seem to have extended even to the Sacraments themselves, if that conjecture
hold true which I now proposed concerning the state of the Corinthians, when
St. Paul wrote his first Epistle to them. And if so, Superiors could have no
curb over them, though they had thought fit to exercise their Authority upon
them. But what is that to our modern Separatists, who can pretend no gifts and
Personal qualifications that may be taken for so much as a Providential Call to
administer the Sacraments, whatever they pretend for those other offices of
Preaching and Prayer? If the Sacraments alone be exempted from these
extraordinary pretenses, this alone will be sufficient to oblige them to
Subjection, by our Principles.

Negative way of arguing be, upon all these accounts, extremely weak, yet the
positive is very solid, that whatsoever Power was exercised by the Apostles or
any other ordinary Governors empowered by them, and was challenged in any
Case, that was certainly their rights, how rare soever the precedents were
wherein they were pleased to exercise or challenge it. This is thought equal,
even in humane right, where prescription it self is thought sufficient to make
a right. One exercise of right is sufficient to confirm the right, and to
overthrow the Legal force of a prescription. But how much more must it hold in
Divine Right, wherein I have shown how little reason there is to ascribe any
thing to Prescription? If they will allow any equal means for judging between
right and condescension, I do not know any way more equal than this is, to judge
of right by positive Rules, by the nature of the Government it self, and by
avowed practices, and to conclude all practices soever that are different from
these, how numerous soever, to be only connivances and condescensions. And
certainly they will not deal more irrationally than disingenuously, if they
will allow of no equal means to distinguish them, if they will needs make
condescension an Argument against right.

reason of these condescensions was never any pretense of any right of
Government to be derived from the People, whether on account of any original
inherent right in them, or of any new conveyance to them from the Apostles; but
purely on such accounts as might have been expected, though the right of this
Government had been as absolutely derived from God, as I suppose it to have
been, as absolutely as that Power they had of proposing new Revelations, and of
obliging all to believe them on their own Authority, which none can think
derived from any concession or compact of the People to be governed by them
(for still this right of the People could neither have obliged Persons
extraordinarily gifted to Subjection, nor the People themselves till they were
satisfied of that Authority the Apostles had to oblige them) yet even these
Persons were at length made subject to the Government of the Church as soon as
ever the Authority of the Apostles was entirely acknowledged, and as soon as
any certain provision was made for Government, and as soon as the
inconveniences of this other state grew to be of that moment as to deserve a
diversion of their thoughts from those other more important employments which
at first took up their whole care.

Subjection of Persons extraordinarily inspired was a thing too great for any
inherent right of the People, so it was plainly introduced by them whose right
it was, without any ratification of the People that might signify any right
they had in this matter by any positive gift. Immediately on writing that first
Epistle to the Corinthians, the women that were Prophetesses were wholly forbid
the public use of their Talents in the Church, and obliged to a modesty of
learning from their Husbands at home, notwithstanding their Divine
Inspirations, and notwithstanding that these Inspirations were given them
rather for the public than themselves. And even the men were obliged to order
in their exercise of those Divine Gifts. And as soon as we certainly know that
Government was settled in that very Church of Corinth; we find withal that it
was to the ordinary Governors that those extraordinary Persons were obliged to
be subject. That was their Case when St. Clement wrote his Epistle to them.
Clem. Ep. 1. ad Corinth.. i.46. (...) [rather (...) as in Clem. Alexan.] For
the (...) is mentioned as one of the (...).. 48.. 3, 4, 5, 6.. 40.. 42, 43, 44.
(...).. 41. (...).. 57.
Those two or three Persons who had occasioned the Schism then mentioned, seem
plainly to have been such as were puffed up on account of their extraordinary
gifts. This seems to have occasioned that part of his Discourse against
Aemulation, and in favor of Humility, because those Persons taking themselves
to equal their Superiors in gifts, seems to have been encouraged, on that
account, to do what they did in disparagement of the Ecclesiastical Authority,
and are therefore called (...), Ringleaders of Aemulation. Yet even these he
obliges to keep to their own station, as severely as the several ranks of the
Clergy were obliged to do so in the time of the Law. Over these he asserts the
rights of the then present Governors, and that from the very Argument I am now
insisting on, of Succession, and in regard of the Divinity of the Institution.
Nay, he plainly tells even these Persons themselves, that it were better for
them to be small and of mean account in the flock of Christ, than by seeming
considerable to be cut off from the hope, or fold, of Christ. So dangerous he
thought it, even for such to be cast out of the Church, and out of the
Communion of the ordinary Governors of it, how much milder soever the Notions
are which our modern Brethren have entertained concerning it.

Second Part to consider the Notion of Schism alluded to in this Epistle. All
that I shall further observe out of it at present, is, that the Apostles, not
the People, took care of settling a Rule for preserving Succession,. 44.
a sign that the Apostles never gave the Power out of their hands, at least,
not so far as to deprive themselves of it. The same might also have been proved
from those Catalogues of Bishops in the Apostolical Sees, which the Ancients
insist on in their first Disputes against Heretics, and which, as it was a
matter as notorious, so is attested to us by the same Authority on whose credit
we receive the Canon of the New Testament it self, and attested with as much
confidence as that Canon it self. Yet this Argument would lose much of its
force for proving that the then present Successors of the Apostles must have
taught the same Doctrine with the Apostles, if the Peoples interest in the
Government had been then so considerable as that it had been in their Power to
have obtruded a Succession different from the sentiments of his Predecessors.
And though the reasons now given to show that the Authority it self did exceed
all inherent right of the People, yet still the prudential reasons might hold,
that they should not have any particular Person obtruded on them without their
own consent. Which as it will not suffice to justify any orders or Sacraments
derived only from the People; so I am confident that it is the uttermost that
can be pretended from these Primitive Ages.

nature of the Power here conveyed that it should be conveyed by these Divinely
Authorized Persons who alone had power to convey it, but also to the precedent
imitated herein. I have already observed that the assemblies of Christians were
taken from the Schools, and that succession was the same way pleaded in the
School and Chair of Christ, as it was usually made use of for mainteining the
Schools of the Masters and Doctrines where they had settlements. We know the
(...) of the Platonists at Athens were continued till later Ages, and we have
Catalogues of the severa^ Masters which supplied that Chair like those of the
Primitive Bishops from the Apostles. And as the deserting these, and setting up
new Schools in opposition to them, was the introducing new Heresies among the
Philosophers, from whom that term was taken; so to desert Apostolical Chairs,
and to follow new ones, was the same thing among the Christians who derived
that term from them. Now among the Philosophers the empowering of Successors
was either performed by the Predecessors, or at least by the Scholars of their
own rank, not by the promiscuous Multitude. And there was other reason why it
should be so, besides the nature of the Power conveyed to them. For when they
contrived their Philosophy by way of Mystery, their Acroamaticks, the
Mysterious part of it, were committed only to these Superior Scholars of the
greatest proficiency. And therefore their Master himself and their Symmystae
must needs have been taken for the most competent Judges of their ability to
succeed them, who they were that understood them best, and who were most likely
to prove faithful in the trust committed to them. For the terms of St. Luke
i.2. Jud. 3.
(...) and 1 Timothy vi.20. 2 Timothy i.14.
(...) in deriving the succession of the Christian Doctrine seem to have been
derived from the Philosophers as well as others.

modern Rabbis, the Judges of the Sanhedrim themseves were they who had the
Power of admitting Successors. Vid. Seldom. Not. in Eutych. and de Syn.
But these seem to have been Ecclesiastical Judges no otherwise than as the
constitution of their Secular Government it self being Theocratical, it took in
Ecclesiastical affairs as a principal ingredient in it. As for the
administration of their Sacred Offices, the Succession was a thing certain, and
confined to a certain Family, and all that men could do in the Case, was, not
to choose any new one in, but, only to exclude those who were incapable
according to the qualifications prescribed by the Law. But whatever was done
was either done by God himself, or the Supreme Civil Governors, both before
and after the Captivity, I think never by the People, at least not near the
Apostles times. And the customs of the Literal Israelites then were they which
the Mystical Israelites, the Christians, generally followed, as far as they
were suitable to the Mystical senses of the Old Testament, and their present
circumstances.

Religious then received, to have every particular Sacred performance done by a
particular injunction of the God they worshipped. Therefore their gods
signified by lots, or some such other way, the particular Person by whom they
would be served on particular occasions, so far they were from leaving any
thing to the disposal of the People. And if this were in any thing observed
punctually, yet hardly in any thing more punctually than in Mysteries. Metam.
xi.
Accordingly when Apuleius was desirous of being initiated in the Rites of
Isis, though he were already a consecrated Person, and though the Hierophanta
was his friend, yet he durst do nothing in it till the Goddess had signified
her pleasure concerning it, whether she would be pleased to admit him at all,
and at what time, and by what particular Hierophanta. For though her choice was
out of Persons already consecrated to her service, yet no particular Person
durst obtrude himself on the office without her particular appointment. Nay,
they thought it as much as their Lives were worth to venture it, and were under
as much terror for the least transgressions of this kind as they were who
officiated in the Jewish ministrations. And can we think that a Power so sacred
as this was could have been derived from the People? But in this matter of
Mysteries the Case is most undoubted, that the giving of the Mysteries it self,
and the (...), and the communication of the ritual Books which none but those
Sacred Persons had in their custody, were parts of the Ceremonies of investing
such Persons in their office. And therefore as none but they had the Power of
these things, so none but they could have the Power of Authorizing their
Successors.

Isis, the Goddess alone had the nomination of the Person who was to perform
her particular Solemnities, so among the Jews themselves, this was the way of
determining the Person where it had not been determined by particular
provisions. In that Case, the Priests cast lots for it, which was a way used in
that Nation, for consulting God, not the People. Thus it was that Achan and
Jonathan were discovered. Luke i.9.
And it was by lot that Zacharias was chosen out of the rest of the Priests of
his Order of Abia to perform the Solemnities of his course. Now this seems to
have been the most ancient way of empowering the Church Officers. Thus St.
Matthias was chosen into the Apostleship in the room of Judas. And possibly
this might be the meaning of that famous passage of Clemens Alexandrinus, Ex
lib. (...).
where giving an account of what St. John did for restoring the Churches of
Asia after his return from his exile at Patmos, he tells us that he did (...),
as Valesius reads it. I suppose his meaning was, that St. John consulted God in
the case, to know who should be entrusted with that that Sacred Office. Which
consultation might be called (...), whether it were performed by lots or
otherwise, as it is usual to signify a whole kind by an instance that is most
eminent in it, and it is known that the way of consulting their gods by lots
was then generally practiced by most Nations that maintained any commerce with
them. The reason that makes me think that this was at first the ordinary way of
empowering Church Officers is the very name of (...) being confined to them,
and used ordinarily to signify the Office it self. Thus the Office of Judas is
called (...), Act. i.17, 25.
not because it was given by the particular way of consulting God by lots, as
certainly it was not in Judas's Case; but for this general reason now
mentioned, at least because he was chosen by Divine appointment. And thus the
Office seems to be called in Clement, as most certainly it was afterward. And
to this it very well agrees that St. Paul tells the ordinary Governors of the
Asiatick Churches that the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops, and the Prophesies
concerning St. Timothy, Act. xx.28. 1 Timothy i.18.
and the trial by the Spirit, in the other St. Clement as well as the
signification by they Sstirit in this.

interests of the several sorts of Persons concerned in this business of
Ordination might thus be accommodated according to the practice of those times.
(...). Clem. Romans Ep. ad Corinth.
It was requisite, not for the Authority it self, but for the success of the
exercise of it, that the Persons to be Authorized should have a good esteem
among the Persons with whom they were to officiate. Whether deserved or
undeserved, yet their actual having it is very considerable in order to their
actual success. And therefore they were always careful that Persons chosen
should be (...), such as should have creditable Testimonies of their good
behavior. Now of their public repute, who could, in prudence, be accepted for
more competent witnesses than the Multitude? They were therefore allowed either
to choose out the number of Persons to be Authorized, as the Apostles prescribed
them the number of seven to be ordained Deacons, or else a greater number, out
of which a new choice was to made, as in the Case of St. Matthias. Yet this
good repute of the Persons was not the thing that could Authorize them alone.
This plainly appears in both instances. In the institution of the Deacons the
Apostles did not only prescribe the number to be chosen (which was plainly an
act of Authority over the Multitude,) but even after the choice had been made
they still reserve the Power of placing the Persons in the office to
themselves. It was only (...), Act. vi.3.
that they might give them, not only the investiture, but, the Authority it
self. But when a further Election was to be made, that was a plain Argument
that the first Election was only to a Candidateship, not to the Office it self.
And therefore if this Authority of the Multitude extended no further than to
this (...), it could not in reason be expounded to give the Authority it self.
For after this nomination of the Multitude followed the (...), which in those
extraordinary times (which continued beyond the Apostles times) was a
consulting God himself in the Case, whether by the custom of lots That of
Matthias.
, or by inspirations of the That of St. Timothy.
Prophets which assisted in their Synaxes, or of the Those of the choice ^f St.
Gregory Thaumaturgus for Bishop of Neocaesarea by the Bishop who ordained him,
and of the ordination of Alexander Carbonarius by the same Thaumaturgus. Greg.
Nyssen. in vit. Thaum.
ordeiners themselves, or by some signs As in the Case of Alexander chosen
Bishop of Jerusalem. Eusebius. Hist.
given before by God, or by some extraordinary appearances As in the case of
Fabian Bishop of Rome. Eus. Hist.
, in the Persons elected. Yet even when this was done, this only determined the
Persons, and the Ordeiners still remained Judges whether the indications were
satisfactory, which was a power sufficient, even then, to oblige all such
Persons to the most rigorous dependence on them. And accordingly when even they
were satisfied, then, and not till then, they proceeded to Ordination, where
that was prescribed as it seems to have been in all the Constitutions of
ordinary Governors. And from their ordination all the validity of the exercise
of their Authority began its date.

John after his return from Patmos, so long after St. Clement had written his
Epistle where he tells us, (...). Clem. Ep. ad Corinth.
that the Apostles had before that taken care for mainteining their Succession;
and if St. John did not deviate from the precedent of the other Apostles; and
if this were the original of the appropriation of the name of Clerus to the
sacred function, as we see very soon after it was appropriated: it will follow
that it will also be most likely that this was the course prescribed by the
Apostles for succession, when as yet we know that these Extraordinaries had not
failed, and when withal we do not know whether the Apostles did know that they
should ever fail. For God may undoubtedly conceal many Truths from many true
Prophets, though he cannot be an Author of error to any of them. And though
afterward as the experience of these extraordinary manifestations, by degrees
failed the Primitive Christians, they were at length necessitated to prudential
means for continuing this Power; yet from this concession, that this was the
state of Succession immediately appointed by the Apostles themselves, two
things will follow very apposite to my purpose; One, that they thought the
Ecclesiastical Power immediately proper to God himself, and far exceeding any
inherent right of the People; the other, that as this Power did* not belong to
the People by any original inherent right in them, so neither was it conveyed
to them by any act of the Apostles in their life time, or by the course
designed by them for the continuance of Succession.

Apostles would confer this right of Government on the People, if we suppose
them left to their own liberty concerning it. We know the Eastern Nations
generally, from whom the Doctrine of the Gospel came to us, were observed to be
more addicted to Monarchy than any other form of Government. And though I know
those Philosophical Sects, the Platonists and Pythagoraeans especially, were
for Republican Principles, yet all the effect they seem to have had on those
Eastern Nations, seems only to have been this, that they disliked the
absoluteness, not the form of Government in a single Person. This, I think, was
all that could have been meant by Josephus, when he makes Samuel averse to the
motion of the Israelites for a King, on account of his dislike of Monarchy. For
if by Monarchy he had understood the Government of a single Person under
reasonable restraints, he could not be ignorant that Samuel himself was such a
Monarch. But that which must, in all likelihood, have made the converts to the
Christian Religion more favorable to Monarchy than to any other form of
Government, must have been the great usefulness of this Topic of the
excellency of Monarchy above other forms of Government against their common
Gentile Adversaries. This was one of the principal Topics they insisted on
against the Gentile Polytheism. Philo and Justin. Mart. de Monarch.
On this Subject they wrote entire Discourses. To this purpose they produce all
the Testimonies of Philosophers and Poets, that speak in favor of Monarchy in
general, whether with application to Divine things, or without it. To this
purpose they urge Arguments taken from the convenience of this Government among
Creatures; nay, even among men themselves. And is it probable that these same
Persons should erect a new Government in Practice, so different from that which
they had so much commended above it in their disputes? that they would for a
matter of so small consequence to them as the particular form of Government,
when without it they might still enjoy the benefit of Government under another
form, overthrow the principal Argument for the most fundamental Principle of
revealed Religion? that they would for it have exposed themselves to the just
suspicions of disingenuity of practicing so differently from their Principles?
They must, in all likelihood, have been more inclinable to think that they
meant as they saw them practice, than as they saw them argue. And though they
had forgotten the advantage they had given their Adversaries by this way of
proceeding, yet is it probable that their Adversaries would forget it too?
Could they forget such an Argument for blasting the reputation of their
Persons, when withal the disrepute of their Persons would go so far, as it
might go then, for overthrowing the credit of the Religion preached by them? On
all these accounts it is very unlikely that the Apostles did, by their
settlement for Posterity, confer any new right of Government upon the People,
besides that which was originally inherent in them.

Truth and Peace. 1. Then, this way of arguing from the actual establishments
of God, as it is much more modest, so it is also much more secure for finding
out the right of Government than any conjectures we can make from the reason of
the thing. It is certainly the most becoming course for a modest Christian in
all things to acquiesce in Gods Judgment, how great evidence soever there might
seem for differing from it. And sure there is great reason to believe, that
what the Apostles did in a matter of so great consequence for the security of
the Christian Religion, as the settlement of Rules of Government to be observed
for all posterity, they did by a direction more infallible than their humane
Ecclesiastical Prudence. And there is the rather reason to ascribe much to
their settlement in this Question, when it is truly stated. For I do not at
present argue the obligingness of their settlement to us now, any farther than
our circumstances are the same as those were which were foreseen at their
settlement. If our circumstances be not the same, they might have been very
prudent in their provisions for settlement, and yet we very imprudent in
following their precedent in those provisions. All that I infer from their
settlement, is only this, that it is no way likely that they did believe that
the People had any such inherent right in the Ecclesiastical Government, as our
Brethren conceive them to have, and which the reasons and Authorities produced
by them in this Argument prove, if they prove any thing. For it is not likely
that they would have deprived them of any thing which was their right,
considering of how dangerous consequence it might have been to the progress of
the Gospel it self for them to have done so, and considering withal how much
their Authority was questioned in those times. But rather from the great
silence with which these Rules were settled; we have reason to conclude, not
only that the Apostles did not intend to deprive them of any right, but also
that the Multitude themselves who were concerned in them did not think
themselves deprived of any. And the very actual judgment of those times are
much better assurances of the truth of this matter than our Adversaries present
conjectures, and much more than any of those reasons on which they are capable
of grounding their conjectures. They cannot think themselves, at this distance,
better qualified for understanding the Scriptures than they were who wrote the
Scriptures, or than they for whose immediate use, and in accommodation to whose
language and circumstances they were written.

reasons they made use of for informing themselves in this matter, besides that
the utmost they can make of them is only conjectural, and the conjectures they
make by them are not so probable as the motives of credibility of those Ages; I
say, besides this, there are other prudent inducements which might in reason
make one more confident of the judgment of those Ages than of those Reasons. We
know no reasons which they could not know as well as we, but they knew many of
which we now are ignorant; and besides were much better able to judge of the
same reasons which we both know than we are. We know none which they could not
know. For the reasons from the nature of Government, in general, and peculiarly
of Government as Ecclesiastical, are not proper to any one Age. But for
bringing these reasonings down to determine the rights of any particular
Government, many particular matters of fact are requisite to be known, of which
they were undoubtedly better Judges than we are. They better knew the actual
design of the Sacraments, what benefits were intended by them, and how they
would oblige men to a dependence on them who had the power of administering
them. They better knew the precedents from whence they were taken, and the
actual state how those precedents were observed by them from whom they were
taken. And they who knew these things could much better judge whether they were
such as would allow the people any right in the Government. They certainly knew
the actual challenges of the people, and the actual condescensions that were
made to them; they knew what was quietly received, and what was either not
received at all, or received with contradiction. And they who knew these things
much better than we do, must also have known much better what either was, or
was then thought to be, the Peoples right in this matter of Government. I only
now mention those advantages they had above us in regard of the times they
lived in, not in regard of those many Prophets and other inspired Persons whom
they could then consult, and by whose assistance they might know many things
certainly, which without them we can only know conjecturally, though we had the
best information that reason is able to afford us.

People had this inherent right of Government originally, as our Brethren
pretend them to have had, yet it cannot exclude a right of God, who can, when
he pleases, take the right into his own hands. Which when he would be pleased
to do, Subjects were as much obliged to submit to his disposal of them, as if
they never had any right of disposing of themselves. I have already given my
reasons elsewhere, and shall not now repeat them. I only observe at present,
how much safer it is, on this account also, to acquiesce in Gods actual
establishment, than to trust to our reasonings from the nature of the thing
which are much more uncertain, and unsecure, as to our Duty. For supposing that
by the reason of the thing we should find that the People might, by their
internal right, pretend a title to dispose of the Government, this might indeed
take them off from making any further enquiry into Gods actual establishment,
but could not, in the mean time, secure their practice. For if, by his actual
establishment, he had reserved the right of Government wholly in his own hand,
and had actually subjected us to his own Rules; he that should insist on that
right of the People for defending himself against these actual impositions,
could not be excused, by that pretense, for his disobedience. For though the
People might have had a right, if God had left them to themselves, to prescribe
or abrogate Rules for the Government of themselves; yet in case God has made
use of his own Prerogative, they cannot then pretend to such a right, because
God has prevented it. And he who, in that Case, should refuse obedience would
be a rebel against God, though he broke no compacts made by the People, whether
with, or without, his particular consent. This will show that, how conclusive
soever the reasons be, yet, for security of practice, all must be obliged to
depend on Gods actual establishment. Which may let our Brethren see their
obligation to enquire into this for the security of their Practice.

People ever had any such original right, yet all has been done for alienating
it that could be done. Whatever could be done by the Rule left by the Apostles
for Succession, by whatever Authority they are supposed to have acted, whether
as Apostles of Jesus Christ, or as Apostles of the Churches; whatever could be
done by the act of the Multitudes themselves, submitting to, and owning the
exercise of Authority in the Officers, and never pretending any power
afterward to resume their own right, if it had been so, nor to practice any
branch of it in calling Officers to an account for mal-administration, how
notoriously soever they were guilty of it; whatever could be done by their own
disowning any such right for many Ages and Successions, and confirming the
sentences of their Superiors against such Persons as challenged such rights in
their Name; whatever could be done by a long and uninterrupted peaceable
prescription against them: Whatever could be done by these, or by any other
means, that are by Humane Laws thought sufficient to make a valid conveyance;
all this has actually been done to deprive the People of this right, if ever
they had it. And therefore no other right could be challenged by them but an
unalienable one by any act of men, not alienable even by the Apostles
themselves, as Ecclesiastical Governors. This alone can justify their
resuming such a right, though they once had it, after so many presumptions of a
Legal conveyance of it from them. If they could lose it, all was done that
could be to make them lose it. And if they challenged it when they had lost it,
they challenged it when they had no right to it, and therefore all that was
done pursuant to such a claim, must not only have been injurious to their
Superiors, but a perfect Nullity in it self. And therefore, if they will needs
decline Historical Testimonies, and argue only from the reason of the thing, it
were well they would take care that their reasons proved, not only that it was
once the Peoples right to dispose of the Government Ecclesiastical, but that it
is their unalienable right. For if they grant it to have been alienable, they
will then be obliged to enquire into matter of Fact, to know what has been done
toward an actual Alienation. And I cannot foresee what our Adversaries
themselves could desire for an Alienation for whose validity they were
concerned, which they can find missing in the Case proposed for alienating this
supposed right of the People.

CHAP. XX. This Authority of administering the Sacraments must be derived from
God by the Mediation of those men to whom it was at first committed by him.
THE CONTENTS.
2. This Authority of administering the Sacraments must be derived from God by
the Mediation of those men to whom it was at first committed by him. The
Negative to be proved, That none can be presumed to have a Call from God,
without, at least, an approbation from the Supreme visible Governors.. I. 1.
It is, in reason, and by the Principles of visible Government, requisite that
this Negative be granted for the Conviction of false Pretenders to a Power
received from God. 1. It is necessary that Pretenders should be discovered. II,
III, IV. 2. It is also requisite that the means of discovering Pretenders be
notorious to all, even to ordinary capacities.. V, VI. 3. These notorious means
for discovering Pretenders must be common to all Ages of the Church, not proper
only to that of the Apostles.. VII. 4. Hence it follows, that God left them to
the same ordinary means of judging concerning the right of Spiritual
Governors, as had been used in judging concerning the right of their Temporal
Superiors.. VIII, IX. 5. By this Rule of judging concerning Spiritual right,
the same way as we judge concerning Temporal, none can be presumed to have this
Power, but they who have received it from them to whom it was at first
committed.. X, XI. 6. This Inference will especially hold when access to the
Supreme is most difficult.. XII, XIII. This is the Case of Ecclesiastical
Government.. XIV. Application to the Principles of a Modern Writer.. XV, XVII.
2. Our Brethren must be obliged, in equity, to grant this way, because they
cannot pitch on a more certain way for the trial of Pretenders.. XVII. 1. They
cannot do it by deriving their Authority from God immediately.. XVIII, XIX, XX.
2. They cannot do it by pretending to receive their Authority immediately from
the Scriptures, independently on the act of their ordinary Superiors.. XXI. An
Objection answered.. XXII.

THOUGH this Authority of administering the Sacraments be such as must be
derived from God, yet it is not so derived without the Mediation of those men
to whom it was at first committed. By the former Proposition it appeared that
no Humane right alone was sufficient to secure a valid administration of the
Sacraments. Which must therefore oblige all who would expect a blessing on
their Ministry, and a ratification of the Offices of it, as not to assume it to
themselves without a Call, so not to venture on it without a Call from God
himself, who only has the power of calling them, and particularly not to trust
any right whatsoever that is purely Humane. But because this Call from God is
easily pretended by Enthusiastic Persons, not only by such of them as are
justly suspicious of a design of deceiving others, but also by such of them as
may be supposed to be themselves deceived, considering the weakness of those
Arguments by which these Persons judge concerning such matters; and because it
is impossible for Governors to prove directly the Negative opposed to such
pretenses, if their nonappearance to them upon such grounds, by which they are
enabled to judge of these things, be not allowed to be a sufficient Argument
against them; and because no Government in this World can possibly be
maintained, nor any order preserved, if such pretenses be allowed which are not
capable of being convicted in this Life; therefore I conceive this second
Proposition to be also very necessary, to settle such a way of proving an
Authority derived from God, as may at once secure the respect due to such
Persons as are truly Authorized by him, and yet withal secure the
practicableness of a visible Government, which cannot be reconciled without a
dependence of such Persons on men who have the office of Government. This will
sufficiently prejudg against all such Enthusiastical pretenders, and prevent
all the encroachments they might otherwise make on Ecclesiaastical Authority,
if, notwithstanding that the Authority it self is derived from God, yet it be
also proved that the ordinary Ecclesiastical Governors be the only Persons by
whose mediation God is pleased to derive this Ecclesiastical ^ower, and
therefore that none ought to be supposed to have a Call from God who cannot
prove that they have received it from those Persons who are entrusted with a
power of calling them. And indeed the whole security of Government depends on
the truth of this Negative. Nor is it alone sufficient for that purpose that
they, who derive their Authority from those men who were at first Authorized by
God, do as properly receive their Authority from God, as if they received it
from him immediately, but it is also requisite that no Persons be admitted into
Office without the approbation of the supreme visible Governors of the Church,
without this they cannot undertake, nor be responsible for, the inconveniences
which might follow upon such an obtrusion, and without the truth of this
Negative, that none are to be presumed to have a Call from God, without, at
least, an approbation of the supreme visible Governors, it will be impossible
for them to prevent such obtrusions. This Negative therefore is the thing which
I am at present concerned to prove.

That it is in reason, and, by the Principles of Government in general,
requisite that this Negative be granted in order to the conviction of false
pretenders to a Power received from God immediately; And, 2. That our Brethren
must be obliged, in equity, to grant it, because they cannot pitch upon a more
certain way of trial. 1. It is in reason, and by the Principles of visible
Government, as such, requisite that this Negative be granted in order to the
conviction of false pretenders to a power received from God. For, 1. It is
against the interest of all visible Government, and of all visible Societies,
as such, that pretenders be permitted to enjoy the benefit of their pretenses
without means of conviction; nor is it to be presumed that any prudent
Legislator could ever contrive things so, as that there should be no notorious
means of convicting such Persons. And they cannot be convinced but by recourse
to such positive means of trial, by which, if they cannot justify themselves,
they must immediately be supposed convicted of the falsehood of their claim. To
permit such Persons to pass without conviction would not only prove a grievance
to Subjects, intolerable by the Principles of equal Government; but would also
make the Government unpracticable in the hands of those who were undoubtedly
entitled to it.

IT would be a grievance to the Subjects, intolerable by the Principles of
equal Government, and therefore unlikely to be intended by an equal Legislator,
that his Subjects should be imposed on at the pleasure of pretenders; that by
this means many more and heavier burdens should be imposed on them than the
Legislator himself would ever have imposed; that there should be no end of
these Imposers or their Impositions, as there can be none, if they be not
reduced to some certain Rules; that the worst and basest part of Mankind, such
as false pretenders certainly would be, should, at least, in this World, be
permitted to tyrannize over their betters, that the highest Criminals against
Majesty, in the very practice of their Crimes, should be permitted to abuse the
dutifulness and obedience of their Fellow Subjects who are more loyal.

it must needs obstruct the exercise of all visible Government in this Life. If
particular Governors be obtruded on the supreme without their consent, they
cannot prevent what mischief may follow, in case of their miscarriage, and
therefore cannot, in Justice, be responsible for them; they cannot secure the
unanimous persecution of the same designs, and the very want of Unanimity alone
is of so great importance in these matters, as that they must extremely
prejudice the success of the designs themselves. But when withal private
Persons are encouraged not only to act independently on the ordinary visible
supreme Governors of the Church on such pretenses as these are; but also to
contradict them and control them; when upon pretense of Authority received from
God, they may be permitted to exempt themselves or any others from their duty
to ordinary Governors; when, though the ordinary supreme visible Governors of
the Church must be supposed to have received, whatever Authority they have
received, from God himself as well as these Pretenders; yet these Pretenders
may still be rather thought credible in their pretenses of a Mission from God;
nay, may also be supposed to have a higher degree of Authority committed to
them than their ordinary Superiors (for none but a higher degree can suffice to
control the Authority of their Superiors) only because their Mission is
extraordinary: As these things must be great encouragements to ill-designing
Persons to make these pretenses, so no exercise of Government can hold, if the
Persons interested in such Pretenses can be confident enough to make them. They
cannot control them, at least in this Life, and that is enough to make the
Government in this life insignificant. It is therefore most reasonable to
suppose that God has granted us means of convicting such offenders as these are.

reasonable to believe that these means of convicting Pretenders be notorious
to all, and notorious even to ordinary capacities. If People do not know their
Governors, how is it possible that they can think themselves obliged to pay
any Duty to them? And if these means be not notorious to all, it will be as
impossible for them to know their Governors. In the Case I am speaking of, it
comes to the same purpose, whether they have no Authority at all, or whether
they cannot be known to have it. For if they cannot be known to have it, all
who think they have it not must take all they do for Usurpation and a perfect
Nullity; and therefore, as they cannot think it antecedently obligatory, so
neither can they think themselves obliged, in any equity, to ratify the acts
of those whom they take for Enemies and Usurpers. Nay, the very nonappearance
of such a right is a very just reason to suspect them of falsely pretending to
it, considering, by the Principles of all Government, how insignificant any
right is supposed to be without means of notoriety, and considering therefore
how very careful all Governors are to provide such means, and not to impute
disobedience as a crime, till these means may be presumed notorious to them who
are concerned in them; and considering how much more equal God is than the most
equal Governors, and how impossible it is that he should forget any thing
which he ought in equity to have foreseen.

notoriety ought to be so great as to be sufficient to give satisfaction to the
generality even of the meanest capacities, besides that it is the common
sentiment of all Governors, the very reason of the thing, and the concernment
even such Persons have in Government, whatever they may have in Doctrines, that
all must be guided by their Governors in their Practice, which cannot be,
unless they know them; nay, the Multitude consisting principally of such
Persons, and Government being principally calculated for the Multitude, and a
knowledge of their Governors being the foundation of all Duties to be paid to
them, all these things, I say, being laid together, do, methinks, make it very
little capable of being doubted.

notorious means for convicting Pretenders ordinarily in future Ages for ever,
we must not suppose that the Apostles left the Church only to those
extraordinary means of discovery which were only proper to their own Age,
which, by the confession of all, are long since ceased, whose credentials at
least are undeniably ceased, without which it is impossible that they should be
notorious to the Multitude. And therefore it is not likely that we should now
be left to the gift of discerning of Spirits, or of Prophecy, or of consulting
God by lots, not to speak now of the extraordinary manifestations of God on the
Persons who were to be tried. Though it is also very observable that even in
that Age wherein these extraordinary means were used, yet, because they were
not evident to any but them to whom they were made, at least not certainly,
therefore, even then, they were not intended immediately for the Multitude, but
for the satisfaction of the Ordeiners, who when they were themselves by these
means informed of the qualifications of the Persons to be ordained, then
invested them with the Powers. So that as it is most probable, even then, that
it was not their gifts, of which these extraordinary discoveries were only
testimonies, but the Solemnities of this investiture that immediately gave them
the Power it self; so it is much more certain, that, in this way of proceeding,
the judgment of the ordeiners concerning the sufficiency of these evidences,
and the testimony given by them, by the act of ordination it self, were even
then the only assurances by which the vulgar were enabled to judge concerning
the Authority of any who were placed over them, even by God himself. And
therefore in this way of trial none could be presumed to have Authority from
God but they whom the ordinary Governors judged to have received it. Which
will, as to all intents of Practice, oblige them to as near a dependence on the
ordinary Governors of the Church as if they had received their Authority from
those Governors themselves. And certainly the reason will be much more cogent
to oblige them, to a dependence on Governors, who can make out no better a
title to the Call it self than what they can receive from the Governors, than
those who might pretend that their obligation to depend on them, was only for
their approbation in the exercise of the Authority committed to them, not for
deriving the Authority it self. These, if their pretense was true, could only
be punished for the disorderliness of their proceeding; but they who derive
their Power not from any supernatural gifts received by them antecedently to
their ordination, but from their ordination it self, must expect that their
proceedings be not only disorderly, but invalid, if they presume to exercise
any Divine Authority not received by Ordination.

ordinary means of judging concerning the right of their Governors which had
been usual among them in judging concerning their secular Governors. These
were best suited to vulgar understanding, that they might the same way judge of
the title of their Spiritual Governors, by which, even they, had been used,
and often been obliged, to judge of the title of their secular Governors, and
the better such means are suited to popular understandings, by so much they
must prove more serviceable to the great end of Government. They must have been
more easily applicable to this particular design of Government, than any new
means that could have been introduced for this purpose; and it is always to be
presumed that all prudent Governors would rather make use of present means
than any other, if they may withal serve their ends as well. In such a Case the
very avoiding innovation is a very considerable advantage of such a means above
any other. Besides it was to be presumed that these were the means intended, if
no express provision was made for any other. For we are to consider the present
customs and Notions of that Age as the matter of their Revelations, to be
reformed where they were amiss, and to be assured where they were uncertain,
especially where the Subject was of consequence. And therefore where something
was necessary to be practiced, and no new order was taken for the introduction
of any thing new, there it was most natural to presume that Christ did not
think fit to make any alteration, and therefore that he was pleased with what
was already received.

that Age, and therefore, if it had been a mistake, he would, in all
likelihood, have prevented it, especially in the first beginnings of
Christianity, not only in regard of the moment of the thing, so far as that Age
it self was concerned in it, but also in regard of the ill influence a mistake
in that Age must have on all succeeding Ages, and the great difficulty of ever
reforming any such mistake afterward, when the mistake should have the
advantage of a present possession, and the averseness which is natural to men
against changing any thing that had such possession; when also such a
possession received from such Persons who had best reason to know what was fit
to be received, would pass for a Presumption against the right of innovating
any thing, and when withal the credentials of Persons who would afterward be
desirous to reform them, should decay, as this Prescription and Presumption
would grow stronger, and prevail more on the minds of men. This therefore being
supposed, that the Scriptures silence concerning any new provision, is a strong
presumption that the sacred Writers, and the Apostles, whose History they
wrote, never intended any; this, I say, will let our Brethren see how
insufficient their reasoning is, from this silence of the Scripture concerning
any certain Rule prescribed for Succession, to conclude against any confinement
of this Power to those certain Persons through whose hands this Succession is
to be continued, when by this means of management it is proved to be an
Argument of the contrary. And they must needs apprehend it as a great distress
to their Cause to be obliged to produce any direct or positive Arguments,
either to disprove this confinement of the Power to Persons in Authority for
the time being for maintaining Succession, or to prove that they who pretend to
an Authority, which they have not received from their Superiors, can justify
their claim by any other solid Principles. Yet to this distress they must needs
be reduced by this Observation.

God intended that the Spiritual Power should be the same way derived to
Posterity as the Temporal Power is, then the matter will be plain, that none
may pretend to this Spiritual Power, but they who have received it from those
men to whom it was first committed. For in deriving Temporal Power this method
is still observed punctually, not only that they who are Authorized by them,
who first received the Authority are validly Authorized, but that none else are
so. And this Negative that none may pretend to Power, but they who have
received it from those men who had at first a Power to give it, has by all wise
Legislators been thought as necessary to oblige inferior Governors to a
dependence on their Superiors; as this dependence has been also thought
necessary for the practicableness of all visible Government. Besides,
wherever Princes are obliged in extraordinary Cases to give extraordinary
commands and Authority to some particular Persons without the formalities of
Law (which is the only Precedent our Adversaries can make use of) yet still
they give them very sufficient Legal Credentials, or where these are wanting
they are not offended, if their private commands be controlled by their public
notorious Rules, and till these appear, and appear to the satisfaction of those
Governors who by those standing Rules are possessed of the Authority, they are
not obliged to yield to them.

verification or Authentic publication even of these Credentials are they from
whence they derive their obliging virtue, and are properly the office of the
subordinate Governors. But this is more necessary to be observed in assuming
of a constant Office than in executing a temporary command. If a whole Office
may be undertaken without the consent of visible Governors, it is not possible
to understand how that dependence can be maintained, which is absolutely
necessary for the peace of Societies. For they who pretend to an Office
independently on the ordinary Governors, and who do also justify an
independent exercise of that Office, must make as constant a practice of acting
independently on their Superiors, as they do of performing their Office, and of
approving themselves faithful to the trust committed to them. And if single
Acts relating to the Public may prove of so dangerous consequence to the
Public when practiced independently on the supreme visible Government of any
Society, how much more dangerous must it be to persist in a constant practice
of such Acts? What security can there be that they shall maintain a
correspondence with their Superiors for driving on the same ends, when they who
are intent on those ends have no interest in the choice of them? And in case of
difference, how can the public peace be preserved, whilst these pretenders to
extraordinary Missions make a constant practice of resisting their ordinary
Superiors? especially if their power be thought greater, because more
immediately derived from God than that of their ordinary Governors; and if
withal as many be allowed to assume these Offices as shall have the confidence
to do so where notorious Credentials are not insisted on for examining the
Truth of their pretenses. At least this is extremely dissonant to the Politics
of all Governments, and worldly Governors, who never give Offices to be
executed in the inferior Jurisdictions without notorious ways of approbation,
nor without the judgment of those Subordinate Officers within whose
Jurisdiction they are to execute their Office. Yet this is the claim of our
Adversaries who challenge an Office of Preaching the word and administering the
Sacraments never received from those Superiors whom they found possessed of the
Supreme visible Government of the Church when they first began their separation.

approving the Authority of extraordinary Calls is then more rigorously and
punctually insisted on* according to the course of humane proceedings, when the
access to the Supreme Prince is more difficult. Indeed where the Prince is near
and may be easily consulted, neither can the danger be so great which may be
occasioned by false pretenders, when they are so likely to be discovered before
they can have time to compass any great design; nor is there that fear that
pretenders will venture, where they are in so imminent danger of being
discovered, and of being suddenly and severely punished upon discovery. And
therefore it is reasonable to presume in such a case, that he who pretends the
Princes name for a design which cannot suddenly be dispatched, does pretend
truly, when it is considered how present a danger it is to pretend falsely, and
that the danger is greater than can be countervailed by success in any design,
and more imminent than to allow time for a design which requires a considerable
time before it can be compassed. And as the Subjects, in such a Case as this
is, need not fear any very considerable ill consequence that may ordinarily
befall them, at least not so ordinarily as they may receive advantage by
sudden, and sometimes secret prudential provisions of their Prince; so neither
can the Princes themselves apprehend the damage, that may follow on such false
pretenses for so short a time as it is possible for them to continue
undiscovered, of that consequence as to countervail the benefit they may expect
from the observance of their provisional commands, though sometimes transacted
with great suddenness and secrecy, and therefore cannot think it reasonable
altogether to forbear the advantages of these provisional commands for fear of
the inconveniences of false Pretenders.

distance is great, or the access is very difficult, or any other cause occurs
that may delay the discovery, or give opportunity for completing ill designs
before the discovery can be made; there all wise Governors have thought it
more prudent and safe to lose the advantage of having their secret commands
without Credentials fulfilled, than to hazard the mischiefs that may follow
from the multitude of commands which may be pretended without control, when
bold men may be allowed the liberty of pretending to them without notorious
Credentials, or when any others are permitted to be Judges of the notoriety of
those Credentials beside the ordinary Governors. Accordingly in Provinces far
distant from the Courts, not only the disposal of Offices, but even particular
provisional commands, (at least such commands as are to be executed publicly)
must first pass the Offices of the Governors of those Provinces respectively,
before those Provinces can be obliged to believe and receive them for the true
Acts of their Prince; and they which are not thus verified are, for that very
reason, presumed suspicious of being false, and till they pass this course of
trial, it is as unlawful to act upon them, as if indeed they had been so, and
what is so done is counted as mere a Nullity in Law, as if the Power had never
been granted them. But if Princes depart into Countries far distant from their
own, where they cannot be consulted, they do not then think fit to lay
restraints on their ordinary Governors by commissions unknown to them, nor do
the constitutions of any Politics oblige such Governors to own any such.

Ecclesiastical Government. God cannot be consulted in this Life, and
therefore, if the Rules of humane Politics be observed here, nothing is to be
taken for his pleasure, but what is proposed for such by the ordinary
Ecclesiastical Governors, I mean nothing relating to prudential Practice or
Authority. At least no Officers can be presumed, in this Age, to have
Authority, who cannot prove their title either received from, or verified by,
our present Ecclesiastical Governors. And it is to the same purpose, on
whether of the two regards they depend. We shall have as much reason to presume
all their proceedings null, for want of Power, till that Power be verified, as
we shall have to believe them null, when we think our selves assured that they
have received no Power at all. Which in reference to Subjects already under
Government will disoblige such Subjects from Submission to them, and will
consequently make their Authority as unpracticable antecedently to this
approbation of the ordinary Governors, as if they had none antecedently. And
because it is not probable, by the Principles of Government, that God would
give an Authority that should be useless and unpracticable, as to all the
proper uses of Authority; this will also make it suspicious that God does not
indeed give this Authority it self antecedently to the approbation of ordinary
Superiors. Especially considering that, though these ordinary fallible
Superiors should be mistaken in thinking such Persons not Authorized when
really they are so, yet still their Authority must continue unpracticable, by
these Principles, and that for ever, if ordinary Superiors should for ever
continue in their mistakes.

Authority is grounded on those gifts of the Spirit which he supposes to be in
Persons antecedently to Ordination, Mr. Humphreys.
and which he therefore conceives not given but approved by their Ordeiners, so
that according to this Hypothesis, Ordination does not give this Power, but
only declares that they have it, and gives them a liberty to exercise it within
the Jurisdiction of the Ordeiners, without which himself conceives it
irreconcilable with any Order or Discipline that they should be permitted to
exercise their gifts within those Jurisdictions, and is sensible how impossible
it is to secure the Church from the mischiefs which may be occasioned by the
pretenses of assuming Enthusiasts, if Subjects may be allowed immediately to
judge of their gifts, and to receive them as the measures of their Practice,
antecedently to the declaration of their ordinary Superiors. If this were true,
it would indeed follow, that Acts of this Authority would indeed be valid
before God, antecedently to the Declarations of ordinary Superiors, and even
after them, contrary to the Declarations of fallible Superiors, in case they
should prove actually mistaken; which is no hard supposition concerning
Superiors who are acknowledged fallible, especially in their Declarations
concerning things which are true or false antecedently to their Declarations,
though they might be obnoxious to Canonical Penalties for exercising their
gifts antecedently to this Canonical approbation.

Practice, the Question will not be, what is really valid before God, but what
may be known to be valid by men. And if men presume that to be invalid which is
really valid, they cannot look on any thing done by them as valid, whilst they
are supposed to doubt of the validity of the Authority by which it is done. And
if Subjects be obliged to stand to the judgment of ordinary Superiors
concerning the validity of the Authority to which men pretend; it plainly
follows, that even where their Superiors are actually mistaken in judging
Persons to have no Authority who really have it, yet Subjects must, in that
Case, presume they have none, at least presume so in reference to Practice.
Which will as much discourage them from joining in Communion with such Persons
disapproved by Superiors, and will consequently oblige them to as near a
dependence on Superiors for the practicableness of their Authority as if they
had really received it from them, which presumed invalidity, is sufficient for
all that I am concerned for in this Question. Besides the unpracticableness of
such an Authority independently on Superiors I have shown to be a great and
prudent Presumption, from the Principles of Government, that no such Authority
is given independently on Superiors.

Negative way of arguing, that men cannot be supposed to have an Authority from
God which they cannot show their title to by the mediation of ordinary
Superiors, because they cannot pitch on a more certain way of proving that such
Persons have received Authority from God than that they have received it from
them who were at first Authorized by God, and Authorized to give their
Authority. I cannot conceive how such Persons can pretend to come by their
Authority from God otherwise than either that they must have received it from
him immediately, or that they must have received it from him mediately, with
dependence on the Scriptures. But neither of these Pretenses can satisfy
others, or prevent the mischiefs which may follow from false pretenses, which I
have shown how much it is the common interest of all Governments, of what
nature soever, to have prevented.

They cannot pretend to receive their Authority from God immediately. For they
neither can give any solid reason for satisfying themselves that God will call
any immediately in these modern Ages, much less that they in particular are so
called by him: nor much less can they satisfy others that they are called. God
has never promised that he will call any in such an extraordinary way in these
modern Ages, nor have we any reason to believe that he ever intended it. All
the extraordinary manifestations, which alone made these extraordinary Calls
seasonable and useful, all confess to have been long since discontinued. And it
is no way likely that he would continue his extraordinary Calls without his
extraordinary manifestations without which they must be so useless. And if it
neither appear in general that God has actually promised it, nor that it is
probable that he would ever have intended it; how can they satisfy themselves
that they in particular are however actually called by him? Will they, or can
they say, that God has spoken to them immediately? No doubt some Enthusiasts
will say so. But it is sufficient for my purpose if this cannot be said without
Enthusiasm.

true Prophets and Enthusiasts, the secret evidences not only of the
Revelations themselves, but also of their proceeding from God, which appeared
to the Prophets themselves, either those that are mentioned by the Jews, or any
others that may be rational. Let them consider how dangerous it must prove to
themselves, as well as others seduced by them, if they should prove mistaken;
how highly responsible they must be to God, if they run in his name when they
are not sent by him, and whether the evidence of their Mission be great enough
either to prevent or countervail that danger. Let them judge themselves in this
particular with the same severity wherewith they would judge others who would
pretend Authority for messages contrary to their own, and with the same
wherewith they must expect to be judged by God, if they should prove mistaken,
and I am confident they will find the evidence necessary for satisfying them in
this particular not only much greater than they have, but also than they can
rationally expect in this present Age. Nay, if they would consider how
impossible it is to justify their Mission, in this way, without such a
particular Revelation as must make them properly Prophets, and how themselves
grant the discontinuance of that gift; I cannot but think, if these things were
thoroughly considered, that there would be very few, if any, who would,
notwithstanding all this, pretend to this Authority, or think they had that
evidence for it, as might really satisfy themselves for pretending to it.

others would be concerned in this gift, indeed more so than the Person himself
who had it, and therefore how insufficient it is that they satisfy themselves
concerning it, unless they be able to satisfy others also; how impossible it
is to expect that others should believe them extraordinarily called, whilst
they do not so much as pretend to extraordinary Credentials; how little God
himself ever expected this, who (when this sending of Prophets was more
ordinary than it can be now pretended, yet) never sent a Prophet without signs
or Miracles to confirm his Mission, and appointed Rules for judging between
true and false Prophets, allowed the judgment of them according to those Rules
to their fallible Superiors; Considering also that the same reasons hold still
for making the same things prudent now, and fit to be expected, as well as
formerly, This would not only prove a very just presumption against such a
pretense with all others, besides the pretender himself, but might also shame
the pretender himself from pretending it without better evidences than are
pretended for the satisfaction of others of the truth of such pretenses.

Can they pretend to receive this Authority from God from the Scriptures, but
so as to receive it independently on the act of any of their ordinary
Superiors. Charters indeed do empower and direct ordinary Governors to
continue a Succession of their Power, but never empower any particular Person
without the concurrence of Governors, never without dependependence on them,
much less ever in opposition to them. If they did, the Persons so Authorized
could not be thought extraordinary Authorized, if they received their Authority
from the same perpetual standing Rule by which ordinary Governors may be
thought capable of receiving it. Either therefore they must not pretend to
receive their Authority immediately from the Scriptures, or if they do, they
must allow that way of receiving it as an ordinary way. And then it will
concern them to explain how it is possible to maintain a dependence of the
inferior Governors on the supreme visible ones, if they receive their
Authority thus independently on them, or how it is possible to maintain
Government in any visible Society without this visible dependence. I am sure
this supposition is extremely different from all Precedents of humane
Politics, which is no great recommendation of its likelihood. But how is it
possible for them to explain how particular Persons can be Authorized by a
Writing immediately, where their particular names are not so much as mentioned?
when they were not in being when the Writings were made, and so could not have
been known by any humane ways of knowledge by the Writers themselves? Can any
Precedent be given for this, that ever any prudent humane Legislators have
thought so small an evidence as this, sufficient for the proof of a thing which
it is the public interest that it should be so very notorious? Nay, in a way
of humane proof, would it not be presumed, on the contrary, that such Persons
could never have been particularly designed by the Writers, whom it was so
impossible for them in a humane way to know? But they may say, that God, who
inspired the sacred Writers, knew all particular Persons to be Authorized by
them through all succeeding generations. No doubt he did so. But it is not his
secret, but his revealed, knowledge that is to be the measure of our Practices.
And how can it appear to us that he was pleased to reveal to the sacred Writers
the Persons who should succeed in the Ecclesiastical Authority in latter
generations, when he has not been pleased to reveal their names, nor indeed to
describe any particular Persons by any such peculiar Characters as might, in
prudence, be sufficient to distinguish them from false pretenders? If they had
been so described as that we might have known them certainly by humane means,
why might not the Writers have known them, who were as able to know what might,
by humane means, be collected from their own words as we are? If they be so
described as that yet they cannot be known by any humane means short of
Revelation, how can they be said to have been revealed at all? how can they be
said to be revealed to us who are to expect no new Revelation, from that by
which it is so impossible to know them certainly?

Enthusiasm, is, that the Scripture may describe the qualifications of Persons
to be Authorized, and that we may know who have those qualifications in the
several succeeding Ages independently on the judgment of the present respective
Governors. But where there is any difference in men's judgments concerning
these qualifications of Persons, that some Persons judge those men qualified
whom others judge not to be so; this is a Controversy, which, as it cannot be
pretended to be decided by the Scriptures, (which, if they indeed tell us what
qualifications are requisite for the Ministry, yet they cannot be thought
withal to tell us what particular Persons are endued with those
qualifications.) So neither is the thing it self always so notorious as to
assure that unanimity of Judgment, even between candid and judicious Persons,
that is altogether necessary for the preservation of the public Peace. Much
less when many are likely to be concerned in it who are neither judicious nor
candid, such as the Persons who set up themselves as Candidates for this
Election, and the interests and Parties they may make. So that still there will
be need of an Authoritative decision in this matter, and this in a thing which
the Scripture cannot be pretended to have decided. But neither is it agreeable
with the Principles of any policy, that all Persons who are qualified
themselves, should, for that reason, be supposed to have Authority, nor that
none should have Authority, who cannot appear certainly to be so qualified. The
public service requires a certain number, which, if it be considerably
exceeded or failed of, the excess or defect will be so far from being
serviceable, as that it will prove prejudicial to the public. And what
security have we that the number of Persons qualified shall be always such as
may answer that due proportion which may be useful? And yet if qualifications
give the Authority, and all that Church Governors can do, be not to give the
Authority to Persons qualified, but to judge who have the Authority already by
their having the qualifications, whatever proportion be requisite for public
service; they must admit all those whom they judge qualified, and admit none but
such, if the qualifications alone be supposed to entitle to the Authority. But
if any may be rejected whom they think qualified, or any admitted whom they do
not judge qualified, either of these are sufficient to show that qualifications
alone cannot be conceived sufficient to entitle to Authority. And yet this is
all that can be thought of, how the Scriptures can be thought to design
particular Persons for Authority, that they may indeed describe and
particularize those qualifications which may fit a Person, when he is known to
have them, for Authority.

CHAP. XXI. Ecclesiastical Authority cannot be derived to this Age without a
continued Succession.
THE CONTENTS.
3. This Ecclesiastical Authority cannot be derived from those men to whom it
was at first committed, to the age we live in, without a continued Succession
of Persons orderly receiving Authority from those who had Authority to give it
them.. I. 1. This Authority could not be derived from the Apostles themselves
to any beyond their own time. Neither by them in their own Persons, nor by
their Deed of Gift, nor by their Writings.. II. 2. It hence follows that the
only way they could use for conveying this Authority to others, after their
decease, must be by appointing sufficient substitutes who might act for them
after their departure.. III. 3. The same reasons which prove it impossible for
the Apostles to convey this Power to any who did not live in their own Age, do
also prove it impossible for any of their Successors to do so.. IV, V. 4. This
Negative Argument will only hold concerning the only substitutes of the
Apostles, and concerning them it will hold, That they who have not received
Power from them who are alone substituted by the Apostles to convey their Power
to others, cannot at all receive any Power from the Apostles.. VI, VII, VIII,
IX. 5. That this Negative Argument applied to any particular Age will hold
concerning the only substitutes remaining in that particular Age. Bishops were
the only substitutes of the Apostles then remaining when our Brethren began
their innovations.. X.

THIS Ecclesiastical Authority cannot be derived, in this Age we live in, from
those men to whom it was at first committed, that is, from the Apostles,
without a continued succession of Persons orderly receiving Authority from
those who had Authority to give it them, from those first times of the Apostles
to ours at present.

Authority cannot be derived from the Apostles themselves to any beyond their
own time. There are but three ways conceivable how this might be possible, that
they themselves might convey Authority to others, either by their Persons, or
by their Deed of Gift, or by their Writings. But by none of these means are
they capable of receiving Authority from them who did not live in their time.
Not from them in their own Persons, because they were dead before the Persons
of whom we speak were born, or were capable of receiving Authority from them.
For it is impossible to understand (by the nature of any Humane contracts) how
a personal right can be devolved to another without a personal act, or how any
personal act can be between Persons who are not supposed coexistent at the same
time. Not by their Deed of Gift, because this also could only convey their
Power to Persons of their own Age. Especially considering that Power is that
which is the original security of all other Gifts. Indeed where a standing
Power is supposed, and a constant orderly Succession into that Power, there a
Gift may be made to future Persons, which may both be determined by Persons so
empowered, and the Gift secured to Persons so determined by them. But all are
so sensible of the unpracticableness of a Gift to future Persons, without a
Power both to determine the Persons, and secure the Gift to them, as that it is
ordinary in Wills to appoint Executors, who may secure the performance, where
the standing Power cannot descend minutely to take care of the performance in
particular cases. And it were certainly in vain to make Testaments, if none
were empowered to determine the Controversies which rise in execution of them,
and if the public Authority did not confirm the Act of the Testator in
nominating an Executor, and the Power of the Executor for performing the trust
committed to him. It is therefore absolutely necessary that a Power be first
established by which the Will may be performed, and a Succession in that Power
ascertained for so long at least as any particular of the will remains
unperformed, before any one can, in prudence, think such a will performable.
And therefore the Power of the Apostles being the Supreme and only Power by
which the Church, as a Body Politic does subsist, must be first secured, and
secured in a regular constant Succession, so that none ought to be supposed, in
future Ages, to receive any Power from them, but they who receive it in that
Succession by the hands of Persons empowered to give it them. And because their
Legacies are not confined to any certain Age, therefore the Power of their
Executors must not expire for ever, and so much the rather because there is no
superior Power to take care of the execution, in case the Persons should fail
who are immediately entrusted with the Execution. Not by their Writings, though
they indeed continued extant after the decease of the Writers, for what has
been said in the future Chapter.

convey any Power to Persons not living in their own Age, seeing they could not
do it by themselves, they must do it by appointing sufficient substitutes, to
act in their name after their decease, that is, they must give such Persons
whom they would substitute, the same Power themselves had received from Christ,
(I mean, as to these ordinary exercises of Power, for which I am at present
concerned) and not only so, but the same Power also which themselves had
received, of communicating this Power to others. Where both of these were
present, the act of such substitutes was to be taken for the Act of the
Apostles themselves, and as validly obliging them as if it had been performed
by themselves in their own Persons, by all the Laws then received concerning
Delegation and substitution. And the want of either of them was sufficient, by
the same Laws, to invalidate a conveyance from the Apostles by so
imperfectly-Authorized substitutes. And I have already shown that the Laws then
received were punctually observed by the Apostles in these their Legal
conveyances. I cannot foresee what other means our Adversaries can think of to
avoid this consequence. Chap. iii.. 5, 6, 7, 8.
When they shall think of any, it will then be time enough to consider it.

Apostles to convey their Power to any who did not live in their own Age, does
also prove it impossible for any of their successors to do so. They also cannot
be supposed capable of acting in their own Persons, when they cease to be in
their own Persons, and therefore can only be capable of acting by their
substitutes, whom they have entrusted with their Power; and none can be taken
for their substitutes but they who have been made so by their personal act,
when they were alive. Which will perfectly reach the Negative, for which I am
concerned at present, that they cannot be taken for the Apostles substitutes,
nor for the substitutes of any of their successors in later Ages, who have not
been substituted by them by a personal act; and that what has not been done
since by any substitute either of the Apostles, or of any of their successors,
cannot be taken for the act of any of them, and therefore cannot derive any
Authority from them.

Successors of the Apostles in every Age respectively, as they are to the
Apostles themselves. As therefore in the Age succeeding the Apostles, nothing
could be done by the Apostles, but what was done by some of them to whom the
Apostles had committed their Power by a personal act in the Apostolical Age it
self: So neither in the third Age could any thing be taken for the Act of the
Successors of the Apostles, but what was done by Persons Authorized by their
personal act in the preceding Age, whilst those Successors were yet living.
And the same reasoning may be brought down through all the intermediate Ages to
that wherein we live at present, so that nothing ought to be taken for the Act
of the Apostles in our present Age, but what is done by them who have been
lawfully substituted by them who have received their Power from their other
lawful substitutes in the several Ages respectively, by personal substitution
of each Predecessor respectively whilst he was yet living, and therefore no
such Act can convey the Authority of the Apostles to any who is ambitious of
pretending to it in our present Age.

Negative Argument consisting in this, that that cannot be the Apostles Act in
a later Age which is not the Act of any of those who derive their substitution
from them by personal Acts in the several Ages; it will not hold but only in
the only substitutes. For supposing the Apostles substituted many in the first
Age (as certainly they did) it will not follow that he who has not received his
Authority from the Succession of Jerusalem, for example, has therefore not
received it from the Apostles at all, because he may have received it from the
Succession of Antioch, or any other Apostolical See. But considering the whole
complex of substitutes in every Age, certainly the reason will hold, that he
who has derived his Authority from none of them, must as certainly fail of
deriving his Authority from the Apostles, as if he had lived in the Age
immediately succeeding the Apostles, and yet had not received his Authority
from any of them who had, in the former Age, received their Authority by a
personal Act of the Apostles themselves. The reasoning still holds the same,
how many soever the Ages of Succession are. Neither can any Authority be given
by the Apostles in the fifteenth Century which is not given by their
substitutes then existing, nor can they then be taken for their Successors who
have not been substituted by several personal Acts of their immediate
Predecessors through all the foregoing Period.

imprudence of managing this Argument hitherto, that recourse has been always
had to the Primitive times, as if the Succession had not been as much
interrupted by a failure in later Ages, as if it had failed then. By which way
of proceeding they both weakened the evidence of the Argument, and withal made
it less popular. They weakened the Argument, both as to its strength, and as to
its evidence. As to its strength, because what had indeed Succession then might
fail of it in after Ages. And therefore though our Adversaries Hypothesis had
been true, that single Presbyters had the Power of ordeining others given them
when they were made Presbyters, and therefore that the Persons ordained by them
then had been validly ordained; yet it is very possible that their Succession
might fail afterward, and that later Presbyters might never have that Power
given them, which if they have not, that is alone sufficient to disanul their
present Ordinations. And therefore the securest way of proving the validity of
present Ordinations is to prove the uninterruptedness of their Succession down
to our modern times, not to rest contented with what was in the beginning, but
might have been since interrupted.

weakened the evidence of the Argument, by resolving it into Primitive Records,
in which way of proceeding it is very possible that many Records might have
been lost; nay, it is most certain that many were so, which though it be no
Argument at all to prove that any thing was not from the beginning which we do
not find mentioned in our remaining Records, yet it is certainly a weakening
the evidence of the Succession, if the trial be resolved into such Records as
might have miscarried. As certainly no secular Magistrate of a Corporation in
this Age could make his title so clear, if he were to prove it from the Records
of all his Predecessors since the Charter was granted, which may very well have
miscarried in a much shorter Succession than that which is requisite for
justifying our present Ordinations, as if he be immediately allowed to resolve
his title into the Charter, as it has been found in unquestionable Practice,
and into his immediate Predecessors. And this is the rather solid, because it
is a Principle agreed on for the security of all Governments to presume they
came from the beginning, unless there appear very probable evidence to the
contrary, though possibly their being from the beginning cannot be expressly
proved from Primitive Records after the miscarriages of so many Generations.
And when God was pleased to settle a Government among men, it is most likely
that he would suit it, as he did many other things of far less importance, to
Humane understanding, and even to those of the vulgar, who are as much
concerned in Government as the Learned, and that he would accordingly expect
their Obedience according to the Rules of Humane equity. And there is less
reason to believe that he would oblige Ecclesiastical Government to depend on
express Records than Secular, not only because it is designed much more lasting
than any Secular form of Government, and Records are more apt to miscarry in a
longer tract of time, but also because the Persecutions to which they are
exposed more than any other Societies of men, must involve their Records in a
greater danger of miscarriage than others. Besides that this dependence on
Records must, in the natural course of things, make the Government weakest in
the later Ages, when we are warned to expect the vices of men most outrageous,
and most needing a restraint, which makes it very unlikely to have been Gods
pleasure that it should depend on them. Which will weaken all our Adversaries
Arguments either from the less, or from the obscurity of those Primitive
Records.

that way of trial must needs be less popular, because it resolves it into more
Ancient Histories and greater variety of Learning than can reasonably be
supposed in popular capacities. If therefore Episcopacy alone, and Episcopacy
in the modern sense, be the only Succession of the Apostles which has been kept
uninterrupted to our present times; the consequence must then be certain, that
there can be no Apostolical Power in our present Age which is not derived even
from our modern Episcopacy.

Negative consequence, it is sufficient, that the Argument be deduced from the
only substitutes that are extant in the Age to which it is applied, that
whatever is not done by them cannot be supposed to be done by the Apostles
themselves. For what if the Presbyterian Government, had lasted as long as our
Adversaries pretend it did? What if the Apostles had lest the form of
Government different in several places, in some Episcopal, in some
Presbyterian, as a very learned Person does conjecture? Dr. Stillingfleet. Iren.
And what if the Presbyteries of those times had indeed the power of
Ordination, and intended to give that Power to all the particular Presbyters
that were ordained by them then? All this would only prove that the Presbyters
so ordained in those times had indeed the Power of Ordination, and that all who
were then ordained by them were validly ordained. But it does not therefore
follow that the present Ordinations by simple Presbyters is valid also, unless
it can be still proved that such a Succession of Presbyterian Government has
been continued down to our present times, and that the Power of Ordination is
now, also conferred by them on simple Presbyters, as they conceive it to have
been then. If all the Successions of those Presbyterian Governments be long
since extinct, (as most certainly they are now if they ever were in being) then
it is as vain to revive a title from them now, which is impossible to be
received from them, as it would be to revive the title of the Julian Family to
the Roman Empire. And therefore they being incapable of having Successors, on
this supposition, it must follow that the Episcopal Successions are the only
Successions now remaining of the Apostolical Power, so that neither Presbyters
nor Presbyteries can now have any more of the Power of the Apostles than what
they can derive from the Episcopal Successions.

CHAP. XXII. The Authority of administering the Sacraments is not now to be
expected any where but in the Episcopal Communion.
THE CONTENTS.
4. This Authority of administering the Sacraments is not now to be expected any
where but in the Episcopal Communion.. I. Hence it follows that all the
Authority which can be pretended in any other form of Government now, must be
derived from the Episcopal Government of that Age wherein that form first
began.. II. The first dividers of the several parties had never a power given
them of ordeining others by them who made them Presbyters.. III, IV. 1. They
have actually received no more power from God than they have received from
their Ordeiners.. V. 2. They have actually received no more from their
Ordeiners than what their Ordeiners did actually intend to give them, according
to their presumable intention.. VI. 3. That is to be presumed likely to be the
intention of their Ordeiners, which may be presumed likely to be thought
becoming by Persons in their Circumstances.. VII. 4. The securest way of
judging what the Bishops, who first Ordained these Dividers, thought becoming
must be by the Notions then prevailing when these first Dividers were
Ordained.. VIII.

THIS Authority is not now to be expected any where but in the Episcopal
Communion. This is a plain Corollary from the former Propositions. For from
thence it has appeared, that no Authority can be expected in this present Age,
but in that Communion where the Succession of Apostolical Power has been
continued to this present. And that this Succession has been continued to our
days in no other but the Episcopal Communion, I conceive to be a thing so
notorious as that I think our Adversaries themselves will not deny it. They do
not, that I know of, pretend the like uninterrupted Succession in any other
form of Government.

Authority which can be pretended in any other form of Government, or in any
other Communion at present, must be derived from the Episcopal, especially of
that Age wherein the several parties began. I suppose therefore that within
less than two hundred years since, that there was no Church in the world
wherein a visible Succession was maintained from the Apostles times to ours,
which was not Episcopally governed. I suppose also that the first Inventers of
the several Sects were at first Members of these Episcopal Churches, and
received both their Baptism in them, and all the Orders they received. I need
not use that Argument here, that they must therefore have received their
Authority in the Episcopal Communion, because there was then no other Communion
that could give this Authority. I think our Adversaries themselves as many of
them as pretend to a regular Ordination, or a valid Succession, will not deny
but that what Orders were received by them, were actually received by their
Forefathers in the Episcopal Communion, and by Episcopal Authority. Let us
therefore see whether the Orders so received can make valid what they now do in
their several Separations, that is, whether they can ratify their Ordinances,
or their Sacraments, or any thing else that concerns them as a Church, that is,
as a Society privileged with Spiritual Privileges?

exercise of that Power by these Persons in their separate condition which they
had before really and validly received from a just Authority which was able to
give it them. I make no exceptions as to the validity of that exercise of it,
much less as to the Canonicalness of it, which I know our Adversaries will much
less regard. The uttermost that can be made of that is only this, that such
Persons did receive a Power for their own Lives, which must expire with their
Lives, which this present Generation is not concerned for. If therefore I can
show that they of this Generation have nothing from them by which they can
justify the validity of their Mission, and consequently the comfort of their
Ordinances, which must, by the foregoing Principles, depend on this validity of
their Mission; this will abundantly answer my design. It will let them see
that, at least in the second Generation, no comfort of Church-Ordinances can be
had out of the Episcopal Communion. Which will both let them see how much their
Congregations must fail of being complete Churches, and consequently fail of
the comforts and Privileges of such Churches, when they are not able to
maintein a Succession; and must withal let them of this Generation see (at
least so many of them as have not Ministers Episcopally ordained) their
obligation, in interest, as well as Conscience, to return to the Communion from
which they have fallen, as they desire all those comforts they might expect by
being in a Church. And even for them, who at present enjoy such Ministers as
have had Episcopal Ordination, this may also let them see how much better it
were to return to the Communion of the Church soon, when they must be at length
necessitated to return at the death of that particular Minister, at least they
cannot hope for another ordained as he is, to succeed him; and withal how
unlikely it is, that their Churches should be the only Churches beloved by God,
when they are in imminent danger of that which God had threatened, in the
Revelations, to those Churches which had provoked him, of having their
Candlestick removed from them, of failing immediately in the next Succession.

first Dividers, nor any among them now who have received the Order of
Presbytery by Episcopal Authority, had ever any such Power given them as might
enable them to ordein others on account of their being made only Presbyters.
Whether they might have given them that Power I am not at present obliged to
enquire. It suffices at present, that they have it not. Their not having it is
alone sufficient to disanul all they do on supposition of it. Nor am I
concerned whether they be obliged by God to give with the Order of Presbytery
the Power of Ordination. No doubt our Adversaries will say that they are so
obliged. But does it therefore follow that they have actually done it, because
they are obliged to do it? May not the Episcopal Ordeiners fail of this, as
well as our Adversaries pretend them to have failed of many other Obligations?
If they do indeed fail, and do not actually give them that power of ordeining
others which our Adversaries suppose them obliged to give them, all that can be
said is, that their Ordeiners are to blame for it, and responsible to God for
it; not that the Persons ordained by them have it, but that they are wronged of
it, because it is not given to them. And is not the very supposition of their
being wronged of it, of their not having it given them, a certain Argument that
actually they have it not? unless possibly they suppose that either they may
have it without being given, or have it from God immediately, though they
cannot pretend to have it from Persons Authorized by him. But both these
pretenses have been prevented by what has been already discoursed: And their
not having this Power, on what account soever they be hindered from having it,
is alone sufficient to invalidate all they do that cannot be done without it.

actually received no more Power from God than they have received from their
Ordeiners. This plainly appears from what has been already proved that their
Ordeiners are they, and they alone who have represented Gods Person in dealing
with them, and God has not appointed any other means of dealing immediately
with them in these later Ages, and therefore all that Power which can be
thought to come to them originally from God must come immediately from their
Ordeiners.

actually received from their Superiors nothing but what their Superiors did
actually intend to give them. One would think this should be very clear, that
they can receive nothing but what is given them, and that nothing can be given
but what is intended to be given. This is indeed the great design of the equity
of the Law, to take care that contracts be observed according to the presumable
intention of the Parties that made them, and the dealing is then thought most
fair and equal when all that is given that can be presumed to have been
intended by a fair dealer, and when nothing more is extorted by the other
Party, whose interest may make him challenge what was never designed for him,
nay cannot, in any prudence, be presumed to have been designed. But for my
present Cause I am not concerned whether this be true. It suffices that nothing
be given by them concerning which they may be presumed that they did intend not
to give it. And though it were possible, that, supposing the Ordeiners were
obliged to give the Power of ordeining others when they made Presbyters, the
Law might presume that they did actually intend to do so, though their secret
intentions were to do otherwise, because the Law is always charitable, to judge
the best where there is no evidence to the contrary, and therefore might
presume in such a case that every man intends really as he is obliged to
intend; yet still the reason why, even in such a case, this might be
reasonable, is not because they can be supposed to give what they never intend
to give, but because they may, in this way of proceeding, be presumed to intend
what they do not really intend, which is still very reconcilable with what I
say, that their gift is to be measured by their presumed intention. And
therefore to prevent all possible exceptions of this kind, I do intend to
ground my Argument, not on the secret, but the presumed intention of these
Ordeiners, I am speaking of, and shall accordingly show that the Bishops who
ordained these revolting Presbyters ought to be presumed to have intended not
to give them a Power of ordeining others.

Law is always charitable to presume that every man intends as it becomes him
to intend: so it is withal prudent to presume his actual intention, not from
what others do think will become him, no nor from what will really become him
in the judgment of God himself, who is infallible, but from what the Person may
be presumed likely to judge to become him according to the general sense of men
in his circumstances. And therefore our Brethren must not judge of the intention
of the Bishop by the real will of God, much less by their own Notions
concerning Gods will, who cannot pretend to be more infallible than the Bishop
himself; but by the judgment of the Bishop himself, that he must be presumed to
intend what, according to the Principles which he is known to believe, as a
condition necessary in his circumstances to his being a Bishop, he must think
himself obliged to intend. This observation will prevent all the Arguments by
which themselves are persuaded that the Power of Ordination ought to be given
to every Presbyter, which they think the Bishop ought to will also, and
therefore that he ought to be presumed to will it, if he be presumed to will as
he ought. It is his actual good intention that we are concerned for at present.
And that must not be presumed from Principles disputed, but from Principles
already, and notoriously granted by him.

actual intention of those Bishops who ordained the first Separatists, there
can be no more prudent and secure measure than to consider the Notions then
prevailing concerning the power of Presbyters, especially those which were
fundamental to all the Canons that were then in force, as the Rules of Practice
of this power. These are most likely to have been taken by them for the
measures of their Conscience. And indeed the Canons were introduced into
practice by a universal consent, either when they were made, or when they were
received. And they who received power, yet were obliged to those Canons as to
the exercise of it; and therefore if they were either persuaded of the truth of
the prevailing Opinion, or were true to the obligations they had taken for the
observance of the Canons, these we have reason to presume to have been the
measures of their consciences, and therefore we have also reason further to
suppose their practices such as might agree with these on supposition that they
acted conscientiously. And though possibly some particular persons might have
entertained singular Opinions, yet it is not so secure to presume his
conveyance of Orders to have been fitted to his singular Opinions, not only
because it is not so easy to presume that any particular Person did follow a
singular Opinion, when the generality were so agreed in another; nor only in
regard of that resignation of Judgment which in those Ages was thought
excellent in point of conscience, on which account many thought themselves
obliged to follow the sentiments of their Superiors, in contradiction to their
own; but also because the validity of Succession depends on the practice and
sense of the Generality, of all places and Ages, but especially of all Ages.
And though a particular person might intend differently from the rest of his
Brethren, yet he could give no more than himself had received, and what that
was depended on the intention of his Ordeiner, which again will be best
presumed from the sense of the Generality. Only the supreme power is that which
can never be presumed to have been confined. At least this is a presumption
that the Bishops then acted according to the Opinions and Canons then generally
received unless they expressly declared themselves to the contrary. Their
silence is so far from being an Argument of their being of another mind, as
that it is indeed a very strong presumption, in this case, if in any, of their
consent. If they continued silent when it so much concerned them to speak their
minds that people might know the power they intended to give the Persons
ordained by them, they must expect that people would understand them according
to the received Opinions, and therefore we have reason to presume that they
themselves were desirous to be so understood.

primitive Church concerning the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters originally;
whatever also they thought concerning the fitness that the power of Ordination
should be given to bare Presbyters; yet it is notorious that the contrary
Opinion and Practice prevailed in the Church universally when the first
dividing Presbyters (whoever they were) were ordained, and for many hundred
years before, even very near the times of the Apostles, if we may believe the
concurrent suffrages of the most learned Antiquaries of our Adversaries. They
do not deny, and indeed the matter of Fact is too notorious to be denied by men
of any ingenuity, that whether they ought to be so or not, yet actually Bishops
were then distinguished from Presbyters, and distinguished in this very
particular, that the power of Ordination was reserved as a Prerogative of the
Bishop, and never communicated to simple Presbyters. Nor was it only their
practice to do so, but their Judgment that they ought to do so on account of
Conscience. It is very notorious that, at least a little before the
Reformation, Aerius, and the Waldenses, Vid. Alphons. a Castr. adv. Haeres.
verb. Episcop.
and Marsilius of Padua and Wiclef, were condemned for Heretics for asserting
the Parity of Bishops and Presbyters. And it is withal as notorious that every
Bishop was then obliged to condemn all Heresies, that is, all those Doctrines
which were then censured as Heretical by that Church by which they were
admitted to be Bishops; and how odious also the name of Heresy was then, even
on account of Conscience. I mention even these, because, whatever their
Doctrines were in other things, and how far soever they might go to justify a
separation from them who taught those Doctrines, yet our Protestants themselves
do not pretend to any Succession in these Western parts where themselves
received their Orders, but what was conveyed to them, even by such Bishops as
these were; nor do I use their Authority for proving the Truth of their
Doctrine in their censure of this particular Heresy: but only to clear what
their actual intention was in the Orders given by them, for which it is
sufficient that they themselves thought them true, whether they were mistaken
or not in thinking so. However this is so acknowledged to have been believed
and practiced in the Ages we are speaking of, as that the very Presbyterians
themselves do charge them with differing herein from the sense of the first
times, because the Bishops had, and exercised, a Superiority over Presbyters
which they conceive they had not in the Apostolical times. They therefore call
them Humane Bishops in opposition to the Scripture Bishops whom they conceive
not to have been distinct from Presbyters. And could the Bishops be no
Scripture-Bishops because they were distinct from Presbyters? And were not
their Presbyters as much distinct, for the same reason, from
Scripture-Presbyters, because they were distinct from Bishops? If this
consequence hold, why do they challenge the power and privileges of those
Scripture-Presbyters when they are so different from them? If it do not, why do
they asperse the sacred Order of Episcopacy in modern Ages with such a
deviation from the Primitive Rule?

Bishops of the later Ages did actually think they ought to be distinct, and
distinct in this very particular of Ordination; how is it probable that they
would give all that power to Presbyters that should leave no distinction
between them? that they would give that power of Ordination to them which they
took for the most characteristical distinctive, for the most incommunicable
Prerogative of the Bishop over Presbyters? Is it probable that they would have
been so partial against their own common interest to betray the honor of their
Order? Is it probable that they would do so when they were as firmly persuaded
that it was their right in Conscience, as well as that it was their interest,
that it should be so? Nay, have we not all the assurance on the contrary that
either Interest or Conscience can give us that those Bishops never intended to
give the power of Ordination to the Presbyters ordained by them? nay, that they
intended, on the contrary, to reserve it from them? And is not this as great an
assurance as can be expected in such a matter?

CHAP. XXIII. What influence the Opinion which prevailed in the modern Schools,
That Bishops and Presbyters differed not Order but in Degree, might have upon
the intention of the Ordeiners of those times?
THE CONTENTS.
Objection. Answ. 1. It seems rather to have been Interest than Conscience that
inclined men to the belief of this Opinion. This cleared from a short History
of this Opinion.. I, II, III, IV, V. Answ. 2. Though this Opinion had been
received more universally, than it appears it was, by the Multitude, yet it is
not likely that it would be so received by the Bishops, upon whose Intention
the validity of the Orders conferred by them must depend.. VI. Answ. 3. Though
the Bishops of those Ages had been universally of this Opinion, yet it does not
thence follow that they must have given to the Presbyters, ordained by them,
the power of ordeining others. It does not follow from the Notions of those
times.. VII. Nor from the reason of the thing.. VIII, IX. The Principles on
which those Persons proceeded in making one Order of Episcopacy and Presbytery
did not oblige them to believe that the Power of ordeining others was a right
of simple Presbyters.. X, XI, XII, XIII, XIV. Answ. 4. They, who then held this
Opinion, did, in all likelihood, neither intend, nor think of, any consequence
from it prejudicial to the establishments then received.. XV, XVI.

THE only considerable Objection that I can foresee in this matter, is the
opinion which then obtained among some of the modern Schoolmen, that Bishops
and Presbyters were all one Order, and differed only in degree, that the
consecration of a Bishop did not give him a new Character, but extend the old
one which he had received before when he was ordained Presbyter; and the
influence that this opinion might have on the Practice of those Bishops, if any
such there were, who then believed it, to give the whole essential power of
Bishops to those whom they ordained Presbyters, yet so as to restrain them in
the practice of it by their Canonical Obedience. I do not take all the
advantages I might against this opinion, as it was maintained in those Ages, to
show that it is too suspicious that it was rather pique than Conscience that
then brought men to it. Whenever it was vented, it seems to have been vented
with particular design, and particular provocation. Not to ascend to the more
knowing times, for in truth I am not desirous to touch the reputation any men
have gained in the World where it may be spared with the interest of Truth,
that is indeed where errors have not been introduced into the World by the
Authority of men of undeserved reputation, and there sure none can blame me for
complying with so unpleasing a necessity. The first time that it was retrieved
after St. Hierome seems to have been in the eighth Century, and then with a
particular design upon the Chorepiscopi, whose power was then maligned as
derogatory to the Ordinaries. And the wisest course for reducing them, and
withal the least invidious, was thought to be, not so much directly to magnify
the power of the Ordinary as to magnify the dignity of them who had been
subject to the Chorepiscopi, which they endeavored not only by degrading the
Chorepiscopus to the orders of a Presbyter, but by extolling the office of a
Presbyter to an equality in some regards with the Bishops, to whom they, the
Chorepiscopus himself, as well as other Presbyters, were obliged to pay
obedience, as indeed he was. All this dispute was nothing but pure design, and
how very disingenuously it was managed, appears from the several Epistles of
ancient Popes counterfeited in that Age, for this very purpose to prove the
Chorepiscopi to have been simple Presbyters, which may justly make us jealous
of the integrity of the same party in this other principle which they advanced
in opposition to it.

Office, and the Bishops themselves not being hitherto concerned to oppose this
opinion whilst it was so favorable to their interests, and whilst it added
to their power by the ruin of so considerable a Rival; though we have reason to
believe that this usefulness of the Opinion must have endeared it to the
Affections of those who had served themselves by it, yet we find little mention
of it from that time till it became again useful. That was when the Popes
aspired to a Superiority above all Bishops and Councils. Then it was that
Dispensations and Delegations grew frequent, so that nothing was performable by
the Bishop by virtue of his Office, but what was communicated to simple
Presbyters by Papal Delegations. This as it highly tended to the advancement of
the Roman See, so we may have reason to believe that all the Arts of the Roman
Court and its Parasites were employed in promoting it. And there was no more
likely policy for it than this, to make use of the same way for the subversion
of the Episcopal Power which the Bishops themselves had before been so
favorable to, when it was used against the Chorepiscopi. Which was a policy of
the same kind with that which that politic See had made use of in their
disputes with the Patriarch of Constantinople. They then seemed not so much
concerned for his equalling himself with them, as for his preferring himself
before the other Patriarchs. This they knew to be a more popular Art to make
him odious without discovering their own ambition. And in our present case, we
know that this was the reason that made the Papal Bishops, even in the Council
of Trent so averse to the asserting the Divine institution of their own order.
And this I believe our Brethren themselves will confess to have been a very
corrupt design. And yet in these unhappy times, whilst this ill design was
driving on, the Schoolmen flourished, of whose suffrages they are so proud in
this particular.

Pope was thus interested to oppress the Episcopal Authority whilst it was
capable to stand in competition with him; so when afterward the generality of
the Bishops were so linked to him by the dependence he had brought them to, as
that they could not be trusted as equal Judges in matters concerning his
Authority, and yet the public exigence of the Age forced them on those
disputes, they were then also interested to weaken their Authority when they
found it so prejudicial to their great design. This was plainly the case when
the disputes came in between Popes and General Councils. If those were to be
tried by Bishops, the Popes must evidently have carried it. Not only the
dependence of those, who were already made, on him for their preferment, but
the multitudes more he might have made, when he had seen it useful for his
purpose, of Titulars and Dependents, as he did in Trent, might have secured him
of the major votes of the Bishops in any Council that would be swayed by the
major votes. This the Papalins very well understood in the Council of Basil
when knowing how small a proportion the Bishops bore in that Council to the
rest that were allowed their votes there, Aen. Sylv. Comment. de gest. Conc.
Bas.
and how sure they were to be over-voted, so long as those other votes were
allowed, they desired that the matters might be determined by the Bishops alone
according to the Precedents of former Councils. But this the Cardinal of Arles
the great Patron of that Council would by no means endure, and among other
Arguments on which he insists in asserting the right of Presbyters to a vote in
Councils, this is the principal, of the opinion of St. Hierome concerning the
original equality of Bishops and Presbyters. And considering how many
innovations the Councils of those times, and this among the rest, were forced
upon by the exigency of their affairs, rather than by their Judgment, such as
the votes of the Universities and of the Deputies of the Nations, (of which I
verily believe no antienter precedent can be given) none can admire if in this
they were also transported beyond what they would have done otherwise. And he
who considers the reasonings of the Council for the Superiority of Councils
above the Pope, as they are represented by Aeneas Sylvius who was among them,
and then a friend of them when he gave this account of them, will find that
they are the very same which have been since insisted on by all Republicans and
Enemies of Monarchy in general, by which it is easy to judge how far the men of
that party, (many of whom were Subjects to Monarchs) were transported with the
heats of the disputes then managed. I mention not the exigency of affairs which
necessitated the Fathers of the Reformation to take refuge in this Opinion,
when they also found how the generality of the Bishops then in being were, by
their interest, obliged to stand by the Roman Court in the Prerogatives then
disputed, as well as by the Oaths they had taken at their Consecration; and
consequently how impossible it was to expect an impartial decision of their
Disputes from an Order so interessed and obliged whether in or out of Councils.
I have really much better thoughts of the integrity of these Persons than of
the Ages now mentioned. But even well meaning Persons are undiscernibly
inclinable to favor Propositions which are inclinable to their Interests, and
to have as little kindness for such as are against their interests. And how far
favor may go for the deciding things which are of themselves any thing
disputable, to divert men from considering the uttermost that can be said for a
contrary cause, and to make little things seem great when they are produced for
a favorable Opinion, he must be a stranger to Humane Nature and Conversation
who has not observed. However their Authority cannot be considerable in this
matter, because no Ordinations depended on them.

prejudg against the evidence producible by our Adversaries in this cause. I do
not therefore prejudg against the Truth of their cause, because their interest
obliged them to defend it. I am sensible how very possible it is that truth may
concur with interest. All therefore that I infer from these cases, is, that
there was in all these cases interest that might divert Persons who were not
very wary, as well as sincere, from the quest of Truth. But truly considering
the light of those times by which alone they were enabled to judge, without
prejudice to the light of our own Age which our modern Adversaries have
produced; and considering the prejudices by which they were generally acted, I
confess I cannot see how to excuse the mainteiners of this Opinion in those
times from insincerity. For how was it possible for them who received Isidore
Mercator's wares for genuine, to doubt of the Primitive Superiority of Bishops
over Presbyters, when he must find all the particular subordinations of the
Episcopal Hierarchy so minutely described in Epistles ascribed to Clement,
Cletus, Linus, etc. And what one was there from Hincmar's time downwards to the
times we speak of, who ever questioned them? Who could question it that
believed the many Legends then extant concerning the Primitive times of
Christianity? And who was there then who could find in his heart to question
them? especially considering their incompetency to judge of the evidence
produced by our modern Adversaries. They knew nothing of most of those
Testimonies amassed by Blondel. Many of their names they had not heard of, at
least they had not seen their Works, or if they had seen, they could not
understand them, as many of them as were in Greek and were not then translated.
The Scriptures themselves as they had been quoted by St. Hierome for this
purpose, were the principal Arguments they were capable of knowing. But it is
withal notorious how much more was then ascribed to Commentators of note than
any evidence of the Text it self for the sense of the Scripture.

Hierome's Authority in applying those Texts prevailed more with them than any
Inferences they could have made from the Texts themselves. For we otherwise see
very many instances of this partiality, not only of forced Literal senses, but
also of Mystical ones, which passed unquestioned among them, and were used upon
all occasions as Arguments against Adversaries on the Authority of Commentators
of far less note than he was of. And the single Authority of St. Hierome
against, not only the concurrent Testimonies of his own Age, and of Authorities
then esteemed every way as considerable as his own, but, (which past for a much
more prevailing Argument in the Ages I am speaking of,) against the concurrent
practice of the then Catholic Church, could not, in any probability, be taken
for so convincing an Argument in Conscience in times that were so manifestly
swayed by Authorities. I mention not the partialities that most probably got
St. Hierome himself that Authority among them, that the very favorable Epistle
of his to Damasus wherein he so extols the Sea of Rome, seems to have
recommended him to the counterfeiter of the Roman Council under the name of
Gelasius, not long before the time of Isidore Mercator, as the Authority of
that Council in Isidore's Collection might recommend him downwards, as soon as
that bundle of Forgeries had once prevailed universally. All the use that I
make at present of these insinuations is, that if it be suspicious whether the
men who then followed these Principles did embrace them out of a sincere sense
of their Truth, then they cannot be presumed to have been Principles of
Conscience. Which if they were not, this is sufficient to show that they are
not fit measures of the Power that was actually given by the Bishops of that
Age.

Multitude, yet how is it likely that it was so received among the Bishops
themselves? Is it likely that they would be generally so partial to an Opinion
so destructive of their common rights as Bishops? Is it likely that they would
be so partial when there was no evident prevailing consideration in point of
Conscience that might induce them to it; when it was a matter of dispute even
among disinterested Persons, and debated by Arguments and Authorities at least
as considerable on their side as on the others? If any particular Bishops had
been so strangely partial against themselves, and thought themselves obliged in
Conscience to be so; yet sure there is no reason to make use of it as a
presumption to judge of the minds of them who had not otherwise declared their
minds expressly, and to judge of them universally. And yet it has appeared that
the whole use of this opinion, for judging what Power was actually given, is
only as a presumption; and even this presumption is useless concerning others
than the Bishops. None but they pretended to the Power of giving Orders, at
least not to the exercise of that Power. And therefore whatever any else
thought besides the Bishops is very impertinent to our present purpose, because
it can give us no assurance what was actually intended by the Bishops, and it
is only their intention by which we can, in prudence, judge what Power was
actually given by them.

prudence, can never be supposed, that the Bishops of those Ages were
universally of this opinion, that their own Order was the same with that of
Presbyters, yet it does not thence follow that they must have given Presbyters
the Power of Ordination. It neither follows from the Notions of those times,
nor from the reason of the thing. And sure we cannot better judge of a matter of
this nature than by one of these two ways. It does not follow from the Notions
of those times. For even they who thought them to be the same Order, yet made
them different degrees; and that not only from the custom of the Church, but by
Divine Right also. But it could not have appeared how they could distinguish
them, even in degree, but by allowing something in practice to the Superior
degree as a peculiar Prerogative, and there was nothing thought so So
Epiphanius. (...). H^res. lxxv.4. And again: (...). Ib. And St. Chrysostom:
(...). init. Hom. ii. in 1. ad Tim. p. 289.
peculiar to the Episcopal degree as this power of Ordination. This was the
very particular excepted by St. Hierome Quid enim facit, excepta Ordinatione,
Episcopus, quod Presbyter non faciat? Ep. 85. ad Euagr.
himself, even where he most of all pleads for parity in other things. I know
there are of our Brethren who understand St. Hierome's words, not of the
original right of appropriating ordination to them as left to them by the
Apostles, but of a privilege actually allowed them by the practice of the
Church in that Age wherein he wrote, which I shall not now dispute. It suffices
that he made no mention of Ordination among the instances of their parity; nay,
that he expressly excepts this particular among his other proofs of the identity
of their Office, without telling expressly on what right it was that he made the
exception, which were very fair occasions to induce them to believe, that he
did not intend to give them the power of Ordination, especially when it was
withal notorious, and confessed by himself, that he lived in the Communion of a
Church, wherein Presbyters were debarred from the exercise of this Power. It
suffices that they who, in that Age followed his Authority, were not obliged by
any of their designs in promoting his opinion to understand him of a parity in
the power of Ordination; nay, never seem actually to have understood him so,
whatever other sense has been applied to him by those who have more subtly
considered him in our present Age. It is not St. Hierome's true opinion that I
am now concerned for, but that of those who might then have followed him. If
they never understood him of a parity between Bishops and Presbyters in the
power of ordination; If they did not really believe them equal in this
particular; if they actually believed that this distinction of degree was from
the Apostles, and that this power of ordination was the peculiar Prerogative of
the Superior degree; then certainly they who then followed St. Hierome, might
notwithstanding, if they maintained these things also together with his
opinion, thinks themselves obliged never to give the power of ordination to the
Presbyters that were then ordained by them. So far our Brethren are from any
solid ground of a presumption that such a thing was ever intended for them.

consequence was far from being owned in the actual sense of those times, so
neither will it indeed follow from the opinion of these Persons, that simple
Presbyters had any right to a power of Ordination. Though they believed
Episcopacy to be the same Order with Presbytery, yet their acknowledging a
difference in degree was enough to hinder them from confounding the peculiar
rights of the several degrees; and this we see was taken for the peculiar right
of Episcopacy. Though they conceived no new Character to have been imprinted in
the Consecration of a Bishop, yet withal they confessed that the Character of
his Presbytery was extended. And why may not this extension extend his Power
also, at least to some Acts to which he had not Power before? Nay, certainly
this very thing was intended by them, that it should actually do so. And if so,
then certainly this extended Power must have implied an addition of Power above
what was in it before it was so extended. Whence it will plainly follow, that
this Power of Ordination to which the Episcopal Character was extended was
wanting in them whilst they were simple Presbyters, that is, before it was so
extended. And therefore they who were of this Opinion, could not think
themselves obliged to give this Power to simple Presbyters. As to the Canonical
exercise of their Power, Presbyters still depended on their Bishops, even in
things not exceeding their Power as Presbyters. But when a simple Presbyter was
licensed to Preach or hear Confessions, this was not properly called an
extension of his Character. By which it seems most likely that by this
extension of the Character they did not only mean a Canonical Liberty to
exercise more Acts of the same Power which they supposed them to have received
before, but an addition of a new branch of Power, which because Presbyters
want, if they presume to exercise it, their doing so must prove not only
Vncanonical but invalid. Though they believed the substance of the Power to
have been the same, yet certainly the least that could have been meant by the
difference of Degree between Bishops and Presbyters must have been that Bishops
had that same Power independently which the Presbyters had dependently on the
Bishops, as to the exercise of it. Undoubtedly this they did grant who held
this Opinion of St. Hierome in the greatest rigor in those Ages I am speaking
of, if they did not grant something more. And yet this is sufficient for my
present design, both to show why these very Persons might not have thought it
fit to give this power of Ordination to simple Presbyters, and why it is very
rational for us also to presume that they did not actually give it them.

Societies the Power of giving Power to others is still reserved as a
Prerogative of him who has that same Power independently. And the reason of it
is very plain as to both parts, as to him that has the Power dependently, and
as to him who has it independently. He who has the Power of administering the
Sacraments, yet so as to depend on the Authority of another in the exercising
of that Power, cannot therefore with any Justice make a valid conveyance of
that Power to another, because he cannot himself be taken for an absolute
Master of that Power. Though the Power it self be given irrevocably, yet while
it is given with the condition of dependence, is cannot be alienable by the
Person to whom it is given, without the givers consent, because the right of
alienation supposes a property of our own, and dependence implies a reservation
of right to him on whom we do depend, which right, as it is absolutely
necessary to an entire alienation, so it cannot, with any Justice or validity
be disposed of without the consent of him whose property it is. Besides that
giving of Power does plainly belong to the exercise of Power, and to a higher
degree of exercise of it than that of the exercise of the Power so given, as it
implies a greater Power to give a Power, which includes a capacity of all the
Acts belonging to it, than only to give a liberty to exercise a particular Act.
And therefore he who has not a just title to give way to the exercise of the
Power so given, can be much less supposed to have one to that higher exercise
of Power by which the Power it self is disposed of. It is also clear as to him
that has the Power independently. It is necessary for Government that all
others do depend on those who are themselves supposed independent. But this
cannot be understood unless the independent Power alone be allowed the Power of
admitting to Office whom he pleases. If others may be allowed to give their
Power, they will soon make themselves independent, if they were not so at
first, by making a party and perpetuating it. But because this whole Power of
giving Power in the Persons I am speaking of is so eternally irreconcilable
with the safety of Societies, therefore it is fit it should never be given
them; and therefore, in the way of presumption, for which I am at present
concerned, it is to be presumed that it never was intended for them.

Order of Episcopacy and Presbytery, they would find that they did not in the
least oblige them to believe that this Power of ordeining others was a right of
simple Presbyters, The plain reason was, that they made their distinction of
Orders only in relation to the Sacrament of the Eucharist. And because simple
Priests had the full Power of this Sacrament, of consecrating as well as of
administering it, so that there was nothing higher requisite for the completion
of this solemnity reserved to the Bishop, nor capable of being reserved to him,
therefore there was on this account no room left for any Order above
Priesthood. And because this Power of transubstantiating the Eucharistical
Elements was then looked on as the highest instance of Power that could be
communicated to Mortals, because this was thought sufficient to exempt from all
Subjection to temporal Princes; nay, to place the Spiritual Power above the
Princes; and yet in this instance of Power, which had been so extremely
extolled in the Disputes of those Ages between the Popes and Princes, the
Bishops could pretend to do no more than what was performable by every ordinary
Priest, therefore it can be no wonder if, in this regard, many of them could
not allow any Order superior to that of simple Priesthood. He that is but a
little conversant in the writings of that Age will find that as the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation was very eagerly maintained as the great recommendation of
the Sacred Power in those Disputes which were then raised concerning it; so it
is particularly urged for the honor of Presbytery, as often as they were put
upon magnifying their Office. And this I therefore take in earnest to have been
the true reason that inclined those of the Writers of that Age that followed
this Opinion, rather than the pretended instances of Scripture, or even the
Authority of St. Hierome himself. For these were Principles for which as they
were more firmly interested, so I believe they were also much more heartily
believed in that Age than any on^ particular controverted sense of Scripture
recommended on the Authority of one particular Father. And therefore whatever
Superiority of Bishops over Priests was reconcilable with this allowance of a
Power of consecrating the Eucharist to simple Priests, all this might have been
acknowledged by these very Persons notwithstanding their making them the same
Order. And considering that this Power of Ordination was thus reconcilable,
this Opinion could not hinder those Persons from appropriating it to the
Bishops.

Power of the Priesthood over the Corpus Christi verum was thought common to
them with the Bishops, yet the Power over the Corpus Christi Mysticum (this was
the language of those Ages) was then acknowledged for the peculiar right of the
Bishops. And what can our Adversaries think themselves gainers by this Opinion,
as it was maintained then, if they did not think the peculiarity of this Power
sufficient to constitute a distinct Order? What matter is it whether they owned
the word or no, so long as they owned the thing which our Adversaries may
possibly think more properly imported by the word? Whatever the word do most
properly signify, yet when we use it, as we do now, to judge of the meaning of
those who used it, we are to take it as they understood it, how improperly
soever they understood it. And we have the rather reason to do so in this case,
because the word had no notorious sense antecedent to those Ages which they
might be obliged to mean, and which they might therefore be presumed to mean
where they did not very expressly declare the contrary. The terms of Ordo and
Gradus, as they were terms of Art, were entirely introduced by themselves,
unmentioned in the Sacred Writers, no nor as the constant language of the
Church, neither of the Catholic Church, nor even of the Latin Church for many
of the most ancient Ages. And why might not they be allowed to impose their own
signification on their own terms?

Power only to Bishops will make them a distinct Order, then they must confess
that the Authors we are speaking of were of our mind in the thing, and of
theirs only in the use of the words, which they will find will stand them in no
stead for the present design of proving their Succession. They must then say
that those Authors make Episcopacy really a distinct Order with us, though they
were pleased to call it only a distinct Degree with them. But if they grant
that this Power is not sufficient to make them a distinct Order, we shall not
be very solicitous whether they use that word so long as they acknowledge this
Power. This Power of Government being appropriated to the Bishops will, in the
consequence, appropriate the Power of Ordination to them, not only as
Ordination implies the giving of the Power of Government to inferior
Governors, but also as it is requisite for the ends of Government, not to give
simple Presbyters a Power of giving their Power to others, for fear of that
independence which would, in course, follow thereupon, even in the exercise of
that Power. Whatever our Adversaries may think of this reasoning in it self,
yet certainly they cannot deny it to have been agreeable to the actual Notions
of those times, which is as much as I am concerned for at present.

Notion of those times, found the Power over the Corpus Christi Mysticum on the
power over the Corpus Christi verum, yet even so there was room left for
asserting the Power of Ordination to the Bishops alone. For though the Power
over the Corpus Christi verum was taken for the highest exercise of Power that
was communicated to Mortals, yet even in that exercise of Power there were
several Degrees which might very probably incline them to acknowledge a
distinction, rather in Degree than in Order, between the Persons distinguished
by them; and this distinction of Degrees was sufficient for appropriating the
Power of Ordination to the Bishops alone. Even in the exercise of that Power,
he who had a Power to give his Power to another must be supposed to have a
greater degree of that same Power than he who had it only for his own Person,
and so that it must expire with his Life. Whether this was a distinct Power or
a distinct Degree of the same Power seems to have been the main dispute between
them who disputed whether Episcopacy were a distinct Order or Degree from
Presbytery. Whoever was in the right, it is sufficient for my purpose that they
were both agreed in this, that this Supreme, whether we call it Power, or only
Degree of Power was appropriated to the Bishops, so that it was never so much
as given to ordinary Presbyters. And what matter was it whether they called the
Character of the Bishop a new one, o^ an extension of the old one, which he had
when he was made Presbyter? These were also terms first brought into general
use by themselves from the private use of St. Augustine, and it was in their
pleasure how they would use them. It is sufficient for me that the Power of
ordeining others was not grounded barely on the Character it self, but on the
Character as extended, and therefore could not be validly challenged by them,
who had the Character alone given them without its extension.

Power of Jurisdiction over the Corpus Christi Mysticum for term of Life were
grounded on the Power over the Corpus Christi verum for time of Life also, so
that he who had the Power over the Corpus Christi verum could oblige the
Mystical Body to what terms he pleased, and set up what Jurisdiction he pleased
over them, when they could not have the true Body without him; yet so it self
there was a right reservable to the Bishop over the true Body which might both
oblige Priests to a dependence on the Bishop, and the whole Church to a nearer
and more necess^ry dependency on Episcopacy than on the Priesthood. The Priests
not having the exercise of their Power over the true Body, but by appointment
of the Bishop, must oblige the Mystical Body to a greater dependence on the
Bishop, than on Priests, in the exercise of this common Power. For this will it
put in the Power of the Bishop to deprive the Mystical Body of the true Body,
if he should forbid the Priests the exercise of their Power, though against
their consent: and will withal put it out of the Power of the Priest to oblige
the Mystical to any dependence on them, in opposition to the Bishop, by denying
them the true Body when the Bishop requires them to give it, because their
presuming to refuse it, in such a case, must be an invasion of the Bishops
right, and must consequently infer a Nullity in what they do without right to
do it. But the Priests not having this Power given them of giving their Power
to others, this must, in regard of this dependence of the Mystical Body on the
true Body, free the People from a dependence on the Priesthood, which cannot
secure them of the true Body in another generation. And on the contrary the
Bishops having this Power given them, and to them alone this will oblige the
Mystical Body to depend on them for a Succession, because they alone can
continue the administration of the true Body to them through all Ages of
Succession.

Episcopacy and Presbytery one Order, on the Principles now mentioned; so they
were certainly the actual sense of those who followed that Doctrine in that
Age. Most certainly they who were of this opinion could not intend to follow
the Doctrines, I do not say of the Aerians who had been reckoned in the
Catalogues of Heretics, S. Augustini and Epiphanli.
long before their own times, but even of the Wiclevists and Waldenses who had
been more lately censured for mainteining the equality of Bishops and
Presbyters. They who know how odious the name of Heretic was in those days;
and how express condemnations of them were required from Persons who were to be
admitted to preferments; and how these Catalogues and Councils who had censured
these Persons were the Standards whereby such Persons were obliged to judge who
were Heretics; they, I say, cannot believe that the Bishops of that Age could
have kept either their Communion or their Preferments, if they had been of our
Adversaries mind in asserting the Order and Character of Episcopacy to have
been the same with that of Priesthood. And they must still remember that it is
by what was maintained by them with a good conscience, that we must judge what
Power was actually designed for the Presbyters ordained by them. We must not
therefore understand these Opinions so as to think that the Persons, who
maintained them in the Ages we are speaking of, intended to exclude all
difference between the two Offices. And if any difference were acknowledged, it
must have been this of Ordination, which St. Hierome himself, the principal
Author of this Opinion, had acknowledged for such an inseparable peculiar
Prerogative of Episcopacy. And therefore we have all the reason we can desire
to presume that even Persons of this Persuasion in that Age did intend to
reserve this Power from the Presbyters that were ordained by them.

theirs is not capable of that Apology for submitting to an unjust Government,
which is usually, and I think very justly, made use of to excuse St. Hierome.
He indeed seems to have thought that in the Apostles Age the Presbyters had a
greater interest in the Government of the Church than was allowed them in his
own. But this did not hinder his submission to the Government even of his own
time, though it had not been so just; nay, did not hinder him from thinking
that it might then have a very just, though an only humane right. It was his
sense, not of the Government in the Apostles times, but of the Government of
his own times, that concerned his present practice. But that which these
Persons taught, who made Bishops and Presbyteries of the same Order, concerned
not only the Apostles Age but their own. They thought them still to be, not
only de Jure, but de Facto, of the same Order, and therefore could not think
themselves under any higher Duty to their Bishops than what was consistent with
their being of the same Order. And therefore if this had allowed them a Power
of Ordeining others, why did they not challenge that Power? why did they suffer
the Bishops to ingross it to themselves, and to secure their present
Usurpations to posterity for ever by an unquestioned peaceable prescription?
Could not any one bold Spirit be found who would stand up for the honor of his
Order? Could neither interest, nor conscience neither, animate some to give a
pre^edent of contradicting it? they do not seem in those Ages to have been
generally so me^k, and so fearful of disturbing the public Peace for what they
thought to be their right. Mighty quarrels were then engaged on for matters of
incomparably more trivial concernment; and where withal they had less interest
either to provoke or animate them than here. And if indeed they had thought of
any such consequences, as they must have thought, if their meaning in this
Assertion were such as our Adversaries are apt to understand it to have been;
how came it to pass that it escaped the censures of their then present
Superiors? Is it likely that it could have escaped those censures in such an
Age wherein policy was their principal study, and the principal employment of
their zeal was the maintenance of their present establishments? Did none of
these Persons who maintained these Opinions ever come themselves to be
Governors? And if their Opinions altered with their Interests, must they not
then have been conscious of the ill consequence, and mischievousness of what
they had maintained formerly? If none of them had been conscious of these
things from their own experience, yet sure their jealousy, and the
momentousness of the thing, would have made them suspicious, though they wanted
solid grounds; if they had only likelihoods. And these suspicions were
sufficient to have awakened all their diligence for suppressing them. When I
consider these things, I cannot but think that the Persons who then maintained
this Opinion concerning the identity of the Order of Bishops and Presbyters
must needs have been very far from thinking of any consequence prejudicial to
their present establishments, much less from attempting any thing in practice,
till pure necessity, as well as opportunity, forced them upon it. They did not
therefore pretend to excuse Presbyters from the least instance of their
Canonical Obedience to their Ordinary, even of that Obedience which was
prescribed by the Canons of those times. So far it is from being probable that
they intended to give them the peculiar prerogative of the Bishop, the Power of
ordeining others; nay, so far do they seem from so much as judging it fit in
Conscience that this Power should be given to them who were then ordained
Presbyters. And yet from what has been already said, it appears sufficiently
that nothing short of their actual intentions to give them this Power can
suffice to legitimate our Brethrens present Ordinations.

CHAP. XXIV. The Nullity of the Ordinations of the Non-Conformists proved from
the Power of the Bishops even as Presidents over the Presbyteries.
THE CONTENTS.
Bishops had the right of presiding over Ecclesiastical Assemblies sufficient
for our purpose.. I. 1. In regard of that Power which must be granted due to
him, even as President. This proved by these degrees. 1. Even by the Principles
of Aristocratical Government, no Power can be given but by the act of that Body
wherein the right of Government is originally seated.. II. 2. No act can be
presumed to be the act of that Body but what has passed them in their public
Assemblies.. III. 3. No Assemblies can dispose of the right of such Societies,
but such as are lawful ones according to the constitutions of the Societies..
IV, V. 4. The indiction of the Assembly by the President is a right consequent
to the Office of a President as a President, and a circumstance requisite to
make the Assembly it self lawful.. VI, VII. 5. The Bishops have always been the
Presidents of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, even as high as our Adversaries
themselves do grant the Practice of Presiding Presbyters.. VIII, IX. This
invalidates the Orders of our Adversaries.. X. This was a right which no
Bishops, how great Assertors soever of the identity of their Order with that of
Presbyters, ever did renounce, or could renounce, without making their
Government unpracticable.. XI. Though the Bishops had received their Power from
their Election by men; yet that would not suffice to make valid any Acts of the
same men without their consent after their Election.. XII, XIII. This right of
Presidency might hold though the whole right of their Power had been purely
Humane.. XIV. But supposing that right Divine, all that men can do can be only
to determine the Person, not to confine the Power. The reasoning here used will
proceed though Bishops had been made by Presbyters alone without the
concurrence and Consecration of other Bishops.. XV. The Primitive Bishops seem
indeed to have been made so by Presbyters without Bishops.. XVI.

BUT though we should suppose those Persons then to have been altogether of the
same mind which they conceive those to have been of who lived in the Apostles
times; though we suppose, not only that they thought it fit that the whole
power of the Bishop should be given to Presbyters, but that they had actually
given it them; suppose we that the Bishop had no more Authority reserved to him
than only to preside in their Assemblies, that is, to call them, and to fit in
the first place of them when they were convened, that is, supposing that the
Bishops Authority were no more than what was consistent with the Aristocratical
form of Government which they conceive to have been observed in the Primitive
times, (though this supposition be notoriously false concerning the Ages I am
speaking of) yet I do not see how, even this way, our Brethren can defend the
validity of their Ordinations by single Presbyters, especially as it is
practiced among them. Even by the Principles of Aristocratical Government no
power can be given, (I do not mean only that it cannot be given Canonically,
but that it cannot be given validly,) but to Persons who are at least in
conjunction with those from whom they receive their power, then at least when
they actually receive it. Which will consequently null all the Ordinations
which have been made in the state of separation, and will therefore make it
impossible for any Schism which is made by single Presbyters, in the way that
has been observed by our Adversaries, to maintein it self with any pretense of
Authority beyond one generation. And this must sure be very acceptable to those
generous Spirits who are more solicitous for Catholic Unity than for the party
in which they were born.

AND that this is so I shall endeavor to prove in two regards: in regard of
the power that must be allowed to the Bishop, even as the President of these
Assemblies; and in regard of that which must be allowed to other Presbyters as
fellow members of the same Assemblies. 1. In regard of the power of the Bishop
as President of those Assemblies. For by the Fundamental Principles even of
Aristocratical Government it is certain, 1. That no power can be given but by
the act of that Body wherein the right of Government is originally seated, that
is, in our case, of the whole Presbytery. It is against the interest of all
Societies, and the principles of all Government, that single Members even of
those who have otherwise power in conjunction with others to dispose of the
Government of a Society, should be allowed the power of disposing of it in
their single capacities. But it is peculiarly against the right of a
Polyarchical Government, because no particular Member has the right of the
whole Society, and therefore cannot dispose of the Government of it, which,
whether it be supreme or subordinate, must imply either a power over the whole
Society, or a power necessarily derived from that which is so. Even subordinate
Authority must be derived from the supreme, that there may be such an essential
dependence upon it as is necessary for the safety of all Societies. This will
therefore make it a Nullity in the thing, if single Members do presume to
dispose of that which is not their own right alone, but the right of the whole
Body.

nature of this Government, the right of it must be supposed to be in the whole
Body, so neither can any act be presumed to be the act of the whole Body, but
what has passed them in their public Assemblies. Though every particular
Member for himself should signify his own consent, yet it is not taken for the
act of the Society, till it be also signified in an Assembly, and it is taken
for the act of the whole Society, if it pass them in their Assembly, though
without the consent of every particular Person, so it have the prevailing vote;
nay, though that prevailing vote be not the greater part of the Society, so it
be only of the greater part of those which are present in such Assemblies. For
the reason of this I say no more at present, but that it is found necessary for
all Multitudes to agree on these Rules for settling Assemblies, and for giving
this power to what is done in such Assemblies to conclude the whole Societies,
and to the prevailing vote of those Assemblies to conclude the whole
Assemblies, before they can pass out of the state of a Multitude into that of a
Society, that is before they can have any Government that can solidly unite
them, at least before they can have any Government that can be practicable. The
same reasons which make this fit to be agreed on in any one Society are common
to all Societies as Societies, and therefore must be allowed the same force in
those that are Ecclesiastical as in those that are Civil, as they are capable
of being administered in this Life. And therefore God himself cannot be supposed
to have made a Government, even of his own institution, practicable, till he
have settled these Rules of administering it. And when they are once settled,
however they come to be so, whether by Gods own appointment, or by the consent
of the People, it will then be very just, as well as fit to conclude, that what
is done on pretense of the right of the Society out of such an Assembly cannot
validly confer any right of the Society, because, on the Principles of the
agreement on these Assemblies, they are not to be reputed as acts of the
Society. And certainly, as nothing, but the Society it self, can in Justice
make a valid conveyance of its own right, so it is not conceivable how the
Society it self can do it by any thing but its own act. Besides, the very
reason of agreeing on these Assemblies as the most convenient means for
administering the power of the Society, seems to be purposely to preclude all
surreptitious acts that might be pretended in the name of the Society, if
designing men might be allowed in their pretenses concerning what might be
transacted privately. And therefore the main design of settling these
Assemblies, seems to be for the establishment of this Negative, that nothing
might be taken for the act of the Society which is not the act of some such
Assembly. But yet proceeding on the Principles on which I have hitherto
proceeded in this whole Discourse, the Argument will have yet more force. For
supposing that the whole right of these Assemblies could not have proceeded
from the bare consent of the Society, but from the actual establishment of God;
the Society it self then can have no more power in the matter we are speaking
of, than what it can derive from the constitution of those Assemblies, and
therefore whatever were acted out of these Assemblies can never convey a right
of the Society, how validly soever it have been acted as to the real consent of
the particular Members pretended for it.

3. BY the same common Laws of all Assemblies of this nature, Assemblies can
dispose of the right of such Societies, but such as are lawful ones according
to the constitutions of the Societies. This is also agreed on in the practice
of Societies of this nature by as unanimous a consent as the former. As out of
Assemblies they have no power to act who might act in them, how many soever of
the suffrages, and how freely soever also had been gotten; so all those
Meetings, how numerous soever, for acts of Government, if they be not Legal,
they add nothing of advantage to the power of particulars singly considered.
They are not, in the eye of the Law, Assemblies but Routs, and their
concurrence, not consent but confederacy. And as it were Rebellion in
particular Persons to attempt any thing of that nature concerning the
Government, without the consent of their present established Governors; so
neither is there any thing in such a meeting that can give them any more power
as united than they had as they were singly considered, that may excuse them
from Rebellion. Nay rather, by the Principles of all Societies, that which had
not been Rebellion, if done singly, is counted so, if it be done in unlawful
Assemblies. And sure none can think it reasonable that the Society should be
obliged to ratify the acts of Rebels. It is not fit that any of its Authority
should be given into such hands, much less is it fit that being given them by
Persons as criminal as themselves, the Commonwealth should encourage the like
undutifulness in others by ratifying what is done by these.

fit, so neither is it just that the Society should be obliged by the act of
Persons unauthorized by her; nay, of Rebels against her Authority. And the very
reason why Rules are agreed on what Assemblies shall be counted lawful, and
what not, seems plainly to be that it may be known by what Assemblies the whole
Society shall be represented, and by what they shall not be so. And if the
Society be not represented by unlawful Assemblies, how can it in Justice be
obliged by them? How can any of its Legal rights be disposed of by them who are
not its Legal Representatives? All Societies are sensible of the great danger
to the public that may follow from promiscuous Assemblies; not only what
corrupt Arts may be used in them for depraving the sentences of Persons
otherwise of themselves never so justly disposed, but also what seditious
practices may be fomented and driven on for a forcible execution of such
corrupt sentences, and embroiling the public in intestine animosities. And
therefore the very design of these Rules seems to be for preventing this
corruption and disorder. And the most natural way of that is by abrogating the
acts of such Assemblies. Which antecedent Rules, whether they be from God or
from the People, are notwithstanding from that power by which the Society it
self, and all its particular Assemblies subsist, and consequently of greater
power than any particular Assemblies. And therefore it cannot be admired that
the ratification of particular Assemblies should depend upon it.

indiction of the Assembly by the President, is a right consequent to the
office of a President as a President, and a circumstance requisite to make the
Assembly it self Lawful. But especially this, by the Rules of all Societies, is
understood to be the inseparable prerogative of that Office, when, by the
fundamental constitutions of the Societies themselves, no certain places, nor
periods of time are agreed on for the keeping of any. For as the very reason of
ascertaining Rules for making Assemblies seems to be purposely to restrain the
Liberty of particular Members, to assemble when they please, for the
inconveniences now mentioned; so withal there must be some who may have the
power of assembling them when they judge it convenient for the public, and who
may withal be allowed for competent Judges of that convenience. For their
having no certain time allotted for them plainly implies that they are to be
celebrated as occasion requires. And when every one is not permitted to judge of
the occasion, and to meet when he pleases, and yet withal it is impossible they
should ever meet, unless some be allowed to judge when there is a fit occasion,
and to oblige others to be determined by them, it plainly follows that it must
be presumed that the Society is not destitute of a power which is so absolutely
necessary for the practicableness of Assemblies, and therefore that this power
must be presumed to be in some, though none be expressly mentioned for it. But
there is none concerning whom this power can be so probably presumed, none so
likely to have been mentioned, if any had been mentioned, none to whom all
undisposed power does, by the common Rules of all Societies, so naturally
escheat, as the President of the Assemblies. Even in the Assemblies a
veneration is due to him for his Office above all other Members, but much more
so out of the Assemblies, when none is in a likely way to be able to oppose
him, by the Laws of the Societies, whether singly or conjunctly, which must
needs give him the preference above all other particular Members where none are
expressly mentioned. For certainly he who calls an Assembly, must have some
advantage over all the Members called by him that he may oblige them to
convene, and it is necessary for the public, that they may be obliged to meet
when they are so called, that is, when the Judge of circumstances thinks it
necessary for the public good in present circumstances. But there is none who
can pretend to this advantage, I do not say of Jurisdiction, but even of
Authority and Reverence, above his Fellow Members, besides the President.

particular Members in such Assemblies expires with the Assemblies themselves,
so that in the intervals of Assemblies there remains no more of that power in
any of them which they have in Assemblies. But the convening of the Assemblies
is an act of Authority in that very interval, and therefore cannot agree to any
but the President, whose Authority alone can be antecedent to the meeting of
the Assembly, so that if it be the right of any, it must be his, because none
besides him is capable of it. And this is more certainly true of him who has a
right to preside in Assemblies when they are convened by virtue of his general
right to preside over the whole Society, as well when Assemblies are not
convened as when they are, than of him who is chosen by the particular
Assemblies for their particular occasions. And he who has his Presidency not by
virtue of any particular Election distinct from that whereby he received his
Office, (if his Office be not arbitrary, or confined within a certain time,)
but given him for term of Life, must have such a Presidency as I am speaking
of. Concerning such a President as this, the Negative Argument will hold, for
which I am at present concerned, not only that the Assemblies convened by him
are, in that regard, lawful, as they are convened by him, but also that no
Assemblies are lawful but what are called by him, because there is no other way
of making them lawful but the lawfulness of their Call, nor any power to call
them distinct from that of such a President.

Bishop was, not only in the more modern Ages, of which I have been
discoursing, the President of their Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and that not
arbitrarily, or by virtue of particular Elections, but constant, and for term
of Life; I say not only then, but as high as our Adversaries themselves do
grant the practice of presiding Presbyters. Which as they among them who
understand any thing of Antiquity do not deny to have been very early after the
Apostles days, so truly I do not understand how they can deny it to have been
practiced even then, without destroying the very Historical Faith of the
Primitive Church, without weakening that testimony on which we receive the
Canon of the New Testament in a matter as notorious to them as that Canon it
self. Not to mention the testimony of Ignatius, though truly I think they who
question it, (since the late excellent In vindic. Ignat. cont. Dallaeum.
defense of it performed with as great evidence as a matter of that Antiquity,
after the miscarriage of so many Primitive Records, is capable of,) might as
well have questioned several Books of the New Testament it self, which
notwithstanding they receive on lesser evidence; I say, not to mention this,
What can they say to the Angels in the Revelations? What to the testimony of
St. Irenaeus Iren. L.iii. adv. Haer. and apud Eus. Hist. iv.14.
concerning St. Polycarp who seems to have been one of them, whom he makes to
have been ordained Bishop of Smyrna by the Apostles themselves? What to the
testimony of Clemens Clem. Al. (...). apud Eus. Hist. iii.23.
Alexandrinus who mentions Bishops among other Offices of the Church settled by
St. John? What to the testimony of Hegesippus Eus. L.iii. Hist. Eccl. c. 20.
who makes the Kinsmen of our Savior to have been made Bishops from Domitians
time to that of Trajan? What to those who mention St. James Eus. Hist. ii.1.
to have been made Bishop of Jerusalem by the Apostles themselves? What of the
seven Polycrates Eus. Hist. v.24.
mentions as Bishops in his own See before himself, the first of which seems,
in all likelihood, to have begun in the Apostles times? Nay, what to all those
Catalogues of Bishops succeeding in the four Patriarchal Sees, particularly the
fifteen in Eus. Hist. iv.5.
Jerusalem from St. James to the destruction of the Jews under Adrian? Nay,
what to the Succession of all the Tertull. Praescr. Iren. adv. Haer.
Apostolical Sees to which the Fathers of the second Century do so solemnly
appeal to prove their own Doctrine Apostolical in opposition to the contrary
pretenses of the Heretics?

wilful forgeries, or general mistakes in a matter of Fact so near their own
time, without so much as any likely ground in History? How will they then
assure us that they were not mistaken in delivering to us the Books of the
Apostles which were not more notorious to them than their Government? And what
could have been a more likely occasion of their mistake of the Bishops being
the Governors of their respective Dioceses than this, that they were, at
least, the ordinary Presidents of their Ecclesiastical Assemblies? They will
not, when they consider it, find it so easy to avoid this Presidency of
Bishops, even in the Apostles times, whatever they may think of their absolute
Monarchy. They will not find their Arguments concerning the confusion of the
names of Bishops and Presbyters in those first times to proceed so firmly
against this. Though both these names had belonged to the same Office, yet it
does not follow but that one of that same rank might have been first, and, by
his privilege of being so might have had the power of their Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, though he had no further Jurisdiction over the particular Members
of such Assemblies when they were once convened. And without granting thus much
at least, they will not find it so easy, as they may think before they try it,
to solve the Phenomenon now objected. The most learned of our Adversaries do
themselves grant as much as I am concerned to infer from them. The (...) and
(...), by which they account for these things, amount to as much as I desire at
present. And Speaking of the Offices of the first Presbyter in his first Period
before the Year 136. he says they did public in collectis, sedulis universam
fraternitatem hortamentis ad bonum Pietatis certamen fidaque charitatis
obsequia excitare, eandem precibus excitare, ordinis consessus cogere, etc.
Praef. ad Apol. pro S. Hieronym. p. 6.
Blondell does expressly grant that these earlier Bishops who lived before the
deviation (as he thinks it) from the Rule of the Apostles, had this power of
calling the Ecclesiastical Assemblies.

rightful possessions of those times by a recourse to the Primitive
establishment of the Apostles, yet it will be impossible for our Adversaries to
convict the Bishops of the Ages I am speaking of, of usurping this right, at
least, of presiding in the Ecclesiastical Assemblies, and that even for term of
Life. And therefore if by this concession the Orders of our Adversaries may be
convicted of a perfect Nullity, it will then very nearly concern them to
consider how they can clear themselves of the Sacriledg of such exercising such
Orders, how they can expect any blessing or comfort in such Administrations.
Now that this is so will appear clearly from the Principles now mentioned. For
grant this power of perpetual presiding to the Bishops, and it will then follow
that the right of convening Ecclesiastical Assemblies will belong to them.
Therefore those Assemblies which meet without their Calling (as all those must
do which meet out of their Communion) can be no lawful Assemblies. But the acts
of unlawful Assemblies, though otherwise consisting of such Persons as had a
real power in lawful ones, are Nullities, can oblige the Society to nothing,
much less can they dispose of a thing of so great moment to them as their
power. They are not only Nullities, but offenses of that nature as that they
are so far from obliging the Societies in any equity to confirm them as that
they do oblige them by the highest common interest to punish them. Which
plainly shows that though Presbyters had been allowed a power of Ordination,
yet they could not validly exercise it out of the Episcopal Communion, and
therefore that whatever may be said to that Question, yet that cannot make it
questionable whether the Orders of our present Adversaries be valid.

right of presiding in the Assemblies was a thing which the highest Asserters
of the Identity of Order between Bishops and Presbyters in the modern Ages I am
speaking of, did undoubtedly never think the Bishops obliged to renounce. Nor
could any Bishop, how heartily soever he believed that opinion, be presumed to
give the Presbyters ordained by him a power of meeting without his leave, when
themselves pleased. And yet undoubtedly the Bishops were actually possessed of
that power by a peaceable prescription of many Centuries, and by the consent of
the Presbyters themselves who lived in them, so that the Presbyters then
ordained could lay no claim to it without an express gift from the Bishops who
ordained them, because they never had that power, nor were there any remaining
then who could give it them besides the Bishops. And indeed the Bishops could
not renounce this power without dissolving the Society, by making the exercise
of Government unpracticable, or without changing the whole frame of Government.
For supposing they had renoun^ed this right, who must have had it? If none had
it, how could the Society be secured that Assemblies should meet if none had
power to call them, if non had power to oblige particular Members to be present
at them when called? If any particular Presbyter had been entrusted with it,
that had only been an alteration of the Person, not of the right of the Office.
The new entrusted Presbyter would thereby become the Bishop, by what name
soever they would be pleased to call him, and all the change that ordinary
Presbyters would find by such an act would be only of their Master, not of
their subjection. If it had been given away indefinitely, no particular
Presbyter could lay a better claim to it than all his Brethren, and by all it
is not practicable, till they be considered as convened in an Assembly If it
had therefore been given to the whole Assembly, either they must thenceforth
have stated times allotted them for meeting, or every meeting must be allowed
to adjourn themselves and to appoint the time and place for meeting again. If
at any time no meeting were ascertained the Government would be dissolved. This
is indeed the way practiced in Peliarchical Governments, but such a resignation
of the Bishop as this must therefore have altered the very frame of the
Government. And where can our Adversaries give any precedent, either in
Catholic Tradition, or even in the times of the Scripture it self wherein any
such thing was practiced by Presbyteries? Where was it ever heard that they
called or adjourned themselves without the Authority of the President of their
Assemblies, by what name soever our Brethren will be pleased to call them?

Bishops came by their power of presiding, whether by the Election of their
Clergy or People, or whether by a new consecration by Bishops only. Let the
guesses of St. Hierome, the counterfeit Ambrose and Eutychius be as true as our
Adversaries can wish them. Let it be so, that the Bishops received no new
Consecration of their own Order, that no men but the Presbyters were concerned
in giving their power to them. Our Adversaries usually think they have
performed a great matter when they have produced these conjectures of these
Authors. And yet when they have made all they can of them, they are no better
than conjectures. These Authors lived too far from the times they speak of to
assure us of any thing Historically. Nor do they pretend to any Histories we
know not of, that might put us in any hope that they speak what they say on
better grounds than eonjecture. Yet these are the only grounds of all that our
Adversaries say positively in this matter. But, I say, granting that these
conjectures were true, and that not only the ancient Bishops, but the Bishops
of the Ages we are speaking of, had no new consecration, nor consequently had
any new power from what they were capable of receiving by the Canonical
Election of their Clergy, and granting therefore that all the further power
they pretend to by their Consecration is no just accession of power, and
therefore none at all; I do not see how, even by this power which they may
receive by their Election, our Adversaries can defend the validity of their
present Ordinations. For what if the Bishop had received his power from the
Presbyters? Does it therefore follow that the Presbyteries must not depend on
him when he has received it? Does it follow that they must still have power, as
freely as formerly, to assemble themselves without his leave, and either to
depose him, or to set up another in his stead, or at least to erect themselves
an independent Body on any Superior? Does it follow that such practices of
theirs would be valid, if they should attempt them?

peace in all prudent humane establishments. In all elective Kingdoms, the
Interreges have a power during the vacancy to dispose of the affairs of the
Kingdom till a new King be elected. But they as well as other Subjects would be
guilty of Treason, if they should attempt the same things afterward. Their
Assemblies would be as illegal, and their proceedings in them of as little
validity as those of other Subjects. So in St. Hieromes instance, Ep. ad Euagr.
the Army chose the Emperor, and when he was so chosen he was not invested in
his power by any Authority superior to that of the Army. Yet that power of the
Army expired as soon as he was once peaceably settled in the power received
from them. They could not then meet as they had done formerly. If they did,
such meetings were thenceforwards illegal, and their proceedings null. Much
less could they justify a revolt from him, or validly defend their
independence on him. Nay, the Emperor Valentinian, though he was chosen by the
Army, yet when he was chosen, he would not endure to be obliged by them even to
the nomination of a Colleague, though he after did it freely. So though the
Presbyteries had a power, in the vacancy of Sees, to do all things necessary
for the Succession of a new Bishop, yet, by the Rules of all successive
Governments, they can only be supposed to have it in trust, and that trust must
be presumed limited according to the design of the power by which it was
committed to them. It does not therefore follow that they can forbear the
Election of a Successor, and much less that they can justify their Assembling
and Acting without him when he is once named. Their power may then for all
this, expire, and they return to the condition of ordinary Subjects, whose acts
I believe our Adversaries themselves cannot think valid, if they presume to
give Authority. And the reason is plain because they cannot be supposed still
to have the power, after they have given it out of their own hands. And
therefore afterward they can neither validly exercise it, nor validly dispose
of it otherwise against the fundamental Laws for settling Succession in the
Society, for which they are supposed to be entrusted.

right of Presidency were purely humane. Yet even so Persons, who have given
the power out of their own hands, cannot recall it again at pleasure, but must
be obliged to stand to their own act. And as this will oblige such as were at
first free, if any were such, in matters alienable by them, and those by whom
the Laws for Succession were first made; so much more will it oblige posterity
who must find themselves already confined by the acts of their Predecessors.
These can pretend only such a right as they have received, and therefore if
they exceed that, they usurp a right, which was never theirs, and therefore all
they do must be invalid. Indeed if the supreme right of managing their own
Assemblies had been, by divine right, unalienable from the Primitive
Presbyters, they, who once had it, might therefore challenge it again,
notwithstanding any Contracts whatsoever for parting with it, because the
Contracts themselves were invalid, and therefore could not deprive them of a
right which they had before they made those Contracts, but must leave them in
the same condition wherein they found them. But what is that to Posterity?
Suppose the modern Presbyters of the Ages I am speaking of, had never given
their ^ishops the power of presiding over their Assemblies. Suppose we that
they were not obliged to stand to the Contracts of their Predecessors in this
matter. All that would thence follow is only this, that they are now in the
same condition as if those Contracts had never been made. But though they have
not alienated a right, that does not prove they have it, unless they had it
antecedently to the alienation. But that is a thing posterity cannot pretend
to. They never had this right given them, and therefore cannot pretend to have
it, though they never alienated it. And they are, at least, thus far obliged by
the acts of their predecessors, as they were thereby hindered from having this
power given them, whether they be, or be not, obliged by those acts of theirs
which may pretend to have alienated it from them. And till our Brethrens
Predecessors who were then ordained can prove that they once had this right
given them, I shall not be concerned whether they have alienated it, or not,
nor consequently whether they be bound to stand to the alienation of their
Predecessors.

power of Episcopacy be Divine, and all that men can do in the Case be only to
determine the Person, not to confine his power; then certainly it will follow
that though men may this way make him, (which is all our Brethren can pretend
to prove) yet they may not therefore, after he is made, either deprive him, or
make another, or exercise the Government themselves without him as freely as
before. For as soon as that power is given him by God, they immediately become
his Subjects, and have then no more power to prescribe limits to his Authority
than they have to do so to the Authority of God himself. Nor am I here obliged
to take the advantage I might take from the peculiar way by which I have proved
Ecclesiastical power to be derived from God. It is sufficient for my purpose
that it be no otherwise from God than that is of every supreme Civil
Magistrate. It is not usual for Kings to be invested in their Office by other
Kings, but by their Subjects. Yet when they are invested, that does not in the
least prejudice the absoluteness of their Monarchy, where the fundamental
constitutions of the respective places allow it them, much less does it give
any power over them to the Persons by whom they are invested. But they are
then, and afterward, as much his Subjects as any others are who have no part
in the Solemnity. And therefore though it had been true that the Presbyters at
first, had not only elected, but placed the Bishop over themselves, as St.
Hierome expresses it; nay, supposing those same Presbyters who had chosen him
should have also used all the ceremonies of Consecration to him, that they had
invested him in his Office by Prayer and Imposition of hands, Eutych. Annal.
Alex. Ed. Oxon. p. 31.
as Eutychius pretends, nay, supposing that no Bishops had any more to do in
his Consecration than Kings have to do in the Inaugurations of our ordinary
Kings; all this, I say, being supposed, which is more than they can prove by
any competent testimony; it will not thence follow that those same Presbyters
who chose and Consecrated him, must have any more power over him, or to act any
thing without him, or to withdraw their obedience from him, after he is so
chosen and Consecrated, than those same Persons have over the Princes who are
Inaugurated by them; and all their presumptuous practices of such a power, may,
notwithstanding all this, be not only as punishable, but as invalid, as the
like presumptions would be in the Inaugurations of Princes. Nor is it only true
that this may be so, (though that alone be sufficient to weaken our Adversaries
confidence in this way of arguing,) but indeed it must be so, whenever the
Person so invested is supposed to be invested in the supreme power, and
whenever the Society over which he is placed, is also independent on all other
Societies. Such a Person can never be placed in his power, if he may not be
placed in it by them, who, after he is placed in it, must themselves be his
Subjects as much as others, unless he be placed in it by his Predecessor, which
no Society can safely depend on for a constant Rule of Succession. In his own
Society he can therefore have none of his own Order that can perform the
Ceremony to him, because we suppose him to be supreme, and there cannot be two
such in one Society. And if he must depend on the supreme powers of the
neighboring Societies for an investiture, so that he could not be validly
invested without them, this would both be dangerous in suspicious times, and
would besides be very prejudicial to the liberty of the particular Society for
which such a Governor were concerned.

must have been the way observed at first in the making of Bishops, how
absolute soever I conceive them to have been when they were once made, and how
invalid soever I think the actings of Presbyters would be which were done
without his consent, after his Consecration, though they were those very
Presbyters by whom he had been Consecrated. And I wish our Adversaries had
Authorities suitable to their confidence, either better than conjectures, or,
if no better, yet more ancient than the time of St. Hierome, whose contemporary
he was who wrote the Commentaries under the name of St. Ambrose, much more than
the very exceptionable testimony and Age of Eutychius. This seems best to agree
with the absoluteness of particular Churches before they had, by compacts*
united themselves under Metropolitans and Exarchs into Provincial and Diocesan
Churches, as the word Diocese was understood in the Eastern parts in the
language of that Age. And this seems to have been fitted for the frequent
Persecutions of those earlier Ages, when every Church was able to secure its
own Succession by its own power without depending on the uncertain
opportunities of the meeting of the Bishops of the whole Province. And the
alteration of this practice, the giving the Bishops of the Province an interest
in the choice of every particular Colleague, seems not to have been so much for
want of power in the particular Churches to do it, as for the security of the
compacts, that they might be certain of such a Colleague, as would observe
them, whose Communicatory Letters they might therefore not scruple to receive,
when they had first, by their own act, satisfied themselves of the trustiness
of his Person before his Consecration. However the matter was, I cannot but
think that it was the interest of the neighboring Bishops in the
correspondence of every particular Bishop that first occasioned and procured
their interest in his Election. Nor can I tell how the Succession could have
been so secure otherwise, unless every Bishop had named and constituted his
Successor in his Life time, for which they had precedents in the Successions of
the Philosophers, in imitation whereof I have already observed, how probable it
is that these Ecclesiastical Successions were framed. But then withal, as that
way was uncertain, so when the Philosophers failed to nominate their own
Successors, then the Election was in the Schools. But this would even then only
warrant such acts of those Presbyteries which held correspondence with their
own Bishops, and with the Episcopal Communion; but in these modern Ages it can
only excuse those to whom the power was returned by the Bishops who had been
peaceably possessed of it for many Centuries before. This I note, that it may
not be drawn into a precedent now any further than it is fit and reasonable.

CHAP. XXV. The Nullity of the same Ordinations proved from the right of
Episcopal Presbyteries as Presbyteries.
THE CONTENTS.
2. Even from the Principles of Aristocratical Government, from the right which
Episcopal Presbyteries ought to have in giving Orders, as they are considered
as Presbyteries.. I, II. This proved by these degrees, 1. Though a Presbyter,
when he is once made, is a Presbyter in the Catholic Church, yet the reason
that makes him so is that correspondence of the whole Catholic Church with
that particular one of which he was made a Member at his Ordination.. III, IV,
V, VI. 2. Hence it follows that he who cannot validly make out his Authority in
the particular Church in which he pretends to have received his Orders, cannot,
in reason, expect that the exercise of his Authority should be ratified in
other Churches who cannot thus be satisfied that he has received them.. VII. 3.
The Church, by which the validity of the Orders of every particular Presbyter
must expect to be tried, must not be a Church that derives its beginning from
him, but such a one as must be supposed settled and established before he could
be capable of any pretensions to Orders. Applied to single Presbyters.. VIII.
To whole Presbyteries made up of overvoted single Presbyters.. IX, X, XI. 4. No
Orders can be presumed to have been validly received in any particular
Episcopal Church as Presbyterian, without the prevailing suffrages of the
Presbyteries.. XII. A smaller over-voted number of Presbyters cannot validly
dispose of the common rights of the whole Presbyteries.. XIII, XIV, XV. The
power given in the Ordination of a Presbyter is a right of the Presbytery in
common by the Principles of Aristocratical Government.. XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX.
An Objection answered.. XX, XXI, XXII. Another Objection answered.. XXIII,
XXIV. Retorted.. XXV. The reason of the Retortion given.. XXVI.

validity of our Adversaries Ordinations, even from the right of Aristocratical
Government, and that is from the right of their Fellow-Presbyters as well as
themselves. If we should allow the right of Ordination to Presbyters as
Presbyters, as our Adversaries desire, yet that will not justify the validity
of the Ordinations of single Presbyters, no nor of a smaller part in opposition
to the greater by which it is over-voted. And our Adversaries cannot defend
their Ordinations at present any better than by the single acts of particular
Presbyters over-voted by the greater part of the Presbyteries of which they
were originally Members. Their first Ministers which began the separation were
much the smaller part of the respective Presbyteries to which they were
related. And though they might, if they had continued in the Communion of the
Church, have had their single votes in all the acts of Government, and the
disposal of all the Offices which, by the practice then obteining, were allowed
to the whole Presbyteries; yet they could never have obtained that the Offices
disposed of by their single votes, must have been validly disposed of and
ratified by the rest by whom they were over-voted. And sure they cannot expect
to be gainers by their unpeaceableness; that their single votes must be
esteemed of greater value out of the Church, than in it; that they, who could
not have made Presbyters in the Church against the prevailing vote of their
Brethren, should be allowed to make as many as they please on condition they
will divide from their Brethren, and make themselves the Heads of a popular
party.

Societies of the like nature. Though the Aldermen of Corporations have a power
together with the Mayors to dispose of the Offices belonging to their
respective Corporations; yet if the whole Table shall meet by themselves in
separation from the Mayor, and in opposition to him, however they might
over-vote him if he had been present, and their assembly lawful, yet what they
should do in the Case we are now supposing, would be a perfect Nullity, and
unobliging to the Corporation. But if any single Alderman should separate from
all his Brethren also, and should of himself undertake to dispose of the things
or Offices of the Corporation, could any of our Brethren themselves approve
them in it? Could they think the Offices so disposed of by them validly
disposed of? Could they think the Corporation obliged to ratify them? And yet
it is strange that they should not see how like this Case is to that of their
own Predecessors. The first Ministers they had ordained in the separation were
ordained by such Presbyters as these, and by such an act as this now mentioned.
And their whole Succession since that time has been maintained generally on no
better a Title. This representation of their case may possibly affect some
popular capacities better than the naked reasons. But that the more judicious
among them may see that my desire it to deal fairly and heartily with them, and
not to represent their cause more invidiously than it deserves, or to take any
advantage that may be taken from a false representation of it, I shall
endeavor to reduce the reason to a more close way of management under the
following considerations, which I shall entreat our Adversaries to consider
impartially.

Presbyter, when he is once made, is a Presbyter in the Catholic Church, yet
the reason that makes him so is the correspondence of the whole Catholic
Church with that particular one of which he was made a Member at his
Ordination. By his being a Presbyter in the Catholic Church, when he is once
made, I do not mean that he may canonically exercise his Power in all
particular Churches where he may have occasion to come, without dependence on
the respective Governors, but that the exercise of his power in his own Church
is to be ratified over the whole Catholic Church in general, that they are to
suppose the Sacraments administered by him to be validly administered, and that
therefore they are not to rebaptize Persons baptized by him when they come to
live among them, nor to refuse their Communion to such to whom he thinks fit to
give it, nor to receive to their Communion those who are excluded from his; and
that they are also so far to ratify the Authority received in his own Church
from those who had power to give it him, as that, if they think fit to permit
him to exercise his power within their Jurisdiction, they do it without
pretending to give him a new Authority, but only a new License; and that
wherever he can exercise his Authority without Canonical injury, as in
Heathenish or Heretical Countries (where no Canons do oblige) ratify all his
acts of power the same way as if he had performed them within his own Canonical
Jurisdiction. This is more than is observed in civil Societies. One Country is
not bound to confirm the censures of another, they are neither obliged to
banish their exiles, nor to receive their Countrymen to the same privileges
among themselves which they enjoyed in their own Country, nor to receive their
Magistrates to exercise power among themselves without a new Commission which
may give them a new power, which the Authority of their own Country was not
able to give them.

power that the Presbyters of our Adversaries may pretend to on account of
their being Presbyters of the Catholic Church, is, because this is the only
pretense that they can plausibly make for the validity of what they do.
Canonical License they cannot so much as pretend to, for exercising their power
within the Jurisdictions of others without their leave. And it has already
appeared that they can make out no Succession from the Apostles, but what must
originally have come from Episcopal Ordination. That therefore they should
expect that the exercise of a power received from the Bishops, yet exercised
within their Jurisdiction, without the License of the Bishops; nay, contrary to
their express prohibition, should be counted valid, how unlawful soever, must
be from the irrevocableness of the Authority at first received by them, and the
unconfinedness of the design of that power antecedently to those Canons by
which it was afterward made irregular in its practice. Were it not for the
nature of the unconfinedness of this power, they could not pretend to any right
to exercise it out of the Jurisdiction of him who gave it them, nor even within
that Jurisdiction without his leave. And therefore if this will not do it, they
can have nothing that can defend their Usurpations from being invalid, as well
as uncanonical.

correspondence of the Catholic Church with that particular one in which he
was ordained, is the true reason why all other Churches are obliged to ratify
the acts of every particular Presbyter, will appear, if it be considered, that
by his Ordination in his own particular Church he can have no Jurisdiction
given him over any other which is not under the Jurisdiction of that particular
Church from which he has received his Orders. And therefore the reason why they
are obliged to confirm his censures cannot be any Authoritative deference they
owe to him, such as Subjects owe to even their fallible Superiors, even in
matters, wherein they think them actually mistaken, yet so to practice as if
they thought them not mistaken; but purely their own actual conviction
concerning the reasonableness of the thing it self, because they either know or
presume it to be fit that his censure should be confirmed. But this reason of
the thing would not hold, were it not that his Church and theirs are in those
things the same, and as they give the same advantages, so they require the same
qualifications, which whoever is presumed to have in one, cannot, by them by
whom he is presumed to have them, be at the same time, presumed to want them in
the other. In other Societies, where the privileges conferred are proper to
the Society, the qualifications are so too. And therefore though one Society be
really satisfied that a Subject has deserved well of another, and that he has
deservedly received his reward for his eminent deserts from that Authority
which had power to give him it, and therefore that he has a just title to a
reward; yet are they not obliged, in any reason, to give him the same honor in
their own. For the nature of these Societies are so little interessed in common
as that the very same performance which is eminently serviceable to one may for
that very cause be as eminently disserviceable to the other, as when they are
in a state of hostility. However it is certain, that, as their interests are
very different, so the means of serving those interests are very different
also, and therefore that there is no real consequence that he who has indeed
obliged one Society, must, in doing so, oblige all others also.

benefits of the Sacraments are such as that he who has them in one Church
cannot, by him, who supposes him to have them there, be, at the same time,
supposed to want them in another. Regeneration, and pardon of sins, and a
Mystical Union with Christ, are the designed effects of the Sacraments. And it
is impossible that he who has these in any one Church can be presumed to want
them in another, by them who presume he already has them. And as no Church can
think it in her power to exclude from her Communion those very Persons whom she
judges regenerated and pardoned and united to Christ; so if she be convinced
that these benefits are validly conferred by a Presbyter in another Church, she
must, in reason, be obliged to treat them as such in her own. Now whether they
be validly conferred, or not, that she is to try by his Ministry. If his
Ministry be a valid Ministry, his Sacraments must be valid Sacraments, and
actually confer the benefits designed by them to Persons not unqualified to
receive them. And whether his Ministry be valid or no, that is, whether he be
indeed a Legal Representative of God, so as to oblige him to ratify what is
done by himself in his name, this being an act of Authority, and of Authority
visibly administered by men, however proceeding originally from God, it must be
judged the same way as is usually made use of in judging concerning acts of
Humane Authority, that is, by considering the power by which he has received
it. And because, by communicating with the Church of which such a Presbyter is
a Member, and from whence himself pretends to have received his Authority, she
plainly acknowledges that that Church has really a power to give him that
Authority he pretends to, therefore the only way to satisfy her self in this
matter is to examine the truth of his pretenses, whether he has indeed received
that Authority he pretends to, from those Persons from whom he pretends to have
received it. Which way of trial does plainly resolve her judgment in this
matter into her correspondency with his Church. By that she judges whether his
Authority be good, and whether he have actually received it.

validly make out his Authority in the particular Church in which he pretends
to have received his Orders, cannot, in reason expect that the exercise of his
Authority should be ratified in other Churches who cannot thus be satisfied
that he has received them. For their duty of correspondence being primarily
with Churches, and only secondarily with particular Persons as they relate to
particular Churches, (which is particularly true in acts of Authority, which
cannot be supposed in any particular Person, but by derivation from some
Church, or, which is to the same purpose, from some Ecclesiastical Person whose
act is to be taken for the act of the Church) it must follow that the trial of
the pretenses of any particular Person to Authority must be by examining his
reception of it from the Church. And therefore if it cannot appear that he has
received any such Authority as he pretends to, from that Church wherein he
pretends to have received it, he is to be presumed not to have it at all, and
therefore all that he presumes to do on supposition of it must be null and
invalid.

Church by which the validity of the Orders of every particular Presbyter must
expect to be tried, must not be a Church that derives its beginning from him,
but such a one as must be supposed settled and established before he could be
capable of any pretensions to Orders. For no other Church can be supposed
proper to try him by, because the Authority of no other Church can be presumed
good antecedently to his being so. All the Authority, nay, the very being of a
Church set up by a particular Presbyter, must it self depend on the Authority
of the Person by whom it is set up. If he be no Presbyter* such a Congregation
cannot be a Church, in the sense we mean the word at present, and therefore
cannot be capable of any Ecclesiastical Authority. Whence it will follow that
he cannot by any act of such a Church derive Authority, if he wanted it before,
because they can have no Authority but what he brought over to them. If he
brought none, they have none to give him. If they had any, yet not such as were
proper for this purpose; both because it is hardly possible that it can be more
notorious than that which was, at least, in time antecedent to it, and because
at least it cannot be such a Church as other Churches have held correspondence
with antecedently to their correspondence with his particular Person, and
therefore whose Authority might have been presumed to have been granted by them
on account of their correspondence with them. And there will appear the less
reason either that this way of trial should be right, or should be admitted by
them, because it is against the interests of all Government whatsoever, and
will justify the practices of any seditious Person who can be so successful in
his seditious practices as to gain himself the reputation of being the Head of
a seditious party. To be sure the party headed by him will give him all the
Authority they are capable of giving him. It is their interest to do so, at
least in the beginnings of disturbances, and as it will oblige him to their
interests, so it will give him greater advantages for promoting those interests
effectually. And then what Government can think it self secure, if it were so
easy to justify seditious practices? How can we think that Governments should
ever be favorable to Principles so pernicious to the rights of Government in
general?

Churches erected by single Presbyters, but concerning such also as had whole
Presbyteries made up of multitudes of single Presbyters, who had been
over-voted in their several Presbyteries respectively. Especially if they
presumed to exercise their Government in the Jurisdiction of another. This
would also be a precedent as favorable to sedition and as destructive to
Government as the other. If fugitive over-voted Magistrates of several places
may invade the Territories of a Third, and there erect themselves into an
absolute Senate, independent on the Government of the place, what security
could there be for any Government? For can we think that those same Persons who
had behaved themselves seditiously in their single capacities, would not do so
also when they were united, and when their common interest still obliged them
to do so, when they might thereby so much better their disadvantages in their
respective Presbyteries? It is the humor of such Persons to unite against a
common Adversary; at least, for a time, how seditious soever they might be
otherwise. And certainly they might expect better condescensions from Persons
as criminal as themselves, who had themselves also many unreasonable things to
be born with, than from their more innocent equals who had Justice on their
side, much more than from their Superiors. And what could any Ecclesiastical
censures signify, if they who had been ejected singly might be thus allowed to
confederate themselves into a Communion and a Presbytery independent on those
from which they had been ejected? Who would value Excommunication or
Deprivation, when they might so easily restore themselves into a condition as
good as that from which they had been ejected, and might, at the same time, so
easily revenge themselves on those by whom they had been ejected, by setting up
another Government within their Jurisdiction, whose acts must also be accounted
as valid as their own? These things show that such a precedent of Presbyteries
erected out of Persons over-voted in their particular Presbyteries, would be
injurious to the common interest of Government in general, though the form were
every where Presbyterian, as well as to those particular Governors by whom
they had been ejected, and to those in whose Jurisdiction they were assembled*
And its being against the common interest of Government, is, as has been
observed, a great presumption that it is against Justice also.

presumption, the same reasons of exception lie against the Justice of such a
Presbytery as against the acts of single Presbyters. I mention not the Canons
that forbid all Churches to receive the Excommunicates of each other, that put
Communicants with them into the same condition with the Excommunicates
themselves, that deprive them all of the Communion of all those Churches who
maintein a correspondence with each other in the observation of those Canons. I
mention not that common interest which, at first, induced the Governors of
particular Churches to agree upon those Canons, and obliges all, even those
that never received nor heard of those Canons, yet to be determined by them in
their practice, on the same account as all, even the most barbarous, Nations
are obliged by the Law of Nations though never explicitly received by them,
because these are as necessary for the common interest and correspondence of
Ecclesiastical, as the other are for those of Civil Societies. Which
consideration must extend the ratification of the censures of particular
Churches to the Catholic Church, as the Law of Nations is common to all
Nations, so that the Excommunicates of every particular Church must be so to
the Catholic Church also. And then sure it will be hard to understand how they
who are de Jure out of the communion of all Churches, can yet be in the
Catholic Church, or how they, who have no right to be members of any Church,
can by their meeting together become a Church, and become capable of
Ecclesiastical Authority. Which reason will, in the consequence of it, reach
Schismatics as well as Heretics, how little soever it be observed by our
Brethren who are very little used to take in the rational rights of Government
in general in their disputes concerning the Government of the Church.

invalidate the acts of these Presbyteries which were urged against the acts of
single Presbyters among them. Whatever may be thought of such a Multitude of
over-voted Presbyters in a Heathen Country, where the right were primi
occupantis; yet where a Government is already possessed, their encroaching on
that must be as invalid as if they should take upon them to dispose of the
goods of such Persons as were in actual possession, whatever might be thought
of what conveyances they might also make of goods that were under no propriety.
And the reason of these two cases is so exactly the same as the conveyances of
power must, in such a case, be as invalid as the conveyance of property.
Besides, according to the nature of Government, which admits of no competition
within its own Jurisdiction, strangers, how numerous soever, immediately become
Subjects by living in the Jurisdiction of another, whatever they be in their
own, and that with this disadvantage also beyond the natural Subjects of the
place, that they can have no interest in so much of the Government as the
Natives of the place may pretend to where the Government is Democratical. And
the acts of such Subjects, how numerous soever, must be invalid in matters of
Government. Now in this I believe our Adversaries will find themselves deeply
concerned. They who pretend to the most regular Ordination of them since the
defection, who were not immediately ordained by Bishops, can only say that the
Presbyters by whom they were ordained had received Episcopal Ordination, and
that they were ordained by a full Presbytery of such Presbyters, not of the
greater part of the settled Presbytery of the place where they were ordained,
or of any other, but only of a Multitude of particular Presbyters from several
parts who were over-voted in their several respective Presbyteries. I believe
they cannot give an instance in any place where the greater part of a settled
Presbytery revolted from the Bishops to them. I am sure they cannot justify
their ordinary successions by such Ordinations.

order of Presbytery which would be allowed in the Catholic Church must first
appear to have been validly received in some particular Church, and that
particular Church must on the Principles now mentioned be some Episcopal Church
as Presbyterian; so no Orders can be presumed to have been validly received in
such a Church without the prevailing suffrages of the Presbyteries. Let none be
surprised at my speaking of an Episcopal Church as Presbyterian. I do it only
that I may, in dealing with our Adversaries, accommodate my self to their
Notions. It is therefore certain that in the Ordination of Presbyters after the
Episcopal way, the Bishop does not lay on his own hands alone, but has the
assistance of several other Presbyters, who are present to lay on their hands
together with him. On this account it is that several of our Adversaries, who
are sensible of their obligation in interest to do it, do justify the validity
of those Orders they have received by Episcopal Ordination. They consider the
whole act only as the act of an Episcopal Presbytery, and consider the Bishop
himself in that act only as an ordinary Presbyter, who cannot lose the power he
has as a common Presbyter by being made a President of the whole Presbytery.
Yet in that act they consider him only as an ordinary Presbyter, because they
think it would belong to him as a Presbyter, though he were not also a
President of the Presbytery, and therefore cannot take it for a Prerogative of
his Office as President. That it is therefore from some such a Presbytery as
this that they must derive the validity of their Orders, appears from the
Principles already premised, that no other Presbyteries can make out their
Succession from the Apostles, that particular Members of even these
Presbyteries cannot do it alone, in a separation from them, that Multitudes of
such particular Persons though meeting together cannot make up such a Church
among them as were requisite to attest the Orders of Persons ordained to the
rest of the Catholic Church who maintein correspondence with them.

Episcopal Presbyteries only as Presbyters, and the Bishop himself as acting
herein by no higher a power than that of an ordinary Presbyter; yet even so no
Orders can be valid but those which were conferred by the prevailing vote of
even such a Presbytery, at least those are invalid which are given by the votes
of a smaller over voted part of them. Even by the Principles of Aristocratical
Government, though it were doubtful whether the greater part might dispose a
right common to them all without the consent of every particular; yet it hardly
can be doubtful whether a smaller part can dispose of such a common right
though over-voted by a greater number of suffrages than their own. Though it
may be thought reasonable that some reserved cases of that nature wherein the
whole Society were deeply concern^d should not pass without the unanimous
suffrages of every individual Member; yet as there is no Justice, antecedently
to compacts, that any individuals should dispose of the rights of others,
though less considerable than themselves, till by the general acts and compacts
of all, whereby Polyarchical Societies are most naturally settled, such general
rules are agreed on by which some particular Members, may, for peaces sake, be
allowed to dispose of the common rights of their Fellow Members without their
express consent in the particular, but by virtue of their general consent once
given to such general rules; so neither is there any reason in prudence, that,
where unanimous consent cannot be had, and it is therefore necessary that one
part yield to the other, the greater should be swayed by the smaller part. The
fundamental rule of all this public justice is, that, where there is a
necessity of a choice, the public be preferred before private interests, that
therefore it is very just to bear with injuries to private Persons when they
cannot be avoided without injuries to the public. Which will in generosity
oblige a smaller part to yield to a greater, but can on no terms oblige the
greater to yield to the smaller, because indeed the interest of the greater
part is more the public interest than that of the smaller.

reason of all compacts of this kind of referring their differences to a
public decision, is the presumed equality of the decision above what would be
among the interessed Persons themselves, and the power to execute what is
resolved on beyond the resistance of those against whom the cause is decided.
And therefore if we should again suppose men free; as they were before these
compacts I am speaking of; we have reason to presume that they would settle
this power of deciding their differences in such hands, where there might be
presumed less danger of corruption, and where there were the greatest power to
execute their own decrees. And both these reasons give the preference to these
major votes above the smaller part. It is to be presumed that it is not so
easy to corrupt a greater as it is to corrupt a smaller part. And when it is
necessary that the decree be executed, the power of the greater is greater than
that of the smaller part, where the particular Subjects of power are supposed
equal, as they are in our present case. And though it be very possible, in
after cases, that it may so fall out that the greatest right may sometimes
belong to that side where there is the smallest power, yet we have reason to
believe that the only reason why it comes to be so is the unexpectedness of
revolutions to which humane affairs are obnoxious, which could not be so much
as probably foreseen when the rules of such Societies were first agreed on.
Otherwise it is reasonable to presume that, at the first constitution of those
rules, they would choose the greatest power and interest for the fittest seat of
Authority* because they would by that be best secured of the execution of the
Sentences given by them. And therefore where we may presume the greater power
lay at the passing of those compacts, and where they who made those compacts
had reason to see the greatest power would always be, there we have also reason
to presume that they would intend to place the greatest Authority.

major vote should prevail through all succeeding generations, because the
major vote, in the case I am speaking of, must inseparably carry with it the
greatest power. And this is a reason that alike concerns all by whom the
Government were at first settled, whether it were by compacts of the Parties
themselves who were to be governed, or whether the Government were placed over
them by a power who had a Jurisdiction over them antecedently to their own
consent: There is the same reason why such a power should decree that the
smaller number of suffrages in opposition to a greater number should be null in
Societies to be established by him, as that the Parties themselves should at
first agree that it should be so. The reasons now mentioned proceed alike in
both cases: Which I therefore observe that our Adversaries may perceive, that
as to the case of which I am now speaking, it will come to the same event,
whether the power of the Presbyteries do come from the consent of the
particular Presbyters, or whether it proceed immediately from the Divine
institution. Still it is to be presumed that things are to be decided by the
vote of the greater part, where nothing is otherwise expressly determined,
because this way of determination is so certainly for the public interest, for
which we have as much reason to presume that God would be solicitous, as that
the Presbyters themselves would be so.

Aristocratical Government, how invalid as well as how irregular it must be for
a smaller over-voted number of the Presbyters to undertake to dispose of the
common rights of the whole Presbyteries, whether as acting by themselves, or as
acting in Presbyteries made up of multitudes of such Presbyters as had been
severally over-voted in the Presbyteries to which each of them did at first
belong. Now that the power given in the Ordination of a Presbyter must be a
right of the Presbytery in common, according to our Adversaries Principles, who
conceive Government to be a right common to them, I do not know whether our
Adversaries themselves will think it necessary for me to prove. If the supreme
visible Government of the Church be the right of such Presbyteries in common,
not of particular Presbyters singly considered; I cannot conceive how such a
Government can be practicable unless the valid investiture of subordinate
Governors be also appropriated to them.

power given at the Ordination of a Presbyter to be a proper power of
Government. It suffices at present that the power given to particular
Presbyters is as properly a power of Government as that is of the whole
Presbyteries. The power of the whole Presbyteries is only an Aggregate
resulting from the valid Succession of the particular Presbyters whereof it
consists. And the power of Administering the Sacraments which is given to
particular Presbyters at their Ordination is that on which their power of
Government is grounded. That is the reason which obliges all private Persons to
submit to the Presbyteries, and to all their lawful impositions, because God
has put it in their power to exclude refractory Persons from the ordinary means
of Salvation. And as far as this power of administering the Sacraments is
granted to particular Presbyters when they are ordained Presbyters, so far also
it is put in their power to exclude private Persons from the Sacraments by
refusing to perform their Office to them. Only because this exclusion by a
particular Presbyter does not hinder other Presbyters, who have as great a
power as himself who should exclude one, from performing their duty to a Person
so excluded, and the exclusion does oblige the Person excluded to submission no
further than as he cannot hope for the benefit of the Sacraments without the
consent of his excluder; therefore it can only be to the whole Presbytery that
every Member of a Church can be obliged to submit, because it is the Presbytery
alone that can oblige all to ratify their censures, so that the Sacraments
cannot at all be gotten without their consent. They can ^^lige their own
Members to ratify them by virtue of the Subjection which each of them owes to
the whole Community. And they can oblige all other Churches and Presbyteries to
ratify their censures by virtue of that correspondence which all Churches and
Presbyteries are obliged to maintein with each other on account of their common
interest. But still this does not hinder but that the power of particular
Presbyters must be of the same kind with the power of the whole Presbyteries,
though it be not of the same extent, which, on the Principles now mentioned, is
sufficient to appropriate the disposal of it to the common right of Government.

de facto no such power was actually designed for them by their first Ordeiners
as is at present exercised by our Brethren in their separation; so by this
later Topic it appears that it does not de jure belong to them by virtue of
any thing given them by the Episcopal Presbyteries, though we consider them, as
our Brethren are willing to consider them in this act of Ordination, only as
Presbyteries, or at the utmost, only as Presbyteries with a President, which
cannot make any substantial difference, much less can the honor of presiding
lose the President any of that honor which belongs to him as a single
Presbyter. Which I therefore observe that our Brethren may see how
unjustifiable their Ordinations are upon any terms. Though this power had been
designed for them by their Ordeiners, or though their being made Presbyters by
their Ordeiners, did, as they think, confer this power upon them really, how
little soever it was designed for them; yet neither of these pretenses can be
available, if their acts were not valid acts of the Presbyteries. If they were
not, they could not give what they did intend to give them, because they could
not confer a valid legal title to that which was not their own to give. So far
must they be in such a case as this from giving really more than they intended
to give. If they think it usurpation for the Bishops and the Presbyters who
adhere to them to act in the name of the whole Presbyteries; how much greater
Usurpation must it be for a smaller over-voted number of Presbyters to attempt
the same without the Bishop? Certainly his presence, though only as a first
Presbyter, must add great Authority to the legitimating their Assemblies as
that must also do to the validity of their actings in them.

precedent, or any reason, defend the validity of such acts of a smaller part
of the Presbyters without the Bishops; so I do not understand how they can
avoid the owning the validity even of the acts of a smaller number of
Presbyters in conjunction with the Bishops, if they will consider their own
interest in them. The Presbyters who assisted the Bishops in the solemnities of
ordeining their first Predecessors were much the smaller part of the
Presbyteries. As for the rest, their consent was not so much as required,
neither by any express act of their own, nor by any delegation of their power
to those who were present, nor presumed from their absence after a Canonical
summons. And yet if these acts were not valid, our Brethren cannot possibly
defend the validity of their own Ordinations. But if they be, I might then show
how impossible it is that the validity of such acts can be derived from the
power of the Presbytery; and how necessary it is that they be resolved into an
absolute power of the Bishop; and therefore how much they will be obliged to
own the power of the Bishops that they may defend the validity of their own
Orders. And considering that the Bishops and Presbyters make up one Government,
it is impossible, if he be absolute, that they can be so too. And therefore if
he can validly dispose of the common right without their consent, they cannot
possibly dispose of it without his, which will again invalidate the acts of
those Presbyteries for which our Brethren are concerned. And if this power of
ordeining others was never given to our Brethren de facto, and if withal the
validity of the conveyance fail by which they may pretend to it de jure, beside
the intention of their Ordeiners; I do not understand what more can be
requisite for overthrowing the validity of their Ordinations.

Presbyters, and were designed to be made so, and to be made so in the
Scripture Notion of that word; and that Ordination is a right belonging to a
Scripture Presbyter. But why should they presume that their design was to make
Presbyters in the Scripture sense any otherwise than as they thought the
Presbyters in the modern sense justified by the Scripture? If this was the
reason, as in all likelihood it must according to the sense of those times;
then certainly their prime design was only to give that power which was then
granted to Presbyters, which will not include the power of ordeining others, as
I have already shown. Besides it cannot be presumed that their design was to
make Presbyters in the Scripture sense any farther than as they thought
Scripture precedent obliging to their own times. If they thought it lawful for
them to alienate the right which originally belonged to them; if, at least,
they thought such an Alienation valid when done, however unlawful to be done;
why should they rather think of retrieving the Scripture-practice in this
particular, than in those of the Deaconesses, and the feasts of Love, etc. to
which no parties think themselves obliged at present.

Hieromes sense of this matter, Ad Euagr.
who never thought himself obliged by his singular opinion concerning the
Primitive form of Ecclesiastical Government to make any disturbance in the
present settlement. And the reason he gives for the change, that it was for the
avoiding Schism, was a commendable reason, and as much concerning his own, and
all future times, as it did those wherein this change was first supposed to
have been made. Schism is still as dangerous to the Church, and Episcopacy is
still as prudent an expedient for preventing the occasion of Schism arising
from parity, now and for ever, as it was then. And the decree of the whole
World which he mentions as the Authority by which this change was made, if it
do not include the Apostles or some such extraordinary Officers, who, in those
times had alone the power of making such a Decree as he there speaks of, which
might oblige the whole World, and in whose time the expressions he makes use of
for expressing this Schism, that one said he was of Paul, another of Cephas,
another of Apollos, were first and most literally fulfilled, and it is unlikely
that they would defer the remedy so long after the occasion, as our Adversaries
suppose; besides that the mistake of men's thinking that the Disciples baptized
by them were their own, is not likely to have continued so long, and to have
prevailed so universally as to occasion a general Decree against it after the
death of all the Apostles, when St. Paul himself had so expressly condemned it
so long before: If, I say, the whole World concerned in this business did not
include the Apostles, (and it is most certain that it cannot exclude them) yet
certainly it must have included all those extraordinary persons of the (...),
who, besides their intimate acquaintance with the Apostles, were themselves
endued with great and Apostolical gifts; and as they cannot be presumed
ignorant of the Apostles mind in a matter of fact so notorious as this was of
Government, so they cannot be presumed unfaithful to their trust in a matter of
this consequence as to make a Decree directly contrary to an establishment of
the Apostles designed by them to be unalterable, and this Decree an universal
one without contradiction of any one of these Apostolical Persons.

now; yet certainly St. Hierome could not, on these terms, think this change
invalid. Nor consequently could any of them think so who were in this matter
guided by St. Hierome. And if so, we have no reason to presume that they must
have intended to restore the antiquated Scripture-right of Presbyters, which,
if it prove true, must overthrow all our Adversaries Arguments for proving that
Ordination was a right of Scripture-Presbyters, in order to the proving the
like right in Presbyters now. Though it was their right then, yet if it be
alienable, it may cease to be their right now. If it were unalienable from
those who once had it, yet without defending the validity of any alienation,
they may want it now, not because they alienated it, but because they never had
it. However, though it had been their design to give our present Presbyters all
that right which belonged to Presbyters in the Apostles times; yet certainly
they who made these Presbyters are the most competent Judges of their own
intentions, if we will deal fairly, not captiously. And therefore, even in this
case, our Adversaries should not immediately conclude that to be the right of
modern Presbyters, because themselves think that Presbyters in the Apostles
time had it, unless they could prove our modern Ordeiners to have been of their
mind in this particular. It suffices at present that I have shown, that it is
not from the Scriptures as a Charter, but from their Ordeiners as Persons
Authorized by that Charter, and as Authentic Expositors of it, if not as to
truth, yet at least as to practice, that they receive their Orders; and
therefore that the power actually received by them must not be measured by the
true sense of the Scriptures, but from that wherein their Ordeiners understood
them. But I have already proved that they who intended to make them Presbyters
in the Scripture-sence, did not, could not, suppose that the power of
Ordination was the right of Scripture-Presbyters.

rights united by God are inseparable by any Humane Authority, and that the
power of Ordination is by God united to the other rights of Scripture
Presbyters, so that it was impossible to give them any one right without giving
them all, or to retein one without reteining all, and therefore that if our
present Presbyters have the power of administering the Sacraments, they must not
be denied the power of Ordination. If our Adversaries mean that those
Presbyters who had both those powers united in them by God could not be
deprived of the one power without the other, nor indeed of any by any Humane
Authority, this, if it should prove true, yet, is a case wherein our present
Ordinations are not concerned, which were not received in those times wherein
our Adversaries pretend to prove that these two powers were so inseparably
united. If further they say that de jure they ought not to be separated, as
they will find the bare Argument from Scripture-precedent very unconcluding to
this purpose (they neither can prove that ever Scripture-Presbyters did ordein
in separation from a President, much less that smaller overvoted parts of any
particular Presbyteries, or any Presbyteries made up of fugitives, from many,
did so; nor, if they could, can they prove the precedent obliging now, without
some more enforcing considerations from the nature of the thing) so they will
not find it easy to produce better. And it is at present sufficient for my
purpose, that they may be separated de facto though they who separate them be
to blame for doing so.

God and the Church as they usually do on this and other occasions. If the
Church's Authority be received from God, then what is done by her is to be
presumed to come from him, the same way as what is done by any man's Proxy is
presumed to be his own act, and as what is done by an inferior Magistrate by
virtue of his Office is presumed to come from the supreme. Which will
especially hold as a presumption, that is, where there are no clearer proofs of
the supreme Magistrates mind being contrary to that of the inferior than our
Adversaries can pretend to for proving the inseparable union of these powers by
Divine institution. If they were then united by God because they were united by
the men who represented God, why are they not disunited by God now when men
alike empowered by him have disunited them? Why should they not oblige God in
one case as well as the other? especially, when there is nothing in the
Commission it self that implies confinement in one case rather than the other,
and when the whole reason of judging is taken only from the actual practice,
how is it possible that any actual practice can prescribe against the power
that introduced it, that it may not introduce a different practice as
arbitrarily as it introduced this? If there had been a distinct Authority for
making the union of these two powers inseparable distinct from that which
united them only in practice, or if the same Authority of men which united them
in practice had declared Gods pleasure to be that they should for ever be so
united; though they might reverse the Authority of their own practice, yet it
might not be in their power to evacuate their own Declarations, because those
are supposed to belong to an Authority greater than their own, and antecedent
to it; and therefore may rationally be supposed such as may null all future
acts that are contrary to it. But such distinct Authority or distinct
Declaration our Adversaries cannot pretend in our present case.

inseparable Union of these two powers by the Divine appointment, our
Adversaries would do well to consider whether it would be more for their
interest or their disadvantage? that is, whether it will not rather follow that
they are no Presbyters at all who have received Episcopal Ordination, that they
have no power of administering the Sacraments, because it is certain that they
have not received the power of Ordination, than that they must have received
the power of ordeining other Presbyters because they have received the power of
administering the Sacraments? The Negative consequence is as unavoidable from
the inseparableness of these two powers as the Affirmative, that is, it is as
certain that where one of those powers is certainly not given there nothing is
given (because it cannot be supposed to be given alone) as that if one be given
the other must be given also. As therefore it is certain that the Ordeiners
intended to reserve the power of Ordination from the Persons ordained
Presbyters by them; so it will follow, by this principle, that if the whole
power was not intended, none was so. And if what was not intended was not
given, and what was not given was not received, and the power of Ordination was
not received; then neither could the power of administering the Sacraments be
received also. And if so, then let them be called by what name they please, yet
really they will be no Presbyters, at least not in the Scripture-sence, if
either of these powers be essential to such a Scripture-Presbyter. And then in
vain do they challenge the power of such Presbyters when they are not those
Presbyters to whom those powers belong. And certainly it is much more certain
and prudent to argue from the nature of the power given to them, that they are
Presbyters in the Scripture-sence who have the power given them which is
supposed to belong to Scripture-Presbyters, and on the contrary that they are
not Presbyters in the Scripture-sence, who have not that power given them; than
that they must have the power because they have the name, and that intended in
the Scripture signification. Names are imposed arbitrarily to signify what men
please, and if they please by the name Presbyter to signify him whom the
Scriptures call so, yet still it is to be supposed to signify that sense which
they understand to be the sense of Scripture, though they be mistaken in the
sense of it. And it is certain that the name cannot alter the nature of the
power which is given to them though the nature of that power may alter the
justice of their title to the name. If they have less power given them than
should belong to Scripture-Presbyters, it must certainly follow that the name
would be given them improperly; and certainly our Adversaries themselves cannot
think it just that they who are improperly called Scripture-Presbyters should
claim the privileges of them who are called so properly.

nature of the powers were mutually inseparable, it would be reasonable to
argue that where one was given both must be so; or if at least on one side this
inseparableness held, it were just to conclude that the other power must be
given, if this be that from which that other is inseparable; but not on the
contrary that the separable power must be given, because that power is given
from which it is supposed to be separable. And on this account there is indeed
some color of reason to presume that where a higher power is given the
inferior is given also, because usually the Inferior is included in the
Superior, though it be not always so. But it will by no means follow that a
Superior power must follow that which is Inferior, because here can be no
pretense either of inseparable connection or of inclusion. Now this is plainly
the case here. All that our Adversaries can directly prove to have been given
to their first Predecessors who received their Orders in the Communion of the
Church is only a power of administering the Sacraments in their own Persons. But
the power of giving this power to others is certainly a power of a higher
nature than the power of administering in their own Persons. If therefore both
these powers be essential to a Scripture-Presbyter; and they cannot prove that
any more than one of them was given to their Predecessors, neither by any
express donation, nor by any inseparable connection with that which was expressly
given; it will clearly follow that they were not made Presbyters in that sense
which our Adversaries understand to be the sense of the Scriptures, and
therefore that they cannot claim the privileges which they conceive due to
Scripture-Presbyters. And for my part I do not understand a more prudent Rule
for distinguishing when the negative way of arguing is seasonable from this
Topic, that neither power is given because it is certain that both are not,
than this, that where it is, on no account, customary to include one power in
the gift of the other (as it is not customary to include a superior power in
giving an inferior) there it is to be presumed that is was not intended to be
given, and therefore that the gift of the other power must be invalid if one
cannot be validly given alone. But where it is reasonable or usual to include
the one in the other, there it is reasonable to presume that both were intended
to be given, because the Person cannot in such a case be supposed willing to
null his own gift, which, on this supposition, he must do, if he do not give
both together, because he must inevitably either give all or nothing.

CHAP. XXVI. The right of particular Episcopal Jurisdictions.
THE CONTENTS.
2. The Episcopal Communion to which every one is obliged to join himself, as
he would secure the ordinary means of his own particular salvation, is the
Episcopal Communion of the place wherein he lives, whilst he lives in it.. I.
This proved against the several sorts of the Non-Conformists according to their
several principles.. II. 1. As to the Presbyterians, and those who acknowledge
an obligation of Government antecedently to the consent of particular Subjects.
And that by these degrees: 1. That, by the obligation of Government in general,
all those particulars must be obliging, without it cannot be practicable.. III.
2. Many of the Presbyterians themselves do acknowledge the determination of
particular circumstances, and the application of General Rules to particular
Cases, to belong to the Office of Ecclesiastical Governors.. IV. 3. It is
absolutely necessary for the practicableness of Government in general, that
every Subject know his Governor, and him particularly to whom he in particular
owes Obedience.. V. 4. The means whereby every particular Person may be
convinced, to whom it is, that he in particular owes Subjection, must be such
as may be presumed notorious to the whole Community, and such whereof others
may judge as well as the Person particularly concerned, and by which they may
judge as well concerning his Duty as their own.. VI. 5. The Authority of these
means must be from God.. VII, VIII. Two Consequences inferred from hence: 1.
Positive, That they must be under a Divine Obligation to own the Authority of
these Jurisdictions whilst they live within them.. IX. 2. Negative, that, from
this Divine Authority of Jurisdictions, they must find themselves obliged to
forbear all opposite Communions or Assemblies within those Jurisdictions.. X,
XI, XII. Application made particularly to the Presbyterians.. XIII. 2. As to
the Independents, who deny all Ecclesiastical Authority antecedently to the
voluntary Obligations of particular Persons.. XIV, XV. That there is really a
power of Government in the Church.. XVI* That this power is not derived from
the Multitude.. XVII, XVIII.

THE Episcopal Communion, to which every particular Person is obliged to join
himself, as he would secure the ordinary means of his own particular Salvation,
is the Episcopal Communion of the place wherein he lives, whilst he lives in
it. I do not say that the ordinary means of Salvation are to be had no where
but in any one particular Diocese. I do not say but that those same ordinary
Administrations of Sacraments which are available to the Salvation of those who
belong to other Dioceses, and do there partake of them, might also be available
to the Salvation of any of another Diocese, if he were out of his own
Jurisdiction, which he must needs be, if he communicate in another Diocese. Nor
further do I say that any one is so obliged by his Baptismal vow in any one
Diocese to continue in that Diocese for his whole Life, as that it would be a
violation of his Baptismal obligation for him to remove elsewhere, especially
if he removed according to the custom of the Primitive times with the
Communicatory and Dimissory Letters of the Ordinary of his own original
Diocese. When our Adversaries prove any of these things let them not think that
they disprove any thing which I have undertaken to defend, nor that my cause
does oblige me to defend. All that I design at present, and which I am sorry
that it will in the consequence of it concern our Adversaries so severely, is,
to prove the obligation that lies on every Member of a particular Diocese to
submit to all the unsinful impositions of the Diocese whilst he lives in it.
For which it is sufficient that that particular Communion be as necessary to
him in opposition to all other Communions which may be had within that same
Jurisdiction without the consent of those to whose Jurisdiction it belongs, as
it is necessary that he communicate at all. For as I have shown that
communicating in general will oblige the Communicant to a dependence on those
without whose consent such Communion cannot be had; and a dependence so great
as may oblige him rather to submit to any impositions short of sin, in
submitting to them, than to lose the external participation of the Sacraments;
so, by the same proportion of reason, if no other Communion can safely be
embraced but that which depends on the Governors of that Jurisdiction to which
the person, I speak of, is supposed to belong, this will oblige him to as great
a dependence on that particular Jurisdiction so long as he belongs to it.

sorts of Non-Conformists, I conceive it necessary to reason with them
differently according to the difference of Principles admitted by them, that so
none of them may want that evidence which may be necessary for their
conviction. As for those who do not admit of rational consequences from truths
acknowledged by themselves, it is vain to reason with them at all. For all
Discourse is nothing else but an inferring of something which is not granted
from something which is so. But this can never oblige any such Person to
believe such Inferences true, if he doubt whether real consequences from his
own Assertions might not be false, though his Assertions themselves were very
true. There is therefore no dealing with such Persons by reason; but they must
inevitably be left to their own Enthusiasm. The rest therefore who admit of
rational consequences I shall consider in two ranks: 1. Of those who admit of
an Authority obliging antecedently to the acts of particular Persons; under
which, I think I might rank the Presbyterians generally, if they were true to
their own Principles, that is, if in arguing against the Church they would be
wary of any other Principles, but such as themselves admit in their disputes
against the Independents; and, 2. Of those who deny all Ecclesiastical
Authority antecedent to the voluntary Obligations of particular Persons. And of
this sort are the Independents and others downwards. These men when they have
(1.) denied the obligingness of Ecclesiastical Authority antecedently to
compacts of the Subjects; And when, (2.) they have withal denied also the
obligingness of the compacts of Predecessors to oblige Successors in this
matter; And when they have, (3.) denied the obligation of their Baptismal
Covenant in reference to any duty owing by them to any particular Church, even
to that particular one in which they have received their Baptism, even so long
as they continue in it; When, (4.) they make the act whereby they confer power
to their Pastors not privative, but accumulative, so that they are still
supposed to reserve to themselves the same liberty after they have empowered
their Pastors which they enjoyed before: I say, when we consider them as
proceeding on these Principles; it cannot be admired that they destroy all
Jurisdiction, especially in regard of place. For how is it possible that such
Persons should think themselves obliged to submit to any particular
Jurisdiction on account of their living within a particular district of place;
when they neither think themselves obliged to own any Lord of any place
antecedently to the compacts of the Inhabitants, nor think themselves obliged
by any compacts of their Predecessors of former generations which might have
given him the Dominion of the place, so far as it was in the power of the
Inhabitants to give it him? How can they think themselves obliged by the place
they live in, who do not think themselves bound by any thing but their own act,
nor by that it self any longer, or any farther than themselves please? But it
seems much stranger how they should do it who do not think particular Persons
obnoxious to Discipline antecedently to any consent of their own, distinct from
that whereby they undertook their Baptism and their Christianity.

Presbyterians, and those others who acknowledge an obligation of Government
antecedently to the consent of particular Subjects, that which can alone be
requisite in dealing with such Persons, is to let them see, that from this
antecedent obligation to Government in general, it follows that they must be
subject to the particular Jurisdictions. To which purpose it is to be observed,
1. That by the obligation of Government in general, all those particulars must
be obliging without which it cannot be practicable. For it is not becoming the
Divine Wisdom that we should suppose that he should constitute a Government
that should not be practicable. He cannot be supposed to design a Government
but for the actual practice of it, because this is indeed the only use of it,
and therefore the only reason that might make it capable of being prudently
designed. But none can design a Government for practice which he knows to be
unpracticable. And therefore if he do design it, it must not be supposed to
have been known by him to be unpracticable, but to prove so for some reason
that was not foreseen by him when he designed it. But this cannot be thought
true concerning God. Whence it must plainly follow, that if any thing else
should prove necessary for the practicableness of the Government designed by
him, besides what was provided for by express constitutions, yet we have reason
to believe that it was foreseen, and therefore also very prudent reason to
presume that it was intended, by him, when he seems to have been so well
satisfied with that which he was so certain would prove true in the event as
that he did not judge it necessary to make any other provision concerning it.

Presbyterians themselves, at least so many of them, in our present Age, who
have lived to see those consequences actually follow which their Predecessors
did not foresee that they would follow; these, I say do not deny but that the
application of general Rules to particulars, and the determination of those
circumstances, without which the general Rules would not be applicable to
particular Cases, do properly belong to the Office of Ecclesiastical
Governors. And whether they granted it, or not, yet they who will stand to the
trial of reason or rational consequences must needs grant the reason now
proposed that all which was necessary for the practicableness of the Government
designed by God, must needs have been foreseen, and therefore designed by him,
in order to the making the Government designed by him practicable. And
therefore all that can be necessary to be proved further against these Persons,
can only be that the acknowledgment of these Jurisdictions is absolutely
necessary for the practicableness of this Government in general.

practicableness of Government in general, that every Subject know his
Governor, and him particularly to whom he in particular owes obedience. If he
only know in general who are Governors indefinitely, and withal, know that he
is not obliged to pay any duty but only to those to whom he in particular owes
subjection, it plainly follows that as yet he may deny his duty to all
particular Governors, because he does not owe them it barely as Governors,
but particularly as his. So that as yet no Government can be practiced: For
Government and Subjection do necessarily answer each other, and Government
cannot be practiced by the Governors without an acknowledgment of Subjection
by the Subjects. An actual exercise of power will be unsufficient to secure a
practice of obedience without a right to such a coercive power. Nor can the
right actually oblige the Subjects to submit unless it be acknowledged by them.
If at least it be not acknowledged for right by the greater part, and unless
they confess themselves obliged in Conscience to acknowledge it, it cannot prove
actually coercive.

particular Person may be convinced, to whom it is that he, in particular, owes
subjection, must be such as may be presumed notorious to the whole Community,
and therefore must not be of private cognizance, but such whereof others may
judge, as well as the person particularly concerned, and by which they may judge
as well concerning his Duty as their own. This is necessary that every Member
of the Community, ignorant as well as skilful, may know his own duty, and be
left inexcusable if he neglect it, which will require great plainness and
easiness in the means that they may be suitable to the meanest capacities of
those who are concerned to be directed by them, as that plainness and easiness
must, in the event make them notorious to all. But much rather it is necessary
in a Community where Governors, and all who are concerned for the maintenance
of Government, are to judge of the actions of Subjects, and to reward or punish
them as they shall judge them dutiful or refractory, whatever the concerned
Subjects themselves shall profess or pretend to judge to the contrary. If this
liberty of judging, and of imposing their judgment in practice, be not allowed
to Governors, it will be impossible for them to answer the designs of
Government. And it cannot be reasonable for them to judge others to be
undutiful, unless they suppose their reasons such as may not only persuade
themselves, but may also prevail on all others who use that industry and
ingenuity which the moment of the thing would require from them. But the
evidence must be much greater which may encourage men to judge of the industry
or ingenuity of those who dissent from themselves, than what may suffice for
their own satisfaction. Probable appearances of things to themselves may be
very prudent reasons to incline men rather to one side of a disputable
question. But that cannot make it reasonable for them to believe that others,
who are more judicious and sagacious than themselves, are all obliged to be of
their mind, and must either be wanting in their industry or ingenuity, if they
be not so. Yet some cases there are which are so very evident as that men may
judge concerning them for others, how judicious soever, as well as for
themselves. But then the evidence must be so great as may exceed all that
whereby we may judge concerning the industry or ingenuity of others. For in this
case only it is reasonable to suspect the disingenuity or negligence of others
rather than their want of conviction in case they dissent from us. And
therefore thus great the evidence must be by which Governors must judge
concerning the punishableness of Dissenters. But the evidence by which they
must judge of the conviction their Subjects may have of the right of such
Governors to govern them, must yet be presumed by so much greater than the
evidence of their particular Decrees, by how much the evidence of Principles
ought to be greater than that of the inferences deduced from those Principles.
For the knowledge of the Persons who are to govern us is indeed the first
Principle of the practicableness of any visible Government.

Subjects may be enabled to judge to whose Government they do particularly
belong, must be from God. And if it be from him, it is no matter whether it be
from him immediately, or whether it be derived from him by the Ministry of men
empowered by him, and who are empowered, by virtue of their general Authority
received from him, to make provision, even for this particular case. It
suffices that God will account resistance to Superiors, whose right is
discoverable by such notorious Rules, as a resistance to Governors established
by himself, and I believe this is all of which our dissenting Brethren
themselves will desire to be satisfied. And that this is so, will easily appear
from the Principles already premised: For if all must be presumed to come from
God which is necessary for the practicableness of the Government established by
him, and the knowledge of their particular Governors be necessary for the
practice of the duty of particular Subjects, and no other means be proper for
this knowledge of their Governors but such as are agreed and notorious; it must
then follow that God must have provided some such means. And then considering
that this distinction of Jurisdictions is such a means for Subjects to
distinguish to whose Government they belong; seeing that this was a means
agreed on by all, and notoriously in use long before the rise of them who first
began to question Jurisdictions; it cannot be denied to be very becoming the
care of God that this should be settled by him. But on the other side,
considering also that the means assigned by our Adversaries different from this
of Jurisdiction are neither notorious nor agreed on by any but themselves, or
those who have innovated with them, who cannot, in any equity, be allowed to be
competent Judges in a matter of this nature wherein the whole Community is
concerned, even those also who dissent from them, who have the advantage of
Number, as well as of Prescription, against them; I say, these things being
considered, these cannot be taken for means of Gods appointment. And therefore
the settlement of Jurisdictions is not only a proper means, but the only means,
by which all must be concluded in this matter. And therefore they must either
be acknowledged obligatory by divine right, or God cannot be supposed to have
made those provisions which are absolutely necessary for making the Government
established by him practicable. This must follow from their finding it already
sett^ed to their hands, when they first began their Innovations, that by
whomsoever these Jurisdictions were first introduced, yet they were not
introduced without the Divine approbation. Which is enough to oblige all them
who find it grounded on such a right, to submit to it. But according to the
Principles of those of our Adversaries who allow the Church a power to
determine particular circumstances not expressly determined in the Scriptures,
but yet necessary for the practice of those general rules which are already
prescribed there, the institution it self must be acknowledged Divine, not only
providentially, but also in regard of the Authority by which it was introduced,
not only because the Church's Authority in general proceeds from God, but also
because she is, by these Principles, authorized to exercise her power in this
very matter which I am now discoursing of, seeing this determination of
Jurisdictions has appeared to be no other but a determination of particular
circumstances requisite for the practicableness of Government in general.

right of these Jurisdictions should be Divine, notwithstanding that the
limitation of them depends on men, especially when, by these Principles, those
men must be supposed to be seconded by a Divine Authority. There is hardly any
instance of a Divine Authority which does not, as to some particular requisite
for practice, need the accession of a Humane Authority. Yet none thinks the
obligation resulting from the complex of both to be therefore any thing the
less Divine. Who doubts but that the Authority even of these particular Books
of Scripture which we now receive for Scripture is Divine? Yet it is impossible
to prove that these particular Books were written by those particular Authors
whose names they bear, on which notwithstanding the credit of their being
Divinely inspired does necessarily depend, but by the same way as we prove
other matters of Fact, that is, by Humane Historical Testimony. Many believe
that the right of Secular Government is Divine, and that the punishment of
Rebellious Persons is accordingly such as those deserve who resist the
Ordinance of God himself. Nay, this plainly seems to be the design of the
Apostles reasoning. Romans xiii.2.
Yet there is no present Government in our parts where the determination of the
particular Persons who are to govern is not wholly performed by men, by men not
pretending to inspiration, nor yet, on that account, expecting any
extraordinary Revelation. The use of Lots and Anguries which might look like
consulting the Gods in the matter are long since discontinued, and were not
observed in the case of those Princes to whom St. Paul notwithstanding advised
the Christians of his time to be subject in regard of Conscience. Romans xiii.5.
Yet those Emperors of the Julian Family were thought Usurpers in that Age, and
had no more to excuse them from being so, besides their Prescription for the
time they had been peaceably possessed of the honors enjoyed by them, and
their not having any visible just competitors. And particularly concerning
Nero, in whose time St. Paul is thought to have written that Epistle, it is
very well known by what wicked Arts of his Mother Agrippina he got the Empire.
Yet when he was free from a more just Competitor, Britannicus.
this did not hinder his Authority from being from God, nor resistance to him
from being a resistance of the Ordinance of God, and, in that regard, from
deserving damnation. Romans xiii.1, 2.
And this must needs be the case wherever God himself does not immediately
reveal himself, nor the Persons Authorized by him perform their credentials in
the presence of the Persons obliged to believe them. They must then assure
themselves of the truth of these things only by Humane Testimony. Yet because
when they are once assured of these matters of Fact, which they cannot be
assured of but by Humane Testimonies, it will then follow that the Revelations
are from God; therefore the obligation to believe these Revelations is supposed
to be so too, and the punishment of disbelief is thereupon proportioned to the
disbelief, not of a Humane, but a Divine Authority. And therefore this may also
be the obligation to submit to the Authority of Jurisdictions, notwithstanding
that their certain bounds were prefixed by a Humane Authority.

Divine right of Jurisdictions, two consequences will follow, which it will
seriously concern our Adversaries to consider impartially. The first is
positive, That they must be under a Divine Obligation to own the Authority of
these Jurisdictions whilst they live within them. I do not mean that they are
obliged never to go out of them, or that when they are out of them they are
obliged to their local constitutions, any more than any are obliged to live for
ever in their Native Kingdom, or to observe the Laws of it when they are in
Countries of Constitutions different from it; but only that they are the same
way obliged by God to acknowledge and submit to the Jurisdiction, whilst they
live in it, on the same account as they who believe the Divine Authority of the
Secular Government b^lieve all the Subjects obliged to submit to the Laws of
their Country, whilst they live in it, as they will answer it to God. Now that
which will follow from this positive obligation is, that they do embrace the
Communion, and submit to all the unsinful impositions of it, that is, all which
are unsinful to the submitters, whatever they be to the imposers, and lay out
their endeavors to secure the peace of it, and to prevent the disturbances of
others, as they would think themselves obliged to do in the Secular Societies
to which they are respectively related. Without these things they can no more
be supposed to own the Ecclesiastical Authority, than they could the Civil, if
they would wilfully abstein from their Privileges in it, and refuse obedience
to its Laws, or countenance others in their disobedience to them.

Second consequence is Negative, that from this Divine Authority of
Jurisdictions they must find themselves obliged to forbear all opposite
Communions or Assemblies within those Jurisdictions. This seems so evident of
it self as that I do not know whether any will doubt of it but in such cases
wherein evident interest makes them justly suspicious of being partial. None
doubts but that other Authorities independent on the Supreme in secular
Societies do manifestly ruin the Authority and security of such Societies; and
that he who secretly countenances such independent Authorities cannot at the
same time be taken for a good Subject and well affected to the visible
Government of his Society, but much more if he should do it openly. They would
in all likelihood think so, if themselves were concerned for the Government of
it. They would not think such Persons well affected to them would deal with
them as they do with their Superiors. If the power of their Jurisdictions be
from God, then plainly it is an invasion of their right for others to arrogate
or exercise power in their Jurisdictions without their leave. It is so even for
Persons who have really power in other Jurisdictions, but much more for them
who never had any power given them, much more for their own Subjects, who, by
the common rules of subjection, in all Societies of this nature, are obliged to
duty within their particular districts. This must be a double Sacriledg, not
only as the right of the Jurisdiction it self, is, on these Principles,
supposed to be sacred, and consequently such as cannot be usurped by any, how
sacred soever themselves be, without Sacriledg, but also because the Persons
themselves are not sacred who invade those sacred Jurisdictions.

common rights, by which the Authority of all these particular Societies and
Jurisdictions subsist, must p^culiarly belong to God, and therefore cannot be
violated without the most direct affront to the Divine Majesty, and the most
terrible expectations of punishment. They belong, I say, more immediately to
his care than those things which even men are empowered to take care of by
virtue of the general Authority which they have received from him, and which
only concern their own Societies respectively. In all subordinations of
Governors, by how much any rules are of more general concernment, by so much
more properly they are supposed to exceed the extent of the power of inferior
Governors, and therefore to belong more properly to him who has the right of
that whole extent which is concerned in those rules. And therefore seeing that
the right of Jurisdictions in general is of much greater extent than any
particular Jurisdiction, therefore it cannot belong to the right of particular
Governors, and because it is the common concernment of the whole Catholic
Church, therefore it must accordingly be proper for him alone who alone is
concerned for the whole Catholic Church in general: Besides that it is
antecedent to the right of all particular Governors. For the right of
particular Governors within particular Jurisdictions is founded on the right
of Jurisdictions in general. Therefore it is that particular Governors have
right within particular Jurisdictions because there is in general a right in
the whole Church to distinguish Jurisdictions, and to appropriate the power of
them to their respective Officers when they are so distinguished, and because,
according to the common rules of equity to be observed in making this
distinction, this particular Jurisdiction has fallen to the share of these
particular Governors. This therefore cannot be founded on the Authority of
particular Governors whose Authority is wholly grounded on it, but only on the
Authority of God whose Authority alone is antecedent to the Authorities of
particular Jurisdictions.

strange in Ecclesiastical Government which is so acknowledged in Civils. There
are also in them some Laws of the like universal concernment, on which the
right of all Civil Jurisdictions depend, and which are therefore as impossible
to be derived from the Authority of particular Governors, and as necessary to
be derived from God alone. Such are the Laws of Nature and of Nations, the
breach whereof has by all wise men been always thought most piacular, and most
properly obnoxious to the punishment of God himself. Which is a consideration
very worthy to be laid to heart by our dissenting Brethren, whether it be not
equally applicable to this present Subject concerning the right of particular
Jurisdictions. And if this be acknowledged to be the truth of this matter, that
the Divine Authority is thus resisted by this disobedience to Humane
Jurisdictions, what can more agreeably be expected as the punishment of such
resistance than that they who are guilty of such resistance by any
acknowledgment of a power independent on the Governors of their Jurisdictions,
should at least lose the advantages they might otherwise expect from the
Society to which they join themselves, I mean those advantages which might
otherwise be expected from a conjunction with them considered as a Society,
especially such advantages as are only to be immediately performed by God whom
they must, by these Principles, be supposed to have disobliged? Which will make
it reasonable to believe that the Sacraments received against the Authority of
these Jurisdictions shall not actually have the benefit of Sacraments, and
therefore shall not actually contribute to the forgiveness of sins, or the
giving of the Holy Ghost, the way whereby Sacraments are supposed to contribute
to them. Nay, instead of that, such communications will incur the guilt of
Sacriledg, on the same account as Corah and his company were guilty of it,
though they were consecrated Persons, for transgressing the bounds allowed them
by the order prescribed by God. But how much more must it be so when Persons
not having any Consecration at all shall presume to encroach on those sacred
rights, of their own Superiors, which God himself who gave them those rights,
does hence appear obliged to preserve inviolable?

Presbyterians can, with any show of reason, defend their own practice of
Authority without acknowledging this right of Jurisdictions? How can they
justify the Authority of their National and Provincial Synods, over all those
who live within the Province or Nation represented in the Synods? How can they
challenge it, even over the Independents themselves who live among them,
notwithstanding their profession of a different Judgment from them,
notwithstanding their disowning any act whereby they have obliged themselves to
submit to their Authority distinct from the Baptism which they have received
among them? How can they have the confidence to charge, even them, with Schism
for refusing to submit to them? or for gathering Churches out of their
Parishes, if the living within the districts of a Parish could give them no
peculiar title to those who did so? What can they call this right they pretend
to over Persons living within their districts antecedently to any act of their
own distinct from their Baptism, if it be not Jurisdiction? For my part, I
profess, I mean no more at present, nor am I sensible that my cause obliges me
to mean any more. And can they allow of Jurisdiction in Parishes only, and not
in those greater Bodies which are only Aggregates of Parishes? The Authority
they challenge to their Provincial and National Synods does plainly show they
cannot do so. And how can they possibly deny the same right and reason of
Jurisdiction to the Parishes and Diocesses wherein their first Predecessors
were baptized? How can they think the same Episcopal Jurisdiction any more
impaired by their own irregular practices since, than they think their own
Jurisdiction impaired by the like irregular practices of the Independents? They
who acknowledge a right over particular Christians antecedently to their own
act, as these generally do when they speak consequently to their own
Principles, must needs acknowledge that the power, so antecedent to private
suffrages, may constitute what rules they please for distinguishing the limits
of the proportion of particular Governors. So that such Persons cannot, with
any show of reason, doubt of the obligingness of such rules of Jurisdiction
when they are once established, but only whether this particular rule of
judging by the districts of place be established by that antecedent Power. But
of this there can be no doubt in our present case, because there is no other
way so much as pretended, by our Adversaries themselves, for distinguishing the
limits of particular Jurisdictions.

Ecclesiastical Authority antecedent to the voluntary Obligations of particular
Persons. I have already observed how much more consequently these men speak to
their Principles than the Presbyterians. And it is indeed impossible that these
men should own the Authority of Jurisdictions, if they will be true to their
Principles. But then the great reason why it is impossible is particularly that
Principle, and the consequences of it, that they think the obligatory right of
all Ecclesiastical power derived from the particular Personal consent of every
particular Member, and that distinct from his consent to be a Member, that is,
from his consent to Baptism. If this be overthrown, then the reasons will
return which I have urged against those who grant a power in the Church
obligatory of all baptized Persons living among them antecedently to their
personal Contracts: For there is no middle way of dealing in this case. They
who disown the Original of power to be seated in the people, if they own any
Ecclesiastical power at all, they must needs place it originally in the
Governors. No third seat can, or, that I know of, has been ever thought of.
And if it be originally in the Governors, then it must be there antecedently
to the consent of particular private persons, and being so, must also oblige
antecedently to their consent, for it is a contradiction to speak of power
without obligation. And if so, then whoever is a Member of the Church is a
Subject of its Government, and whoever is a Member of the visible Church is, by
the same reason, a Subject of its visible Government. But none can deny that it
is the visible Church, as well as the invisible, of which Baptism makes us
Members; nay, many of our Adversaries especially, will say, that it is the
visible Church rather than the invisible. Whence it will follow that none who
is baptized is sui Juris, and therefore cannot need a new contract distinct
from that of his Baptism to make him a Subject of some Ecclesiastical
Government.

Subject to Ecclesiastical Government in general, and subject to the visible
Government of the Church, then he must in particular be a Subject of a
particular visible Government, when he becomes particularly a Member of that
visible Church for which those Governors are concerned, either by Baptism or
by cohabitation. It is very true that Baptism does admit a Member into the
Catholic Church, because it gives him a right to be received into all other
Churches distinct from that wherein he was baptized, (if he have occasion to
remove) without a new Baptism. But I cannot think it does so immediately, but
by being admitted into a particular Church he must consequently have this title
to be admitted into all other Churches by virtue of that correspondence which
all are obliged to maintein with each particular in ratifying its censures and
its Sacraments. Which, if it prove true, it will then follow that the title
every baptized Person has to Communion with the Catholic Church is grounded
upon his being first a visible Member, and consequently a visible Subject, of
that Church wherein he first received his Baptism. Which will settle the right
of Jurisdictions on as solid a foundation as they can desire who are themselves
concerned for it.

power of Government in the Church, and that it is originally seated in the
Ecclesiastical Governors, antecedently to the consent of the people. And these
will both appear from the Principles which I have hitherto advanced, that is,
from this supposition, that the right of Government is grounded on the right of
administering the Sacraments. For by this it plainly appears, that the
Governors have a power over particular Persons, because they can impose their
own determinations on them under pain of exclusion from the Sacraments, that
is, in consequence to our Principles of exclusion from the ordinary means of
Salvation. For this exclusion being, in reason, a greater mischief to the party
excluded than imprisonment or banishment, or even Death it self, therefore it
is also reasonable that it must prove as properly coercive to oblige him, who
values it according to its due desert, to yield of his own will rather than
suffer under such severities. And even those temporal coercions themselves
cannot prove actually coercive to him who apprehends no inconvenience in them,
at least not coercive whilst they are only threatened, not actually inflicted,
which yet is the most designed coercion of threatening Laws, which prove
coercive to many though they be inflicted only on a few. And when they are
justly possessed of this power of compelling their particular Subjects by
having this power of the Sacraments confined to them, they need nothing more
express, but have the whole power of Government also given them by as necessary
a consequence as he has the right of any secular Government entirely, who is
alone and rightfully possessed of the power of the Sword.

right of Government in the Ecclesiastical Governors is not derived from the
Multitude. I have already shown that the original right of the Sacraments does
not belong to the Multitude, but to God; that therefore they can have no power
in this matter but what is given them expressly by God; that there is no
evidence of such a gift; nay, all the presumptions that can be against it, that
it was not from them but from the father that Christ received his power, that
he gave his Authority immediately to the Apostles, and the Apostles their
immediately to their Successors, without depending on the suffrages of the
Multitude. These things will overthrow from the foundations the pretensions of
the Multitude in this matter.

Multitude had originally that power which our Independent Brethren pretend
they had; yet it will not thence follow, that they do well to take that
liberty, they are pleased, to overthrow the obligation of the established
Jurisdictions. How do they prove that they could never alienate this power by
their own consent through a long and peaceable Prescription? that Predecessors
could not oblige Successors in the alienation, if it was valid? that the
Multitude could not oblige particular refractory Persons by their plurality of
votes? that if any act of the particular Persons were necessary, their consent
to Baptism, and to become Members of the Church, was not an implicit consent
to subject themselves to the Government of the Church of which they became
Members? that their gift is not privative but accumulative, and revocable at
the pleasure of the particular Donors? None of these things are inconsistent
with the right of Democratical Government in general. Nay, the contrary to our
Adversaries sentiments in all these matters has been believed and relied on in
the practice of most of the Democratical Governments that we have ever heard
of, and I doubt whether our Adversaries can produce one instance, like the
Government they would set up in the Church, out of all the Democracies and all
the Histories now extant. And as all these presumptions lie against them, so
the office of proving lies upon them, as they are the Innovators from the
common Doctrine of the whole Catholic Church as far as we are capable of
knowing them by any certain information. Nor will the proof of any one of them
suffice, but of all of them; nor of all of them on the same degrees of evidence
which might suffice for matters of inferior concernment, but the evidence here
should be expected proportionable to the danger and mischief which must follow
on their practice, in case they should prove mistaken. But so far are they from
proving these things with that accurateness and evidence which, upon these
considerations, ought in reason to be expected from them, as that I can hardly
think that any judicious and candid Person among them would have the
confidence, on these terms, to undertake them.

CHAP. XXVII. That the Separation of the Non-Conformists is properly SCHISM,
and that from the Catholic as well as from particular Churches.
THE CONTENTS.
2. That the nature of this Obligation to submit to all unsinful conditions of
the Episcopal Communion is such as will make them guilty of the sin of SCHISM,
who will rather suffer themselves to be separated than they will submit to such
conditions. The Notion of SCHISM, as it is only a breach of correspondence, not
sufficient for my purpose.. I. As it is a breach of a Body Politic, it is.
Application to our Adversaries.. II. That by the Principles here proposed, the
Persons from whom they separate must be their Governors.. III, IV, V, VI, VII.
Other things proved that are necessary for this Application.. VIII. That this
separation from their own particular Churches must necessarily infer a
separation from the Catholic Church also. The Objection proposed.. IX. Answ.
If it were otherwise, it would destroy all Discipline, and therefore all the
dividing parties who are for Discipline are obliged, as well as we, to answer
this Objection, and to be favorable to what we shall say in Answer to it.. X,
XI. A more particular Answer proving the thing principally designed. 1. This
pretense of Union with the Catholic Church can be no encouragement for any to
neglect any means of continuing his Union with his own particular Church,
unless he may be assured that, whilst he wants it, he may notwithstanding
continue united to the Catholic Church.. XII. 2. That Union with the Catholic
Church, of which we may be assured, must be such as may appear to us by the use
of those external ordinary means which God has appointed for mainteining that
Union.. XIII. 3. In this way of judging, he that would assure himself of his
being united to the Catholic Church, must do it by proving himself united to
some particular visible Church by an external Communication in their
Sacraments.. XIV. 4. The external Communion of another Church, which while a
separated Person does maintein, he may have hopes of keeping still his Interest
in the Unity of the Catholic Church, must not be any other Communion within
the Jurisdiction in which he lives, and from which he is supposed to be
separated. This proved in regard of Usurping Members of the same Church..
XV.XVI. and of unauthorized Members of other Churches, within the same
Jurisdiction.. XVII, XVIII. 5. Such Separatists cannot maintein their title to
Catholic Unity by being received into any other Churches, though otherwise
absolute and unaccountable to the Church from whence they are separated.. XIX,
XX, XXI. This proved. 1. The nature of the inconvenience, incurred by
deprivation of Communion in a particular Church, is such as that it is
impossible that the censure can be valid in that particular Church, unless it
be valid in others.. XXII. 2. Hence it follows, that if such a Person be
received to the Sacraments in another Church without as good an Authority, for
uniting him to the unity of the Catholic Church, as that was by which he was
deprived, only on supposition of the continuance of his invisible unity with
the Catholic Church, notwithstanding his visible separation from a part of it,
such Sacraments must, as to him, be perfect Nullities.. XXIII. 3. No particular
Church can, by its Authority alone, restore any to Catholic Unity who has been
separated from it by another Church, without the consent of the Church by which
he was at first separated.. XXIV. 4. Hence it follows, That all that can be
done by other Churches receiving a Person separated from the Communion of his
own Church, can only be to judge of his case, not so as to oblige the Church to
which he belongs originally to stand to their judgment, but only so far as
concerns their own Jurisdiction.. XXV, XXVI, XXVII. 5. Whatever is necessary
for the design of Gods establishment, that he must, by his design, be obliged
to ratify, whether he has expressly said he will do so, or no. This applied..
XXVIII. The validity of the separation proved, when it is the act of the
Separatists themselves, without any censures of Ecclesiastical Authority,.
XXIX, XXX.

That the nature of this obligation to submit to unsinful conditions of their
Episcopal Communion is such as will make them guilty of the sin of SCHISM, who,
rather than they will submit to such conditions, either separate themselves, or
suffer themselves to be excluded from Communion by their respective Diocesan
Ordinaries. And all that will be necessary to be said concerning this, will be
only to remember and apply what has been already proved throughout the body of
the whole discourse. It is therefore certain, 1. That Schism, as such, is a
dissolution of the Body, and therefore Schism in the Ecclesiastical sense is a
dissolution of the Church, which is the Mystical Body of Christ, a dividing of
its Unity wherein soever that may be conceived to consist. If the Unity of the
Church consisted only in a Unity of correspondence without any obligation to
yield incumbent on one party rather than on any other, then the crime of Schism
would only be culpably chargeable on him who was chargeable with the breach,
that is, who either began the separation on unsufficient reasons, or who
suffered himself to be excluded on terms of less importance to him than the
correspondence. So that in this way of trial the whole Judgment concerning this
matter depends upon the merit of the Cause. Where there is no duty owing on
either side, there the whole reason of obligation to yield on one side must
only be the reason of the thing, its little momentousness in comparison with
the momentousness of mainteining correspondence. And as in this case, the
interest of the party is the only solid reason, why he may be conceived to be
obliged to yield, so the most proper and competent Judge of this interest is
supposed to be the party himself who is concerned in it. As therefore the
common interest of the several divided parties does, in this way of judging, no
farther oblige any one to yield to the others terms than as it may appear that
the common interest is more its own particular interest than the things to be
yielded in regard of it; so that even the acknowledgment that any thing is
indeed for the common interest cannot oblige any to yield it barely, as it is
the common interest, but as it is his own private interest, and more so than
the thing to be yielded for it; so also in this Unity of correspondence, which
is very well consistent with an equality between the several parties who are to
maintein this correspondence, every one is sui juris, and therefore very justly
to be determined by his own judgment concerning his own interest, and cannot be
obliged to renounce his own judgment, in compliance with others concerning his
own matters, how much soever he may value their judgment otherwise above his
own. This therefore would be the only Notion of Schism, if all the Members of
the Church were equal, or if all the difference between them were only such as
would make a reverence due to some Persons for their eminent personal
accomplishments, so that still it fell short of a Subjection due to them in
regard of any Office or Authority. And I have accordingly observed that in this
dispute concerning Schism, Introd.
our Adversaries Notions are exactly fitted to this Hypothesis, even of those
of them who otherwise own a properly-coercive Authority of the Church over her
particular Members.

Schism is not sufficient for my purpose. For my design is not to implead our
Adversaries on the merit of the cause of their separation from us, but to show
their obligation to yield on their part, how confident soever they may be that
they have the truth on their side, and that their Superiors are mistaken. For
this purpose therefore it is necessary that the Unity of the Church be supposed
such as may be culpably broken by them who hold the right side of the
Controversy, if the truth it self be not of that moment as to justify a
separation, and if it be not the denial of any the least truth that is required
as a condition of peace, but only a condescension in practice. And if it appear
that the Unity of particular Churches (for which alone I am immediately
concerned in this whole Discourse) is that of Bodies Politic, that the things
required from our Brethren in order to a solid peace are required by their
Superiors* that they are justly and properly their Subjects, and owe to these
Superiors a duty not of reverence only, but also of Subjection, that therefore
the obligation of yielding is incumbent on them, and that in all things short
of sin, that for mainteining this Unity of Bodies Politic it is absolutely
necessary that Subjects be obedient actively in all things lawful, and
passively even in things unlawful, and that this passive obedience obliges
Subjects to abstein from either erecting or abetting any opposite Societies: I
say, if these things appear, it will then follow that our Adversaries, in
mainteining opposite Assemblies to their lawful Ecclesiastical Governors, on
what pretense soever of mal-administration of the Government short of Heresy,
(which can alone make Governors incapable of the right of Government) must
become guilty of a culpable breach of the Churches Unity, which is that which
is properly meant by the true Notion of Schism. Now all these things prove true
on the management of our present Hypothesis.

Governors, and consequently that the Society, for whose Unity they are
concerned, is properly a Body Politic, will both of them follow from each
other, and will appear from the same proofs. 1. Therefore they who have the
power of rewards and punishments have the power of Government. And especially
if their power be not only a power of actual possession, but also of right,
then they must also be acknowledged to have the right of Government, which will
oblige Subjects to submission, even where they cannot be compelled to it, on
the same Principles of Conscience, by which they are obliged, without Humane
compulsion, to pay every one that which is rightfully their due. For it is by
these rewards and punishments that Government is administered, that Subjects are
induced or compelled to their duty; and as it is impossible for Government to
be administered without them, so it is also as impossible to suppose that he who
has the power of rewards and punishments can be restrained from the power of
governing them whom they can punish and reward. If these things be only
actually in their power, they can actually necessitate them to Subjection. But
if they also possess them rightfully, that must oblige them to a Subjection,
even in conscience.

alone have the power of the benefits of any Society must also be supposed to
have the power of its rewards and punishments. For indeed all rewards are only
a conferring of those benefits, and all punishments are only deprivations of
them. Thus it is in civil things, because the power of the Sword extends to all
worldly enjoyments, therefore he who has this, has it in his power to confer
these enjoyments, or to deprive of them at his pleasure. From whence it is that
his Subjects find themselves obliged to pay their duty to him, on account of
their own interest, as they value these fruitions of worldly good things, or
their deprivations. And therefore if it be in the power of any Order of men, to
dispose of those benefits which are to be expected from Christian Societies as
Societies, to admit or exclude whom they please from them; this must, for the
same reason, put it as much in their power to oblige all to a compliance with
them, who value the privileges of this Society, as the power of the Sword
enables them who have it to oblige all to a submission to them who value the
privileges of their secular Societies. This will as properly put it in their
power to reward or punish the obedience or disobedience of their Ecclesiastical
Subjects, as the power of the Sword does put it in the power of secular
Governors to reward or punish the dutiful or undutiful behavior of them who
are their Subjects in temporals, especially considering,

benefits here spoken of are the benefits of the Christian Society as a
Society. Whoever has it in his power to gratify another in any thing he stands
in need of, has it consequently in his power to oblige him who needs it to
comply with him on any condition, less afflictive than the loss of it to him
who stands in need of it. And by how much the thing is more valuable and more
necessary, by so much stricter will his obligation be to compliance. But yet
this will not give the Person, in whose power the gratification is, a proper
Authority and Jurisdiction over him whom he has power to gratify, unless the
gratification be of that kind that it is necessary to him, as a Member of the
Society, and therefore which may be necessary for all other Members as well as
himself. Whoever has it thus in his power to oblige any Member as a Member,
must have a universal power over all the Members, which he who has, must, by a
necessary consequence, have a power of obliging the whole Society. And
certainly this power of obliging the whole Society will amount to that which we
call properly Authority, if any thing deserve that name. Especially,

benefits in the power of such Persons be necessary to the Members on account
of Conscience, and if withal they think themselves obliged to believe, in
Conscience, that they are not to expect these gratifications from any other. If
the benefits necessary to all Members of the Society be necessary on account of
Conscience, then all Members must think themselves obliged in Conscience to
comply in order to the obteining them. And if withal they think themselves
obliged in Conscience to believe the appropriation of this power to them, they
must needs believe that they receive it from God, who, as he has alone the
power of ratifying all these exercises of this power, so he has consequently a
power to invest whom he pleases with this power. And as this power does
necessarily infer a power of Government, so it must necessarily be supposed
that God foresaw that it would do so, and therefore that he did really intend
that power of Government which he foresaw would follow from this power of the
benefits of Ecclesiastical Communion for those on whom he was pleased to confer
the power of these benefits. And if he did intend any Government at all, it
must needs have been extremely unpolitick to have entrusted this power into the
hands of any but of such whom he designed for Governors. For it must have
obliged the people to a greater dependence on such Persons than on their
Governors themselves, which must, in case of any difference between them, make
such Persons too hard for their Governors. And that must in the consequence
destroy all coercive power over such Persons, without which coercive power it
is impossible to conceive how any Government can be practicable. Which will
withal let our Adversaries see how necessary it is that they who have the
supreme visible power of these benefits be uncontrollable by any earthly power.

power of these benefits of the Society of the Church, as it is a Society,
appears plainly, by the Principles of the precedent discourse to be confined to
a certain order of men above others, who must therefore consequently be
understood to be invested with the proper power of governing all others who
are, by this contrivance of things, obliged to depend on them. It has appeared
that the benefits of the Christian Society, as a Society, are remission of sins
and the gift of the Holy Ghost; that the ordinary means of conveying these
benefits are the Sacraments; that the Sacraments themselves are of no efficacy
unless they be validly administered; that they are not validly administered,
unless the Person who administers them be lawfully Authorized to administer
them; that none can challenge any Authority for this purpose from God, but they
who have derived it from the Apostles, nor any in these days from the Apostles,
but they who have derived it from them in a continual succession; that none can
pretend to this succession, at least, cannot maintein it to future generations,
out of the Episcopal Communion; that a Person living in a particular
Jurisdiction cannot expect this benefit of Episcopal Communion, from any other
Communion but that of the Ordinary of Jurisdiction wherein he lives, whilst he
lives in it. Which will as properly, and by the same parity of reason, prove
that the Ordinary of a particular Jurisdiction is the particular Governor to
whom particular Persons are obliged to pay their particular obedience whilst
they are within the Jurisdiction, as it proves that Bishops are the Governors
of the Church in general.

Schism, do follow in course, especially on the Principles already proved in
this Discourse. It follows, 1. That all our Brethren who live in particular
Diocesses are properly subject to the Ordinaries of those Diocesses. If the
Ordinaries be their Governors, it is unavoidable, by the Rules of Relation,
but that our Brethren must as properly be the Subjects of those Ordinaries.
And, 2. That our Brethren must therefore owe their Ordinaries a duty not of
reverence only, but subjection. Reverence may be due from those who are not
Subjects. But Subjection is the duty which properly regards Subjects as they
are Subjects, and is therefore as properly due to their Governors, as
Governors, as God himself challenges honor as a Father, and Fear as a Master.
Mal. i.6.
And it is as impossible to own any particular Governors for Governors
without paying particular subjection to them as it is impossible to own any
particular Person for our Father or Master without paying them the honor or
fear which are respectively due to those Relations. And, 3. That this
Subjection, which is due to them, will require that they should rather yield to
their Governors than that they should expect that their Governors should
yield to them; nay, that they are bound in duty to yield in all things that are
lawful, especially when, upon a modest proposal of their reasons to the
contrary, their Governors profess themselves dissatisfied with those reasons,
and still require the same things from them as necessary for the public. If
the matter of the things required in such a case as this be not sinful, the
disobedience must needs be so, because it is injurious to the rights of
Governors. And therefore by the Rule of our Brethrens own casuistry, they are
to choose it as the safest course, rather to hazard the greatest inconveniences
to themselves that may follow from the nature of the things required, than to
hazard the guilt of this sin against God by refusing the duty which he has
imposed on them to their Superiors. Though I have withal shown that it were not
every sin that would excuse them for the neglect of their duty to Governors
but only such a sin as were greater or more evident than the sinfulness of such
a neglect, and that very few, if any, sins can be so. However, 4. Even in those
cases wherein their Subjection does not oblige them to active obedience, yet it
does oblige them at least to passive. And it has been shown that this requires
not only that they submit to the punishments inflicted on them by their
Superiors, but also that they do not join with any opposite Society. And it has
appeared from the sequels of these Principles of Unity, as applied to
particular Jurisdictions, that all Societies within the Jurisdiction must be
opposite who do not own a dependence on the Governors of the Jurisdiction.
From all which put together it must follow that the separation, of which our
Adversaries are guilty notoriously, is destructive of the Ecclesiastical
Government of the respective Jurisdictions wherein they live, and consequently
Schismatical in respect of those particular Churches, as Schism consists in a
violation of the Churches Unity, and as the Unity of those Churches does, on
these Principles, appear to consist in a Unity of Government.

Unity of particular Churches, if they may still continue united to the
Catholic Church. For if this may be their case, they may still enjoy all the
benefits and comforts of the Christian Religion. They may enjoy the benefits.
For as long as they are Members of the Catholic Church, so long they are
Members of Christ himself, of his Mystical Body, and, by this means, are in as
near a capacity to receive all vital influences from him as the Members of the
Natural Body are to receive the influences of the natural Life. And so long
they make up one Legal Person with him, and so have a Legal Title to all that
he has done and suffered for them, on performance of conditions, which is all
the privilege that we our selves do challenge on account of our being within
the external Communion of the Church. They may also enjoy all the comforts of
the Christian Religion, even all that assurance of the safety of their
condition which they are capable of receiving, even in the external Solemnities
of the Covenant, and the application of the external Seals. These themselves
they may receive, if not in the Church from whence they are ejected, yet in
some other where they may be received upon their ejection, who may have as just
an Authority to administer the Sacraments as the Church which has ejected them,
and is no more obliged to stand to the judgment of the Church who has ejected
them than she is to stand to hers, but is every way as competent a Judge of the
qualifications to be required from those who are to be admitted to her own
Communion. This indeed seems to be the true reason why all the Discipline of
particular Churches has been so insignificant, since the Catholic has been
divided into so many parties who are ready to receive each others
Excommunicates. They only can be terrified to do their duty who must otherwise
be excluded from the Catholic Church, to which alone the privileges of the
Church can be thought confined. But for avoiding this, whatever censures they
lie under from particular Churches, two excuses are obvious from our
Adversaries Principles. Either they make the Unity of the Catholic Church such
as that they may be contained in it who are excluded from the visible Communion
of all particulars; or, if they require visible Communion with some particular
Church to Communion with the Catholic, yet they have been used to contein,
under the name of the Catholic Church, all the several divided parties, those
which are Heretical and Schismatical, as well as the Orthodox. And upon these
terms it is impossible for any censures to deprive of the whole visible
Communion of the Church. As the case stands now, the very case of being
excommunicated by one Church is a recommendation to others to receive them. And
if none others would, yet it is but the setting up a new Communion of their
own, which any censured Persons may do with as good right as many others have
done before them.

Unity of the Catholic Church, whilst men are excommunicated out of the
particular Churches to which they are more particularly related, at least if
their exclusion from their particular Churches were not so much as a
presumptive exclusion from the Catholic, but that excommunicated Members might
not only as certainly be, but also as certainly assure themselves that they are
Members of the Catholic Church, as they could before when they were Members of
their own particular Church; I should then acknowledge that Persons so
excommunicate could not have any reason to apprehend themselves to be in any
such danger of Salvation as might oblige them to such unsinful condescensions
as those are concerning which I have been speaking, in order to the avoiding of
that danger. For it is to be considered that as the whole immediate effect of
Excommunication is privative, so the deprivations of the benefits of
Ecclesiastical Communion do herein differ from the deprivations of Secular
censures, that the benefits cannot be taken away in one place if they may be
enjoyed in another. He who is banished from England may really be deprived of
all those accommodations which he is entitled to as a Subject of England, which
is all that the power of England can do to him, and which is a real effect of
that power. And yet at the same time he may enjoy the like or greater
accommodations in France, because these are capable of being enjoyed by them
who are deprived of their English Freedoms. The difference of Country is
sufficient, in this case, to afford some places privileges different from the
privileges of others. Put the Spiritual advantages, whereof men are deprived
by Excommunication, the pardon of sin, the giving of the Holy Ghost, the
promises of future and eternal Rewards, are things impossible to be enjoyed in
one place, if they be wanting in another. It is God himself that must
immediately ratify them; and his power is equally concerned for the Church who
has exercised her power of Excommunication, as for her who receives the others
Excommunicates. And therefore, if, notwithstanding the Excommunication of such
Persons, they may yet communicate in other Churches, and expect that God should
confirm to them the benefits of such Vncanonical Communions, they must
consequently expect that God, in doing so, must disanul the censures of the
Church which has Excommunicated them. Which must consequently disoblige all who
think so from all condescensions on their part for the recovery of the
Communion of which they are deprived.

one place may be received in another without so much as the formalities of an
absolution to repeal the sentence which has been passed against them; nay, must
never have been presumed to have been cast out of the Communion of the
Catholic Church by the Excommunications of their own Church; then they must
still be supposed to have continued in a state of Pardon and Possession of the
Spirit upon performance of the moral conditions of the Gospel. And then what
effect can their Excommunication be supposed to have upon them that may oblige
them to any condescensions in order to an Absolution? And therefore, that I may
settle the Discipline of particular Churches on a solid foundation, it will be
necessary to show that the Unity of particular Churches is, in the ordinary
constitution of things, so inseparable from the Unity of the Catholic Church,
as that whoever is cut off designedly from the Unity of a particular Church,
however it come to pass, whether by his own act, or the act of his Superiors)
cannot at the same time be presumed to retein the Unity of the Catholic
Church. Whence it will follow that, as I have proved our Brethrens separation
to divide them from the Unity of their particular Churches of which they are
Members respectively, so it must consequently divide them from the Unity of the
Catholic Church, and so be as properly Schismatical in respect of that, as it
is in respect of their particular Churches. But I could wish that they would
remember that the reason obliging me to this is the interest of the Discipline
of all particular Churches in it, and the unpracticableness of that Discipline
without it, by what form of Government soever it be administered, whether
Monarchically or Aristocratically or Democratically. All who maintein any power
of Church censures are as much concerned for it as I am. Neither the
Presbyterians nor the Independents themselves can ever expect that their
censures can oblige any to perform their duty, if all they do be only to
exclude him from the Ordinances of their own particular Congregations, but that
notwithstanding he may as validly partake of Ordinances in other Congregations
as he did before, and be received on as easy terms as if he had never been
censured. This I the rather warn to let them see how they are, in interest,
obliged to be favorable to the reasons which I am to produce on this Subject,
and withal that they are obliged to believe their own Objections false, and to
answer them as well as we are, if they be for Discipline, and think the reasons
inducing them to it more cogent than their Objections.

Union of particular Churches with that of the Catholic Church; I desire it
may be remembered, 1. That there can be no encouragement for any to venture to
neglect the Unity of particular Churches on pretense of their disability to
deprive him of the Unity of the Catholic Church, unless he may be assured in
that case, of his being disunited from his own particular Church, that he
notwithstanding continues united to the Catholic Church. It is not the real
truth of the thing it self, but the Arguments whereby this truth may appear to
him, that can afford a Person comfort who were concerned to practice it; and I
have shown that the less comfortableness of such a condition is sufficient to
oblige to all unsinful condescension rather than venture on it. And therefore
if it may but appear that the means of our assurance of our being united to the
Catholic Church depend on our being united to particular Churches, this will
be sufficient to oblige all to keep to the Unity of their particular Churches
as they would assure themselves of their being united to the Catholic Church.

Union with the Catholic Church that may appear to us, and afford us present
satisfaction, we must mean such an external Union as is made and maintained by
the use of those external ordinary means which God has appointed for that
purpose. And I have also shown that the external Sacraments are those ordinary
means of Divine institution for mainteining the Unity of the Catholic Church,
and for obteining those Spiritual blessings to which all Members of the
Catholic Church are entitled on account of their being Members of it. All that
I have said concerning this will reach the Catholic Church as well as the
Church of the particular Jurisdiction. Baptism does admit into the Catholic
Church as well as into the particular Church where it is received. And in the
Lords Supper we profess our selves united to all Christians in general as well
as with those who are present at the particular Communion. And all who hold any
efficacy in it do not deny but that we are made one with those with whom we
profess our selves to be united. Nor is any other external way pretended for
uniting us to the Catholic Church, besides these whereby we are united to our
particular Churches, at least, none is pretended as of Divine institution. And
whatever may be pretended for other w^^ of Union with the Catholic Church may
be the same way prevented in reference to the Catholic Church, as I have
prevented it in reference to their particular Churches, in weakening the
pretenses of Separatists to Union with those Churches from which they are
Separated. And whatever I have said to show the necessity of these external
Sacraments to Salvation, whether as Seals or Solemnities of the Covenant, or as
to the nature of the benefits conveyed by them, do plainly prove at least the
Negative (for which I am alone concerned at present) that none can be
ordinarily assured of his being united to the Catholic Church without an
external participation of the Sacraments.

assure himself of his being united to the Catholic Church must do it by
proving himself united to some particular visible Church by an external
Communication in their Sacraments. I say only some particular visible Church,
because it is not requisite, for this purpose, that he be determinately of any
one, but it is sufficient that he be of any. And by external Communion with
some visible Church, I do not mean that the whole Church must be present in the
place where he does communicate; but as he who communicates with two, at the
least, besides the Minister, (which is the smallest number our Church allows of
for a Communion) does yet communicate, at least, with that whole Church of
which those few are Members (even according to the Independents themselves,
they who are present, how few soever, must be allowed, at least to communicate,
in some sense, even with the absents of their own Congregations,) because they
are contained under the same terms of Unity with those who are present, the
same Unity of Government, and the same Uniformity of the terms of Communion; so
he that communicates visibly with any particular Church may, on the same
account, be supposed to be, in some sense, even in visible Communion with the
whole Catholic Church, inasmuch as a visible correspondence is, or ought to
be, maintained between that particular Church and all others, and consequently
as he has reason to expect that, if he were in any other Church, he should be
received on the same terms. And on this account, whoever receives the
Sacrament, though in a Wilderness, yet must thereby profess himself a Member of
some particular Church, though, I confess, in the case, it must needs be a very
imperfect one. For he must receive it from the Priest as a Person Authorized to
give it him. And where there is Authority and Persons subject to that
Authority, there must be a Church in the sense in which I am now obliged to
understand it, as its Unity is that of a Body Politic. And because it is
impossible to assure our selves of our being united with the Catholic Church,
but by our visible participation of the Sacraments, and as impossible to
partake of these Sacraments externally without partaking of them from a Person
Authorized, and impossible to do that without uniting our selves thereby to
that Body Politic to which his Authority relates; it must therefore be
impossible, on these terms, for any to assure himself of his being united to
the Catholic Church, but by an external Communion in some particular Church.
At least therefore thus much must be granted, that he who is separated from the
Church, in whose Jurisdiction he lives, cannot have any pretense of continuing
in the Unity of the Catholic Church, unless he be, at the same time, received
into the Communion of some other particular Church. If he be out of all
particular Churches, it is impossible to conceive how he can be in the
Catholic Church; and if he be out of their external Communion, he must be out
of the external Communion of the Catholic Church. And to apply this
observation closer to our Brethrens case, I consider,

external Communion of another Church which, while a separated Person does
maintein, he may have hopes of keeping still his interest in the Unity of the
Catholic Church, must not be any other Communion within the Jurisdiction in
which he lives, and from which he is supposed to be separated. As for any other
Churches they are also confined within their own Jurisdictions by the common
right of Jurisdictions, and so confined as that their intermedlings in other
Jurisdictions are not only irregularities, but mere Nullities, and neither
their obtruding Officers can oblige others to receive them, nor their presuming
to censure or absolve, without the consent of the power of the Jurisdiction,
can oblige either Subjects or subordinate Officers to ratify their censures.
And much less can any party of the same Church do it within their own
Jurisdiction, especially against the consent of the Supreme Governors of that
Jurisdiction. And the reason is plain, ^^cause in the most confined acceptance
of a Church there ca^ be no more than one in a Jurisdiction, and therefore the
multiplying of opposite Assemblies in the same Jurisdiction cannot mu^^iply
Churches, but still that party, and that alone, must be the Church of the
Jurisdiction which has the original right of Authority on their side. It is
certain by the fundamental constitutions of all Government, that neither the
acts of Subjects in opposition to their Governors, nor of inferior subordinate
Governors in opposition to the Supreme visible Governors, nor of a smaller
over-voted part in opposition to a prevailing number of suffrages, are to be
taken for the acts of the Society. And on account of some, or all, these
defects, no act of any of the Conventicles in London can be taken for the act
of the Church of London. So that still he that only communicates with the
Conventicles may notwithstanding that be excluded from the Communion of all
particular Churches in the World, even that of London it self. And therefore
this can never, in this way of judging, secure any Communicant of his being in
the Communion of the Catholic Church.

Churches, so neither are they valid as to the nature of the thing, and
therefore cannot validly admit a Member even of that particular Church. And if
they be not valid in reference to that particular Church, I leave it to our
Brethrens second thoughts to consider, how they can be valid in regard of the
Catholic Church. It suffices at present that this Nullity of such Sacraments
hinders them from making their Communicants Members of any particular Church,
which is sufficient, on our present Principles, to deprive them of the comfort
of their being assured thereby that they are Members of the Catholic Church.
And yet, if what I have said prove true, I have directly proved that they who
received invalid Sacraments cannot. by virtue of such Sacraments, expect the
Spirit of Christ, or to be validly united into his Mystical Body, without which
our Adversaries themselves will neither think it possible to be united to the
Catholic Church, nor could they think a Union with the Catholic Church
desirable on such terms, though it had been possible. Besides, whoever
intermeddles to repeal censures within a particular Jurisdiction against the
Superiors of that Jurisdiction, cannot be presumed to be a competent Judge of
such matters, though his Judgment should be never so true, and the Superiors
never so much mistaken; yet in all matters of practice not sinful, the
Superiors Judgment is that wherein the Subject is obliged to acquiesce, as to
practice. And therefore though it were fit that a Person censured by the
Governors of a Jurisdiction should be restored, yet none but the Governors
themselves who have censured him have power to restore him. And therefore
though such Persons so restoring him should have right on their side, as to the
reasonableness of the cause why he should be restored, yet still these two
cases are very different, that it is fit he should be restored, and that he
actually is so. And though the Superiors themselves who have power of restoring
him, do judge it fit that he should be restored, yet even their judging it fit
that he should be restored does not actually restore him. And therefore if the
Authority of these Persons fail who presume to restore a Person censured by the
Governors of the Jurisdiction against the consent of those Governors, that
alone is sufficient to invalidate the act of his restitution. And if he be not
actually restored, it plainly follows that a Person, so restored, is not yet an
actual Member of that particular Church, and therefore, notwithstanding that
restitution, still continues out of the Communion of all particular Churches,
and consequently of the Catholic Church in general.

usurping Subjects cannot make a Member of that particular Church to which they
are related as Members, will also prove that their being received into the
Communion of other Churches, by alike unauthorized Members, can never make them
Members of those Churches into which they are pretended to be received. And
therefore if valid Sacraments be only administered in the Episcopal Communion in
opposition to all others, at least in such places where there are such opposite
Communions, and it is impossible for any to be made visibly a Member of any
Church without a visible participation of its Sacraments, then no reception by
Persons divided from Episcopal Authority in other places can make them Members
of the Churches of those places where they are received. If the Conventicles in
London have no power to make a Member of the Church of London, then though such
a censured Person as I am speaking of, who should despair of a visible
Communion with the Catholic Church in London, should remove to York, yet he
could not better his condition by that removal. The Conventicles in York are,
for the same reason, under the same incapacities of making him a Member of the
Church of York as they in London were for making him a Member of the Church of
London. And let him remove never so often, yet wher-ever the same reason holds
there will still remain the same impossibility of a relief. Let him hold
correspondence with never so many Conventicles in never so many or distant
places, all they can do put together, cannot make him a Member of one
particular Church.

Churches, if any there be, not Episcopally governed, not yet opposed to any
Canonical-Episcopacy of the place they live in, (if notwithstanding they keep
an amicable correspondence with the Episcopal Communions, and withal keep true
to the terms of correspondence,) they cannot receive to their Communion any who
has refused to communicate with those Episcopal Communions with which they
mantein correspondence, whilst he lived among them, and was subject to them.
As for a surreptitious Communion which may be obtained with foreign Churches
without knowledge of their condition at home, it can be of no more validity
before God than their surreptitious bargains one with another. And it is to be
remembered, that in these matters of Communion, the Divine ratification is the
only thing considerable. This is the true case of our Nonconforming Brethren.
And this being supposed to be their case, and withal that the things which I
have endeavored to prove in this Discourse are true, I do not see how it is
possible for them to prove that when they are out of the Communion of the
Church of England, they are in Communion with any other particular Church in
the World, that may give them any plausible pretense of continuing in the
Communion of the Catholic Church. Though other absolute Churches independent
on the Church of England might receive them to their Communion who are
separated from the Communion of our Church, and the Sacraments administered to
such Persons were valid Sacraments, yet this can afford no comfort to our
present Non-Conformists, because they cannot plead any countenance from any
such Churches. And this were sufficient for my present design, to prove that
they are actually out of the Communion of the visible Catholic Church.

Independent Brethren do usually profess themselves not to understand, how any
can communicate with the whole Catholic Church, or consequently be excluded
from Catholic Communion; and because it must be a much more affecting
consideration to them, to cut them off from all hopes of re^^e^ on pretense of
any claim to a Union with the Catholic Church, if it may be proved that their
separation from their own particular Church must, not only, de facto, cut them
off from all communion with other Churches, but, de jure, ought to do so, and
therefore that all that other Churches can do for them cannot restore them to
that Catholic Unity which they must have lost by their separation from any one
particular Church, whilst it remains Catholic, that is, whilst it mainteins
the terms of Catholic correspondence; Therefore, 5. I proceed further to show
that such Separatists cannot maintein their title to Catholic Unity by being
received into any other Churches, though otherwise absolute and unaccountable
to the Church from whence they are separated. By Catholic Unity, I do not here
mean, as our Independent Brethren do, a Unity of meeting ordinarily in the same
Assemblies. That I confess unpracticable in the Catholic Church. But as the
absent Members of particular Churches do not, by every particular absence, lose
the right of Union with their particular Churches, because, as long as they
submit to the conditions of Communion, they have a right to be received to
Communion, as often as they shall be pleased to come to it, and are accordingly
properly said to be united to it, and to be in actual Communion with it, even
when they do not actually communicate with it at all; so is the case in
reference to Catholic Communion. Every Person, by his Baptism in any
particular Church, is admitted a Member of the Catholic Church, not of the
Elect alone (nay, not at all, according to those who say that they who fall
away totally and finally, when they are adult, could never have been Elect
whiles they were Infants) but of the visible Church also. And that plainly
appears hence, that all agree that if he have occasion to travel into foreign
Churches, he has a right to be received to the external visible Privileges of
baptized Persons among them, only on a certificate of the Baptism received at
home, without reiterating it in the several Churches where he desires to be
admitted to Communion. Only the reason of our Brethrens misapprehensions seems
to be this, that they seem to conceive his right to the particular Church where
he is baptized to result from his Union with the Catholic Church, whereas
indeed his right to communion with the whole Catholic Church results rather
from that actual visible Communion in which Baptism does visibly invest him
with his particular Church, as all other Churches are obliged to maintein a
correspondence with this particular Church, and therefore to ratify the
Sacraments therein administered as validly administered.

Baptism did indeed primarily admit a Person into the Catholic Church, and
secondarily into the particular Church in which the Baptism was received, as a
part of the Catholic Church; then our Adversaries would reason very
consequently. They might then very reasonably pretend that the Union here made
were an invisible Union, for so that must needs be which can be supposed to be
made with the whole Catholic Church antecedently to any visible Union with any
particular Church. Then they might reasonably plead a Union with the Catholic
Church, though out of all visible Union with any particular Church, because
their Union with the Catholic Church would be antecedent, and therefore
Independent on their Union with any particular Church. Then they might justly
question the right of particular Churches to deprive them of their Union with
the Catholic, when they could not think themselves in a worse condition upon
their separation from their particular Church, than they were in antecedently
to their Union with it; but then they thought themselves united to the
Catholic Church. They might justly continue their claim of right to Union even
with that particular Church from which they were separated, on the same
Principles of their continuing still united to the Catholic Church, and the
right to Communion even with that particular, as well as other Churches, being
grounded on their persevering Union, with the Catholic Church. And this right
to Communion would be as properly an actual Communion with that Church it self,
as absenters and those who forbear the Sacrament, are notwithstanding said to
be in actual Communion with it. Which if it should prove true, it will then be
as impossible for particular Churches to deprive any Member so much as of their
own Communion, as it is impossible to deprive them of their invisible Union
with the Catholic Church, from which this right to Communion with particular
Churches is conceived to follow by so necessary a consequence. But methinks the
destructiveness of these consequences to any Discipline whatsoever should make
all Patrons of Discipline wary of the Principles from whence they do so
inevitably follow.

right of Catholic Communion be grounded, as to particular Persons, on the
right they enjoy to the Communion of the particular Churches where they live,
and the right those particular Churches have, as parts of the Catholic Church,
to have their Sacraments acknowledged, and their Members received in all other
Churches whom they take for Catholic; then that which deprives them of the
Communion of their own Churches must, by consequence, deprive them of the right
of being Members of the Catholic Church, to which they have no other title
than what they can derive from their being Members of their own particular
Churches, to which they are respectively related. And then as it is in the
power of the Governors of particular Churches, to deprive them, at least, of
the Communion of their own particular Churches, and so to cut them off from
their being Members of them; it must also consequently be in their power to cut
them off from their Communion with the Catholic Church, to which they have no
other title but that Membership. This therefore I shall endeavor to prove from
the Principles which I intend to make use of for proving this present
Particular.

inconvenience, incurred by this deprivation of Communion in their own
particular Churches, is such as that it is impossible that the censure can be
valid in their own Churches, unless it be valid in others. The design of the
suspending from the Sacraments is, for so long to deprive the Person of the
benefit of the Sacraments, till he yield to the thing required from him by the
Authority by which he is suspended. Either therefore he has still a title to
the benefit of the Sacraments from which he is suspended, or he has not. If he
have still as good a Covenant-title to the benefits of the Sacrament as before,
and can as well assure himself of his title; what loss can it be for him to be
deprived of the Sacramental Elements? How can it ever oblige him, in
conscience, to submit to that Authority which can inflict no greater punishment
than this deprivation? If therefore God himself be obliged to ratify the
censures of particular Churches in order to the preservation of their
Government; then it must follow that the Person so deprived must lose his
interest in the New Covenant of the Gospel, and all the privileges consequent
to that interest. And he who has lost his interest in the Covenant, cannot
retrieve it by a bare change of the place and Jurisdiction. He that has no
interest in the Gospel Covenant cannot possibly continue a Member of the
Catholic Church whose Union consists in their confederation in the same
Covenant. And considering that the Covenant is the same by which they are
united to God and to each other; nay, indeed that their Union to each other is
grounded on their Union with Christ, they are therefore Fellow Members of each
other, Ephesians. iv.25. 1 Cor. v^.17.
because they are all Members of the same Mystical Body of Christ, they are
made one Spirit by partaking of that one Spirit which is also his; therefore it
is impossible that they can be separated from this Mystical Union with one
another, unless they be both or one of them at least disunited from Christ,
which they who are, must, by necessary consequence, be disunited from all the
Members of that Mystical Body. And however that Union with other Members could
afford little comfort to a Person concerned in it, which were consistent with
their separation from Christ their common Head. So also they who are deprived
of the title the Covenant is capable of giving them to remission of sins in one
Church, cannot at the same time be judged to be free from their sins in the
other, even on performance of the Moral Duties, and he who is not so cannot be
judged to be in a present capacity of being a Churchmember. This proves at
least that the Church which thinks the censure pronounced against any Person to
have been pronounced validly, and to have cut him off from the Church wherein
he was censured, cannot at the same time think him united to themselves in the
bond of Catholic Unity, if they think the Church from whence he is divided to
be Catholic. And the case is the same whether the Person so divided have
divided himself by separation, or have been divided from them by the censures
of a Lawful Authority. Still so long as he is divided from any one Church that
is Catholic, he cannot continue his Unity with them, if they continue theirs
with the Church from which he is divided.

Sacraments in another Church without as good an Authority for uniting him to
the Unity of the Catholic Church as that was by which he was deprived, only on
supposition of the continuance of his invisible Unity with the Catholic
Church, notwithstanding his visible separation from a part of it, such
Sacraments must, as to him, be perfect Nullities, and cannot convey to him the
proper benefits of Sacraments, even on the performance of the general Moral
conditions of Faith and Repentance. For the Sacraments cannot convey the merits
and influences of Christ to any, but those who are united in his Mystical Body,
by the same proportion of reasoning as the Vessels, by which the vital
influences are conveyed in the Natural Body, can convey them to none but those
who are parts of the Body to which they are supposed to belong. The strength of
this Mystical reasoning I have elsewhere proved. Seeing therefore that the
Sacraments can convey no influences but unto them who are united to Christ, and
on the supposition I am now speaking of, the Persons thus received to the
Sacrament cannot be supposed thus united to him; therefore such a Communicant
could not expect any benefit from such Sacraments, not only in regard of his
want of those moral dispositions, but also in regard of his incapacity, though
he had them. This therefore will be the case where the reception to Communion
is only granted as a Testimony of the Unity which the Person so received is
supposed to have invisibly, even antecedently to such reception. But if it be
designed further, not to testify that Catholic Unity which he is supposed to
retain, but to restore it to him who is supposed to have lost it by his
separation from his own Church, this is another case. And concerning it, I say,

particular Church whatsoever can, by its Authority alone, restore any to
Catholic Unity who has been separated from it by another, without the consent
of the Church by which he was at first separated. This is plain from what has
been said before, because this is impossible to be done without disanulling the
Authority by which he was at first separated from the Church. For if this later
Church can restore such a Person to Catholic Unity, then it may also restore
him to Unity with that Church by which he was at first separated. And if so,
then he may have a right to the Communion even of his own Church, even whilst
he is actually separated from them. And then what effect can such an Authority
have whereby it may appear to be Authority, if it cannot deprive him of so much
as the right to that Communion from which he is so separated? Seeing therefore
both these exercises of Authority cannot be supposed valid at the same time,
and seeing therefore that God is obliged to disanul the one, if he will ratify
the other; it will not be difficult to determine which of the two must prove
invalid. The Church which endeavors to restore such a Person is supposed to be
only equal with the Church which has rejected him, and therefore can have no
Authority to reverse her censures. And therefore as God is not obliged to
ratify that act of hers in regard of her Authority, so he is obliged to
disanul it, as he is the common Governor of all the Churches, and as he is
thereupon obliged to maintein Discipline, and that correspondence between the
Churches which is so necessary for the preservation of Discipline.

other Churches receiving a Person separated from the Communion of his own
Church can only be to judge of his case, not so as to oblige the Church to which
he belongs originally to stand to their judgment, but only so far as concerns
their own Jurisdiction. They can judge whether they be in conscience, or for the
maintenance of their common correspondence, obliged to ratify their censures
within their own respective Jurisdictions, that is, they can judge concerning
the validity of the censures, whether they be grounded on a cause properly
belonging to the Authority by which they were censured, and whether they have
reason therefore to presume them valid before God, that is, indeed, whether
they do really cut him off from Catholic Unity. And in case they find the
sentence pronounced against him in his own Church invalid in it self, they may
then receive him to their own Communion, yet so as that they do not pretend any
Authority to reverse the sentence pronounced against him in his own Church, but
only to declare the original invalidity, and that only with relation to their
own obligation to confirm it within their own Jurisdictions; nor pretend to
restore him to the Catholic Unity which he had lost by the censures which had
been passed upon him in his own Church, but only receive him as an
acknowledgment of his uninterrupted right to Catholic Communion, and of their
own obligation as parts of the Catholic Church to admit him to their own
Communion. This certainly they may do by their own Authority without any the
least encroachment on the Authority which had originally passed the censure,
not as superior to that Authority, but only as not subject to it.

actually to have been the case of the Western Church in the cause of
Athanasius. Whilst he was charged only with Canonical matters they were
willing to hear what might be said against him, and in the mean time to suspend
him from their own Communion. But when they found, partly by the notorious
conviction of the disingenuity of the accusations of this kind (as in the
charges of the suborned whore, and the cutting off the hand of Arsenius, and
profaning the sacred offices at Mareotis) and partly by their delays and
evasions of this kind of trial, that this was not the thing indeed insisted on,
how much soever it was pretended, but that it was rather an artifice made use
of for the subversion of the common faith professed by him, they must then look
on such censures as passed upon him rather for his Faith than for the
Ecclesiastical crimes which were pretended. Wherein if they judged right, the
censures must have been essentially invalid on two accounts, both as to the
cause for which they were inflicted, and as to the Persons by whom. As to the
cause for which they were inflicted. For they could not believe that God would
deprive him of Catholic Unity only for mainteining the Catholic Faith, which
was one of the principal foundations of that Unity. And as to the Persons by
whom they were inflicted, who being Heretics were incapable of being Bishops,
and consequently of any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, besides that they were not
obliged to maintein any correspondence with Heretics, and therefore could not
be confined to Canons in dealing with them, the Canons being only terms of
correspondence. Though in the case wherein our Adversaries are concerned, there
is much more reason for the confinement of this power of other Churches. For
the power is much more absolute which particular Churches may challenge over
their particular Subjects than that which Provincial or National Synods can
pretend to over particular Churches. And therefore the obligation to confirm
their censures must be proportionably greater on account of the common
correspondence.

Governors of particular Churches do as often deprive of Catholic Unity, as
they deprive any really of the Communion of their own Churches; and that all
that other Churches can do cannot really unite any to the Catholic Church who
has been separated from any particular Church by a just Authority, without the
consent of that Authority by which he was separated; and that if their
receiving such a Person to their Communion do him any good, it must be only in
such cases wherein he was really never deprived of a right to Communion, even
with that Church whose actual Communion has been denied him. The only thing
remaining further for settling the Discipline of the Church on a solid
foundation can only be to see in what cases the censures may be presumed valid,
and wherein it may therefore be known that the restitution is invalid* and
unsafe to be trusted; and whether any relief may be expected thence by Persons
in our Brethrens circumstances. If either by any censure of their Superiors, or
by their own resistance and separation from them, they be really separated from
their own Churches to which they were originally related, they must
consequently be separated from the Unity of the Catholic Church, nor can they
be restored to it but by being reunited to their own particular Churches, and
that by a reconciliation as visible as their separation. And for clearing this,
that their separation must needs be a real separation, even in the esteem of
God himself, I desire it may be considered,

design of Gods establishment, that he must, by his design, be obliged to
ratify, whether he has expressly said he will do so, or no. Nay, indeed there
can be no necessity that he should expressly warn them of it who are already
sufficiently convinced that this is agreeable to his design. For it is certain
that God cannot design an end without the means, nor be ignorant of what is
requisite to his design as a means, nor fail where the means belong to his part
of the Covenant to see them performed, as I have already shown that it is his
part to perform the benefits of the Sacraments. None but he can immediately
give the Spirit, and apply the forgiveness of sins which are there promised.
But yet he is obliged to do so when the Persons Authorized by him do it in his
name, and with reference only to that end for which he has given them that
Authority. If therefore Government be a thing designed by God, and the
ratification of this separation by God be necessary for the end of this
Government, I do not know what can be required further to prove that God is
obliged to ratify it. The former has already been proved, and the later will
appear by easy inferences from it, especially considering the peculiar
circumstances of our Adversaries case. The practicableness of any Government
will require, 1. A power of determining indifferent circumstances; and, 2. A
power of obliging Subjects to stand to the judgment of Governors concerning
the expediency of such determinations, at least to acquiesce and submit in
practice, though they may otherwise think them mistaken in their judgments;
and, 3. A power of obliging Subjects to a passive obedience even in things
unlawful, so long as the title to this Government is lawful. And this passive
obedience implies that they must not assume a power which is not committed to
them in any case at all, no extremity whatsoever can warrant that; that for the
same reason they do not abet others who are guilty of it; that because the
independency of Societies cannot possibly be understood within a Jurisdiction
already rightfully possessed, without either assuming or abetting such an
Usurpation, besides the resistance that must thereby be made against the lawful
Authority of the Jurisdiction, therefore no opposite Societies be erected or
abetted within settled Jurisdictions. These are things so necessary to
Government in general, as that the Authority exercised in these cases must be
valid, if there be any Authority at all acknowledged that may properly deserve
that name. And therefore, in these cases, there can be no necessity to descend
to the merit of the cause. Whatever the cause be, so long as it is reducible to
any of these Heads, the presumption lies clear in favor of the Governors.

separation for any of these causes is altogether unjustifiable on their part,
whence it will follow, that if they be separated by their Superiors for any
cause of this kind, they are separated, as well for a just cause as by a just
Authority, so that nothing can be wanting for making their separation valid
before God. And though their separation be entirely their own act without any
express censures of their Superiors, yet it will as effectually cut them off
from the Unity of that Church from which they separate, as if they were
deprived by Authority. For the great design of God in joining the Grace of the
Sacraments with the external participation of the Elements being, by this
contrivance of things, to oblige them to adhere to their Superiors without
whose consent they cannot enjoy the Sacraments, the reason of the thing will
require that they lose those Graces as well by their own separation of
themselves from their Superiors as by being separated by them. The Unity of the
Church is alike prejudiced both ways, and if withal we consider this right of
Governors as designed by God for a preservative of Unity; nay, indeed as the
very bond of Unity of a Body Politic; it will then appear that a separation
from visible Governors must be a direct violation of this Unity, and the
rather so, because it is impossible that it should not be injurious to the
rights of Governors which God himself has designed for the preservation of
Unity. Nay, it plainly overthrows their coercive power over Malefactors by
which they are enabled to preserve this Unity. For if all they can do for this
purpose be only to cut them off from their Communion, and they may elude this
by cutting themselves off first, this is an art that may be made use of by any
who are objects of their Discipline, and must therefore render their whole
power ineffectual. As therefore this visible separation does evidently cut them
off from any legal notorious pretense to Unity; so by its opposing the design
and means appointed by God for the preservation of Unity it must also cut off
such Separatists from all hopes of relief in point of equity. For all that can
be said to justify men's claim to the equity of Gods promises, when they
evidently fail of performing the ordinary conditions of those promises, can
only be their compliance with Gods design in making those promises, which could
not, in their circumstances, be complied with by the use of the ordinary means.
But this cannot be pleaded in our Adversaries behalf. And therefore such a
separation as this must really cut off the Members so separated, from Catholic
Unity, and consequently the reconciliation made without the consent of the
Church, which had been particularly injured by the separation, must be invalid,
and cannot expect the Divine ratification.

Church which would venture to reconcile them would have reason to believe that
they were really disunited from the Catholic Church antecedently to her own
reconciliation. Whence it will follow that she cannot truly declare them
united. And therefore, unless her act of reconciliation can reunite them whom
she finds disunited, it can signify nothing for the comfort of the Persons
reconciled by her. But besides the reasons now-mentioned there are others
sufficient to convince such a reconciliation, not only of irregularity but of
invalidity also, both in regard of the reconciliation it self, and in regard of
the correspondence she is obliged to maintein. In regard of the reconciliation
it self, because indeed it nulls it self. For if she have no power to cut off,
she can have none to reunite them who are cut off by others. And upon the same
reasons by which she deprives other Churches of having a power to cut off that
Member which she is pleased to receive to her Communion, and to own as still
united notwithstanding what has been done for cutting him off from the Unity of
his own Church, she must also deny that power in her self to separate any of
her own Members from her own Unity. For if, on the terms now-mentioned as
necessary for the preservation of Government in general, his own Church has not
a power to deprive him of her own Unity, she can have it in no case at all, nor
can any other Church have it, because it is the same power that is supposed
common to all particular Churches. This will at least show that they who admit
of any such power of Churches to punish the misdemeanors of particular
Subjects with an effectual deprivation of her own Communion, cannot, in reason,
look upon the reception as valid, at least so far as it is only declarative.
And that it cannot be valid by way of Authority to restore to Catholic Unity
those who had been validly separated from it, will appear from the other
consideration of the correspondence they are obliged to maintein with all other
Churches. For it having appeared that, by the Divine contrivance of things,
every particular Church is obliged to ratify the censures of all others in
order to the securing of her own Discipline, it will thence follow that God as
a Governor is obliged to secure this correspondence; which himself has made so
necessary by his own appointment. And therefore where his own interposition is
concerned (as it is in ratifying the acts of Church Authority) he must be
obliged to ratify that act only which is in favor of this correspondence, not
that which overthrows it. Not only as this way of dealing answers the deserts
of the parties concerned in the case of which I am speaking, but as he is by
his own Government obliged only to ratify such exercises of power as are
performed by a just Authority. And that such receptions are utterly destructive
to this correspondence, I think our Adversaries themselves can hardly question.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Usefulness of this Hypothesis above others.
THE CONTENTS.
usefulness of this Discourse as to its two great Designs.. I, II. 1. For the
most likely Notion of SCHISM. Two advantages of this way of stating the
Government of the Church above others.. III. 1. That the Government thus
contrived will be most wisely fitted for practice.. IV, V. Because best fitted
to the capacity of the illiterate Multitude.. VI. Who will, 1. By these
Principles, be best enabled to distinguish their true Superiors from false
Pretenders.. VII. As to the Ordination of our Ministers.. VIII, IX, X, XI, XII.
As to that of the Non-Conformists.. XIII. 2. They will hereby be best enabled
to judge of the extent of their Duty to their true Superiors themselves.. XIV,
XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII. 2. This Hypothesis is peculiarly suited to the practice
of such a Society as the Church is, for preserving Unity and a due respect to
Authority in it, especially in times of Persecution.. XIX, XX, XXI, XXII,
XXIII, XXIV, XXV, XXVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXIX, XXX, XXXI. 2. The usefulness of
this Discourse as to its second great design, the showing the real danger and
mischievousness of the sin of SCHISM. The impossibility of doing this on our
Adversaries Principles.. XXXII, XXXIII, XXXIV, XXXV, XXXVI, XXXVII, XXXVIII,
XXXIX, XL, XLI. On our Principles, the Notion given hereof is popular, derived
from the nature of the sin it self.. XLII, XLIII. And suited to the affections
and relish of pious Persons, though illiterate.. XLIV. The great advantage of
Reasons suited to the affections of the Persons to be persuaded by them.. XLV.
These Principles are more easy to be judged of by popular capacities, in three
regards.. XLVI. 1. Most of those Disputes which are matters of Learning are
here avoided.. XLVII. 2. The remaining Disputes are reduced to such things
which even illiterate Persons must be supposed experienced in, even in their
Wordly affairs.. XLVIII, XLIX. 3. The main Principles of this Discourse are
such as are granted by our Adversaries themselves.. L, LI, LII. The great
advantages of proceeding on granted Principles.. LIII, LIVE. Particularly in
relation to the accommodation of our present Disputes.. LV.

HAVING therefore thus finished my designed Method, it will, I suppose, be very
convenient to make some short reflections upon the usefulness of the whole
design, and of this particular way of managing it, above others that have
hitherto been ordinarily insisted on.

cause, to insist on: 1. To let our separating Brethren understand, as well as
I was able, their Obligation to submit to all unsinful conditions, how hard
soever they may seem otherwise (when imposed on them by their Superiors as
conditions of Communion) as they are desirous to clear themselves of this
charge of SCHISM; And, 2. Withal to let them see the great danger and
mischievousness of this sin. This, as well as the former, is a thing hitherto
not sufficiently understood. And when both of them are cleared, I do not know
what can be further necessary to make all good, well-disposed, Souls sensible
of the great Obligation incumbent on them to return to Catholic Unity.

SCHISM is a breach of the Church's Unity; that the Unity of the Church is that
of a Body Politic; that the Unity of a Body Politic consists in a
subordination to the Governors; that the Body Politic is visible, and
therefore the Government must be so too; that God has accordingly contrived the
Sacraments as visible confederations of this Body Politic; that by confining
the ordinary communications of his Grace to the Sacraments, he has put it in
the power of them who have the power of the Sacraments to exclude from these
ordinary conveyances of Graces; that, by confining the power of administering
them to a certain Order of men, he has put it in the power of those men to
admit or exclude from the Sacraments whom, and upon what conditions they
please; that from this contrivance of things there will necessarily follow a
proper power of Government, and of coercion, at least in all things lawful,
however inconvenient; that because nothing can follow from the Divine
constitution of things but what was actually foreseen and designed by God in
his actual constitution of them, therefore this Government, and the Obligation
to Unity resulting from it, were also foreseen, and designed by him. Now in
this way of stating the Government of the Church, there are two advantages
above any other ways of stating it: that this way of explaining the Government
will make it most wisely contrived for practice, and most suitable to the
nature of such a Society as the Church is, and to such a Government as must be
conceived most suitable to such a Society.

IT will hence appear to be most wisely contrived for practice. And this is a
consideration of great concernment in a matter so naturally, and so principally
designed for practice as Government is. And it is a very strong presumption of
the truth of it. As it is certain that such Hypotheses concerning Government as
make it unpracticable, must for that very reason stand convicted of falsehood,
how plausible soever they may seem otherwise; so if there were others that
might, in other regards, seem equally probable, yet this would be a real
advantage above them, if it might be more practicable. For this consideration
being, as I said, principal in a matter of this nature, it is certainly the
wisest course to judge of inferior probabilities by it, though we were otherwise
unable to give particular Solutions of them, as we do not the least scruple the
existence of that motion which we see with our eyes, notwithstanding all those
Philosophical subtilties which may be objected against the existence of any
motion, because we take our senses for the most principal instruments of humane
information. Besides that such a Government will indeed appear to be most
worthy of Gods Wisdom, which appears most suitable to the ends for which God,
as a Governor was obliged to design it. And it is not only an excusing
presumption to presume that to be true concerning God which is most worthy of
him, where either there are no Arguments at all, or where the Arguments appear
in other regards equal; but it is also a great Argument of the Truth of an
Hypothesis, when all things answer it so as they would, or must, have done, if
God himself had been the Author of it.

Hypothesis here given is indeed thus fitted for practice, will appear, if it
be considered that general cases are those which all prudent contrivers of
Government do take themselves to be obliged to foresee. If these things be
sufficiently provided for, they will not think their reputation concerned, if
things fall out hard in particular cases. Not only the impossibility for humane
prudence to foresee all particulars, which will concern men; but the nature of
the things, which will reach even God himself, will make such inconveniences as
those are impossible to be avoided. But where these general cases are not
provided for, that is a certain disrepute to the whole contrivance, and
therefore a certain conviction of a contrivance pretending to come from God;
and where they are best provided for, that ought to be a prevailing presumption
that such a particular Hypothesis came from God where it is certain and
supposed that some did so.

general cases relating to Government are they which concern the Multitude of
those who are to be governed, and therefore those of mean and ordinary
capacities, and unimproved by learned Education, because indeed these are the
most considerable ingredient in the Multitude. And therefore it is certain that
a Government contrived by Divine Wisdom must needs be such as that even they,
proceeding on those general presumptions, (which they are capable of in their
other affairs) may be capable of knowing their duty, even where they are
sensible of their own incapacity of judging concerning the merit of the things.
And that Hypothesis which gives the best account in this regard, and most
suitable to such capacities, must therefore be presumed most agreeable to the
Divine Wisdom. And this will appear in both those particulars which are of
principal importance for making duty practicable: in regard of the Superiors to
whom this duty is to be performed, where many competitors pretend to the title
of Superiors; and in regard of the extent of that duty which they are to
perform to those true Superiors.

true Superiors from the multitude of false pretenders to that name. These
ordinary Persons I am speaking of need not trouble themselves with those
disputes of our Brethren concerning the form of Government settled in that part
of the Apostles Age whereof the Scriptures do inform us; no, nor in the
Histories of those Ages which immediately succeeded the Apostles: either for
clearing the sense of those Scriptures; or for showing what was introduced by
the Apostles in that later end of their Age, wherein the Church was more ripe
for settling a succession of Government, and whereof the Scripture History does
not pretend to give us any account; nor for discovering what was introduced by
the unanimous consent of the Church, of parties concerned as well as others,
and which was morally impossible to have been without the knowledge or
approbation of the Apostles, and much more impossible that it should have
obtained so suddenly and universally, if the Apostles had known and disapproved
it. These disputes, besides that they are not so certain in such a loss and
obscurity of Primitive Monuments, by which they ought to be decided, are withal
matters of Learning beyond the reach of the Persons I am now discoursing of.
But they way of judging which is the true Church, in opposition to other
Schismatical ones by Succession, as it is more certain in it self, so its proof
depends on things much more capable of being judged of by these Persons. For,

plain, and plain even to such illiterate Persons, who do but understand what
it is to reason, that (granting the Principles of our present discourse) there
must be such a succession owned somewhere, unless we will question the validity
of all the Sacraments of the World, which were indeed to question the
continuance of the Church it self, at least, as it is a Body Politic. And this
being certain will be a rational presumption of the falsehood of any Arguments
produced to the contrary, though they could not tell how to answer them.
Especially if they depend on things of which such Persons find themselves less
competent Judges than they are of this. Whence it will also follow that such
Arguments cannot, in reason, expect a bearing from such Persons, till they be
first convinced of the insolidity of these Principles.

such Persons, be also notorious, by the unanimous consent of all Persons
skilled in the Histories of those Ages, that for many Centuries before the
Reformation, Succession from the Apostles was not maintained so much as in any
one individual Church in the World, by any Government, but Episcopal. This is
not a thing controverted even by them who do indeed dispute the right of
Episcopal Government. And therefore here unskilful Persons may securely trust
the testimony of the skilful, because they are unanimous, on the same account
of prudence whereby they find themselves obliged in other cases, wherein they
have no skill, to trust them who are skilful. Now from this unanimous
acknowledgment of this matter of Fact in our present case, it will follow, both
that the Succession was then maintained in the Episcopal Government, even as
then administered, seeing it must otherwise have been perfectly lost; and that
all pretenses to this Succession in any Person now must be derived from that
Episcopal Government which immediately preceded the contrary Innovations,
because no other could then pretend to such a Succession.

common prudence which enables, even such illiterate Persons, for managing
their worldly concernments, wherein they have equal occasion for knowing
something not done within their own cognizance, and wherein they must
consequently be obliged to rely on the testimony of other credible Persons;
and the same industry, which even that common prudence will dictate to be
necessary for so great and near concernments as those are of eternity: These, I
say, will enable these same Persons to judge which of these different pretenders
are really invested with Authority, and consequently to which of them they are
bound as Subjects to pay Obedience. For,

Innovations are so late, and of so clear and remarkable an Original, as that
it needs no great Learning, even for such a Person, to inform himself when they
began, and what Government then prevailed universally. He may be assured it was
Episcopacy, if he should distrust his own enquiry, by the unanimous consent, as
I said, of interessed as well as disinteressed, agreeing in it. And,

present Bishops have succeeded the Bishops of those times in a Canonical way:
both that they have their power given them in a Succession from them who were
then invested with it (I mean, at least, so far Canonically as is requisite for
the validity of their call) and that they have had as much power given them as
was requisite to keep up the Succession valid to this day. For none can doubt
but that an Episcopal power, according as it was understood and designed in
those Ages, did include a power, not only of ordeining other ordinary
Ministers, but of validly consecrating other Bishops too; And none can doubt
but that these two powers are abundantly sufficient for securing succession,
and that all our Ministers have their present Orders from them who, upon these
terms, must be supposed sufficiently empowered to confer them on them. The
Successions are so few, since the Reformation, as that every particular
Minister may easily reckon up the particulars for his own vindication. I
presume this also notorious, because I suppose the ordinary prudence, even of
honest Rusticks, would not think the contrary suggestions concerning the
Nags-head Ordination (raised only by a few concerned Persons, in a corner, and
not divulged till many years after the thing was done) to be credible in
opposition to the still extant Records of the Nation to the contrary.

illiterate Persons may satisfy themselves of the validity of the Ordination
of our Ministers, they will also find reason to question that of the
Non-Conformists. They need trace them up no higher than the first deviation
from Episcopacy. And supposing that they must thence derive all the power they
can now pretend to have, it will be as easy to discover the Nullities of their
present proceedings as it is to discover the like Nullities in their worldly
affairs, in which they are often concerned to trust their own judgments. They
might find the Nullity, even of those, who were at first lawfully ordained by
them who had power to Ordein them, in their actings against all the visible
Superior powers by which they were ordained, on the same account on which, in
their worldly concerns, they would think the actings of a particular
lawfully-empowered Constable invalid, if he opposed himself to all the visible
supreme Magistracy of the Land in which he had been made a Constable. Much more
must they find the Nullity of the Successions continued from such Persons. In
their secular affairs they judge a title null, if either the power given were
not sufficient for mainteining a Succession, or if a sufficient power were
given, but by Persons who had no power to dispose of it. And they may find
themselves to judge thus, not because of any concernment of it as secular, but
in regard of the pure intrinsic Justice of the Contract, and the nature of the
thing, which must therefore equally concern the like Contracts and conveyances.
And upon the Principles here proposed they need only apply these Concessions.
For I have endeavored to show that the power of ordeining others was not given
them by the Episcopal Presbyteries from whom the first of them received their
Orders, at least that it was not given them separately from those Presbyteries:
That, though they had that power given them, yet the Orders since conferred by
them must be Null, even by the Principles of Aristocratical Government, even as
Aristocratical, because they have neither been conferred in lawful Assemblies,
nor by plurality of votes. So that still in all this there is nothing but what
may appear, even to such illiterate Persons, even by those common rules of
Justice by which they guide themselves in their secular Transactions.

Governors from false pretenders, They will, 2. Be better enabled, by these
Principles, to know the extent of their Duty, even to their true Governors
themselves. They need not here follow our Brethrens method of engaging into
disputes concerning the expediency or inexpediency of every constitution,
seeing this will not excuse them from their duty though they should prove
really inexpedient. Because for that not they, but their Superiors, must be
responsible, if they be obedient; but they themselves may be responsible, if
they should withdraw their obedience unwarrantably. Nor need they trouble their
Heads with those many scruples of our Brethren which make their duty
unpracticable, and therefore must be groundless; or even with those which,
after all considerations, may still remain practicable, yet not without much
tediousness and scrupulosity, even to well-meaning Persons themselves, which
certainly could never have been designed by God.

duty will be plain and easy. What may appear to be their duty, upon reading
of the Scripture with an honest and unprejudiced heart, and that moral
diligence and assistance of skilful Persons in matters wherein they would find
their own unskilfulness, which their own prudence would suggest in matters of
the like concernment, expressed in an ancient Book, and in an exotic tongue
and style; what, I say, might, upon these terms, appear to be their duty
clearly, (for it is not likely that God would oblige such to any duty which,
upon these terms, might not be clear to them) that they must practice
whatsoever any Authority on earth should decree to the contrary. As for other
things, how inconvenient soever, they cannot, in prudence, be thought
sufficient to encourage them to a resistance, because there can be no greater
inconvenience than to be excluded from the ordinary means of Salvation,
excepting sin. And therefore in all impositions whatsoever, how oppressive
soever, and therefore how sinful soever they may prove to the Governors who
impose them, yet if they be not also sinful to the Subjects, the Subjects
cannot be excused from yielding to their Governors as much the lesser
inconvenience. So that, by these Principles, such idiots, as I am speaking of,
are disobliged from any further enquiries into the merit of their Superiors
Impositions, but only whether they be sinful. And the instances must needs be
rare which could, on this account, oblige them to stand out against their
Ecclesiastical Superiors.

illiterate Person I am speaking of, may by his own prudence find how unsafe it
would be for him to rely on his own Judgment, but only in such cases wherein,
upon full information in the evidence by such as were skilful, he might find
himself capable of apprehending and judging. For others which, even on these
supposals, he could not find himself fit to judge of, (that is, wherein he could
not apprehend what were told him, and what withal he should judge necessary to
be thoroughly apprehended by any one before he could be qualifyed for judging
concerning them) he must, in the same prudence, think it the safest course to
rely on the judgment of such as were skilful. And when he must, in pursuance
of this discourse, find himself obliged to trust some guide, there are peculiar
reasons why he should, in prudence, submit himself to the guidance of his
Ecclesiastical Superiors rather than any others. Besides the equal skilfulness
of such Superiors with any others who might pretend to guide him; besides the
peculiar obligation of providence to direct them who, as Superiors, have so
many presumptions in favor of them, to oblige others to acquiesce in their
determinations, and therefore whose errors must, in this regard, prove of so
fatal consequence to the prejudice of Multitudes of good and well-meaning
Persons: I say, besides these things, he will hereby secure himself the use of
the ordinary means of Salvation, which must needs be acknowledged to be a very
prudent and affecting consideration to sway a doubtful practice. He who were
tru^^ sensible how much he must be a loser by living out of all (...)* so as to
want those ordinary Assistances to which Communicants are entitled, and which a
daily experience of his own frailties would make him very unwilling to want;
and were withal sensible how, not only fruitless, but mischievous, it would be
to gain the external Elements in an unwarrantable Communion; would find that
within him which would never suffer him to forfeit the external Communion of
the Church, but upon reasons extremely weighty and considerable. As nothing
under sin would be judged a sufficient reason, so neither would any evidence,
concerning the sinfulness of a condition of Communion, be judged sufficient,
but such as were drawn from the nature of the thing, not from any contrary
Humane Authority; nor even any such evidence from the nature of the thing which
were not of greater importance, and more convictive than those which recommend
the credibility of Ecclesiastical Authority. Which will yet further diminish
the number of the doubts of this kind. Which might be supposed incident to
candid, though illiterate, persons.

intrinsic to the thing, of its sinfulness, and suppose we those reasons
stronger than the reasons of credibility of their Ecclesiastical Superiors; all
that would follow, even so, would be, that it ought not to be done for the
credit of any Humane Authority that should call it lawful. But may it not be
sometimes done when it cannot be omitted without a greater sin? Will it not in
such a case cease to be a sin, when both are unavoidable? Undoubtedly it will,
if its sinfulness depend on circumstances, which is the most our Adversaries
can pretend concerning our conditions of Communion. For, from our Principles,
it has appeared that the sins of disobedience to Ecclesiastical Superiors, and
of dividing the Church, or separating from it are of a higher guilt than can be
pretended to be in those sinful conditions, even according to them who believe
the conditions sinful. They will not pretend the sin of wearing a Surplice,
etc. equal to the sin unto death, to that against the Holy Ghost, or those
spoken of, Heb. VI. or X.

real sinfulness of such a condition be yet further supposed not to be
circumstantial, but in the nature of the thing absolutely considered; then I
confess the thing is by no means to be done, not that it is at any hand lawful
to avoid it by flying into a greater sin, but because there is no necessity of
doing either. He that cannot communicate but on conditions which he believes
sinful, may forbear the Communion which he cannot keep but on such conditions.
But such forbearance would be no sin, as separation would be even in such a
case. For still dividing of the Church, disrespect to Superiors, usurpation of
a Sacred Power, or abetting such an usurpation, would be as essentially and
unalterably sinful as such conditions of Communion could be pretended to be.
And therefore even in such a case he would continue as much obliged to avoid
separation, as to avoid the Communion which could not be had without such
sinful compliances; Nay, by so much the more, as the sinfulness of such a
separation must be supposed greater than the sinfulness of such a Communion.
Which will let, even the ignorant Person, I am speaking of, see his obligation
to passive obedience where he cannot pay active to his Ecclesiastical
Superiors; and that this duty of his passive obedience will oblige him to
forbear opposite Communions, even where he cannot, by any lawful compliances,
enjoy the lawful one. This does at least reach the case of Laics, and with
regard to Communions destitute of sufficient Authority, for which I am at
present concerned.

general suitableness of our Hypothesis for practice, It is particularly
considerable, 2. That it is peculiarly suited to the practice of a Society of
such a nature as the Church, for preserving Unity and a due respect to
Authority in it. For the Church as a Body Politic must always preserve a
coercive power over her own Subjects: And that, 1. As well in persecution as
prosperity. For persecution was indeed the principal let she had reason to
expect, when her Government was first established, and for which it is
therefore most credible that her Government then was peculiarly fitted, and
therefore she must have been enabled to maintein this Authority independently
on the favor of the secular Magistrate. And therefore, 2. She must have been
enabled for this purpose without any title to the Bodies or Fortunes of her
Subjects, and so without any power of using coercive means of these kinds,
whether by employing her obedient Subjects to inflict such penalties on her
disobedient ones, or by moving the secular Magistrate to it. Because these are
things to which, as she can pretend no right as a Spiritual Society, so she
cannot expect to have them actually in her power in such a time of persecution.

coercive power in a Society under such disadvantages, It is plain, 1. That the
Authority must be purely Spiritual, and coercive only over the consciences of
its Subjects. It must be Spiritual, because Christ has given his Officers, by
virtue of their being Officers of his Church, no title to any temporals at all.
And therefore they cannot, by virtue of their being his Officers, have so much
as a good title to dispossess their Subjects of their Lives or Fortunes. It can
only be over their Subjects consciences, because, by want of their title to
externals, they can have no coercive power over their Bodies. And therefore
what coercive power they have must be over their consciences, or they can have
none at all. Whence it will follow that they must needs destroy all coercive
power in the Church who pretend that Ecclesiastical Laws do not oblige the
conscience, especially they who urge it in that extravagant sense in which some
seem to mean it, and more are obliged to mean it by the interest of their
reasonings.

conscience, but that it may also have a secondary influence on the external
actions of men, to oblige them to perform such external duties upon account of
conscience, which they might otherwise have been unwilling to have performed of
themselves. For unless this Obligation of conscience have an influence on the
external actions, it can be of no use for the external Government we are
speaking of, whose Subjects are men, who are not capable of being edified by
our thoughts any farther than as they are signified to them by our actions; and
it is administered by men, who cannot judge of the Observation of their own
injunctions (otherwise than by our external actions) in order to the rewarding
the obedient, or punishing the disobedient, and indeed for whose ends only
external actions are useful, as was already observed. And yet they must not
only be those external actions to which their own prudence would oblige them
for their own intrinsic usefulness, but also such wherein Subjects may differ
from the judgment of their Superiors, that they must be obliged in conscience
to observe in order to the ends of Government. For no Government whatsoever is
capable of being administered by fallible Persons, unless their Subjects
conceive themselves obliged to submit to them even in such cases wherein they
should believe them actually mistaken in point of prudence; (for the generality
of moral affairs, and especially the prudential commands of Governors, are not
capable of any more than probable evidence, and in such cases it is very
possible for such Governors to be really mistaken, and for Subjects to believe
them mistaken, and yet if they be not observed even in such cases, other
instances are so very rare as that their Government it self must prove in a
great measure useless and unpracticable) for without a coercive power over
Subjects no Government properly so called can be maintained, and there can be
no coercion, if Subjects be permitted to do only what they think fit themselves.

conscience must be such as may oblige them, not only to perform such external
actions as otherwise they would not, if they had been left to their own
liberty; but also, to perform such actions in compliance to visible Superiors.
So that in order to the mainteining the Authority of this Government on their
consciences, it is requisite that the Authority commanding be judged to be a
reason obliging them in conscience to perform whatsoever is so commanded, and
that these visible Superiors are to be taken for authentic Judges of their
obedience or disobedience, so that though they may not always be obliged to
believe their Judgments concerning their own behavior true, yet they must
always externally acquiesce in their determinations, believing themselves
obliged in conscience to give them active obedience in things lawful, and
passive in things that are not so. For external Authority cannot be maintained
over the conscience without an obligation, even in conscience, to obedience;
and the act cannot be obedience, if it be not performed for the sake of the
Authority requiring it, and no obedience short of this now mentioned can reach
the ends of a visible external Authority. And therefore it must needs be
extremely vain for them to think to satisfy their consciences* of their
obedience, by appealing from their Governors to God as the Judge of their
consciences. This were indeed an acknowledgment of the Authority of God, if God
had instituted no external Soci^ty of men. But having done so, it is plainly a
refusal of their duty to their Ecclesiastical Superiors, when their Authority
is not admitted, neither for its own sake, nor as an authentic Expositor of
the mind of God, as the reason of their actions* but the Divine Authority is
appealed to independently on them; and plainly a resisting of the Divine
Authority as vested in them, as God has required that they should be obeyed for
his sake, and as, by leaving no remedy for Appellants in this World, (wherein
alone it is that this Authority can be useful) he has sufficiently intimated it
to be his pleasure that their Authority should be unappealable here, in order
to the forementioned obedience.

Authority over conscience must be such as may awe even wicked men themselves
who are not altogether of a profligate and feared cons^ience. And therefore the
mischief attending disobedience must be very great, as it must needs be, that
it may by them be conceived sufficient to oversway the mischief they apprehend
in wanting the gratification of their vicious appetites; and very clear and
unobnoxious to disputes on the acknowledged Principles of Christianity, that it
may be owned for such, even by them who are so strongly interested, and
therefore prejudiced, against it, For wicked men are they who constitute the
greatest part of all great Societies, and it is principally for them that all
coercive Government is settled, not only that men of different Judgments, but
also of different affections, may be necessitated to an external compliance.
Now in order to the establishing such a Government as this, what can be more
conducive or more becoming the Divine Wisdom than this Systeme of Principles on
which I have been hitherto insisting?

oblige their Subjects thus in conscience to comply with them against their
wills, unless there were some benefit to their consciences to be gained by
their obedience, and some prejudice also to their consciences to be incurred by
their disobedience. Possibly some few good Subjects might be moved by the
command of God, and the general indefinite expectation of rewards from his good
will, or punishments from his displeasure, as some few good Subjects would be
moved by those constitutions of their Prince which were ratified by no other
penalty than that of his displeasure. But as in seculars this is very rarely
found sufficient, in experience, for the Government of great Communities,
without specification of the immediate reward or punishment which should attend
their obedience or disobedience to particular commands; so it will be as
necessary to observe this same method, for a Government of this nature, even in
Spirituals. For the nature of those Persons who are apt to transgress is
usually so dull as not to be very apprehensive of spiritual and future
inconveniences, if there be not something particularly to be feared at present
upon the neglect of their duty, some advantage to their consciences that may,
even at present, prove more considerable to them than the pleasure of their
sins, and some disadvantages of the same kind that may at present oversway the
loss of their sinful pleasures and the contradiction of their appetites in such
performance of their duty.

Subjects to this compliance to their Spiritual Superiors, it is also further
necessary that the distribution of these Spiritual rewards, and the infliction
of these spiritual punishments be some way at the disposal of these spiritual
Governors; and therefore that God do not so immediately and arbitrarily give
the one, or inflict the other; but that the Church may have an influence on the
actual determination of the Divine pleasure in these affairs, so that it may be
presumed that God will bestow his spiritual blessings, or inflict his spiritual
punishments, according to the Church^s censures or recommendations. For this is
the only way to determine men's respect to Ecclesiastical Officers. For as no
Governor can awe, without he have the disposal of the rewards and punishments
belonging to his respective Jurisdiction, so neither can Ecclesiastical
Officers compel any by their spiritual Authority, without the disposal of these
spiritual rewards and punishments.

evidence be given to convince Subjects that they may expect spiritual rewards
by their obedience to Ecclesiastical Officers, and fear spiritual punishments
upon their disobedience; and that this evidence be suited to the capacities of
the Persons to be affected with it. For unless they can be convinced of it, it
can never awe them, and unless it be suited to their capacities, it can never
convince them. Now it is plain that the immediate disposal of these spiritual
rewards and punishments cannot be entrusted to the Ecclesiastical Officers as
the power of temporal rewards and punishments may be to the seculars, who when
they have the power of the Sword once committed to them, need no further
assistance of the power that gave it them for rewarding their obedient, and
punishing their refractory Subjects. But Spiritual rewards and punishments, are
not immediately capable of being given to men in this Life; and though they
were, yet Subjects are not capable of being assured of them, because they are
not obnoxious to the discovery of sense. And therefore the only way for
Subjects to be convinced that the rewards promised, and the punishments
denounced by the Church shall be performed accordingly, must be to assure them
that God, in whose power alone they are immediately, will oblige himself to act
in these particulars according to the Church's determination. And yet because
Church Officers are fallible, and, like other men, obnoxious to humane
frailties; and there is therefore an extreme on the other hand to be avoided in
the Divine Government of the Church; that in case of error of the Keys many
very innocent Persons must miscarry (many times only for acting according to
their own more-rightly-informed consciences; and therein only for preserving
their Loyalty only to their Supreme, in opposition to their subordinate
Governors, that is indeed, for doing that which if they had neglected, had
made them obnoxious to punishment) if God should peremptorily have obliged
himself to have conformed his own actings to the Church's determinations:

harder and rarer cases, as yet not to deprive the Church of that assurance of
the validity of her Sentences as may terrify her Subjects from disobedience,
is this, to give much better assurance that the Church's promises shall be
ratified by God, and a greater fear that the Church's threats shall be
inflicted than otherwise. For this, as I have shown, will oblige men, in
prudence, to presume for the Church as the safest way, and never to disobey
her, but on extremely hard and evident danger of sin, and where they do so, to
be wary of transgressing their own bounds, not to deny passive where they
cannot give active obedience, for fear of weakening their title to the equity
of God, and making their already-uncomfortable condition yet more hazardous.
And as by this means the condition of such Dissenters is not made desperate, so
it is very fit it should lie under some discouragement, both because the
instances are comparatively but very rare and unlikely, and the Persons very
few that were requisite for managing such a breach conscientiously (and it is a
constant rule of prudence to frame general provisions by general cases, and to
be less solicitous for the rarer) and to discourage others from such attempts
who might not be likely to manage them with the like good design and
moderation, and to oblige even such good Persons themselves to a greater
wariness in making the breach at first, and a constant industry and calmness of
Spirit, to be always ready to be reconciled on any tolerable terms. And these
are certainly designs very necessary for such a Government as this we speak of.

assurance of Salvation greater in the Communion of the Church than out of it,
is to confine a Legal Title to the promises, even on performance of the moral
conditions, to the Communion of the Church; and to allow no other Plea but that
of equity without it. And this has appeared, from our Principles, to be not
only wise, but just too.

Church's power to admit to, or exclude from a Legal Title to the promises is
to put the Covenant in her power, by virtue of which God is, in a Legal way,
obliged to fulfill his promises.

Covenant in her power, is to confine all its Legal obligation to some external
Solemnities which may be capable of being confined, and being known to be so,
to the Governors of the Church. For it is only of these externals that
Subjects can judge, and these are indeed the only things which are capable of
being obnoxious to Ecclesiastical power. And therefore it is only by Gods
confining his own influences on the spiritual rewards to these external
solemnities that he can put the rewards themselves in the power of
Ecclesiastical Governors. At least this is the only way we know of, which is
sufficient to show that we have no reason to expect any other.

appropriating these Solemnities to Church Governors is by giving, them only,
a Legal power of acting in the name of God (the want of which Legal power will
invalidate a Legal obligation in what is done in supposition of it) either as
subordinate Governors, or as persons peculiarly consecrated for that purpose.
And for our present design it is very sufficient that God do, on the
performance of these external Solemnities, admit us to an actual Legal Title to
the promises (as far as the Covenant it self is capable of giving us a Legal
Title to them, that is, no otherwise than on performance of obedience) and that
the Church's exclusion from these Solemnities do also exclude men from such a
Legal Title. But neither of these do oblige God to any unequal dealing to
Persons wrongfully excommunicate. For still there is no Covenant to condemn
whom the Church condemns, though the Person so condemned cannot plead any Legal
Interest in the Divine Covenant for his Salvation. So that, by these
Principles, God is under no Legal Obligation to punish him. Yet his loss of a
Legal Title to the promises may be indeed a great discomfort to him in this
Life. Which as I have already shown to be sufficient for mainteining the
Government of the Church, which is only a Government for this Life; so it may
justly be inflicted even on particular innocent Persons for so great an
advantage of the Society by the same Principles of Justice by which all great
Societies are governed, who never think it unequal to suffer some few
innocents, in rarer cases, to suffer some inconveniences for the benefit of the
whole. And it makes amends to them for all that, even by our Principles, God is
still at liberty to be as bountiful as he pleases to them in the other Life. He
may there give them those Blessings to which they had indeed no Legal Title,
much more of which they could not in this Life assure themselves by any Legal
Claim in case they really had a Legal Title. However this may suffice to show
how this contrivance of things will secure the Church as great a ^oercive power
over her own Subjects as she can be supposed capable of, even in times of the
severest persecutions. Which will, by the Principles now laid down, show how
very likely it is that this is the true Notion of Ecclesiastical Unity, and
therefore withal, how very probable it is that in violating this Unity they
must prove guilty of that which will properly deserve the name of SCHISM.

the best account may be given of the real danger and mischievousness of the
sin of SCHISM. The ordinary ways of stating it, have either extremely obscured
the thing, or the danger of it. To resolve the blame of a Separation (as our
Brethren do) into the merit of the particular things for which the Separation
is made; and to make no further mischief in abetting the wrong side of the
controversy, or advantage in following the right, than that of believing a
false or disbelieving a true Proposition, which yet is disputed among good wise
men whether it be true or false; must leave the generality of illiterate
Persons in an indifferency with what Communion they join (which is in truth the
case we generally find them in) or involve them in inextricable perplexities in
choosing the right one. For how can they think purely intellectual mistakes very
piacular in the eyes of God, especially where they are so very reconcilable
with a good meaning, and an innocent practice? Or if they were so in questions
of a clear resolution, and to learned and judicious Persons who might be
supposed to have such abilities and opportunities for resolving them as that
they could hardly be mistaken in them without being extremely wanting to
themselves; yet how can they think it credible that God should be so extremely
severe, to exact a belief of the true side in matters so extremely disputable?
to exact it even from unskilful Laics? and that even where their guides (whom
they must needs trust who find themselves so unqualified to guide themselves in
such disputes) are themselves so extremely divided? Where opinions are so very
different and contradictory, the most illiterate Person that is, who has but
common sense, must needs think some of them mistaken. And can he, at the same
time, find in his heart to believe that God will treat himself with any
severity for not discovering those truths concerning which he finds Persons
incomparably more qualified than himself, to be mistaken? This I am verily
persuaded, not only to be suitable to the condition of the generality of this
sort of Persons, but also to be their actual discourse, whenever they allow
themselves the liberty of any serious thoughts concerning this matter, it is so
very agreeable to their practice. We see them go indifferently to Churches or
Conventicles according as they are affected to the Ministers, not on any
constant Principles concerning the Communions.

SCHISM than barely the wrong belief or disbelief of a disputable proposition.
But when they come to be examined closely, either they will prove so small, or
be again resolved into such nice and intricate disputes in order to the
charging any with their actual guilt, as that no particular consciences can be
moved with any great horror of them, either to believe them criminal in any
high degree, or that themselves, in any particular case, are guilty of them.
They pretend that charity requires forbearance, and a keeping in mutual
Communion as far as is possible; and therefore that SCHISM is a violation of
this grace which is indeed the sum of practical Christianity. But when again
both these particulars are examined by their Principles, no Person need to be
very apprehensive of this danger. For what great crime can it be to separate
from the Communion of men, for the cause of God? What great horror can they
have at it, supposing they should prove mistaken in the event? Nay, is not
their Charity to God pretended as the reason why they conceive themselves
obliged to separate from their Brethren? This is a thing they have not yet
endeavored to explain by any Principles, how their love to God (to use the
Apostles expression) obliges them to love their Brethren also, and to
communicate with them whose Communion is with the Father and the Son. Nay,
according to them it is very hard to reconcile their love to God with their
love to Ecclesiastical Communion. Even a probable persuasion of their
consciences is, according to their Principles, sufficient to excuse their
separations. And, besides that this does again resolve the debate into
disputable Prepositions, it must needs be an extremely barren cause indeed that
can be destitute of so much as probable Arguments for its support.

uncharitableness consist? Not in any great mischief done to themselves by
their separation. They do not much value the loss of the Sacramental Elements,
though they should be forced to lose them. The same reasons, which made them
believe that their separation from men was for Gods sake, will also incline
them to believe that (if they had a greater opinion of the advantage of the
Sacraments than it appears they have) yet the spiritual advantages of the
Sacraments should be supplied by him for whose cause they had made the
separation; and in that case the want of the external Elements could be no
great loss indeed. Nor are they, by their Principles, obliged, even in that
case, to lose the Elements themselves. For they can easily join in a
Confederacy among themselves; and when they have done so, this very necessity
is either thought a sufficient Call it self, or at least a sufficient
Justification of it from its other illegalities and invalidities. So that they
are thus conceived to enjoy all the means, ordinary as well as extraordinary,
to enjoy the conveniences as well as the necessaries, the comfort as well as
the hopes of Salvation, as freely out of the Church's Communion as in it; and
suppose all these as efficacious to them, whilst they act according to their
probable consciences, though they should prove erroneous, as if they were never
so certain. And, upon these supposals, to what prejudice can they conceive
themselves obnoxious by their separations.

prejudicial to the Communion from which they withdraw? But as for any duty
owing to them which they might rob them of by this withdrawing of their own
Persons from them, they acknowledge none. And this being supposed, no Charity
obliges them to beware of prejudicing others by promoting their own
conveniences, when one of them is unavoidable; and for any further prosecutions
of those whom they have thus deserted, they are very separable from the cause
of separation in general.

ignorant Laick to any great caution in enquiring or resolving on the right
Communion, from any considerable inconvenience that might attend the
consequence of his being mistaken (and indeed the whole obligation to diligence
in enquiring after the truth of any Propositions is only rationally derivable
from their influence upon our practice) so, though the crime had been more
piacular, yet, upon these Principles, there is so little evidence in proving
any particular Person's guilt, as that, upon that very account, there can
appear no great obligation to cautiousness. For supposing that the violation of
the Church's Communion had been indeed in a high degree uncharitable; and
supposing that uncharitableness in as high a degree criminal: Yet how can it
appear that any ignorant Laick is guilty of that uncharitableness in his
separation?

conversion from whom he separates, and of all welfare when they are converted.
Nay indeed it is hard to suppose otherwise. For this is a charity which all
Communions, how Schismatical soever, have for those from whom they are divided,
to wish them of their own party, and wish them well when they are so; and it is
the interest of their Faction, how little regard soever they had to God, or the
welfare of their Brethren as Christians. And this is indeed the utmost Charity
which most of them conceive to be actually due to those who are not in external
Communion with themselves. And as every ignorant Laick may be conscious to
himself of this charitable affection (if it deserve so good a name) how
Schismatical soever he may be really; so it will not be easy, on their
Principles, for such a Person to know when his act of separation is
uncharitable, at least not without resolving all again into disputable
Propositions.

Author of his own departure is so far from being an Argument, as that it is
not, by their Doctrine, so much as a pregnant presumption, that it is on his
part uncharitable, and therefore Schismatical; no not though he go so far as
not only to refuse active obedience to his ordinary Superiors, but also to
resist them, and either to set up or abet other Communions in opposition to
them. For it is not the actual separation, but the cause of it that will make
it uncharitable and Schismatical; and that may, on our Brethrens Principles, be
as easily supposed to have been given by his Superiors as by himself, though he
have been the first actual divider. For I have elsewhere shown that our
Brethren consider Superiors here as plainly acting on equal terms in these
matters with their Subjects. And upon these terms there cannot so much as a
presumption lie on their side, that his separation may therefore be presumed
likely to be uncharitable on his side because himself was the first Author of
it.

Superiors as fallible as himself; considering that even in matters of
disputable evidence, and depending on some things not so obnoxious to his
cognizance, they yet encourage such an ignorant Laick to dissent from them on
his own Judgment.

believe otherwise than they (which might indeed be more tolerable and
rational, if he did not so only in such cases wherein he had a full prospect of
what learned men could inform him) but also to differ in his practice too, even
where his compliance in practice need not signify any Hypocritical
dissimulation of his Judgment, that is, not only to forbear the practice of
what he should judge to be unlawful, (which is no more than honest dealing) but
also to forbear the practice of what he judges unfit and oppressive in
compliance to the will of his otherwise lawful Superiors. Whereas such
compliance as this is very lawful, to pleasure another in that which he
otherwise himself believes imprudent, and is daily practiced by themselves
without any fear of Hypocrisy in their Oeconomical or Political relations, and
indeed every where, where they acknowledge such a right of Government as may be
worthy of that name. For this is the plain meaning of our distinction between
obligation in Practice, and in Judgment; and even in this sense they oppose it.
Besides their refusing even passive obedience to the Church, even in this case,
does plainly signify how little they ascribe to Ecclesiastical Authority.

compliance is necessary for accommodating these differences, they do as much
require it from the Church as themselves, and do as confidently charge her with
Schism, as long as she does not yield her impositions to them, as we charge
them with it for not complying with those impositions. And upon these terms
what presumption can be for Authority, if Authority be as much obliged to yield
as her Subjects, and if Persons be in no greater probability of avoiding this
uncharitableness by yielding than by opposing it? So that the ultimate recourse
here must be had to the merit of the cause, and of how little horror that can
be to such a Person I have already shown. Thus insufficient our Adversaries
Notions are for explaining any thing in the guilt of SCHISM that might prove
terrible to popular capacities.

SCHISM is given as the most incultivated Laick may understand to be extremely
mischievous, by the same rules of prudence whereby he manages his worldly
affairs. Not to mention the dreadful punishments it deserves from Gods hand,
and the great obligation, incumbent on him from his own attributes, and the
reasons of his Government, to inflict those so deserved severities on Persons
truly criminal; not to mention the great displeasure he has actually declared
against sins of this nature (especially if what has been said concerning the
sin against the Holy Ghost, and the sin unto death, etc. should prove true) and
the difficulty of being excused by any pretense of ignorance whatsoever in our
Brethrens circumstances: I say, not to mention these things, our Hypothesis
does give a particular account of its intrinsic mischievousness, of the good
things it deprives them of, and the evils to which it exposes Persons guilty of
it, in the nature of the things themselves, as God has made them by his general
institution. It hence appears to be a forfeiture of all right to the
Evangelical Covenant, at least of all the comfort that may be reaped from an
assurance of such a right; and a consequent exposing the criminal to all those
other mischiefs from which he could not expect deliverance but by the
Evangelical Covenant. And the giving an account of this intrinsic
mischievousness of SCHISM will be a great probability that the Hypothesis is
true, by which so intelligible an account is given of it, because it is so
suitable to Gods contrivances in his other providence, whereby he has made
every sin to carry its own mischief with it, besides the punishments which may
be feared for it from the Divine displeasure against sin in general.

them who, in other regards, may think themselves most secure of Gods
Indulgence in remitting his own right to punish them, unless they can also hope
that this indulgence shall be so great as may, not only pardon their omissions,
but also provide them extraordinaries, where their own neglect has deprived
them, in the natural course of things, of all ordinary means of safety. Which
is certainly a favor to be expected by very few Persons, and in very
rarely-occurring circumstances, and therefore no way fit to be trusted, in any
prudence, where better may be had on any tolerable, that is, unsinful, terms.

benefits of Church Communion, and such disadvantages of losing it as may, not
only be valued for real benefits and disadvantages in the judgment of pious and
spiritual Persons, but may also be most heartily adhered to or most heavily
resented by all whose affections are rightly disposed, that is, such only as
are spiritual, and judge of things by spiritual relishes. This will make pious
Persons seriously sensible how much it is their interest to beware of being
mistaken in a case where their mistake may prove so hurtful to them on a
spiritual account. Which will also oblige them to that accurateness in
examining such reasons for which they are apt not to be so solicitous where the
mistake is not like to prove of so dangerous consequence; and to that favor in
judging, and that cautiousness in practicing, on the securer side, which all
account not only prudent, but conscientious, where their more suspicious
interests does not make them partial.

reasoning to the affections, as well as the judgments, of Persons concerned is
most agreeable to Humane Nature, who are not ordinarily affected with truth
considered barely as it is truth, but as it is their interest; nor do
ordinarily take truth as truth to be their interest, but as it may prevent some
practices which may prove dangerous, or as it may produce or direct some which
may prove advantageous. And in this regard it is also further likely to prove
most agreeable with the design of God, who, as he is best acquainted with the
nature of his creatures, and is most compassionately careful that his creatures
may not fail of the favors he had designed for them, so he is most likely to
suit his contrivances for their good to that nature of the generality of
mankind, and even of those of popular, as well as those of extraordinary, and
more exquisite, capacities. And particularly this kind of reasons is most
proper in matters of practice, and withal is more certain and solid when the
affections complied with are themselves rational, (which is undoubtedly the
case of these religious affections) for what is agreeable with a rational
affection cannot be dissonant to that reason which makes it so. Only it is more
likely to prevail with Humane Nature, which is more influence by them, as they
are affections than as they are rational.

would be extremely fearful of so great a danger of so great a mischief, if
they knew it, might fall into it, against their wills, for want of knowledge of
it; I have endeavored to suit those Notions of the mischief of SCHISM to the
meanest understandings, as far as the subject matter would bear. This I have
endeavored, by avoiding most of those disputes which are matters of Learning,
and beyond the reach of the Persons I am speaking of, on which most of our
Adversaries most elaborate volumns have been hitherto employed; and by reducing
those which I insist on to the same way of trial in which even such Persons
themselves have reason to be experienced, even in their worldly affairs, and
wherein therefore the same degree of prudence, which may make them able to
secure their wordly concerns, may also qualify them to judge of those which are
greater, and of more importance to them; nay, by proceeding on such Principles
which are not denied by our Adversaries themselves, so free they are from
disputes on all hands. And I cannot tell what even such illiterate Persons
could desire more for their assurance in a matter that is actually so much
disputed.

AVOID most of those disputes which are matters of Learning, and concerning
which most of our Adversaries Volumns have been hitherto written, and
concerning which they who are in prudence obliged to trust others, for want of
skill in themselves in those parts of Learning which can only inform them in
matters of this nature, might pretend (that which, if truly pretended, would
indeed prove very considerable to such Persons) that men of skill and candor
are of different minds. I need on this occasion only to recapi^ulate what has
been said concerning the disputes relating to Government, because the
Principles of Government and Schism are, in our way of stating them, exactly
the same. I have therefore not concerned my Reader in the Primitive form of
Government, nor in the truth or falsehood of any thing that has been written on
that subject. I have not concerned him in the particular disputes concerning
the Antiquity or Novelty, concerning the convenience or inconvenience of the
particular impositions to which his compliance is expected. I have not
concerned him in those many other disputes which prove things false which
themselves do and must acknowledge to be true, which make that power of
Government unpracticable which themselves confess to be just, and which they
are therefore as much obliged to answer as we are; which disprove things whose
truth appears by Principles much more notorious and more confessed, and more
certain than those are by which they are disproved, nay, which go against those
general presumptions for practice which the prudence of the generality of the
unconcerned part of mankind have agreed on, as much more certain than any
evidence that can be pretended to the contrary, and which therefore all, that
own those Principles, must acknowledge to be false, though they do not as yet
understand the particular Sophism. Nay, it is no more thought prudent to be
scrupulous in practice on subtilties pretending to disprove what appears true
upon such Principles than Diogenes thought himself concerned to forbear motion
because Zeno offered to prove it impossible, or to vouchsafe such Objections a
serious answer. And when these disputes are cut off, how few will there remain
that can perplex the illiterate Reader? What numbers of our Adversaries Volumns
will he find himself unconcerned in? how easy will it be to find the Truth in
these matters in comparison of what it is commonly understood, and must be so
by him who has not considered the things here suggested? But besides the
multitude of disputes which are here avoided,

illiterate Reader, is, that the remaining disputes are reduced to such things
which even illiterate Persons must be supposed experienced in even in their
worldly affairs. It is hardly possible, even for such a Person to be ignorant
of the nature of Contracts in general, and of the general equity and measures
of their obligation, they are of so familiar inevitable use to him in his
worldly conversation. He cannot but even there find it reputed very ill in any
to put another seal to a Covenant without his Authority. If himself were served
so, he would not only think himself in no equity obliged to stand to such a
Covenant, but would certainly resent it as a great injury done to him. He finds
this yet more severely thought of by all communities in conveyances of power,
that it is Treason by the fundamental Laws of all Societies, not only for a
Person to presume to seal himself either a Pardon or a Patent for Authority
without leave from the supreme visible Magistrates, but also for all such as
abet or defend him in it, or own any Authority in him by virtue of such an
invalid patent. He knows himself, how illiterate soever, would be proceeded
against as a Traitor, if he should offend in either of these kinds against the
Community wherein he lives. He knows conveyances of power ought to be
notorious, and are every where presumed to be so, because no pretense of
ignorance is accepted of by any community to excuse any who are found guilty of
any irregularities of this kind. He knows Succession is the way every where
agreed on for conveyances of power, especially of the supreme visible power.
And he may find how impossible it is to think of any other notorious way for
the satisfaction of others, how Ecclesiastical power could be derived from
Christ or the Apostles through the distance of seventeen Ages, especially where
it is acknowledged that God does not now give any power immediately. He will
find that by the same rules of equity, a presumptive title is sufficient in
present Governors, where it cannot be certainly disproved; and that what we
have said concerning the equity of Gods dealing with men will make it more
particularly credible in the conveyance of Ecclesiastical Government; that
therefore as in a disputable title to secular Government none thinks it
necessary to be informed of all past ages, (for example to prove the title of
our present Princes from the Caesar's, who were once rightfully possessed of
these parts of the World) but thinks it reasonable to rest satisfied with the
original of the last innovation, so neither can it be necessary for knowing the
want of Ecclesiastical power in present pretenders to it to enquire into the
times of the Apostles; that succession is as perfectly ruined by a failure of
200 as by one of 1600 years standing; that by this means he is concerned to
know as little History for the title of the present Nonconformist Ministers as
he is obliged to know for knowing which part to join with, where different
parties are made for an ambiguous title to secular Government. I would not on
this occasion recapitulate the Heads of my whole discourse. These general Heads
are sufficient to show that the materials are generally such as even ordinary
illiterate Persons who have but that prudence which is requisite for managing
their secular affairs are competent Judges of them, and are supposed to be so
by the general proceedings of all Societies and disinteressed Judges, They can
neither be assured of the secular Government they live under, nor of several
Tenures of their Lands and Charters, nor of their unrepealed Laws without
recourse to Originals of as difficult enquiry as these are which will suffice
for the question of SCHISM, upon the Principles here promoted.

experience in their worldly affairs will enable them to judge of the
unexcusableness of the sin of SCHISM, as well as of the Persons who are guilty
of it. It is undoubtedly a great mischief, even to such capacities, to be
deprived of all title to those advantages which we enjoy by virtue of the
Evangelical Contract. And to such as these who are led generally by sense, and
are therefore very inclinable to disbelieve the being of that which does not
appear to them, it must be a prevailing Argument to distrust their interest in
the Covenant when they see themselves deprived of the external Solemnities by
which this interest in the Covenant it self is ordinarily gotten and
maintained. The equity of the Covenant is too subtle a thing for these to judge
or to be confident of, when they find themselves incapable of a Legal claim.
And yet if they were to judge of the obligation of the Divine equity by those
rules which they should think equal for themselves, if they were obliged as God
is, they could not think God obliged, even in equity, in the matter we are
speaking of. If themselves had made a Covenant upon condition of the
performance of the solemnities of it by the Persons, with whom they had been
pleased thus to Covenant, they will not think themselves obliged to give the
gift upon nonperformance of the condition, though the performance had in the
event proved impossible. And of such a nature the Covenant of God with mankind
appears to be upon our Principles. His promises are mere gifts, and therefore
upon nonperformance he must be supposed to return to the same freedom, whether
he will give them again, wherein he was before the Covenant was made. Nay,
though the condition to be performed had been a valuable consideration, and so
had been a ground of equity upon nonperformance of the Solemnities; yet if
they had never Covenanted without the Solemnities, and had expressly declared
these Solemnities to be the only instruments by which they would oblige
themselves, they would not think themselves obliged, so much as in equity, to
performance on their own part, unless the Person concerned had used all
possible diligence for performance on his proportionable to the benefits
expected. Which must let them see their own obligation to yield all things
short of sin rather than fail of these Solemnities, because the benefits here
expected are sufficient to countervail such concessions, if they would hope for
any equity in this case. Not now to mention the presumption of sealing
Covenants to themselves when they cannot procure the seals from them who are
authorized by God to seal them, which is not only a Nullity to God considered
as a Covenanter, but a provocation highly punishable by him as a Governor, and
which themselves would think so, if they were in his Case. So far are Persons
who are thus far guilty from a claim to equity, even by those general rules of
equity by which these illiterate Persons are guided in their worldly dealings.
But if these illiterate Persons should be yet too solicitous for Authorities
(though that be a thing which their Teachers are not too forward to recommend
to them where they are not evidently swayed by interest to do so,) yet,

THE main Principles of my Discourse are such as are already granted by our
Adversaries themselves. That the Gospel is transacted in way of a Covenant, and
that the Sacraments are the seals of that Covenant, though, as to the substance
of the things, they may have been granted by several antienter than the
separation of our Brethren, yet none were then so zealous for these Notions,
nor so accurate in the properties of speech resulting from them. I am sure it
was not so ordinary either in the primitive Church, or in the Western Churches,
for many Centuries before the Reformation, to write so many professed Volumns
on this Subject of the Covenants, or to call the Sacraments seals in ordinary
discourse concerning them, as it is now among the generality of our separating
Brethren of whatsoever denominations. I think there are very few, if any, among
them who are at all for Sacraments, but they have entertained these Notions
concerning them. And these are the fundamental Principles of the precedent
discourse, though I have also provided less doubtful Principles for those who
might doubt of them. What is asserted further is only in consequence to these
Principles, and therefore must be admitted by them who grant the Principles
from whence these consequences are deduced. And yet, even of these consequences
themselves, some of the chief and of greatest importance to my design, are also
generally granted by those parties whom ignorant Persons have reason to regard
as equal and competent guides in affairs of this nature, that is, by such of
them as are not led by professed Principles of Enthusiasm, but by sober and
prudent considerations of the nature of a Church, and the necessity and nature
of that Government which themselves find necessary by their own experience when
they come to practice it, that is, indeed, when they find themselves obliged,
by their own interests, to consider it soberly and impartially. And it is only
in such a case as that is that it can be prudent for ignorant Persons to trust
them, when they are considering positively, what is true, rather than when they
are thinking only how they may avoid an Adversary.

Covenant, and the Sacraments being the seals of that Covenant, I infer the
necessity of a lawful Mission for a valid administration of the Sacraments.
This is also admitted by the generality of those parties now mentioned. Even
they who say that gifted Brethren may preach, yet do not so ordinarily allow
that such Persons may administer the Sacraments, till their gifts be at least
solemnly approved by such as have, at least, that power of solemnly approving
them. And they who derive their Authority from the people, yet either do so
upon that general popular mistake, whereby they take the power of preaching the
word for more essential to the Ministry, and for an exercise of the supreme
Authority wherewith they are invested (which supreme act of Authority infe^s
and includes the inferior exercises and branches of it) than that of
administering the Sacraments: Or, if they derive even their Jurisdiction from
their power in admitting to, or excluding from the Sacraments; yet the reason
is, because they then consider them as Ceremonies of admitting to, or excluding
from their Society, rather than as seals of the Covenant. And then the reason
why they derive the power of administering them from the Multitude is from that
general power which every individual of the multitude has to choose his own
company, which he may give away if he pleases: Or, if, yet further, they
consider them even as seals, yet they rather consider them as seals on their
own part, what conditions they are pleased to submit to, and the Minister as
the common Procurator Authorized by every particular Person to promise and seal
the Covenant in his name, than as seals on Gods part conveying a legal right to
promises on the performance of conditions. And it is undoubtedly the right of
every particular Person, to enter into what Covenants he pleases, and to
delegate whom he pleases to act for him in sealing them. But i^ they had
considered them as seals on Gods part, there could have been no pretense of a
power in the people to assign delegates for him, on any Principles that I know
of, that are maintained among them. Very few of them, if any, do so much as
pretend that the Multitude has a right to administer the Sacraments in their
own persons. Nor can they have color, on the Principles here proposed, to lay
claim to any such right. The Spiritual benefits here conferred, as pardon of
sins, the gift of the Holy Spirit, and supernatural rewards on the performance
of duty, are plainly not originally at their disposal. Nor can they pretend to
any general conveyance of this power from any who had any right to dispose of
them, neither from God himself, nor from the Apostles, nor any of their
Successors empowered by them.

nature of Covenants in general, that one party should be allowed the liberty
of allotting delegates for the other. Though the same Persons may be chosen to
mediate and transact the Covenant between both parties, yet it is proper that
this common power be conferred on them by the distinct suffrages of the parties
themselves, who must first act for themselves before any third Person can be
empowered to act for them. This is certainly just and equal where Covenants are
transacted on equal terms between equal parties. But where they are mediated
between Superiors and Subjects; where the obligation lies wholly on one side,
and it is to be accounted a great favor that the other is to be admitted to
it, as it is plainly in the case for which I am at present concerned; though it
be very just and reasonable that the obliging party may impose whom he pleases
on the other to be their common representative, and oblige the other, to accept
the Person so imposed, both by the interest which he is already supposed to
have in them, and the interest which the other party may expect by being
admitted into such a Covenant; yet it is in no regard reasonable that the
obliged party should expect this liberty in dealing with their Superiors.
Supposing therefore this true state of this whole dispute, I think I may have
reason to hope that I shall not meet with very stiff opposition from my
considering Adversaries, even in this second fundamental Principle of my
discourse, concerning the confinement of a valid administration of these seals
to ordained Persons. And if they do, in earnest, lay so great stress on these
Principles as they seem to do by the zeal they express in defending them; I
shall then further hope that they will stand by their consequences, and rather
return to Ecclesiastical Unity, when they shall find themselves obliged to do
so by just consequences from these beloved Principles, than quit the
Principles, when they shall understand how naturally such consequences follow
from them. Which would argue a greater aversation in them to peace than the
kindness which they have entertained for those Principles.

pious person is obliged to submit his very principles themselves to an
impartial examination, as well as the inferences deduced from them; and
especially then to do so when he sees Persons of known integrity, and withal
more judicious than himself, not only to doubt of them, but also to believe
them erroneous (because he has reason to distrust their being self-evident,
when he sees Persons so perspicacious dissatisfied concerning them, and nothing
but self-evidence, at least, so far as the matter will bear, and that
self-evidence, at least, examined fairly by his own faculties, can be a prudent
reason for any to take up any proposition as a self-evident Principle) yet it
is certainly the easiest and the most taking way to argue consequentially from
Principles already admitted by the Persons to be persuaded. It is the easiest,
because it cuts off as many disputes as there are Principles granted, none of
which could otherwise have been unsettled without a very exact and particular
confutation, and a particular answer to all those prejudices, as well as
appearances of reason, which have induced such Persons to take up such
Principles. It is also the most taking way: For the greater part of the vulgar
are not sensible of this their obligation, but as they take up their Principles
precariously, so they stick to them as unaccountable measures of all
consequential reasonings.

custom of believing them, and many consequences following from them; and the
great disappointment which must follow if they prove questionable; and the
multitude of errors that must follow from one error of this nature, which very
few have the ingenuity to own, though they were convicted of them; and the
multitude of other Principles which have been hitherto believed on as little
reason as these, and will therefore prove as justly questionable; and the
consequent obligation which will follow hereupon, of examining all things over
again to their first Principles before they can trust any thing; and the
anxiety and unsettledness which they must hereupon be exposed to, till they can
get through the ambages of this new enquiry, and find new and secure Principles
which they will be apt to despair of ever finding, if their present Principles
should fail them; not to mention the many interests of their affairs and
combinations which are undiscernibly rivetted into the belief of customary
Principles: These things, I say, and many more, make such a change as this is,
extremely difficult in Multitudes. I do not say that these reasons are solid
and justifiable, for refusing to admit of a trial of received Principles: But
they are certainly popular, and such as usually take with Humane nature in its
usual frailties, and not only with the unskilful vulgar, but even with the
generality of the wisest. I think he must be very much unacquainted with
mankind who does not discern how rare it is, even for such, to change from the
Principles of their education. And therefore such reasonings as offer the least
violence to such Principles may consequently expect to meet with the least
difficult reception.

accommodation of our differences with the consent of the several parties, is
most likely to be hoped from such discourses as proceed on Principles already
granted. And certainly this way of accommodation with consent is not only the
most desirable, but the most practicable, expedient for retrieving Catholic
peace. But where this accommodation cannot be made, in the conditions of peace,
without a yielding on one side, (which is certainly the case in our
Ecclesiastical differences, for no wise man can think all the disputes which
now divide considerable Communions, to be either only verbal, or of little
consequence, but some must needs be granted to be both real and momentous, and
wherein one side must necessarily yield before they can be capable of entering
into a secure and solid peace) a yielding in consequential errors may be much
more easily expected from the several parties concerned, than in such which
immediately reach their avowed Principles: For errors of this kind are most
general. Even they who maintein true Principles may be mistaken in their
consequences, so that, on an impartial examination, there may, on every side,
be found just reason for yielding something of this nature. And every party
will be more willing to yield something for themselves when they find others
willing to yield something to them. Men will be less averse to the ingenuity of
acknowledging themselves mistaken, when they shall find that they themselves
are not the only Persons who have been mistaken, and that even their
Adversaries to whom they yield can have no reason to triumph over them for it,
as not being themselves so innocent as to deserve the confidence of throwing
the first stone at them. The retreat is honorable whilst they may appear to
have been always right in their main Principles, and that their mistakes have
been only such as are liable to humane nature. And as the world is now, it is
hardly to be expected that any one sect will universally yield, but where their
retreat may, at least, not prove dishonorable. Besides, the evidence to be
expected in Principles, is so great, as that it will not leave that pretense
for ingenuity for Persons mistaken concerning them as in Consequences, which
may frequently prove uncertain and obscure, how clear or certain soever the
Principles are from which they are deduced. And men may appear more pardonable
for not having pursued every Principle home to its remotest consequences, than
if they have taken up their first Principles themselves precariously. They
cannot be presumed to have used any diligence at all who appear unacquainted
with the first beginings of their work, and especially in things so evident of
their own nature, and wherein so little diligence might therefore be sufficient
for their satisfaction. And these many conveniences of such an Hypothesis do
make it likely to have been designed by God, and therefore to be true, being so
fit for the use designed by him, according to the Principles already mentioned.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books sold by Benjamin Took at the Ship in St. Paul^
Churchyard.
SKinneri Etymologicon Linguae Anglicanae, fol. Archbishop Bramhall's Works,
fol. Bishop Sanderson's Sermons, fol. Mr. Farindon's Sermons, 3 Vol. fol.
Thorndicius de Ratione ac Jure finiendi Controversias Ecclesiae, fol. The true
Intellectual System of the Universe, wherein all the reason and Philosophy of
Atheism is confuted, by R. Cudworth. D. D. Bishop Taylor's Life of the Holy
Jesus, with Doctor Cave's Lives of the Apostles, fol. F. Walsh's History of the
Irish Remonstrance, fol. The Collection of all the Statutes now in use in
Ireland, fol. Caussin's Holy Court, fol. Bishop Taylor's Sermons, fol. Doctor
Brown's Travels with Cutts, in quarto. Batei Elenchus motuum in Anglia, octavo.
Langhorne Elenchus Antiquitatum Albionensium, octavo. -- Chronica Regum
Anglorum insignia omnia eorum gesta ab Hengisto rege primo usque ad finem
Heptarchiae cum catalogo Regio and Schemate Genealogico, octavo. Dodwell's two
Letters of Advice, 1. for taking Holy Orders. 2. for studies Theological, with
a Catalogue of the ancient Fathers. 8. -- Some considerations of present
concernment how far the Romanists may be trusted by Princes of another
persuasion, 8. -- Two short discourses against the Romanists, 12. Stearne de
obstinatione, praefixa sunt Prolegomena Apologetica de usu Dogmatum Stoicorum
in Theologia. H. Dodwell, 8. Poems and Songs by Tho. Flatman. Poems by N. Tate.
Herbert's Life and Character of a Country Parson, 12. The French Gardener, 8.
Aero-Chalinos: Or, a Register for the Air, by N. Henshaw M. D. Fellow of the
Royal Society, 12.

