Thomas Dangerfield's ANSWER To a Certain SCANDALOUS PAPER, ENTITLED, The
KINGS EVIDENCE Vindicated, as to the Imputation of PERJURY.
IT IS now come to that pass, that if a Man have a design either to play the
Fool or the Knave, the way is ready chalked out for him; It is but pretending
he has a Friend in the Country, which has a corn or scruple in his Conscience
that very much pains him, and then the busy Casuist betakes himself to his
Pen, pretends an Answer to his pretended Friend, and so takes an occasion to
follow the steps of the worst of men; who, but lately, has under the same
Notion scarce left a person, from his King to the meanest Subject, on whom he
had not made some reflection or other. And these are the usual ways which some
men take to expose their Quack-salving Receipts upon the Stage of the World.

Some such kind of Charletan is that nimble Critic, that pretends to Vindicate
the Kings Evidence, as to the Imputation of Perjury, in a Letter to a Friend.
Such a Letter, which it may be easily believed, never saw the Post House, or
ever Lodged in Carriers Pouch: Such a Letter, that he who occasioned it, was an
overcurious Nicodemus; and he that Answered it, was a man of too mutable
Genius, to make his Argument hold up to a Vindication; A piece of such
double-diligience, and of a tincture so agreeable to that of the Meal-Tub, as
if Madam Cellier had shamed an Affidavit or two for the delay of her Trial,
only in expectation of having Mr. D's. Evidence more plausibly redicul'd, for
her second delivery. How exorbitantly, and without fear or wit, the Evidence
for the King has been hitherto openly attacked in base Scurrilous Pamphlets,
and accused of Perjuries, etc. without the least probable ground, is well
enough known; but because all those silly Aggressors failed, up starts one of
the Holy Catholic stamp, and at a -- random-distance in his Party-per-pale
habit, with a Py-bald Conscience, thinks to stab their credit in that friendly
disguize of a Letter to a Friend. I am sure, as to the Subject, no true
Protestant could have pitched upon it, but for mischiefs-sake, and to some bad
end (a thing which such a person I hope would not be guilty of): And as for the
person, he scorns your Vindication, but strangely admires your confidence in
pointing at him so particularly with your base Perjuries, as if your
Hobgoblin-Title had only undertaken to Bugbear him alone from his Assertions of
too near approaching Truth, because so formidable to the Infernal Crew of your
Catholick-party.

But to descend from the Title to the purulent matter it self, you shall find
this same Quack-salving Operator provoking the sick and weak conscience of his
tender friend and patient, to disgorge the undigested uncleanliness of his
surmiz'd scruples; that so, under the covert of dissembled Protestantism, he
might be the better enabled to revive the old wonted method of discoursing by
Evasions, Equivocations, Mental Reservations, etc. and envenom wounds of his
own making, otherwise what can be the meaning of those Repetitions of his
pretended Friends words. You mention his Felonies and Perjuries; say you, if
such a Villain should be credited, etc. What are these but knavsh Insinuations,
to call the Kings Evidence Perjured, and Villains, under the pretense of a
Vindication; but rather to beget a disbelief of his Testimony in the hearts of
the people, to create jealousies and fears, to stagger and amuse the more sage
persons; and in fine, it could be intended for no other end than dis-unity and
confusion; by which officious kindness of his, he has endeavored to tax me
with far greater Crimes, than ever Madam Cellier in the hight of all her spleen
could invent: But it seems, that what that bold Virago, my open Enemy left
undone, this same Tinker of Consciences has undertaken, in the habit of a
Friend to accomplish.

And that you may the better see how he goes on, undermining that Reputation
which he pretends to Vindicate, he lays the soundation of his discourse in
these words; I say, says he, that notwithstanding all the Felonies and
Perjuries you suggest that Mr. D. may have been guilty of; I assert, that his
Evidence is as good as that of any Papist, that is a Traitor to a Protestant
King.

And thus you see, while he seems to lick up the Vomit of his Friend, and
swallow the filthiness of his disburthened Conscience, he still reserves the
Venom under his Tongue; in fine, it is a mere Paper-Plot, to nip the buds of
good opinion in the spring of Reformation, and blast the fruit which the safety
of the King and Kingdom are expecting to gather from it; For do but consider
it, and you shall find the whole Conscience Bolus, which this Empyrick of a
Casuist has prescribed to his Patient in the Country, to be nothing else but a
halfpenny Question confidently begged, false grounds, and fictitious surmizes,
to make the world believe a thing that never was; a piece of smooth
Lestrangism, and Masqueraded Knavery, to debauch the Juries of the Nation in
point of my Testimony.

Otherwise why should he suggest me to be guilty of Perjury, a Crime that among
all my miscarriages, was never yet laid to my charge? Certain it is, that even
when I was a Papist and Conspirator, it is well known, how tender I was of an
Oath, before the Right Honorable, one of His Majesty's Secretaries of State,
before whom I refused to Swear for the good of the Catholic Cause, what I knew
to be false, though the whole stress of the Sham-Plot depended upon it; for
which I was well assured of absolution, and had the fair prospect of a
considerable Popish Fortune; upon which refusal I lost my Warrant; and as the
Great All-seeing God would have it, broke the neck of that hopeful (but
Hellish) design, which was laid against so many Innocents, by a timely
discovery, to the Grand detriment of the whole Popish Cause.

A man of integrity and honest principles, would have been sure of some
unquestionable instance, before he surmiz'd or suggested such a Chimerical
Scandal, and of such consequence against any person under worse Circumstances
than Mr. D. And therefore they that look upon that person (whoever he be) to be
a Friend and Vindicator of my self, or any other of the Kings Evidence that
have yet appeared, are most egregiously mistaken.

But for all this, I assert, says he, that his Evidence is as good as that of
any Papists, that is a Traitor to a Protestant King. Now look ye Mr. Assertor,
it is not a straw matter what you Assert, since it is so little to the purpose;
neither have you any thanks for that Assertion, until you can appear, and make
it out more plain, than your villifying-pen has yet done; till which time, on
the other side, they assert, That you are a dissembler, a busie-body, a man of
lost labor, and that which is worse, my equivocating, flattering Friend. But,
Sir, know you are quite besides the Cushion, for it is now past the question,
Whether or no my Evidence be but as good as that of any Papists, whose
principles, as you say, and every body knows, are Equivocations, Mental
Reservations, Treasons, Deposing of Kings and Princes, together with all the
most Enormous Crimes imaginable; but yet that which is still worse than all
those put together, Perjuries; a Sin, which even the greatest Criminals (a
Papist excepted) abhors; and will rather choose an ignominious death, than to
live by a false accusation.

Now, Sir, to let you know how much my Evidence is beyond that of any Papists,
or Rebel-Traytor. Observe that I am Rectus in Curia, Legalis homo; so that
unless you can prove me to have committed what you suggest (which is certain
you never can), I boldly tell you, I think my self a better Witness than either
your self, your friend, or e're a Papist breathing: For what have we to do with
a sort of people, whose principle it is, not to keep any Faith with Heretics?
or who would be in love with that Religion (if I may call it so) whose bond is
Perjury, whose badg is Rebellion? therefore come out from amongst them, be no
longer a partaker in their most notorious Villainies, lest you receive also of
the Plagues which (undoubtedly) God has prepared for them.

What a noise have we had with an officious Casuist, who gives himself the
trouble of raising a Question, where there is no question to be made; which
does but create in us a real Confirmation, that all his Reasons thereupon
urged, trite and common Stories, were only the pretense that gave him liberty
to scribble. But his main design and drift was quite of another strain; that is
to say, to Invallidate my Testimony, by comparing it with that of Popish
Traitors and Rebels; and by starting a remote question, and drawing false
conclusions from bare surmizes, to give a plaufible opportunity to call one of
the Kings Evidence Perjured Villain, as a Preparative for the great Trials
shortly at hand.

Sir, you will do well to find some better employment for your uneasy
Conscience, which is to apply your self to the only preserver of Kings and
Kingdoms, for your speedy Conversion. After which I could readily embrace you
with that sort of tenderness, as is becoming a reformed person and a good
Christian.

T. D.

London, Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-head-Alley in Paternoster Row.
1680.


