AN ANSWER TO Six Queries, PROPOSED To a Gentlewoman of the Church of ENGLAND,
by an Emissary of the Church of ROME; fitted to a Gentlewomans Capacity.

By HENRY DODWELL M. A. and sometimes Fellow of Trinity College near DVBLIN.

LONDON: Printed for Benj. Took. MDCLXXXVIII.

A PREFACE.
IT is of no further concernment to acquaint the Public with the occasion of
penning these Papers, than as the occasion might have an influence on the
Design; and as it may be very useful to inform the Reader of the Design, that
he may the better know what to expect in the Performance.

He may therefore be pleased to understand that the following Queries were
tendered to a Gentlewoman of the Communion of the Church of England by a
Romanist, who had a design of seducing her; and that they were answered by
another hand, but on such Principles, or in such a way of management, as that
it did not give her the desired satisfaction. This gave occasion to some that
were concerned for her, to show the Paper to some others, in order to the
inviting them to undertake it in a way that might be likely to prove more
successful. By this means of Communication it came at length to my hands, from
a Person who first desired my Opinion concerning it; and then with some
earnestness importuned me to commit my thoughts to writing. Pursuant therefore
to this occasion, my Design was in the first place to show from sound
Principles, that the Church of England is able to defend her Reformation from
the Errors of the Romanists, and to clear her self, as far as She is charged
with that Breach of Communion which followed thereupon, without giving any
advantage to the Non-Conformists to justify either their first Separation from
Us, or their Eternal Subdivisions from one another. Nor was I willing to engage
a Person in the Gentlewomans condition, in any Controversies that might be
spared without Injury to the merit of the Cause; or to debate even such as
could not so be spared, by such Arguments as might exceed her opportunities of
Enquiring, or her capacity of Judging, so as to oblige her to depend on the
conduct of others more Inquisitive and Judicious. But I have either waved
Authorities where I could debate the Case by Arguments less liable to Dispute,
and better suited to the understanding of a Gentlewoman; or where I have been
necessitated to insist on them, I have endeavored to make out their
Credibility by such Presumptions as are easy to be understood, and samiliar in
parallel Cases, and generally granted as most Prudent, whenever unskilful
Persons find themselves obliged to acquiesce in the conduct of Persons more
skilful and judicious than themselves. And I have purposely avoided all
Citations of Authors, even where necessary, but such as were to be had, even in
English, and therefore might be consulted by the Gentlewoman her self.

I confess those other Reasonings fit for Scholars, as they are more subtle, so
they are withal more solid and conclusive. But withal I consider, 1. That those
things wherein Scholars have the advantage of unlearned Persons, are
principally such wherein Reading is absolutely necessary for their Historical
conveyance to us. It is certainly impossible for any to know what Doctrines
were maintained in the Apostles times (and consequently what Doctrines are
true, where they are supposed capable of no other Evidence of their being true,
but because they were so maintained) without insight into the several Histories
and Authors of the intermediate Ages through which they are to be deduced. But
for other things whose evidence of their being true, does not depend on such a
conveyance, the Reason of the thing is a sufficient Evidence; and of this every
equally rational Person, how little soever he be conversant in Authors, is an
equally competent Judge. And of this kind are many of the things here
mentioned, on which the stress of the cause depends. The prudent Reader will
easily discern which they are, without my instancing. And 2. even in those
things which depend on Positive Revelation, and wherein the only means of our
Assurance of them is Historical Tradition; though it be indeed true that
Persons of little Reading cannot so competently assure themselves of the
Writings and Opinions of former Ages, without the assistance of others more
conversant in those Studies: Yet since it is not the way of Prudent rational
Persons, therefore to conclude a thing to have been revealed by the Apostles,
because such Authors tell us that it was so; much less because such Authors
maintained it, as their own Opinion; but first to assure themselves of such
things on which the Credibility of such Authors in such matters may be made
clear to us, and then of those Expressions from whence they conclude such
Authors to have given Testimony to such a thing as an Apostolical Tradition: It
is plain that the Judgment of these things depends wholly on the Reason of the
things themselves. And therefore where Learned Men are agreed, as to their
accounts of the Authors and their Expressions; and where the only remaining
Dispute is, Whether such undoubted Works of such Authors be competent for the
conveyance of a Tradition; and whether such Expressions, considered in all
their Circumstances, come home to the Controversies at present debated; these
are things whereof common Prudence, and a cultivated natural Judgment may as
well qualify Men to pass a Censure as the greatest Reading imaginable. And
this seems to me the best way in affairs of this nature, to wave such things as
were disputed among Learned Men concerning their Historical Informations, and
only to found my reasonings on their unanimous Concessions. And most of the
Controversies betwixt Us and the Romanists are of that nature as to be capable
of this way of management. Now this way of not intermedling in the Disputes of
Learned men, but only proceeding on their unquestioned Concessions is (as most
solid and satisfactory to the most accurate Learned men themselves, so) most
prudent and easy for those who are unlearned. And 3. even as to those other
things wherein I have indeed proceeded on popular Presumptions, yet considering
that these are the only Reasons which God has fitted to the capacities of the
greatest part of Mankind, and that God is in his Goodness concerned to give
them Reasons sufficient for their direction, and that the Nature of the Things
themselves is of importance to his Government, and that it is therefore
requisite that their directions be such as may not only excuse their mistakes,
but secure them of the Truth it self; I say, these things being considered,
there will be reason to believe, that however fallible such general
Presumptions may be in their own nature, yet that God in his Goodness has so
ordered the matter in affairs of this nature, as that those who are guided by
these Presumptions, may by the use of them be secured of the Truth it self in
these Particulars.

As for the Method observed in this Discourse, it is such as I conceived most
clear and comprehensive in few words, and yet withal most accurate and
satisfactory to a doubting Person. For any one may be much more secure of a
Consequence when he is first secured of all its Principles, and he can much
better judge of them when he has an entire Prospect of them in the natural
Order wherein they lie, and wherein they are necessary for the deduction of
such a Consequence. Yet I have neither deduced my Principles too remotely, but
as near as I could find them clear and indisputable; Nor have we insisted on
the Proof of those that were clear, any further than I conceived it necessary
to do so from the actual Disputes concerning the Consequence. And I have been
careful rather to prove than to confute; which I conceived to be a course, as
less Invidious to Adversaries (who should find themselves no further concerned
than as the consequences of positive Truths might make them concerned) so also
more satisfactory to a Person in the Gentlewomans condition. And in the whole I
am so little conscious of any design of displeasing any to whom Truth it self
might not prove displeasing, as that if any Adversary shall think it worth his
time to Answer what I have said, I am not my self afraid of Provocation from
any thing which he can say in following my Precedent.

THE CONTENTS.
Qu. 1. WHether any one going from the Church of England, and dying a Roman
Catholic, can be saved? Page 1. Q. 2. Whether they be Idolaters, or No? 11. Q.
3. Where was the Church of England before Luther's time? 14 Q. 4. Why all the
Reformed Churches are not United in One? 22 Q. 5. Why the Church of England
does not hold up to Confession, Fasting-days, Holy Oil, which we our Selves
commend? 26 Q. 6. Why was Reformation done by Act of Parliament? 29
AN ANSWER TO SIX QUERIES, etc.
Q. 1. Whether any one going from the Church of ENGLAND, and dying a Roman
Catholic, can be saved?
I. IF by the words [can be saved] be meant a possibility in regard of the
MEANS, we then deny it. For we hold that such Errors are maintained in that
Communion as are in their own nature destructive af Salvation.

Such are,

1. The Doctrines even of their Vid. Consid. of Pros. Concern.
Church which oblige them to do mischief (as those concerning the Popes
Supremacy over Princes in Temporals, and concerning their Duty of prosecuting
Heretics) The For the Jesuits, see the Provinc. Let. and the Moral Theolog.
of the Jesuits; and for the rest of that Communion, the Jesuits defense of
themselves by way of recrimination against others.
looseness of their Casuistical Divinity, countenanced by such Authorities of
Casuists as must needs influence such Persons as act conformably to the
Principles of that Communion; and their generally allowing a greater Liberty to
such Persons as are desirous to reconcile their Vices with their hopes of
Eternity, by their licentious Applications of those two Distinctions of
Precepts and Counsels, and of Mortal and Venial Sins, whereby they make most
Duties Counsels, and most Sins only Venial. Which danger is the more
considerable to an ignorant Person, who for want of Skill of her own, must in
Prudence, and by the Principles of that Communion, be obliged to trust such
unsecure Guides.

2. Not to mention the ill Influence of several of their Doctrines on the Lives
of such as own them; the very imposing them as matters of Faith, the
Excommunicating and Anathematizing all that deny them, the condemning
Dissenters as guiity of Heresy and Schism (at least what they call Material)
the inserting several of their controverted Doctrines into their Liturgies, so
that they who cannot believe them, cannot veraciously join with them in their
Devotions, are Innovations from the liberty allowed in the Primitive Church,
wherein many (whom all own for excellent Persons and good Catholics) never
owned, nay some of them doubted of, or contradicted, such conditions of
Communion; in sum, their unreasonable grounds of dividing Catholic Communion,
and their Incharitableness to Dissenters, are Errors dangerous to the Salvation
of the Person owning and abetting them. For all will own, even the Romanists
themselves, that the Crime of breaking Catholic Communion, where it is justly
imputed, is destructive of Salvation.

3. Several Abuses of that Church (I say of the Church, not only of particular
Persons in it) are so gross as that several of the most eminent and candid men
of their own Communion have owned them for such: such as Prayer in an unknown
Tongue, denying the Chalice to the Laity, Fabulous Saints and Stories still
continued in the best approved Ecclesiastical Offices, Martyrs canonized for
bad Causes conducing to the greatness of the Roman See, as Becket for Example:
Yet by the Principles of that Communion, pretending to Infallibility, it is
impossible that any Abuse (in defense of which their Church is engaged, as She
is here) should ever be reformed, because it is impossible that a Church, so
pretending to be Infallible, should ever grant any such thing to be an Abuse.
And many more abuses are by the moderate Persons of their Communion owned in
the Court of Rome, which yet by the power allowed to the Court over their
Church, by the general consent of the Church it self, cannot possibly be
reformed. Seeing therefore that the Church of Rome does thus oppose all
possible Reformation of Abuses of this nature; and seeing that, whilst these
Abuses are not reformed, many of them may justify a Separation, and most of
them may do it when all hopes of Reformation are professedly opposed; Catholic
Peace on such terms as may, not only lawfully, but commendably, be yielded,
will be impossible. And the abetting of such a Party as makes Catholic Peace
on just terms impossible, must needs be an Error destructive of Salvation. This
is a mischief unavoidably consequent to mistakes in a Society pretending to be
Infallible.

As these Errors are thus of their own nature destructive of Salvation, so
going over to that Communion from another, does naturally involve the Person
doing so, in the actual guilt of the Errors themselves:

1. Because Communicating (according to all) does involve the Persons
communicating in the guilt of such Errors, at least, as are imposed as
conditions of the Communion, as these are in the Church of Rome. This needs not
to be proved against the Romanists, who insist on it against Us, as much as We
do against them.

2. This must especially hold in such as revolt from our Church to theirs: both
because such an embracing of their Communion is more an Argument of choice and
designed preference in such as leave others to come to it, than in such as are
born in it, and consequently must signify a more express approbation of the
Terms of it; and because more explicit recantation of our Doctrines are
required even from Laick Revolters, than from such as are born in it.

3. Because the Resignation of Judgment is expected more entire from Women and
Laics than from skilful Persons (who may in some cases be allowed the Liberty
of their own Judgment even by the Principles of that Communion) so that Persons
in the Gentlewomans condition, may by this means come to be Responsible not
only for the dangerous Doctrines of their whole Church, but also for the
Personal Errors of their Priests and particular Confessors: both as they are
(by the Principles of that Communion) allowed to be the Authentical Proponents
of the Doctrines of their Church, to unlearned Persons (who are not themselves
qualified for judging concerning them) as their Church is of the Doctrines of
Christ to the Learned; and as the same Rules of Prudence oblige them as
strongly to trust their particular Priests for Opinions, as they do their
Church for Doctrines of Faith, where they are still presumed as incapable of
judging themselves.

II. If by this possibility of Salvation mentioned in the Question, be meant
only [a possibility of the EVENT] notwithstanding the dangerousness of the
condition of Persons of that Communion, upon account of their being of it; then
the Resolution will depend on this: How far Errors of their own nature
damnative may not prove actually destructive to the Salvation of the particular
Erroneous Person, on account of the Ignorance and Vnvoluntariness with which
the Person comes to be engaged in such Errors? For on these accounts it may be
conceived that the Errors may either not be imputed to her at all, or be
imputed in sollow a degree as to become pardonable by the general Stipulations
and promises of the Gospel for the pardoning of Sins of Inadvertency and humane
frailty, which are supposed expiable by a general Care of fulfilling the
conditions of the Evangelical Covenant, together with a general implicit
Repentance of Sins unknown as well as known.

Now of these two ways whereby an Error damnative of its own Nature may be
hindered from proving actually damnative in the Event to the Erroneous Person,
it is only an Invincible Ignorance (that is, such as can be remedied by no
means that are in the power of the Person who is supposed Erroneous) that can
hinder all Imputation of her Error to her; and only such a degree of Vincible
Ignorance can suffice for extenuating the Imputation so far as to render it
pardonable in the way now mentioned, that is very hardly avoidable by the
Person, considering the frailty to which her condition in this Life is
obnoxious. So that for judging concerning the Condition of Revolters (which is
the Gentlewomans case) the Enquiry will be, what degree of Ignorance they are
capable of that may make their Errors Involuntary? that is, How far such as
they are, may be capable of being Ignorant of their Duty to adhere to ours as
the true Communion? And for discerning this, these following Particulars would
be fit to be considered.

1. That we are all agreed (Romanists as well as Protestants) that all sorts of
Persons (Ignorant as well as Learned) are obliged to adhere to the true
Communion (whatever that is) in contradistinction to others, at least, under
pain of losing the Ordinary means of Salvation, and consequently that
comfortable satisfaction of the security of their own condition, which they who
enjoy the Ordinary means of Salvation must needs be more capable of than they
who are necessitated to repose their whole confidence in Gods Extraordinary
Mercies.

2. That all Persons being thus obliged by God to embrace the true Communion,
the Inducements to it must be supposed sufficient for the conviction of all,
and consequently suited to the capacities of all who are thus concerned to
receive Conviction.

3. Therefore the Reasons being thus supposed sufficient for the conviction of
all, there can be no pretense of Invincible Ignorance for any but such as are
Ignorant of those Reasons, which cannot be supposed to be the case of Revolters.

Hence it follows, at least, that if Revolters act rationally, that is, Enquire
what it is they leave, and why, and accordingly follow their Convictions as
they ought, before their Change; they cannot be supposed capable of Invincible
Ignorance. So that the only imaginable pretense for rendering their Error
Invincible, must be the supposed Invincibleness of those Prejudices which may
hinder a well-meaning Person, acting conscientiously, from acting rationally.
Which must be either,

1. Opinions conceived obligatory in Conscience, hindering the Persons embracing
them from Enquiry, or following their own Convictions; of which kind many
instances may be produced which are favored by the Casuists of the Roman
Church: Or, 2. Precipitation in passing Sentence on a partial Evidence,
resolving on some particular advantage of one Cause without considering its
disadvantages, or the advantages of the contrary Cause, which might possibly
overweigh it if impartially considered: Or, 3. An undiscernible favor to one
Cause more than another, whereby we wish it rather true in regard of its
greater compliance with some particular Interest or Affection, which may be
thought Innocent, at least, if not commendable; which may the more likely
prejudice a well-meaning Conscientious Person, because it may indeed be Prudent
in some Cases, and it is not easy for a Person acted by it to discern when it
is not. But it is hard to conceive how any of these mistakes can be Invincible
in Revolters.
Not the 1. for

1. There can be no reason to take up such Opinions so gratuitously, which are
so Prejudicial to all Reasoning in general.

2. There can be no reason to take them for granted as first Principles,
without Enquiry, (by which means very absurd Propositions may be taken up by
very rational Persons) where it is known that many skilful, and (as far as can
be judged) Conscientious Persons do, not only question, but, deny them.

3. Revolters from us cannot as much as pretend any Prejudices of Education to
excuse such mistakes, seeing that among Us they find them utterly
discountenanced. And as they have thus neither Reason, nor (among Us) Authority
that may induce them to the belief of those Doctrines: So neither,

4. Can the Authority of our Adversaries be any probable inducement to persuade
Revolters to the belief of these irrational Doctrines:

1. Because the Romanists themselves are sensible of the absurdity of these
Doctrines, and their unserviceableness to their own Interests when they have to
deal with Persons whom they desire to seduce; so that they are not likely to
recommend such Doctrines to such Persons, as Credible, on account of their own
Authority. For if they should offer to persuade such as they esteem Heretics
of the unlawfulness of intermedling in Religious Disputes, or following their
own Convictions in them, it would be the means to make it impossible to
Proselyte such to their own Party. 2. If they should be so imprudent as to
persuade them of the Truth of these Doctrines so prejudicial to their own
interests in these Circumstances; yet the Person tempted would need no other
Argument to confute them than their attempts to Proselyte her at the same time
when they should teach her that it were unlawful to hearken to any Reasons, or
to venture her own Judgment concerning them, if contrary to what at present she
believed to be true. 3. Because if she must not trust her own Judgment, but
rely on Authority, it would be most Just, as well as most Prudent, to trust the
Authority of her own Party whom She has experienced, rather than her
Adversaries whom She has not; and therefore it could not be reasonable to trust
Adversaries contradicting the eminent Guides of her own Party. 4. Because, at
least, the Authority of Adversaries cannot be presumed in Reason so great, with
a Person not yet of their Communion, as to oblige her to believe, on their
account, what She her self thinks Irrational: Nay, rather whilst it is
questioned how far their Authority is to be trusted (as it ought, in reason, to
be considered before a change) and whilst the private Judgment of the Person is
trusted (as none else can be) in this debate; what in her own judgment seems
unreasonable, would rather render the Authority suspected if it should
recommend it, than be it self believed for the Authority.
Especially considering 5. that to such a one as is not yet persuaded of the
Credibility of their Authority, this would afford a very prudent Argument for
suspicion of their Integrity, when they should urge her to the belief of such
things whose Truth they would not allow her liberty to examine by her own
private Judgment.

Not the 2. for

1. It is hard to conceive a Person educated in the true Church so ignorant of
the advantages of her own way, as to be Invincibly persuaded by those of the
contrary, which upon a complete comparison are (by the Supposals laid down in
the beginning of Vid. II. 1. 2.
this Discourse) so very disproportionable to them, and which may appear so by
the Judgment of all who are concerned to judge concerning them.

2. The fallacy of trusting such partial Representations is so easily
discovered by the most ordinary Experience and Prudence in human affairs, and
so universally acknowledged in all other ordinary occurrences, as that it can
hardly impose on any who proceeds with that Caution which all acknowledge
requisite in changes of great and dangerous consequence, as all confess those
of Religion to be.

3. Though a less advantage on one side above the other might suffice, where
the Person were not pre-engaged in either; yet all confess the disturbance of a
change, and the danger of venturing on an unexperienced way, so considerable,
as that they are not to be attempted on barely Equal terms; which is a further
warning for the Gentlewoman to be wary, who is tempted to change from the
Principles of her Education.

4. Supposing the Person were so Ignorant as not to discern the advantages of
her own Communion above any other by her own observation, yet in that Case, it
is on all sides held Prudent to hear on both sides what can be said by them who
are skilful: which if She understand, and be able to judge of by her self, She
must then (by the Supposals now mentioned) see the advantage of her own side;
but if She does not, and so be necessitated, even in the choice of her
Communion, to rely on the conduct of a Guide, it must in that Case be much more
Prudent to trust a Guide whom She has experienced, than one whom She has not.

Not the 3. for

1. That Favor which is wholly derived from the inclination of the Affections
must needs be due to that side wherein the Person is already engaged: both in
Justice, as all generous Persons conceive themselves obliged in all Cases
capable of favor, to be favorable to their old Friends rather than others;
and in Prudence, because by this means the disturbance of a change is best
prevented.

2. If any Favor may be upon reasonable and well-meaning accounts extended to
one Cause above others: Either because the trial of its Truth is easier, or
because its Truth (if it may be proved) may be conceived subservient to better
purposes; as Mr. Cressy confesses himself favorable to the Arguments produced
Exomolog. Sect. 2. Chapter 16. Sect. 2. P. 162. Ed. 2.
for a Judge of Controversies, because the decision of that Controversy alone
would prevent the trouble of Enquiring into the rest: yet even so (if this
Favor be taken up and managed as it ought to be by a virtuous well-meaning
Person) it will not render the mistake of a change Invincible. For,

1. This Favor (as far as it is justifiable by reason) is to be had for the
Religion wherein the Person had been educated, and of which She is actually
possessed, upon the same rational accounts whereby that other Favor is
conceived justifiable, and in as high a degree of obligation; both as we are
better able to judge of what we know already, than we can be presumed to be of a
strange Religion; and as we can be more confident in the practice of a Religion
we have always maintained, than we can in that which must suppose us convicted
of having been formerly greatly mistaken. 2. This Favor, as far as it may be
conceived Prudent and Rational, can only take place there where all other
things are supposed Equal, which cannot be supposed in the true way. 3. This
Favor ought not to hinder the Person from an Enquiry into the contrary Cause,
unless the Evidence produced be very certainly convictive, which also cannot be
supposed in the way we are speaking of. 4. This way of Favorable Presumption
being the only way by which the generality of the Vulgar are capable to Judge,
and there being in the true way inducements for all sorts of People; therefore
it must be said that if this way be managed impartially, that is, if all the
Presumptions on both sides be considered, this must bring them to the Truth.
Hence it follows, by the Principles of all Parties, that the Error of a
Revolter can hardly be presumed Invincible, and consequently not wholly
Excusable. So that for Judging concerning the Salvability of particular
Persons, it only remains to be enquired further, Whether they be capable of
such a degree of Vincible Ignorance as may be expiable by a General Repentance,
and the performance of all other Conditions of the Gospel in an Erroneous
Communion? And the Resolution of this depends on these Enquiries:

1. Whether the Erroneous Communion (the Roman for Example) embrace the
Doctrine of Repentance so entirely, according to the Conditions required of it
in the Gospel, as that the Repentance performed in it may be presumed such as
God will accept? 2. What degree of Vincible Ignorance is expiable by a General
Repentance? For it is certain that all is not. 3. Whether a Revolter from our
Communion be capable of that degree of Vincible Ignorance which is so expiable?
The exact Discussion of these things is too large to be insisted on at
present, and therefore I shall only make application to the design of the
Question. I shall therefore show that what Possibility of Salvation soever we
may allow to Persons of the Roman Communion, yet it is no prudent ground to
encourage one who is not already of it, to revolt to it. To this purpose I
desire it may be considered,

1. That all the grounds we pretend to have for our Charity, are rather
Negative than Positive: rather our unsatisfiedness with those Arguments which
pretend to prove them actually damned, than any Positive Convictions that any
of them are actually saved.

2. That our Charitable Presumptions are principally grounded on things
impossible to be known by Us, such as are the Vncovenanted Mercies of God, and
the possibility of Sincerity, and even particular Explicit Repentance of the
Error in the Person; so that it is very easy for Us to be mistaken in our
Charity, and we professedly choose it as a mistake (if it should prove one) more
pardonable than Censoriousness.

3. That the Case, concerning which we Judge Charitably, is so very rare and
extraordinary, as that no particular Erroneous Person can be very confident
that it is her own: Nay, when we say, that their Errors are of their own Nature
destructive of Salvation, and that God has not interposed any General Ordinary
means for preventing their proving actually damnative in the Event, it will
thence follow that there are very just fears concerning the generality of their
Communion, and consequently many odds to one of the miscarriage of each
particular Person, which the Gentlewoman may do well to think of seriously.

4. That the degree of Penitence which shall be accepted by God in a particular
Case, upon account of his uncovenanted Mercy, is very hard, if not impossible,
to be known by the Person concerned; so that even they who shall enjoy the
benefit of it in the other World, yet may want the comfort of it in this; and
therefore can ground no confidence in any Practice undertaken on that
Supposition.

5. That this Security is very much more hazardous, and more difficult to be
Judged of, in Case of Vincible, than of Invincible Ignorance, which has been
proved to be generally the condition of Persons concerned in this Enquiry.

6. That it is certainly more difficult in the Case of Revolters, than of such
who have had their Education in the Roman Communion.

These things I conceive sufficient to show that our acknowledgment in this
affair can afford no security for a Revolt, to a Person who seriously believes
Us, and is desirous to be Guided by Us. But if we be considered as Adversaries,
and consequently our Authority be considered only as cogent against our Selves,
especially when taken in conjunction with other things, as they usually argue
the Security of a change from our Singularity in Asserting the Salvability of
our own Communion, and our Agreement even with the Romanists in owning the
Salvability of theirs; whence they conclude it safer for an Ignorant Person to
venture her Practice in that way, in the safety whereof we are all agreed, than
in that wherein we are singular: In Answer hereunto I shall, at present, only
propose these things to the Gentlewomans Consideration:

1. That the unreasonableness of this Argument has been sufficiently shown by
others; particularly She may consult Bishop Taylor's Letter, and the Dean of
Canterbury's Sermon, which On 1 Cor. III. 15.
are in English, and are short and easy to be understood by her.

2. That the Supposition it self is false here. For they of the Roman Communion
do as fully own the Possibility of the Salvation of particular Persons in our
Communion, as we do in theirs, both as to the Principles whence it is deduced,
(touching Invincible Ignorance) which are granted as well by them as by Us, and
even in express Confessions, when they are pleased to speak their minds freely;
of which I must needs say, they are in Policy more cautious, for fear of giving
Us any encouragement to continue in our own Communion. If She doubt of this,
She may, if She please, consult of our English Authors (for in dealing with her
I would not willingly quote any others) Mr. Richworth Dialog. 1.. 7. page 38.
Ed. Paris, 1648. Mr. Cressy Exomolog. Sect. 2. Chap. 50.. 11. page 396. Knot in
Charity Maintained, Part I. Chap. I.. 3, 4. compared with Mr. Chillingworth's
Answer, Ib.. 3, 4.

3. That this Candor of ours, when compared with their reservedness in speaking
their minds in this Case, is an Argument of our Ingenuity and fair dealing more
than theirs, which is a considerable Argument of trust to an Ignorant Person,
who finds her self obliged to trust the Authority of one of Us.

Q. 2. Whether they he Idolaters, or No?
I Must confess that I think the true Notion of Idolatry more difficult than is
commonly conceived, and to my Understanding not yet sufficiently explained. Nor
am I willing on this occasion to engage on that Dispute, both because it would
be too tedious, and because I think most of the mistakes already entertained
concerning it to have been occasioned by its having been stated in Disputes
with a design on some particular Adversaries. Not intending therefore to
determine positively, Whether the Practices required by their Church as
Conditions of her Communion be necessarily Idolatrous? I shall only, at
present, recommend these things to a Person in the Gentlewomans Condition, whom
I suppose not so capable of examining the particular merit of the Cause, and
therefore it will be the most Prudent course for such a one to Judge by general
Presumptions.

1. That their Notions concerning the Saints are exactly the same with those of
the later Heathens of the Primitive times concerning their Demons then
worshipped; who yet were as certainly guilty of Idolatry (if the concurrent
sense of Primitive Christianity may be believed) as those accused of it in the
Old Testament, concerning whose sense we want those Records which might so
fully inform us. For it might have easily been shown, that those Demons were
confessed to be of an inferior Order, and not to require that supreme degree of
Worship proper to the Supreme Being; nay, that they thought them deputed by the
Supreme Being it self to convey his influences to Us, and our Prayers to Him.

2. That if the Heathens (notwithstanding that their Devotions were designed
for good Demons) were yet deluded by Evil ones, who were by God permitted to
interpose in their stead, because they paid that Relative respect to Persons
whom he had not declared it his pleasure to have so worshipped, and before
Images where they had no security from any promise of God, that none but good
Demons should presentiate themselves; How can the Romanists be secure that
they are not the same way deluded, seeing they have as little Security from
God's Word (which is the only competent means from whence they can in this Case
have Security) that it is his pleasure that they should be publicly Invocated,
and that he has given them the Office of conveying his Blessings to Us, and our
Prayers to Him, and that he will permit none but good Spirits to presentiate
themselves at their Images?

3. That if Miracles pretended to be done at such Invocations be urged as
Arguments that God is pleased with them, this was pretended by the Heathens
too. And it may be, if it were impartially Enquired into, there would not be
greater and better attested Miracles for Invocation of Saints among the
Romanists, than for the Invocation of Demons among the Pagans.

4. That the same Arguments used by the Scriptures and Primitive Christians
against the Heathen Idolatries, are applied by the Protestants to the
Image Worship among the Papists now; and the same Answers given by the Papists
now, were then also insisted on by the Pagans.

5. That as these are very shrewd Suspicions of the dangerousness of this
Worship, so this danger is ventured on without the least necessity; there being
undeniable Security from the Primitive Records and Revelations of Christianity,
that God is pleased to accept such Prayers as are addressed to him through the
Intercession of Christ alone, so that there can be no necessity of having also
recourse unto the Saints.

6. That Image Worship is not countenanced by as much as any Venerable
Authority of truly Primitive Christianity, and that the Second Nicaene Council
that introduced it, was put to very disingenuous Shifts of counterfeit
Authorities for it.

7. That whatever may be thought of the Worship designed by the Roman Church,
yet even Mr. Thorndike himself (with whose Authority our Adversaries
principally urge us in this Dispute) does not deny that Idolatry is practiced
by the Ignoranter Persons of that Communion, which the Gentlewoman may justly
fear, lest it should prove her own Case.

8. That the Roman Church her self cannot be altogether excused from the
Idolatry of her Ignorant Communicants, seeing she puts unnecessary Scandals in
Ignorant persons way, and is guilty of encouraging their Ignorance and
Carelessness of Judging in matters of Religion.

9. That the Practice of that Communion is generally worse and grosser than
their Principles (as the Gentlewoman may inform her self of, in that impartial
account which is given of them by Sir Edwyn Sandys in his Speculum Europae)
which yet is observed and countenanced by their most Eminent Guides; so that
such as She cannot secure themselves from the danger of it.

10. That the Romish Church is by so much the more culpable in this Particular,
because She has not been content only to countenance and encourage a Practice
in so great danger of proving Idolatrous, so needless in it self, so destitute
of all Authority, either of Scripture or the Primitive Catholic Church (which
yet does so extremely stand in need of Authority;) but She has also imposed it
as a Condition of her own Communion (which She calls Catholic) so that they
who are willing to Believe and Practice all that was Believed and Practiced in
the Primitive Church, must now be Anathematized and condemned for Heretics for
refusing to Believe or Practice any more, or to condemn those as Heretics who
do refuse it.

Q. 3. Where was the Church of England before Luther's time.
THE design of asking this Question is certainly to make our Confession of
Novelty (in such Cases wherein our Adversaries presume our Novelty so notorious
as that we our Selves cannot deny it) an Argument against Us; yet they
themselves are concerned in some Cases to deny its cogency. For even they
cannot deny that the deprivation of the Laity of the use of the Cup (for
Example) has been lately introduced into their Church by a public Law. If
therefore it may appear that our Church is Ancient as to all intents and
purposes wherein Antiquity may be available, but that the Church of Rome is not
so; and that in the sense wherein the Church of England has begun since Luther,
there is no reason to expect that She should have been Ancienter, and that the
Justice of her Cause does not require it; and that the Antiquity upon these
Suppositions confessedly allowed to the Church of Rome is no Argument for the
Justice of her Cause: these things, I think, will contain a fully satisfactory
Answer to the Gentlewoamns Question. I shall not at present engage on an
accurate Discussion of these Heads: but shall only suggest such short
Observations as may let her see how unreasonable our Adversaries confidence is
in this Argument, wherein they do so usually triumph. Therefore,

1. Antiquity is indeed necessary to be pleaded for Doctrines, such especially
as are pretended to belong to the Catholic Faith, and which are urged as
Conditions of Communion. This is the Case wherein it is urged by Tertullian and
Vincentius Lirinensis in their very rational Discourses on this Argument. And
for this, I think, we may challenge the Church of Rome her self to instance in
one positive Doctrine imposed by us which She her self thinks not Ancient. I am
sure the Controversy is so stated commonly, that we are blamed, not for
Believing any thing ancient or necessary which is not, but, for not believing
some things which She believes to be so. And if She her self believe all our
Positives, and withal believes that nothing is so to be believed but what is
Ancient; it will clearly follow that She cannot, in consistency with her own
interests, deny the Antiquity of our Positive Doctrines. But for the other
Doctrines superadded by them, and denied by us, which are indeed the true
occasion of the present Divisions of Communion, we charge them with Innovation,
and are very confident that they will never be able to prove them, to the
satisfaction of any Impartial Person, either from clear Scripture, or from
genuine Antiquity of the first and purest Ages, which are the way wherein we
are willing to undertake the proof of our positive Doctrines. Nay, their
greatest Champions decline the trial, and complain of the defectiveness and
obscurity of the Primitive Christian Writers, which they would not have reason
to do if they thought them clear on their side.

These things therefore being thus supposed, That no Doctrines ought to be
imposed but what are Ancient; That ours are so by our Adversaries own
Confession, and that our Adversaries Doctrines are not so; and that in Judging
this, the private Judgments of particular Persons are to be trusted, as the
measures of their own private Practice (as it is plain that those Discourses of
Tertullian and Vincentius Lirinensis are principally designed for the
satisfaction of particular Persons, which had been impertinent if the Churches
Judgment had been thought Credible in her own Case, as a Judge of Controversies;
besides that even now this Argument from Antiquity is made use of for
convincing such as are supposed unsatisfied with her Authority, and therefore
to whom that Authority can be no Argument) which Liberty of Private Judgment is
then especially most fit to be indulged when the distance is so remote as it is
now, when no Church has now those Advantages for conveying down Apostolical
Tradition in a Historical way as She had then: These things, I say, being thus
supposed, it will follow that we are wrongfully Excommunicated, and therefore
that we have no reason to fear that their Censures should be confirmed by God.
And though I confess every Error in the Cause of the Churches Censures will not
excuse the Censured Person for continuing out of her Communion, when the
Communion may be recovered by any Submission, how inconvenient and harsh
soever, if it be not sinful; yet that is the very Case here, that we are not
only wrongfully Excommunicated, but the terms proposed for our restitution to
Communion would be directly sinful, as has been shown before. Whence it Vid. Q.
I. Sect. 1.
will follow that we are excusable, not only in suffering our Selves to be cast
out of their Communion, but also in continuing out of it. But because this is
not our whole Case, who do not only abstain from their Communion, but set up a
Communion of our own, and maintain an Ecclesiastical Body Politic distinct
from theirs; our defense herein will depend on the Justice of the
Ecclesiastical Power of those Persons who govern our Ecclesiastical Assemblies.
And therefore,

2. All our concernment for Antiquity here will be, that our Bishops derived
their power from such as derived theirs with a power of communicating it in a
continual Succession from the Apostles. And this we do acknowledge true
concerning the Popish Bishops themselves, and do derive the validity of our
Orders from the Antiquity of theirs without any more prejudice to our Cause
than the Primitive Catholics did suffer by acknowledging the validity of
Baptism administered by Heretics. For the Succession of their Pastors is very
reconcilable with a supposed Innovation in their Doctrines (and certainly
themselves cannot deny that it is so, whilst they charge the Orientals with
Heresy, whom yet they cannot deny to have always maintained as uninterrupted a
Succession of Bishops as themselves) especially considering that the
Innovations we charge them with, of adding false and new Articles of Faith, not
of denying the old ones, do not in the least interrupt or invalidate their
Succession. This therefore being supposed, that the first Bishops of our
English Reformation received their power from such as had derived theirs by an
uninterrupted Succession from the Apostles; it will follow that they were valid
Bishops, and if so, had the power of keeping Church Assemblies, and exercising
Jurisdiction in them, both for the Government of their present Charges, and
communicating their power to succeeding Generations. For nothing of this is
pretended to exceed the power of a valid Bishop. The charge of Heresy it self
cannot hinder the validity of their Orders either received or communicated;
though it may indeed, in the Judgment of them who believe them so, render them
obnoxious to Canonical Incapacities of executing them, and to Legal
Degradations, not from the Character, but from the actual Jurisdiction properly
belonging to their Office. But to such Canonical Incapacities and Degradations,
they will not deny even validly-Ordained Persons themselves to be obnoxious,
and therefore cannot make that an Argument against the validity of our Orders.
And yet even this Charge of Heresy against our Bishops is not here to be
Judged by the pretenses of our Adversaries, but by the merit of the Cause; and
therefore is not to be taken for granted till it be proved.

That therefore which is indeed new in the Church of England, is, that though
her Positive Doctrines and Orders be Ancient, yet the Profession of her
Negatives, and the open Assertion of her Liberty from the Encroachments of the
Roman Court, and all her other Practices grounded on these Principles, were not
avowed by her Ecclesiastical Governors for several Centuries before the
Reformation. And in Answer hereunto I shall insist on the Heads already
intimated. Therefore,

1. There was no reason to expect that her opposition to these Errors should
have been Ancienter, though we should suppose the Errors themselves to have
been so. For there was no reason to expect that Errors should have been
discovered for some Ages before the Reformation, when there was so great a want
of that kind of Grammatical and Historical Learning which is only fit to
qualify a Person to Judge of Ecclesiastical Tradition; at least, they were not
likely to have been discovered by such a number as had been requisite to
maintain an open opposition. And if the Errors had been discovered, yet it was
not easy to expect success in holding out against the Court of Rome, which was
then so very powerful, and there was no reason to expect such attempts from
Prudent Persons where there was no probability of success. And there was yet
least reason of all to expect this opposition from Bishops then, when no
Bishops were made without the Popes consent, which he was not likely to give to
such as were likely to oppose him; when, after they were made, they were
obliged to be true to Him by express Oaths, as well as by their Interests of
peaceable continuance, or hopes of future preferment; when, at least, it was
impossible to resist their Fellow Bishops, the generality of whom were, in all
likelihood, swayed by these Prejudices; when they had seen mighty Princes
themselves worsted in those Contests, and the extreme Severity of that Court
against Dissenters; when, lastly, differing from the Church of Rome in any
thing was counted Heresy, and Heresy was prosecuted with the extremest Infamy
(which must needs weaken the Authority of those Opposers with others) as well
as other Penalties of the Canon Law. Nor,

2. Does the Justice of our Cause require a greater Antiquity for our
Negatives: For,

1. Our Negatives are not pretended to be of perpetual obligation, but only for
preventing the malignity of the contrary Affirmative Articles to which they are
opposed. And therefore there is no reason to expect Formal Negatives opposed to
Additional Articles from the beginning, before the Additional Articles
themselves were thought of; nor to expect a Reformation of Abuses before there
were Abuses to be Reformed, seeing that in course of Nature these Negatives
presuppose the contrary Affirmatives, as a pretense of Reformation must also
presuppose Abuses. And therefore the pretense of the greater Antiquity of our
Adversaries Errors and Abuses is so far from prejudicing the reputation of our
Negatives and Reformation, as that it is indeed the best Argument of their
Justice and Seasonableness. For such Negatives as these, and such a
Reformation, must needs have been unwarrantable, if there had not been before
Errors fit to be denied, and Abuses fit to be reformed. Nor, 2. Is it any
Prejudice to the Justice of our Cause, that these Errors were not opposed with
formal Negatives as soon as they appeared. For such Errors as these were
usually first received as the Opinions of private Persons before they were
countenanced by Authority; and whilst they proceeded no further, there was not
that mischief in them, nor consequently that obligation to oppose them, as when
at length they came to be so countenanced. For the Errors of Private Persons,
whilst they are no more, are not conceived so to oblige us to be of their mind,
as that our silence should in any Prudence be expounded as an Argument of our
consent; and consequently cannot be such a provocation to us to oppose them
openly in our own Defense. Nor, 3. Is it necessary to expect that there should
have been an open opposition of them, even as soon as countenanced by
Authority. For if even in the reproof of the miscarriages of private Persons,
Christianity obliges us to proceed with all possible candor and modesty; we are
certainly much rather obliged to proceed so in dealing with Persons of
Authority. We should give them time to reflect, and we should bear with any
Personal inconveniences that are not directly sinful; rather than occasion
those disturbances which are usually to be expected from a public opposition
of them. Nor is this forbearance more agreeable to reason, than to the
sentiments of those Ages who were generally possessed with an excessive
veneration for Authority, especially Ecclesiastical; so that there is reason to
believe that they would bear with such Errors as long as the Abuses were
tolerable, however otherwise inconvenient. 4. Therefore that which makes these
Errors intolerable to private Persons in dealing with Authority (for of such I
speak) is the imposing and urging them as Conditions of Communion. And this
might have been shown to have been late, not before their Errors were defined
and imposed in their Councils. And therefore it was but lately that any public
opposition was to be expected, even from them who were in their Consciences
persuaded that our Adversaries Doctrines were Erroneous. And, 5. When they were
thus imposed, yet even then private Persons were concerned, in Conscience as
well as Prudence, to forbear an open opposition, when there were no hopes of
doing good, nay too probable fears of prejudicing their Cause by it for the
future: when upon their opposition, they must have expected to have been
condemned; when being condemned, they were to be cast out of Communion; when
being Excommunicated for such a Cause, others would have been deterred by their
Example, and their credit must have been impaired by the Infamy incurred by the
Canon Law then in force, and their very condemnation would for the future
mightily prejudice Men's minds against the like attempts, when none could revive
the like true Doctrine without the disrepute of being supposed to revive an
anciently-condemned Heresy; and when there were no hopes of being able to
preserve themselves in opposite Assemblies without Bishops to Head them,
without whom they could not maintain a Succession of Priests, nor consequently
of Sacraments, and the like employments and advantages of Ecclesiastical
Assemblies; and when no Bishops were likely to countenance such a design,
whilst they were held in such captivity to the Court of Rome by Oaths as well
as their other Worldly Interests, and when no Persons of a free ingenuous
temper were likely to attain the honor of Episcopacy.
These Reasons, with a very easy Application, may suffice to show that in an
ordinary way there was no reason to expect the Reformation sooner than it was.
And that there was no necessity sufficient to oblige God to interpose to raise
Men up to it Extraordinarily, will appear if it be considered,

6. That it is not every necessity of the Church that can oblige God to use
such Extraordinary means, but only such a necessity as must have destroyed a
Church from the Earth, that is, such a Society of Men wherein Salvation might
be attained by the ordinary Prescriptions of the Gospel. Now the prevalency of
these Errors does not oblige us to acknowledge that such a Church as this must
have failed even in those Ages wherein these Errors are supposed to have
prevailed for some Centuries before the Reformation: For, 1. Though the
Occidental Church had failed, yet Christ might have had such a Church among the
several Communions of the Orientals. And I know no greater inconvenience, in
this regard, in admitting the faileur of the Occidental Church, than what our
Adversaries themselves are obnoxious to, in admitting the like defection in the
Oriental. 2. The prevailing of these Errors does not oblige us to deny an
ordinary possibility of Salvation according to the Prescriptions of the Gospel,
even in the Church of Rome it self in those Centuries before the Reformation:
For, 1. We do not deny all Necessaries to Salvation, even according to the
ordinary Prescriptions of the Gospel, to have been taught even then in the
Church of Rome. The Errors we charge them with, are not of Defect, but Adding
to the Original Articles of Faith. And therefore, 2. If it may appear that the
sin of Adding to the Faith was not (to such as were no farther accessory to it
than by continuing in the Communion of such as were really guilty of it) so
imputable ordinarily as to hinder the Salvation of such as were not otherwise
wanting to themselves in their own Endeavors; or at least not in such a degree
as to oblige God to interpose in an Extraordinary way for its Ordinary
prevention: this will be sufficient to show that (supposing those Errors so
dangerous as we do indeed suppose them, yet) God was not obliged to raise up,
and maintain a Communion in opposition to them for preventing the failing of
such a Church as I have spoken of, even in these Western Parts. And that this
was so, may appear from these Considerations: 1. That that skill in
Ecclesiastical Learning, by which our first Reformers were enabled to discover
these Errors, was generally wanting in the Ages before the Reformation, which
might make their mistakes then much more pardonable than now. 2. That the great
mischief of these Errors is, not so much the believing more for matters of
Faith than really was so, as the mischievous Consequence of doing so, the
Divisions of the Church necessarily following hereupon, the condemning of good
Catholics for Heretics and Schismatics, and excluding them from Communion,
and hereby making the Peace of Christendom impossible on any just and tolerable
terms, and Abuses impossible to be Reformed. Which was not so imputable in
those Ages when there was no visible Communion to be condemned by joining with
that of Rome; for as for the even unjust Excommunication of particular Persons,
Providence is not so concerned as to interpose Extraordinarily for their
Prevention. This I say on Supposition that the Waldenses and Albigenses, etc.
were such as our Adversaries represent them. If they were otherwise, then among
them there was a Succession, for so long, of Churches holding our Doctrines
before Luther. 3. The Prudential Reasons now given might then generally excuse
private Persons, and all such as were not accessory to the guilt of introducing
those Errors (who were much the greater Part, and it is only for the greater
Part that Providence is necessarily concerned) from the guilt of not publicly
Reforming them. Yet even they are not so Excusable now, when the power of the
Pope is so much decried, and there are so many Churches and Church Governors,
under whose Protection they may put themselves, and with whose Communion they
may join, in opposition to them.



3. The Antiquity allowed to their Errors on this Supposition is not sufficient
to justify their Cause. For,

1. This Antiquity is not Primitive, but only of some later Ignorant Ages. And
the Unreasonableness of presuming Doctrines to have been Primitive only,
because they were actually found embraced by the Church in later Ages, and of
Prescribing on that account against a new Examination of them by immediate
recourse to the Originals, might have been shown from the Fathers as well as
from the Protestants.

2. The Antiquity of those Notions of theirs, whereby they confine the
Catholic Church to that part of it in the Roman Communion (which might have
been proved Fundamental to all their other Doctrines, as they are made Articles
of Faith and Conditions of Communion) is contradicted by the Oriental Churches
generally, who are as ancient, and of as Unquestionable a Succession, as the
Church of Rome her self, and as ancient in teaching the contrary.

3. The utmost Antiquity which we allow for their unwarrantable Doctrines, is
not so great as must be acknowledged (by all that will Judge heartily) for
several, which on all sides are acknowledged to be Heretical, I do not only
mean those of the Arians, but also of those great Bodies of the Oriental
Historians and Eutychians, continuing to this day divided from the Roman
Church; especially if they be really guilty of those Heresies which are charged
on them; and they must by Romanists be held guilty of some, for Justifying
their own Practice of condemning them.

4. Some of their present Decrees (particularly those concerning the admission
of the Apoeryphal Books into the Canon, and receiving Unwritten Traditions with
Equal Reverence with the Written Word of God) I doubt are not more anciently
imposed, as Conditions of Catholic Communion, than the Council of Trent it
self, which was since Luther. And both of these are very considerable, and
especially the latter is very Fundamental to many of their other Decrees.

Q. 4. Why all the Reformed Churches are not United in One?
I Presume the design of this Question is not so much a Curiosity to be
informed, either of the Politic Reasons which in the Course of Second Causes
might have an Influence on those Divisions which were occasioned by the
Reformation; or of those that might move God to permit Second Causes to act
according to their Natural Inclination, without the Interposition of any
Extraordinary restraint: but only to lay hold on that Advantage from our
acknowledged Divisions, which they may seem to afford to the Prejudice of our
common Cause. I shall therefore at present only propose such things to the
Gentlewomans Consideration, as may let her understand the weakness of this
Argument (how Popular soever) when they conclude us either mistaken our Selves,
or, at least, unfit to Guide others in the General Reformation; because we are
not all agreed in all the Particulars.

To this purpose it will be at present sufficient to insist on two things: 1.
That there is no reason why the Romanists should upbraid Us with this Argument,
and that it is their Interest, as well as ours, to Answer it: 2. That the
Argument it self is of no force as it is used by them against us.

1. There is no Reason why the Romanists should upbraid Us with this Argument,
and they, as well as we, are obliged to Answer it. For,
1. This very Argument was by the Primitive Heathens made use of against
Christianity in General, as it is now against Us; and our Adversaries would do
well to consider, whether the same Answers pleadable by themselves now in
behalf of those Christians, and actually pleaded by the Apologists then, be not
as pleadable for Us now. Nay, this multitude of Sects in Christianity is even
now the great Argument of Irreligious Persons against the Truth of Religion;
and I cannot believe that any Piously disposed Person among them, can be
pleased to allow the Argument to be of any force in either Case, rather than
want an Argument against Us. Yet I believe they will never be able to show any
Disparity.

2. If they speak, not of Dividing Principles, but of actual Divisions, they,
as well as we, have such among themselves. They have Divisions betwixt the
Irish Remonstrants and Anti-Remonstrants, Molinists and Jansenists, as well as
Thomists and Scotists, and Jesuits, some of which Parties are Divided as well
in Communion as in Opinions. If they say that these Divisions are not the
faults of their Opinions, but the particular perversity of Persons, who will
not stick to those Principles which might keep them United, when their Interest
inclines them otherwise: the same will be pretended by every Dividing Party. If
they think it Injurious that their whole Communion should be charged with the
misdemeanors of Persons condemned by it; We all of Us plead the same, for there
is no Party that does not condemn all others in those things wherein they
Divide from themselves.

3. If they think our Differences concerning the Particulars we would have
Reformed, an Argument that the whole design of a Reformation is in it self
Suspicious and Uncertain; let them consider what themselves do or can say, when
they are, in the like way of Arguing, urged by Us with the several Opinions
concerning the Seat of Infallibility; whence our Authors conclude the
Uncertainty of the thing it self. It might easily have been shown, upon this
and the like Occasions, how they do, and are obliged to, acknowledge the
Unreasonableness of this way of Arguing. But the designed Brevity of my present
Employment only permits me to point at the Heads of what might be said, not to
enlarge on the Particulars.

4. It might have been shown that these Differences among them concerning the
Judge of Controversies, tend Naturally, and by due Rational Consequence, to the
dissolution of their Communion, a Charge which we think cannot be proved
against that which we believe the Right Communion.

2. Therefore, to show directly the weakness of this Argument, Let it be
considered,
1. That whatever Differences they upbraid us with, yet they can never prove
that they follow by any Natural and Rational Consequence from the General
Principles of the Reformation, though possibly they may indeed have been
occasioned by that Liberty of Spirit which was absolutely requisite for
undertaking a design of such a Nature; as it must on all sides be acknowledged
possible that things really good may notwithstanding prove occasions of Evil.
And how very Unjust and Unreasonable it is to charge Personal Faults upon
Designs (that is in this Case the faults of Reformers upon the Reformation)
all, even the Romanists themselves, will acknowledge, in Cases wherein they are
disinteressed.

2. That, this being Supposed, all that they can conclude from these Divisions
of the Reformers, is only, that no one Communion of the Reformers has that
advantage over the rest as that, Antecedently to all Enquiry into the merit of
the Cause, its Word is fit to be trusted as a Guide in Controversies, to assure
any of its own Truth, and of the Error of all differing from it. This, if the
Gentlewoman will observe, she will find that their Arguments from this and the
like Topics, only aim at. For because they challenge such a Privilege
themselves, they fancy Us to do so too; and that our design is not to overthrow
a Judge of Controversies, but only to translate that Title from the Pope to
Luther, or some others of our eminent Reformers, which is far from our design.
But this difference in Opinion does not in the least prove, but that, upon a
particular Enquiry into the merit of the Cause, one Party may be found to have
the advantage of the other, which is all that we pretend to.

3. That this difference of the several Parties of the Reformation in other
things, is rather a very strong Presumption (for an Ignorant Person who must
conduct her self by Presumptions) that there is great reason for those things
wherein they are all agreed, and indeed is a greater Argument for the
Credibility of the Reformation in general, than for that of the Roman
Communion. For to a dis-interessed Person the Agreement of those is a more
valuable Argument for the Truth of what they say, who seem most of all acted by
the merit of the things, and least of all influenced by the Opinions and
Authorities of a few; and there can hardly be conceived a more considerable
Argument of their freedom in Judgment, than their actual difference in other
things. What therefore the Protestants are agreed in, seems more likely to be
the real sense of all that are so agreed upon an Impartial Enquiry; whereas the
Romanists are generally Influenced by a few of the Court of Rome, to whom the
rest do generally conceive themselves obliged in Conscience to conform. And
this advantage of the differences of Protestants for recommending their
Credibility in other things, above that of their Adversaries, to the Trust of
an Ignorant Person, will appear the more remarkable, if it be considered,

4. That they are not only agreed in general in the fitness of a Reformation,
but also in most of the Particulars to be Reformed. Indeed if they were only
agreed in general, that it were fit a Reformation should be, but agreed in no
Particulars; it might seem too probable a Suspicion, that it was not Truth, but
Faction, and the disturbance of the Public, that was their common design. But
that is far from being the Case here.

5. The Divisions of the Protestants in Doctrine are not so irreconcilable as
they may seem. The Harmony of Confessions shows them agreed in the Principal.
As for the others, it is plain that our Church of England does not think them
worth contending for, whilst she admits the several Parties into her Communion;
and if other Protestants think otherwise, yet She is not Responsible for them,
because She is not of their mind. The most pernicious Principles of all, which
most Naturally tend to Division, and which make the differences resulting from
them most impossible to be reconciled, are the differences concerning
Church Government; and in that our Church has Innovated nothing that should
cause any breach, even from the Roman, much less from any other part of the
Catholic Church. And most of their other Differences are no longer
Irreconcilable than the Persons are likely to continue averse to
Reconciliation; but these Differences about Church Government are so derived
from the nature of the Things, as that they may Cause Division among Persons
otherwise well meaning, and of a Peaceable Disposition.

6. This Argument from the Divisions of Protestants, is principally proper for
such as are not actually engaged in any particular Communion of them, and even
to them ought to have no more force than that of a Prudent Presumption, till
the Person so Presuming might have leisure to examine Particulars. But that
seems not to be the Gentlewomans Case whom I suppose to have been hitherto
educated in the Church of England, and to have had sufficient opportunities of
Informing her self concerning us. For such a one it would sure be sufficient
that our Church is no way guilty of these Divisions, whatsoever may be the Case
of other Protestants.

Q 5. Why the Church of England does not hold up to Confession, Fasting-days,
Holy Oil, which we our Selves commend?
IT is a mistake that the Questionist does suppose Us to commend Holy Oil.

However we think all the Instances here mentioned lawful and indifferent, and
so to be as obnoxious to the Prudence of particular Church Governors, as other
things of that nature are by all acknowledged to be; and we shall conceive our
Selves secure of the Gentlewomans Communion, if She will not alter till our
Adversaries prove them necessary Antecedently to Church Authority, which is
more than they will as much as pretend to, at least, concerning some of them.

These things therefore being thus supposed, I shall propose two things to the
Gentlewomans Consideration: 1. That supposing We were to blame in omitting
them, yet this were no ground for Her to leave our Communion: 2. That as far as
they are not imposed by our Church, there was reason for their not imposing
them.

1. Supposing that we were indeed to blame in omitting these Ecclesiastical
Observances, yet this would be no sufficient ground to excuse the Gentlewoman
for leaving our Communion. For,
1. No Indifferent thing, how imprudent or inexpedient soever (and that is the
highest Charge that the Churches mistake in a matter of this nature, is
chargeable withal, as long as the Object is supposed of its own nature
Indifferent) as long as it is not sinful (and certainly it can be no Sin to
submit for Peace's sake to an imprudent Constitution) can excuse a departure
from a Communion that is in other regards allowable.

2. Whatever a Separation on this account might be in others, yet it is less
excusable in Subjects, who are no way Responsible for as much as the
Imprudences of such Constitutions, and who are certainly bound to bear with all
tolerable frailties of their lawful Governors, and who are not indeed so well
qualified for Judging concerning them, as neither being so well skilled in
Politics generally, nor being made acquainted with the secret Reasons of such
Constitutions, which might make that, which without them might seem strange,
appear highly commendable when considered with them.

3. The Gentlewomans Sex, and possibly her particular Condition, may not have
those Advantages which many others (though Subjects also) have for Judging
concerning them.

These Arguments are so agreeable to the Principles of our Adversaries
themselves, as that they frequently make use of them for retaining Persons in
their own Communion. Which the Gentlewoman may be pleased to take notice of, if
any of her Tempters should Question them here, where they are disserviceable to
their Interests. But farther,

4. Abuses in Governors acknowledging themselves Fallible (tho they be
supposed indeed to be Abuses) are much more tolerable than in those who do not;
seeing there may be hopes that Governors, acknowledging themselves Fallible,
may in time be better informed, and may then themselves reform what is amiss,
without the compulsion of their Subjects; which can never be expected from such
as pretend to be Infallible.

5. If Abuses of this Nature be conceived a sufficient Reason for leaving a
Communion wherein we are already, much more are they sufficient for hindering
our access to another, wherein as yet we are not. So that this same Reason, if
it should make her desert the Communion of the Church of England, would also
hinder her joining in that of Rome, in which the most Judicious and Candid
Persons of that Communion will acknowledge Abuses of the like nature.

2. As far as these Omissions are countenanceed by our Church, there is reason
for it.
I say [as far as they are countenanced by our Church] and therefore the reason
I shall give for such Omissions shall be as they are considered under that
Notion: 1. Therefore, for Fasting Days, I think they are imposed with the same
design of Religion in our Church as in that of Rome (for that account of
Jejunium Ceoilianum, which is given by some, is not taken for the true sense of
our Church by her most genuine Sons) and that our Church is conceived to have
as much Authority to oblige her Subjects in Impositions of that Nature, so that
I cannot look on this disuse prevailing in Practice as countenanced by our
Church. If the Gentlewoman be so zealously concerned for them, I am sure She
may Practice them in our Communion, as well as in that of Rome, as several
others do.

2. Confession, even to a Priest, in order to his Advice and Absolution, our
Church, I think, owns as much as that of Rome; though we do not make it a
Sacrament, nor make it absolutely necessary, in an ordinaey way, for the
remission of every particular Sin, that it be particularly confessed. That the
Practice of it is at present discontinued, our Church, I think, is not the
Cause. That She has not interposed her Authority to continue it, might have
been excused:

1. Because the thing is only of Ecclesiastical Right. For the ancientest
obligation to confess Sins, tho scandalous in their own nature, yet not become
notorious (tho that differed much from the Confession which is now used in the
Roman Church) was first introduced after the Persecution by Decius, and that in
opposition to the Novatians, as Socrates affirms; and this was also afterward
taken away by Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, who ordered every one to be
left to his own Conscience in that matter, for which other Bishops were so far
from censuring him, that they followed him in it almost in all places, as the
same Historian tells us, and that omission was vehemently pleaded for by St.
Chrysostom, and obtained for no small time in the Greek Church, whatsoever it
did in other places. Whence it follows that She has power, in discretion, to
determine concernining its actual practice what She thinks fit. 2. Farther,
this being supposed, that it was in our Churches power not to Impose it, that
She did act prudently in not Imposing it, but rather recommending it to the
Liberty of private Devotions, will appear, if it be considered that, if She had
imposed it, She must necessarily have excluded all such from her Communion as
had not been satisfied with it; and it had not been Prudent to have excluded
Persons from her Communion for Indifferent things avoidable by her, when She
was complaining of the like Tyranny in the Church of Rome, especially
considering that it was also likely that the number was great of those who were
so dissatisfied with it.
However, if the Gentlewoman be desirous to Practice it for her own
Edification, I believe She may be furnished with Persons fitted for it in the
Church of England.

3. As for the use of Holy Oil in any of the pretended Sacraments, we do not so
far condemn it, as to refuse Communion with other Churches that use it; nay, we
our Selves retain it as a decent Ceremony of Consecration in the Coronations of
our Princes. Only we again conceive it,

1. A matter indifferent in it self, and not Essential to those Offices,
because of the differences in the Church concerning it. 2. This being supposed,
our Church does no way conceive it Prudent to continue it; both because it was
the design of the Reformation to reduce the Sacraments to their Primitive
Simplicity, that so Persons might Communicate in them on the same free terms as
then; and because the Errors of those who made them Essential to the Mysteries,
were of great Consequence, and very fit to be so discountenanced by a
discontinuance of the Practice it self.
If by the Holy Oil here mentioned, he meant particularly their Sacrament of
Extreme Unction, 1. Our Adversaries cannot prove a Sacramental Unction for the
first Centuries. A Miraculous one they may, but seeing themselves confess the
ordinary Use of the Miracle to have ceased, there is no necessary reason
obliging our Church to continue the external Ceremony. This is at least
sufficient to show that it is in the Churches power to continue it, or not.
Which being supposed, I add, 2. That even in regard of the benefit expected by
it, whether of Bodily recovery, or remission of sins, or Spiritual strength
against the Agony of Death, the Gentlewoman, nor any other Subject of our
Church, can suffer no loss by our Church's discontinuance of it. For all these
things are as certainly attainable by the means continued in our Church from
Unquestionable Apostolical Tradition (as the Prayers and Absolution of the
Priest and the Blessed Sacrament) as they could by the Unction it self; so that
I cannot perceive how a devout Person need to be concerned for the want of it,
on the terms now mentioned. Especially considering, 3. That in the way it is
Administered among them, to Persons past hopes of recovery, and usually past
sense of their own condition, it cannot be conceived in any rational way,
capable of Edifying the Devotion of the Person concerned, and no other way is
suitable to the Dispensation of the Gospel. And supposing it no Sacrament,
there is no reason imaginable why the Prayers of the Assistants for such a
Person may not be as acceptable to God, without the observation of this
external Ceremony, as with it. And as upon these concessions its Continuance
must needs appear unnecessary, so, 4. It would be inexpedient to countenance
the Errors consequent to the Opinion of its being a Sacrament, which are of so
weighty a concernment, by continuance of a Custom which may so easily be
spared. These things may suffice at present for satisfying the Gentlewoman of
her little concernment for it, without engaging on the Dispute concerning its
lawfulness.

Now this Fundamental Principle of our Churches Proceedings in these and the
like Particulars, concerning the power of the Church for Innovating from
Ancient Customs, not only by Adding new ones, but Abrogating old ones, might
have been proved not only from the Principles, but from several Practices of
the Roman Church her self.

Q. 6. Why was Reformation done by Act of Parliament?
REformation may be considered two ways: Either,

1. As Preached and Imposed under pain of Spiritual Censures, and of Exclusion
from the Communion of the Church, and a deprivation of all the Privileges
consequent to that Communion. And this is certainly the Right of the Church,
and was accordingly practiced by the Church in our English Reformation:

2. As Enacted as a Law of the Land, and consequently as urged the same way as
other Laws are, under Temporal Penalties, and External Coercion, and encouraged
by Temporal Advantages. And this is undoubtedly the Right of the Secular Power.
And this was all in which the Secular Power did concern it self in the
Reformation.

What I can further foresee in favor of our Adversaries is, that 1. The
Secular Power ought in Conscience to be herein advised by the Ecclesiastics:
and, 2. That though external obedience may be paid to the mistaken Decrees of
the Secular Power following the mistaken part of the Ecclesiastics, yet the
Obligation (in Conscience and Right) of such Decrees must be derived from the
Justice of the Churches proceedings in advising the Magistrate; so that no Act
of the Magistrate can make amends for any Essential defect in the proceedings
of the Church. But the only Effect of the Magistrates concurrence in that Case
is, that what is already performed without Heresy or Schism in the Church, may
be by that means settled in such a particular Commonwealth without Schism or
Sedition in the State. And therefore seeing they suppose that at the
Reformation the greater number of the Bishops then being, were overawed and
deprived of the Liberty of their Votes by the Secular Magistrate, and it is the
nature of all Societies to be swayed by the greater Part; therefore they may
think it unreasonable to ascribe the Reformation to the Church of England, but
only to a Schismatical part of it; so that the Magistrate having attempted this
Reformation without warrant from the Church, they think they do well to call
our Reformation it self Parliamentary.

To this therefore I Reply, 1. That the use we make of this Topic of the
Magistrates concurrence, is indeed no other than to clear our Reformation from
being Seditious, which is ordinarily charged on Us by our Adversaries, and much
more ordinarily on the Foreign Protestants.

2. That for clearing the very proceedings of the Magistracy from being
Heretical or Schismatical, to the Conscience of the Magistracy it self, it is
sufficient that the Magistracy gave its Assistance and Protection to no other
Church, but such as, at least, according to the genuine Dictate of their
Conscience, was neither Heretical nor Schismatical. But this Justification of
the private Conscience of the Magistracy is, I confess, a thing we are at
present not so necessarily concerned for; and therefore,

3. We grant farther, that for satisfying our own Consciences of the Justice of
these proceedings of the Magistracy, it is requisite that we be satisfied that
they were Advised by that part of the Clergy, whose Advice we conceive they
ought to have followed. So that if this may appear in the Case we are speaking
of, this, and this alone, will be a sufficient Vindication of the Magistrates
proceedings to the Consciences of his Subjects.

4. Therefore the Determination of the Justice of the Advice followed by the
Magistrate, may be resolved two ways: Either from the merit of the Cause; or
from the Legal Authority and Right the Persons may be presumed to have to be
consulted on such occasions. As for the former, it is in the present Case the
principal Dispute, Whether the Reformation undertaken by the Magistrate, was
right or not? and therefore very unfit to be relied on as a Presumption to
prove the Magistrates proceedings Irregular. The later therefore only is proper
to be insisted on here. And it consists of two charges: That by the Laws of the
Land the Magistrate ought to have been advised by the Bishops then possessed of
the several Sees; and, That in advising with the Clergy, whoever they were, he
ought to have allowed them the Liberty of speaking their minds, and to have
been swayed by the greater part. These things are conceived so necessary, as
that the Magistrate not observing them, may be presumed to act as no way
influenced by the Clergy. Which is the Reason why they call our Reformation,
wherein they suppose them not observed, Parliamentary.

1. Therefore as to the Legal Right of the Popish Clergy to advise the Secular
Magistrate, two things may be Replied:
1. That this Legal Right may be forfeited by the Persons by their Personal
misdemeanors, and of this forfeiture the Secular Magistrate himself is the
proper Judge; and that this was exactly the Popishs Bishops Case at that time.

2. That the consideration of this Legal Right is of no use for satisfying the
Consciences of their Subjects, which yet is the only use that is seasonable for
this occasion.

2. As for the Canonical freedom to be allowed them in advising, and the
obligation of the Magistrate to follow the advice of the greater part: These
Canonical Rights can only satisfy the Consciences of their own Communion, but
cannot be pretended necessary to be observed, where there are different
Communions. For,
1. The Romanists themselves never allow that freedom to Persons out of their
Communion, as was plain in the Council of Trent, and still appears on all
occasions.

2. Especially in particular National Churches, as ours was, they themselves
will not deny that the greater part may prove Heretical, and therefore likely
to prevail by Plurality of Votes; in which Case themselves would
notwithstanding think it unequal for the Magistrate to be swayed by them.

3. This has always been the Practice of the Church, and the Catholic
Emperors, never to allow any Canonical Right to the Assemblies and Censures of
Heretics, as Athanasius was restored first by Maximinus Bishop of Triers, then
by Pope Julius, after that by Maximus Bishop of Jerusalem, and at last by the
Emperor Jovinian, without any Canonical revocation of the Synods that had
condemned him. Many Instances of the like Nature might be given.

4. The Popish Clergy had given the first Precedent of this Liberty themselves,
in refusing to admit of the Canonical Appeal of the Protestants from the Pope
to a free General Council.

FINIS.

