IMPRIMATVR:
HAving perused the following Advices, I conceive them suitable and convenient
for the use of the persons concerned respectively; And I do accordingly
Recommend them to the use of such young Students in the UNIVERSITY as design
the Study of Divinity, or the susception of HOLY ORDERS; And to all others that
shall desire to engage themselves in that HOLY FUNCTION. And that they may be
communicated with more advantage, I do hereby License them to be Printed and
Published.

JA: ARMACHANUS.

Two Letters OF ADVICE, I. For the Susception of HOLY ORDERS* II. For STUDIES
THEOLOGICAL, especially such as are Rational.


At the end of the former, is inserted, a Catalogu^ of the Christian Writers,
and genuine Work that are extant of the first three Cent^rice.

(...). S. Chrysostom. de Sacerdot. L. VI.

DVBLIN, Printed by Benjamin To^k^, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent
Majesty; and are to be sold by Joseph Wild MDCLXXII.

To the Most Reverend Father in God, JAMES, by Divine Providence Lord
Archbishop of ARMAGH, Primate and Metropolitan of all IRELAND, and
Vice Chancellor of the UNIVERSITY OF DUBLIN.
My LORD,
YOU are so many ways Entitled to the Patronage of the ensuing Advices, as I
do not know how I could be just in omitting this oc^^sion of a public
acknowledg^^ent of it. For whether the Subject be considered, as relating
either to Conscience or Learning, you have a right of judging all concernments
of either kind: the former as Metropolitan, and consequently as the supreme
Guide of Conscience under God in the Church of Ireland; the later as
Vice Chancellor of our University, in which regard you are most justly
interessed in the fruits and seeds of your own cultivation: or the persons
concerned, they are all of them such as depend on your direction, and therefore
the rules for whose behavior ought most properly to be communicated to them by
your recommendation: or my self, as you have upon all occasions given evidences
of your favor to me, so more signally in this affair, by first advising this
publication, and after honoring it with your own License and approbation.
However presumptuous the attempt might seem, in other regards, yet to a Judge
so candid and favorable, as I have always found your Grace to be, the
innocence and sincerity of my design for restoring Christianity to her
primitive splendour, may suffice to excuse, if not expiate, appendent
imprudences. For your Grace already understands too well to be informed by me,
how vain it is to attempt a Reformation of the Laity whilst the Clergy is not
held in that Reputation by them which might provoke them to an imitation of
their example; and how little hopes there are of retriving that Reputation
without a Reformation of their lives and a restitution of their discipline,
which would prove the most expedient means to let such persons who either
cannot, or will not, distinguish betwixt the Sacredness of their Office and
their personal demerits, understand the unexpressible usefulness of their
Calling being piously and conscientiously discharged in order to the most
momentous and most noble ends of mankind. And that a preconsideration must
needs prove more successful in promoting this industry in practice, which
would, by way of obvious consequence, restore their honor, than any postnate
advices as being likely to prevent the engagement or admission of such persons
who would not afterward be capable of such impressions; and that it is more
secure for the persons concerned to let them understand the personal and
habitual qualifications necessary for rendering their duty performable by them
than afterward to admonish them concerning particulars, when it is too late to
retire, how unsuitable soever the practice prove to their personal
qualifications, will not, I think, be doubted by any intelligent considerative
person. This is my design in the former of the subsequent Letters, the
usefulness and convenience whereof is further cleared in the Letter it self,
and has not, that I know of, been attempted by any other. If it had, I should
very willingly have spared my own pains. My manner of performance also has been
at once to show the Ad^^ces rational and to have been designed by our Church,
that so it might be fitted for all sorts of concerned Readers, both such as are
able to judge it themselves, and such as are not. I have therefore ordered the
whole in such a series of discourse as that the sequel must needs be admitted
by him who has granted the principles laid down at the beginning; and the
first principle is that which the Church her self first enquires into, even a
Providential Call from God, or a motion of the Spirit, as far as that may be
credited without danger of Enthusiasme; and accordingly the inferences have
generally been examplified in such instances as have been approved by our
Church since her reformation, that so I might, as well as I was able, prevent
objections against my design from the inconsiderableness of my person, an
artifice too usually, as it is weakly and unreasonably, made use of for the
defeating the most commendable projects. The objection in it self is in truth
so very little momentous as that I should not think it worthy to be taken
notice of, if I were not more solicitous for my cause than my person. But
seeing it is so obvious in the way of persons that may be concerned to cross my
design, and withal so taking with the vulgar, I doubt it will concern me even
in prudence to crave your Graces patience for a brief Apology. Omitting
therefore my own justification, which I confess a task too great for my weak
abilities (though if I did undertake it on a public account, I might for an
excuse of such immodesty, urge the example of the great Apostle, who, out of
tenderness for his cause, was (as himself confesses) necessitated to such a
folly) yet I conceive it undeniable that the merit of the cause is abundantly
sufficient to compensate the demerit of my person, and for my part, so that the
cause may not be prejudiced, I shall very heartily submit the choice of
Instruments to the pleasure of God himself. Besides further that it is
extremely unreasonable to urge personal demerits against a cause. Indeed if the
cause had been recommended on personal regards, the disparagement of the person
might have invalidated such a recommendation. But considering that nothing here
is pretended, but the solidity of the reasons submitted to an impartial
examination; none can say that they are the weaker for being propounded by an
unworthy person. Neither indeed is the supposal true, that even in point of
Authority any thing here is recommended only by my private person; for having
shown it in every particular approved and designed by the Church, it must needs
be supported by her Authority, which may well be presumed sufficient for the
design intended, the general reformation of her Clergy. But I must thankfully
acknowledge that your Grace has in a great measure freed me from these personal
odium's by undertaking the Patronage of these otherwise despisable attempts.
For none can now pretend themselves unconcerned in the Advice of a Laick or a
private person when the supreme Metropolitan has not only thought it
convenient, but recommended it. This is the reason that necessitated me to take
Sanctuary in your Graces Patronage, wherein I dare more confidently promise my
self a kind reception because you have encouraged it. Yet am I not herewith
satisfied; but as necessitous persons are usually emboldened to new requests by
past concessions; so, in order to the desired success of these Papers, I
further beg a favor, greater and more efficacious than the greatest
munificence of the most potent Temporal Princes, though less impoverishing, and
that is your Fatherly blessing and Prayers for these and the other Studies and
endeavors of

Your Graces most obliged and obsequious servan^ H. D.

A PRAEFACE To the READER, Containing some necessary Advertisements preparatory
to the ensuing Discourses.
HOW much the reputation of Religion is concerned in the honor of its
relatives, especially the persons teaching and professing it, as it has been
the sense of all prudent Nations, so it is too evident from the experience of
ours. For if we seriously reflect on that Irreligion and Atheism which has
lately so overrun that part of the Gentry who have had that freedom of
education as to discern beyond the grosser superstitions of the credulous
vulgar, and yet wanted that depth and solidity of judgment, or that industry
and diligence, which had been requisite for a positive satisfaction, concerning
the true measures of things; I think there cannot be a more probable Original
assigned for it, than this of the contempt of the Clergy. For when upon
pretense of a maintenance of their Christian liberty, some persons of a better
meaning than Information, were seduced by their more subtilly-designing Leaders
to resist some indifferent Constitutions of their Superiors; they found
themselves obliged in pursuance of their principles to call in Question their
whole Authority. For considering that they were not any particular abuses of a
just Authority, not any bare inexpediency in the Ceremonies already established
(for which Governors, not Subjects, had been responsible, and for which a
redress ought to have been desired by Subjects in a modest and peaceable way,
which, if denied, could not have justified a separation, seeing that nothing
under sin can excuse that, and a condescension to Superiors in confessed
inexpediencies cannot be proved a sin) but the very Authority by which they had
been established; and finding further that this Authority was of that kind that
was indeed intrinsecally involved in all exercise of Government, so that it was
impossible to plead and exception of duty upon supposal that their Superiors
had transgressed the bounds of their just power; they perceived themselves
reduced to this extremity to justify their own disobedience by a renunciation
of their Authority. For indeed all Government must needs prove useless that is
denied a power of imposing temporary obligations, and that power must needs be
denied where all things necessary are supposed antecedently determined, and
what is not so is thought incapable of any just determination. Having therefore
thus divested the Clergy of all power properly so called, yet that they might
seem to attribute something to the eminency of their place in the Church, they
were willing to allow a power of persuading such as were willing to obey, only
with this difference (that I can perceive) from the meerest Laick, that Laics
might persuade others to piety, but Clergiemen must; that it was charity in
them, but duty in these; that it was only the general Calling of those, but
the particular of these; that the Laity might discharge it privately, but the
public performance of it was only permitted to the Clergy. This seems to
have been the uttermost design of their most ancient Patriarchs, none of them,
that I know of, ever enduring to hear of any Laical encroachments on the
Calling it self. But whilst they were so Studious in opposing their
established Superiors, and so careless of better provisions for that
unsettlment themselves had introduced into the Church, or the ill consequences
of their own attempts; they unawares undermined their own foundations, and
exposed themselves to the same encroachments from the Laity which themselves
had attempted on their settled Governors. For least any veneration of their
Calling mi^h^ render their persuasions themselves so awful as not to admit of
any easy contradiction, which might still preserve some discipline and
dependence of the Laity upon them; themselves had furnished the usurping Laity
with such pretenses as that, that reverence it self must needs prove very
inconsiderable. For first, they had opposed professedly all difference betwixt
the Clergy and Laity, and indeed all relative Holiness, as Popish and
Antichristian, and tending to the usurpation of a Lordship over Gods Heritage;
so that now there was nothing left to the Clergy that might as much as
challenge a respect of the Laity but their personal skill in the objects of
their Profession, which both left the unskilful Clergy destitute of any
pretense of challenging reverence; and was no curb to the more skilful Laity;
and indeed in the event made them perfectly equal, seeing that the skilful
Laity might as well challenge respect from the unskilful Clergy, as the
skilful Clergy from the unskilful Laity, their order being indeed no
ingredient in the ground of such a challenge. Besides secondly, their making
the Scriptures an adequate Rule for all prudential establishments, and obliging
the Laity to a particular enquiry into the merit of Ecclesiastical
Constitutions, even in probable, as well as certain, senses of the Scripture,
not as much as advising a modest acquiescency in the judgment of the Clergy
even in things they do not understand, nor indeed letting them understand their
incompetency in any case where they might hope for the assistance of a more
able guide (for indeed that pretense of understanding the Scripture by its
internal light, or by the Spirit whereby it was written, or by prayer without
urging the use of ordinary means, the methods of expounding the Scriptures so
celebrated among them, seem extremely to favor Enthusiasm, and to supersede
the necessity of an exterior guide) these pretenses, I say, seem to deprive the
Clergy of the Authority even of proponents, which is the least that can be
imagined, and therefore of all respect on this regard, and therefore must needs
degrade them to (...) with the Laity, in all which way of proceeding every
later Sect argued rationally and consequently from the Principles of the first
Innovators. The Laity therefore having such specious consequent pretenses for
their independence on the Clergy, and yet the Clergy still insisting on their
Original claim, it was obvious to conceive with what jealousy and partiality
their proceedings herein must be censu^ed by the Laity now conceiving
themselves as Adversaries concerned to maintain their liberty against the
conceived usurpations of the Clergy. And finding the Clergy to be interessed
in the Controversies, both as to the honor and obedience challenged by them,
and as to that affluence of temporal fruitions which had been conferred on them
by devout persons as suitable expressions of that honor; they did not make
that use thereof, which in reason they ought, to enquire first, whether that
private interest it self of the Clergy, were not coincident with the public
of the Church; or secondly, whether it were not coincident with the truth,
whereof if neither could appear upon a sober scrutiny; but that the arguments
for the contrary were found either evident or more probable, then indeed, and
not till then, it might be presumed that interest might have an influence in
their determination. But, as the vulgar is very willing to censure, and yet
very loath to undergo the trouble of a laborious enquiry, so they have made the
Cler^ies interest a prejudice against their cause; so that now their arguments
are either not heard (they not being presumed competent Advocates for their own
cause, and others not being concerned for them, as not being concerned with
them) or if they be heard, yet with no indifferency, the interest of the
Clergy being thought inconsistent with that of the Laity: a way of proceeding
not only very unjust but very unreasonable, it being every way as weak to
conclude a cause false as true on no other pretense but that of private
interest. However this argument, such as it is, being by profane persons taken
for granted from the concessions of the Religious Laity, and they withal
further discovering the unreasonableness of those persons who, upon pretense of
honoring Religion had brought a contempt upon its principal professors and
defenders; it was easy for them to conclude Religion it self dishonorable and
suspicious from this repute of its chiefest Champions; for if what make; for
the interest of the Clergy must immediately be condemned or suspected without
any further enquiry, which is the unreasonable practice of the vulgar, then the
profane person finding Religion in general conducive to this purpose, and
being brought into suspicious thoughts of the Clergy by the pretended
discoveries of the greatest pretenders to Religion; it is obvious to conceive
what consequences he will be likely to deduce thence to the prejudice of
Religion in general. Especially considering that this dishonor of the Clergy
was like to invalidate the use of all coercive means for inducing the Laity to
a practice of their duty, and so to leave them entirely to the influence of
their own good natures, which though at first they might be heated into a zeal
by way of Antiperistasis from the opposition of their Adversaries; yet upon
their disappearing, that zeal which had only been inflamed by aemulation,
must, like Rome upon the demolition of Carthage, decay, and so their former
li^entiousness will return with a violence proportionable to their former
restraint. And when men are come to this extreme they will then be as much
concerned that those threats of the Clergy which awaken their Consciences, and
make them nauseate and disrelish the ploasures of their Sins, should be false,
at least should be believed so by themselves (which belief though false, may
serve to stupifie their present sense) as they pretend the Clergy interessed
in their truth, and therefore may be presumed as partial. And when men are
willing and interessed to disbelieve Religion, how very weak reasons are
sufficient to induce them to it, themselves acknowledge when the case is not
immediately applied to themselves; there being no disparity to exempt disbelief
from being as obnoxious to interest as that credulity so much decryed by them.
Indeed any one that would consider the persons (that they are such usually as
are not seriously addicted and though pretending to be w^^s, yet not deeply
considerative) or the weakness of the reasons, either tending to direct
Skepticism, or undermining their own foundations, or arguing an unwillingness
of conviction, would suspect this to have been the gradation of their
disbelief. As it has therefore thus appeared both from reason and experience
that this contempt of the Clergy does naturally tend to Atheism and
Irreligion; so on the contrary the best prevention of these horrid consequences
will be their restitution to their due respect and honor; which will best be
performed by a praemonition of persons designing this Calling, that they may
neither engage in what they are not able to effect, nor endeavor a reformation
of inconveniences when it is too late. This is the design of these Papers,
which I hope all they who ground their hopes of present or future prosperity on
their love of our Jerusalem, will conceive themselves obliged to further by
their prayers or powers as God shall enable them.

But besides this first use which is very suitable to the necessities of this
present age, there is also another of no small moment, the satisfaction of our
well meaning separating brethren. For whatever other weak reasons are pretended
(as indeed I think they would seem very weak to any prudent judicious
indifferent persons that were convinced of the heinousness of that Sin of
Schism which they are produced to excuse) yet I think they are the lives and
unseriousness of some of our conformable Clergy, that are indeed their
decretory arguments; for this indeed seems to be the great reason that makes
them fancy our ministry less edifying than their own, because they come
possessed with irreverence to their persons (for I do not perceive that
themselves pretend the same difference in hearing such of ours for whom they
have entertained a greater respect) and that negligence of (...) and unserious
way of Preaching seem to be the true grounds of that irreverence. Now my way of
defense is not the least to justify their ^ices or imprudences, or to defend
their persons against public justice (as they seem to misunderstand us, when
they charge us with the Patronage of Profaneness upon account of these
persons) but to let them understand how little our Church is indeed concerned
in their defense. For if the Character of a Clergieman here described answer
the true design of the Church (as I have shown that it does by Injunctions and
Canons produced from her since her Reformation) then it will appear that such
persons are so far unconformable as they are disliked (for it is plain the
person here described can neither prove impious in his life, nor imprudent or
trifling in his Preaching) and sure themselves will not think it equitable that
our Church should be charged with the errors of non-conformists. The only
thing therefore that may seem blameworthy here is that the Canons of the Church
are not executed on such persons with due severity. But neither will this
excuse their separation; for first, they are not concerned to see this justice
done so as to be obliged upon neglect of it to withdraw from our Communion. For
neither do they suffer in a personal regard, the ordinances administered by the
irregular or imprudent Clergy, whilst permitted, not depending on their
personal sanctity or prudence, and therefore being as efficacious to the
well-disposed recipients as otherwise; nor are they entrusted with a public
charge, so as to be responsible for public miscarriages when irremediable by
them; and therefore secondly, all the blame of such connivances is to be laid,
not on the Government, whose standing established Rules oblige them to a
severer care, but on the Governors, who may also be charged with
nonconformity when they do not act according to the Rules prescribed by them;
and therefore it will be very unjust for these personal neglects to separate
from their Government and Communion; especially considering Thirdly, that
separation on these regards is so far from preventing the inconvenience or
remedying it, as that indeed it does but transfer the blame from the Governors
to such Separatists (though they think to avoid it) by affording an Apology, by
them unanswerable, to Governors for such personal neglects: That the
delinquents cannot be persuaded to reform themselves, and that a power of
persuading only is allowed them by these separating brethren; that even as to
that coercive power challenged by themselves, yet it is not prudent to exercise
it without any probable hopes of success, that being the way to expose it to
contempt, which in a power which has nothing to render it coercive but the
Sacredness of its esteem in the opinion of the delinquent, may endanger the
whole Authority, as the loss of that will occasion a general impunity, a much
greater evil than any single inconvenience. And seeing the multitudes of Sects
and Communions ready to receive a punished delinquent, and the disparaging
opinions introduced by them concerning Authority, may th^^, upon their
principles, ex^use Governors from the execution of the Canons, where the blame
will afterward ly themselves may understand without any suggestion of mine. I
shall beseech them to bestow some serious and unprejudiced thoughts upon it.

Now though the following Advices be calculated principally for the use of the
Clergy, who are more entrusted, and therefore more obliged to caution on the
account of the multitude who depend upon their conduct as well as themselves;
yet are there several things proportionably useful for the Laity. For there is
as much truth in that pretense of our Brethren for equalling the Laity to the
Clergy as there was in that of the Rebellious Congregation of Corah, that all
the people of God is holy, that Christians, as well as the Israelites, are
called the 1 S. Pet. V. 3.
Lords Heritage, that Christ has made us all Rev. ^ 6. V. 10. xx. 6.
Priests to God and his Father, that we are built up a holy 1 S. Pet. ii. 9.
Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
And accordingly common Christians are obliged to the same Offices to the
Heathen common World as the Clergy are to the Laity: Thus they are to show
them a good example, to be lights in the World, to reprove and exhort
delinquents, and to offer up rational Sacrifices for the whole World. And if
they were to be received adult to the profession of Christianity, there would
be the same care for purity of intention in Laics as there is now in
Clergiemen. Thus in the primitive times none were received to this profession,
but they who had first given some evidences of their sincerity, either by
enduring some rigorous initiatory penances, as was usually practiced in
admissions to Pagan mysteries. Thus three months Fast was prescribed in the
time of the Rec^gn. I. III. and VI.
Author of the Pseudo-Clementine Recognitions, and the Quadragesimal Fast was
appointed before the most ancient Anniversary for Baptism, Easter; and Arnobius
was not trusted till he had written in defense of the Christian Religion, and
St. Cyril of Jerusalem in his Pras. and Catech III.
Homilies to the competentes is very earnest in urging the necessity of a
sincere and cardinal intention; and from this great caution of admitting
Heathens to an intuition of their mysteries, it was that after all indications
of their sincerity even adults were not admitted without the Testimony of
Susoeptors or Godfathers, persons of approved gravity and sincerity. And the
same obligations are in reason incumbent now on those who are adult, though
Baptized in their Nonage. If I were not unwilling to be tedious, it had been
easy to have shown in all the other qualifications how even private Christians
are in their proportion obliged, though not in so eminent a degree, and rather
excused from that by its impossibility to their circumstances, than its
unnecessariness. But that which I shall at present especially recommend to the
perusal of the Laity, is Letter I. Numb. XXVI. where they may find such
prescriptions as may prevent many disconsolations in the practice of Piety to
which the neglect of them does expose many seriously devout persons.

It has also by some worthy Friends been thought requisite for rendering the
present attempt more useful for our Britannick Churches, to recommend to the
persons, concerned in these Advices, the Study of their Public Records, the
Homilies and Articles and Books of Ordination and Common Prayer, and Canons and
Constitutions since the Reformation, though this indeed is easily reducible to
that head of skill in all those Controversies that divide Communion; for this
seems to have been the adaequate design of the Church herein to show what she
thought necessary to be believed, or, at least, not factiously contradicted by
such as were to be admitted to her Communion. And for the better understanding
her true sense in this affair, and its vindication from the misunderstandings
of her Adversaries, it were very requisite to read the whole History of the
Reformation, and to observe the sentiments and temper of the principal persons
engaged therein; and by what kind of mediums her proceedings have been
justified in the several Ages, and against the several Adversaries,
respectively. By this means you will best understand the difference betwixt her
impositions; which of them were intended as conditions of Catholic Communion,
that is, as fundamentals; and which only of her particular, that is as prudent
and probable, and not obliging to an internal assent but only an exterior
peaceable acquiescency (for certainly the Church intended some of both kinds)
and the late way of requiring an external assent only to the Articles
indefinitely, without prescribing any prudential limitations, how far that is
to be extended, and admitting a liberty of straining the Articles in favor of
our own opinions, without any consideration of the Controversies therein
designed by the Church, may be expounded so licentiously as to open a gap for
the most pestilent haeresies.

In the Second Letter, I confess many things in the improvement of the
proposals there laid down, and in the Catalogues of Books, might have been more
accurately enlarged, but that I conceived these sufficient to initiate a
Novice, which I have there signified to have been my uttermost design, and I
doubt whether it would be prudent to discourage beginners with the Prospect of
too greater a task. In my censure of School Divinity, there is one fundamental
defect omitted, which I look on as so very considerable, and of so extremely
fullacious consequence to them that rely on it, and yet never observed, that I
know of, that I thought it worthy a particular mention here. That is, that the
greatest and most Sacred* mysteries of the Trinity and Iucarnation are
explained as to their Theological consequences from the principles of the
Peripa^etick Philosophy as borrowed by them from the modern translations and
Commentaries of the Arabians. It is plain that all the use of Philosophy in
affairs of this nature cannot be to discover any truth anew, but only to
explain the sense of the Authors delivering it, and that that Philosophy alone
can be useful to this purpose, whose Language was observed by them; and that
not Aristotle but Plato was then generally followed not only by the generality
of the Philosophers of that age, but in accommodation to them his Language
observed by the Scriptures themselves; especially St. John I. and by the
generality of the Fathers, those of greatest repute in both the Occidental and
Oriental Churches, the pretended Areopagite and St. Augustine himself, to whom
the Schools are most beholden, St Basil, both St. Gregory's Nazianzen and
Nyssen. St. Chrysostom etc. So that this way of proceeding is liable to two
very fundamental mistakes (which should be studiously avoided in affairs of so
great concernment) First of explaining Platonic language by Peripatetick
Philosophy; Secondly of explaining the ancient Peripatetick Philosophy by the
present expositions of the modern Arabians. These with the other defects there
mentioned would methinks invite some generous Advancers of Learning to review
the whole foundations of our Modern School Divinity which would be an attempt
becoming the ingenuity and inquisiti^eness of the age we live in. And seeing I
have taken this occasion of mentioning such a design; it may be it may not
prove altogether unacceptable, perhaps something necessary to clear my meaning,
to propose such a way of managing it, as I conceive most convenient, which I
most willingly refer to the censures of persons more skilful and experienced.
That I think would be First to distinguish accurately betwixt such Questions as
are to be decided by reason, and such whose principles are either wholly or
principally derived from Revelation. In the former the Schoolmen may be more
securely trusted, their excellency lying in the closeness of their discourse.
But here it self, it were well that their principles were reformed; especially
in such an age as this is, care should be taken that nothing be taken up
precariously upon the Authority of any however celebrated Philosopher (a
practice too frequent among them) but what might sufficiently recommend it self
by its own nature and intrinsic reasonableness. And then for those which are
derived from Revelation it is plain that their whole decision must be derived
from Testimonies either of Scripture or Ecclesiastica^l Authors, the producing
whereof seems to be the principal dosign of the Master of the Sentences; though
some things are added in the Sums concerning Prophecy and the Ceremonial Law.
Concerning these therefore it seems to me expedient that some excellent persons
skilled not only in Ecclesiastical but Rabbinical and Philosophical learning,
and indeed generally in Oriental Philo^logy, would undertake a Historical
account of them; wherein he should First show Historically how the whole
Article was believed and taught in the several Ages of the Church, what forms
of speaking were used by the Fathers concerning it, how it was expressed, and
how much concerning it believed in its first simplicity, how afterward
additional explanations were introduced and by what degrees: what was the first
occasion of the several Controversies, who were their principal Haeresiarchs,
how they were disposed in their manners and how addicted (...) the Studies,
wherein their Haeresies (...) truly consist, whether in the perniciousn^^ of
their Doctrines, or their factious mann^^ of propagating them to the prejudice
(...) the Churches peace. If in the perniciousness of their Opinions; then it
were we^ it were shown First what those opinion were as near as could be from
the Haeretick own words; and Secondly upon what ^^casion first entertained; and
Thirdly (...) what degrees promulged; and Fourthly by what arguments deseaded,
and among them which were principal, and which only secondary and accessory;
and Fifthly by what success (...), by whom seconded, and by whom (...) Sixthly
by what degrees (...) First by what Fathers, Secondly by what (...), and
Thirdly by what (...); and how all their proceedings were ^esented by the
Catholic Church (...) and in all these degrees of (...) First how far both
parties (...), and wherein they (...) Secondly as to their differences, to show
what was condemned as pernicious (and among them what was counted more and what
less pernicious) and what only as improbable, for it seems plain that many
errors of Haereticks were not counted Haeresies; and Thirdly the degrees of
unanimity in the Church in her censures: what censures were generally received
and confirmed by the Catholic Church (...); what only by her representative,
in general Councils; what only by particular Churches in Provincial; what
only by particular persons, how numerous or (...) soever; and ^ou^thly the
arguments alleged in defense of the Ecclesiastical censures, especially such
of them on which the Churches resolution was principally grounded, and of which
her Champions were most confident; and indeed if these were judiciously chosen,
I think it would not be amise if the weaker were quite omitted, both because
they are perfectly unnecessary as depending entirely on the conclusiveness of
the others, and involved in the same success; and because with some Cavillers
who are glad of any occasions of carping they might prejudice the principal
cause, there being no more politic way for betraying the Truth in so (...) an
Age as this than to offer to defend it by unconclusive arguments. And the same
way of proceeding may be proportionably applied to Theological questions of
meaner concernment. When thus the matter of Fact had been thus plainly
represented, it would then be seasonable to proceed to a positive judgment
according to these Historical evidences. And in order hereunto it would be
further expedient to consider the first Originals of every (...), what
foundation every Article had in the actual belief of the persons to whom it was
revealed, antecedently to the Revelation, and therefore how the Revelations
were likely to be understood by them; which being discovered, then to examine
in the Second place what might be deduced concerning the whole Article from
such Originals, whether Pagan Philosophy, or opinions or practices prevailing
among the Rabbinical Jews, or the Hellenists, for whose use the Scriptures
were principally designed. When this is done, then it would be convenient,
Thirdly to compare the Article so explained with the Scriptures as understood
by the Primitive Fathers, to see how far it was approved, and where corrected
and amended by Revelation. And this may be proportionably applied, not only to
the primitive doctrines of the Church, but also, to her later explications and
modes of expressions opposed to the several Haereticks opposing it. Concerning
which the method of accurate enquiry would require that First it were examined
whether only the doctrine were pretended derived from their ancestors, or also
their own explications and phrases of expressing it. If only the doctrine,
then to examine whether indeed the expressions of the Ancients concerning it
were aequivalent with their own. If also the individual expressions, then to
examine the sense of the Ancients concerning such expressions and the Authors
that used them by the Rules already propounded concerning the decrees of the
Church against H^ereticks; and whether they used them in the same sense as
afterward. When materials were thus prepared, and the Truth thus discovered,
which must needs suppose a considerable volumin^usness, and probably some
difference of opinion in the diversity of Auhors requisite to be employed on so
great a Task; then it would be further seasonable toar^ some judicious and
prudent persons should reduce the whole to a Compendium, (which might serve as
a Text for Scholastical disputes, instead of Lombard) with references to the
larger Treatises that they might be more readily consulted on occasion. And the
best way of contriving this would, I think, be to distinguish this Compendium
into two parts: the former of Natural, and the later of revealed theology,
where every thing might be reduced to its pr^^ter principles. Many other
expediencies hereof might have been mentioned, as present I shall only mention
one which I conceive m^re considerable. That is, that hereby persons might not
be invited to meddle beyond their abilities; for the Principles of these two
parts have so little mutual dependence on each other, and the natural
endowments requisite in the persons that should undertake them are so very
different, and so rarely conjoined in one person (a rational judgment without
much reading being sufficient for that Divinity which is purely natural; and
much reading and a tenacious memory and a Philological Critical judgment being
requisite for that which is revealed) that it is no way convenient that every
one who might attempt the rational part, though with very excellent success,
should immediately, without consideration of his own abilities, presume himself
fit to venture on the other that concerns Revelations. And indeed any sober
considerative person may easily observe how untoward the Rotionalists of this
Age who dee^y Book-learning prove when they are engaged on a Subject that
requires reading, what improper notiors they impose on terms they do not
understand, how strangely they misrepresent their Adversaries meaning,
disputing many times against (...) of their own brains, how difficully they
yield to that which would not once be scrupled by skilful persons, how in
answering they propose such possible cases as are perfectly destitute of all
actual probability. And a propor^ionable slightness is ordinarily (...) in the
rational discourses of great (...) though I confess some very excellent persons
have been accurate in both; but such instances, being more rare, cannot
prejudice the general Rules we are now discoursing of. Then in both parts it
were well (in imitation of Origin (...).) to premise First what Propositions in
every Article were to be taken for unquestionable, as being evident from Reason
or Revelation as explained by Tradition; and it would be more useful if it were
distinctly shown what kind of evidence agreed to every Proposition
particularly. For thus what were self evident from natural reason might be
relied on in disputes against even Atheists that are not Skeptical (and they
that are destroy all discourse as denying all Principles) what were clearly
consequent from the notion of a Deity and Providence, would be of force against
our modern Pagan Theist^s, and all persons admitting such a thing as Religion;
what were clear from Old Testament Revelations could not be denied by the
Jews, especially if so expounded, and that unanimously by their own Rabbis,
what were clear from the New Testament must be owned by all Christians that
admit of it, even those that extend its perfection to all indifferent
puncti^^^^; what were clear from it as expounded by primitive Catholic
Tradition, might be taken for granted against all such as were willing to stand
to that trial; and lastly that which had no other evidence than the actual
definition of the Church how groundlesly soever, could only be made use of
against such persons as are for a blind obedience to such a Church without
examining the reasons of such definitions. And in all these instances it were
well to note what were indeed evident from such Principles, and what were also
admitted for such by the Persons acknowledging such Principles, which would be
f^rther ^ery considerable in order to the success, seeing many things may be
indeed rational, yet not a knowledged such by the persons concerned* Yet I do
not intend that every person should be permitted to dispute each of the^e
things publicly as professing his own diss^^^faction concerning them, but that
they who are called to it P^^videntially (as in this Age frequent occasions
will occ^r) in order to the satisfaction of others may have a ready Pr^m^tuary
to have recourse unto in time of necessity. Otherwise the Church ought, as a
Church, to prescribe the belief of some things as a necessary condition of her
Communion. When these principles were th^s methodically disp^sed, it would then
be seasonable to improve them in the Controversies whose free discussion might
be tolerated among good and peaceable Christians, if among these a caution were
had for the retrenching such as were unnecessary and unedifying. This way, if
it were prudently managed would not only afford solid principles for the
Schools, but also lay the most probable foundation for the reunion of
Christendom. For if things were thus accurately enquired into, I verily
believe, Governors would find a necessity of remitting their rigor in several
impositions, and Subjects would discover the great necessity of obedience and
the no-necessity of those reasons produced for their separation. But I must
confess the work is too great to be attempted by private persons how
considerable soever, and therefore would require not only the patronage but
also the cencurrent industry of Governors; and by how much the greater the
Authority were that countenanced it by so much the more likely it would be to
thrive. For great freedom were requisite in the correction of present, errors,
and that could not be so safely trusted to the management of private persons,
and would be received with less envy and faction from the Church, and would not
prove a precedent for any factious Innovations. Only I must confess that the
doctrine of Infallibility whilst maintained will hardly be reconcilable with
a candid review of what has been already, though never so erroneously,
received. But First even among them, it were well they distinguished what had
been decided by the Church from what had not been so; and Secondly even among
them abuses, never so universally received, if not Canonically decided, might
be reformed; and Thirdly considering that a preservation of their Authority and
a prevention of Innovations, which they conceive effectually performable only
by that pretense, seem to be their principal inducements to it, may be thus
provided for by being themselves the Authors of such Reformation; it may be
they might not (...) it so inexpedient to yield even this which seems to be the
principal cause that makes our breaches irreconcilable. And certainly if it
would please God to inspire Governors with a serious and industrious, and
candid, yet active Spirit for the service of the Church much more might be
done, that is, for the Restoration of Religion, and unity, and the prevention
of those daily scandalous, both O^inions, and Practices, which all good
Christians do so seriously deplore; and that he would be pleased to do so their
con^ederated prayers and endeavors might be very available.

Letter I. CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. Numb. I. The design of the following Advices. II. The danger
of miscarriage in the Clerical Calling, the consequent necessity of a Call from
God for undertaking it; how we are to judge of this Call in a rational way, the
general requisites thereunto. III. The first requisite, A pure Intention, what
it is, and how to be tried. IV. V. VI. The second requisite, Natural Gifts, how
we may hence conclude a Calling. VII. Why these Gifts are called Natural. What
they are that necessary in regard of knowledge. All Theological knowledge not
simply necessary for every ordinary Parochian, but what is more immediately
practical. Men are to be fitted for further knowledge by the practice of what
they know already. VIII. The great use and probable successfulness of this
Method in reducing Heretics or Schismatics. IX. The knowledge of a Clergieman
ought to be not only that of a Practitioner, but that of a Guide. Hence is
inferred, First a necessity of knowing and understanding Fundamentals wherein
all agree, as of the Apostles Creed. From whence is also further inferred a
necessity of understanding, First the Scriptures, and therefore the Originals
wherein they were written, especially the Greek. X. XI. Secondly, the Fathers
of the first and purest Centuries. The necessity of this. XII. The expediency
of it. XIII. Secondly, a necessity of skill in such Controversies as divide
Communions. XIV. Thirdly, a skill in Casuistical Divinity. The insufficiency of
Pulpit-reproofs, and the necessity of dealing with particular Consciences in
order to the Reformation of particular persons. XV. XVI. XVII. Requisites for
inducing the People to a practice of their duty, when known: First a skill in
the Ars Voluntatis. XVIII. Secondly, Boldness and Courage in telling them of
their duty. How necessary this qualification is, and how much to be tendered.
How it may be best performed without offending on the other extreme of
petulancy. XIX. Thirdly, a sweet and sociable, yet grave and serious,
Conversation. How these two seeming contradictory extremes may be reconciled.
XX. Fourthly, a holy and exemplary life. XXI. That their Lives may be
exemplary, two conditions are necessary* First, that they be Excellent. XXII.
Secondly, that their Excellency he conspicuous. How this conspicuity may be so
contrived as that it may not hinder Humility and Modesty* XXIII. The last
requisite, a firm and stable Resolution. How to be tried. XXIV. These Advices
seasonable for such as have already undertaken Orders, as well as such as only
design them. That these personal qualifications will supersede the necessity of
particular Rules. XXV. Two things further requisite for a nearer accommodation
of the forementioned qualifications to practice: First, that an observation of
them from a principle of Divine love and on a rational account, is more
expedient both for personal comfort and public edification. XXVI. Second, some
general Rules in managing a Parochial Cure for bringing the People to a
ruleable temper. XXVII.

The Catalogue of the Writings of such Christian Authors as Flourished before
the Conversion of the Roman Empire to Christianity. Page 131.

Letter. II. CONTENTS.
THE Introduction, and Heads of the ensuing Discourse. Numb. I. What is meant
by Scholastical Divinity. What to be observed in Oratory. The Light and
Certainty of the Rational Faculties supposed anteedently to all Theological
proof. II. A method of managing Reason most advantageously in Theological
Controversies. III. The usefulness of Reason and School Divinity. In what
principal Controversies they are especially seasonable. IV. A censure of
School Divinity, and how it is to be used. V. The most accurate way of finding
out the sense of the Scripture. The use of Philological Learning in general in
order hereunto: particularly, First of those Tongues wherein they were
Originally written; Secondly, the Idioms of those Tongues; Thirdly, the Idioms
of the Writers; Fourthly, the Antiquities: the Customs of the Zabij, Chaldaean
and Phaenician; their History, Chronology and Geography. The way of judging the
Testimonies of the Fathers concerning Traditions. VI. The use of Saecular
Philosophy in order to School Divinity. VII. The use of Saecular Learning to
the Text of the Holy Scriptures, of the ancient Greek Poetry; of the Greek,
especially the Stoical, Philosophy. An Apology for it. VIII. The means for
unriddling the mystical senses of the ancient Poets and Philosophers, and
Public Idolatries of the Heathens: the Oneirocriticks and Hieroglyphics. An
Apology for their use in expounding Prophetic Books of Scripture. IX. The
Authors to be read for initiating a young Student in each of the particulars
advised. X. The Method to be observed for preventing distraction in so great a
variety. XI.

ERRATA:
THE most material Errata that might prejudice the sense, or prove any other
way inconvenient, are already corrected with the Pen. Some others there are of
less momen^, which upon occasion of this vacancy are here presented; as Page
18. l. 14. for advant ag^ously read advantagiously. P. 22. l: penult. for
especially r. especially. p. 51. l. penult* for Besides r. Besides. p. 54. l.
25. for i ^. r. in. p. 55. l. ^. for he p r. help. p. 231. r. 131. p. 163: l.
11 for oppotunities r. opportunities. p. 179. l^ ult. for wholly r. wholly.

Letter I.
A Letter of Advice to a young Student designing the Susception of HOLY ORDERS.
SIR,
I. HAving got that opportunity Areopagites, (...), make use of it, without any
further Ceremonial Addresses.

Bishop Tailor.
, where you will find most Capacities provided for, or, among the Ancients, who
usually speak more from the heart, and experience of Piety, than our Modern,
though otherwise more accurate, Authors, St. Chrysostom de Sacerdotio, or St.
Gregory's Pastoral, or St. Hieroms 2d. Epist. ad Nepotianum: entire Treatises
concerning it, though some of them more peculiarly relate to the Episcopal or
Sacerdotal Order) and my own little experience in the world, and none in the
circumstances considerable in managing a Clerical Life, may sure be sufficient
to excuse me from such a Task; besides that it must needs prove both tedious
and burthensom to your memory, and intricate to your prudence, to make
application of innumerable Rules to circumstances yet more infinite that can
never be foreseen. My design therefore shall be, only to propound such Advices
as may capacitate you for the discharging of your Function to the advantage of
the Public where you shall be entrusted, as well as your own Soul, and enable
you more advantagiously to judge concerning particulars, than you can by Rules;
and those grounded on such sure Principles, and such excellent ancient
Precedents, as that, I hope, you shall have no reason to complain that they are
unpracticable, because they are not calculated from present experience.

III. To which purpose, before be subservient to the Supreme Governor of the
World, in order to his principal designs, to which the World it self, and
consequently the vastest Empires and the greatest Princes, and whatever else is
counted glorious in the esteem of inconsiderate Mortals, are subordinate by God
himself in a capacity as ignoble as is that of the Body to the Soul; so, the
hazard is proportionable: the miscarriage of those noble beings for whose
redemption nothing but the blood of God was thought sufficiently valuable; and
consequently accountable according to the estimate God himself has been pleased
to impose upon them: that therefore you remember that you stand in need of
greater natural Abilities and providential Auxiliaries, as it is more difficult
to take care of a multitude, than of a single person; that if supernatural
assistances be necessary for the salvation of the most able private person,
much more they must be so to one not pretending to the greatest abilities in a
personal regard when engaged in public; that therefore you never venture on it
without probable presumption of the Divine assistance; that that cannot
possibly be presumed if it be undertaken rashly (God never having promised to
succor us in dangers voluntarily incurred by our selves) that it is rash if
undertaken without a Call from God; (I hope you will not understand me of an
Enthusiastical unaccountable one, but a rational and providential, which you
may observe the Do you trust that you are inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost, to
t^ke upon you this Office and Ministration, to serve God for the promoting of
his Glory, and the edifying of his People?
Church her self to have taken care of in the very Office of Ordination) that
you cannot prudently presume a Call but upon these principles: that you are
principally created for the Divine Service in the improvement of Mankind; that
you are engaged in Gratitude to perform your Duty in it for the many benefits
by him conferred on you; Answ. I trust so. Ordering or Deacons.
that you cannot approve your self grateful unto him unless you love him, nor
veraciously pretend to love him unless you most desire what you conceive most
pleasing to him; whence it will follow that you must addict your self to that
course of life which is most pleasing to him, if you find your self qualified
for it, for this is the only truly rational Providential Call, which can
without Enthusiasme be expected and judged of. Now these qualifications must be
a pure intention, natural abilities, and a firm immovable resolution; for if
any of these be wanting, you can never be secure of your own endeavor, much
less of the Divine assistance, for avoiding so imminent a danger.

to warn you what it is you may safely trust in this enquiry. First therefore,
for the purity of your designs, you may observe that purity implies a freedom
from mixture of what is more base with what is more noble, whether that which
is base be predominant or only equal. And therefore that your designs may be
pure, you must take care that 1. You design this course of life for those ends
alone, which indeed do only render it worthy being designed by you upon a
rational account; for this must needs be that which is most excellent. 2. That
you do not design this most excellent for any thing less excellent as a more
ultimate end: Nay, 3. That you do not design any thing less excellent as an end
even coordinate with the more excellent, but only as subordinate. The latter
points are those wherein you may be most easily mistaken, and wherein it will
be most difficult to satisfy your self of your own sincerity. At present you
may take this Rule: if you find your self so affected with the less noble end
as that without it you have reason to think that you should not undertake such
a difficult duty for the more noble end alone, you have reason to suspect that
the more noble end is only subordinate, and the less noble truly ultimate; and
if you find that your desires of the less noble end are such, as that, if you
should fail of it, you would find less complacency in your duty, though you
were sure thereby to attain that which is supposed more noble, you will have
reason to suspect your designs of the less noble end to be, at least, partial
and coordinate. Both designs are sinful; but with this difference: that the
designing the more noble end for the less noble, argues the Will perfectly
depraved, and implies no volition, but only a ve^^eity, for that which is more
noble, and therefore can no way entitle such a person to the Divine favor; but
the making the less noble end coordinate, argues indeed a volition, but so
imperfect, as cannot move the Divine favor, who cannot choose but take ill
such a dishonorable Competitor, and who will by no means yield any of his
honor to another; nay, who has further declared it his pleasure, either to
have the whole heart, or none; who will by no means partake with his
Adversaries, but nauseates and abhors the lukewarm person. But though, where
this is expressly designed, it can no way deserve his love, yet, where it is
irreptitious and by way of surprise, it may, at least, incline his pity, upon
the same account as other sins of infirmity, to which the ordinary life of
Mankind is supposed obnoxious, and for which allowances are made in the very
stipulations of the Gospel. Yet will not this consideration suffice to excuse
your neglect of it; for both, negligence will make it cease to be a sin of
infirmity; and besides the consequences of it (whatever the occasion may be)
are so pernicious, as may make you either less serviceable in your office, or
less acceptable in your performances of it; and are therefore, with all
possible caution, to be avoided.

Clerical Calling rationally desirable, is that to which it is upon a rational
account useful, which can be nothing in the world (the design of this Calling
being to teach men how to despise and easily to part with all such things the
World calls good) but only the service of God in a peculiar manner; and that
this service is to fulfill his Will as far as you are capacitated for it by
this Calling, which only aims at the sa^vation of the souls of mankind. Be
sure therefore that the service of God, and the salvation of souls be entirely
your design. And do not trust your saying so, but make some experiment of your
affections; for it is by their habitual inclinations, and not by some warm
lucid intervals of reason, that your course of life is like to be determined;
and you are to remember, that your choice is irrevocable, which must oblige you
to a serious consideration of what you do before you undertake it. Place
therefore your self by frequent meditation in such circumstances wherein no
other end were attainable. Suppose the Church were in a state of persecution,
which is not only the warning, but also the promise, of the Gospel; or that
your flock were assaulted by the malice of any cruel, or the scandalous example
of any great, but powerful, sinner; or many other such hazardous cases which
may fall out though the Church be countenanced by the saecular Government;
would you here follow the example of the true S. Joh* x. 1^. 12.
shepherd, or the hireling? Could you by your own example let your flock
understand that your self did seriously believe what your Calling must have
obliged you to have taught and urged to them: That S. Joh. xvi. 33. 1^. Joh.
xi. ^5*
the world and all its allurements and menaces are to be despised, that Phil.
^^* 8.
all things are to be accounted loss and dung for the excellency of the
knowledge of the cross; that Acts ix. 15, 16.
tribulations upon this account were glorious, and Acts v. 41.
being counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ peculiarly honorable;
that S. Matthew. v. 11. 12.
persecutions and reproaches, and bitter calumnies suffered for so good a cause
were matter of exultation and exceeding joy? Could you even in these
difficulties repeat your choice if it were reiterable? Or, if you were
desporate of any other portion in this life, would you not either wish it
undone, or even actually undo it if you could with honor? Do not think this
case Romantic even now; for both this will be the securest way of passing a
faithful judgment concerning your own temper, especially of that which is
necessary for this Calling; and this is one of the chief duties and uses of the
calling it self, that you be ready Jer. xxiii. 2. Ezekiel. xxxiv. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
to assist your flock in the time of necessity, and S. Joh. x. 11. Phil. ii. 17.
to lay down your life for them, when it might prove for their advantage; and,
believe it how prosperous soever you may fancy Christianity to be among us, you
would find it to be actually true, in a high degree, by the odium you must
needs incur by a conscientious discharging of your duty: in admonishing
scandalous persons, openly, and others, secretly, of their Vices, and
suspending such as would show themselves incorrigible from the communion; in
freely, and sometimes openly, rebuking the great ones as well as the mean, nay
sometimes more, inasmuch as their example is more pestilential; in generally
weakening the hands and hearts, and disappointing the designs, of impious
persons, by shaming them out of countenance, by reducing their companions, and
generally awing them by a constantly grave and severe behavior.

VI. And by this experiment you or a more plentiful maintenance, or a politic
design of making your self considerable in gaining a party for your own
designs, though, I confess, the humor of our Protestant Laity is generally so
self-confident, and so little dependent on their Ministers (if they do not
despise them) as that this last Temptation cannot now be very dangerous. For if
you can as cheerfully serve God in the absence of these temporal encouragements
as with them; if you can for your own sake patiently bear with the
succeslesness of your performances, and satisfy your self in the conscience of
having performed your duty; if you be as industrious and careful of a Cure less
temporally advantageous, as of one that is more, and of persons that cannot, as
well as of those that can, reward you; if you know, with the Apostle, how to be
abased, as well as how to abound; if you can praise God as cheerfully in a low,
as in a prosperous condition; nay more, as having then a title to many
blessings of which your prosperous condition is incapable; if you can find your
affections so disintangled from the World, that you are, like Phil. i. 23, 24,
25.
St. Paul, careless of living, upon your own account, but only for the Divine
Service; then indeed, and not till then, you may be securely confident of the
integrity of your intentions, and venture your self in this warfare, as the
Clerical Calling is expressly called by St. Paul, 2 Timothy II. 3, 4. And as it
were certainly most secure that your affections were thus generally alienated
from these more ignoble designs, that you may satisfy your own conscience of
your own freedom from the suspicion of them; so, because the heart is so
intolerably deceitful as that its inclinations cannot be certainly discerned
till the objected be vested with advantageous particular circumstances; and
these cannot be so prudently foreseen in general; it will, at least, concern
you to make the experiment full in such cases as you are by your own
inclinations obnoxious to, and whose circumstances may very probably and
frequently occur, and therefore may rationally be expected. Remember that this
enquiry be performed, as in the sight of God, to whom you must return an
account of this Stewardship, and whom it is impossible to deceive; and for your
own sake, whose interest is not meanly, but, greatly and eternally, concerned
in it: not only for your personal prejudice which you may incur by your
imprudence herein, but also those mischievous consequential miscarriages, which
will involve you deeply in the guilt of the ruin of as many Souls as shall be
engaged therein by the example, or imprudence, or negligence of their guide,
who should have been exemplary to them. It were well if you made this the
subject of a Communion-exercise before you take Orders; for when you have
divested your self of all worldly designs, and have God alone before your eyes,
and spiritual considerations; and have acknowledged your own insufficiency to
discern the deceitfulness of your heart, and have therefore humbly implored the
Divine assistance, and entirely placed your confidence in him, and his
inspirations, not extraordinary and Enthusiastical, but, Providential and
moral: That he may be pleased to clear your understanding from all prejudices
of your will; that to your understanding, thus prepared, he would suggest the
securest motives; that he would enable you with a prudent and distinguishing
spirit in passing your judgment, and making your election of them; when, I say,
you have done all this, you will then have the greatest moral probability that
is possible, that your judgment (if you can satisfy your self of your
sincerity in observing these Rules) is the judgment of right Reason, and
consequently, in the way we are now speaking of, the Will of God.

VII. But neither is this purity of Call from God, or to venture securely and
prudently on it. Not the former; for Gods designing men for particular
Callings, is, in a Providential way, to be concluded from his gifts, which are
the talents he intrusts us with, and therefore obliges us to improve, and that
after the most advantageous way; so that where God has given natural gifts
peculiarly fitting a person for a particular Calling, and where it is withal
evident, that either they fit him for no other Calling, or, at least, not so
advantagiously, or to a Calling not so advantageous; there, if he follow the
dictate of right Reason (which is the only Providential voice of God) he must
needs conclude himself in prudence obliged to follow this, rather than any
other. But you may be here mistaken, if you consider either your Gifts, or your
Calling, partially. Your Gifts you are to consider universally, in regard of
themselves, or their effects, which may with any great moral probability be
foreseen, whether natural, or accidental: whether, as some of your Gifts do fit
you for the Clerical Calling, so, they may not equally fit you for another?
whether, if they fit you only, or peculiarly for this, yet, you may not have
other qualifications that may make it dangerous? whether, if you have such as
may render it dangerous, the danger be greater, or more probable to come to
pass, than the advantage? whether, if you have none, yet, you have not only
some, but all, the qualifications for this Calling? whether, if some be
wanting, they be either fewer, or less considerable than those you have? So
also, concerning the Calling it self, you are to consider whether, all things
being allowed for, it be likely to prove more advantageous, or disadvantagious,
to you? whether it be more necessary, or only more convenient? whether, if
more necessary* it be also more secure, especial^y in regard of your greater
interest^? And concerning all these enqui^es, you may fall into great mistakes,
if you have not before rectified your intention, and so fixed on a right end,
from whence you may deduce faithful measures o^ things. It will therefore here
concern you to use all possible prudence and caution; and you cannot be excused
if you use less than you would in a case wherein all your secular fortunes and
your life it self were deeply hazarded, seeing these things are incomparably
less trivial.

Pelagianism as to put me to the trouble of an Apology for calling these
qualifications natural. My meaning is not, that these natural qualifications
alone are sufficient for discharging the Clerical Calling? Or, that those
Auxiliaries that are superadded are only natural; but only, that all
superadded Auxiliaries are grounded on the improvement of such as are natural,
not as merits rigorously obliging God in point of Justice, but as motives
mercifully persuading and inducing him, who is of himself already munificent;
so that the principal and original ground of expecting these supernatural
Auxiliaries, which can only be hoped for by them who are peculiarly called,
can antecedently (as it is plain that the ground of their hope must be
antecedent) be grounded on nothing but what is natural. To let this therefore
pass (that this whole Discourse may be deduced home to your case) it will be
necessary to show what these qualifications are, which will best be understood
by their accommodation to the design for which you intend them. That therefore
I suppose to be the taking of a particular charge upon you of the souls of a
particular Congregation; so that according to the several ways of the
miscarriage of such souls, you ought to be contrarily qualified for their
security. And the miscarriage of their souls being occasioned by their non
performance of their duty, your qualifications must consist in such requisites
as may induce them to that performance. And these will, in general, be reduced
to two heads: such as may be necessary for informing them in their duty, and
such as may induce them to practice it^ for in both these put together their
security does adaequately consist. And in order to these two ends you must be
endued with two requisites: knowledge, for convincing their understandings; and
prudence, for persuading their wills. By knowledge I do not so much mean that
which is Speculative and Scholastical, as that which is more immediately
Practical. For I suppose your charge to consist principally of the illiterate
multitude, and that if you have any intelligent learned Laick that may be
capable of higher things, yet that it is more rare and casual; and that in
these qualifications, I am speaking of, we are not so much to consider what is
rare and extraordinary, as what is frequent and usual; what is useful and
convenient, as what is absolutely necessary. For both those extraordinary
occasions cannot so much oblige to a peculiar provision, especailly in those
multitudes which are necessary for these services of the Church, all which
cannot be expected capable of them; and those cases, being extraordinary, may
be supplied by a few peculiarly gifted that way, seeing it is Gods usual way
thus to distribute those (...), which are indeed convenient for the edification
of the Catholic Church in general, but not absolutely necessary for every
particular charge. For these ends therefore, wherein your other studies of more
necessary concernment, or the aversion of your own genius, may not incline you,
or afford you opportunity, or enable you, to attain such skill your self as
were convenient; it will be sufficient that you hold correspondence with such
as have it, whom you may consult with as occasion shall require, and so not be
altogether unprovided even for these extraordinary occurrences. But that which
will more peculiarly and indispensably concern you, is that more immediately
practical knowledge, which all are some way bound to observe, and of which
none, which act prudently in their common concernments of the world, may be
presumed incapable. And it were well that you would reduce all other
speculative knowledge to this, as it is certainly designed by God. My meaning
is, that you would not begin with notions in instructing others, but that you
would first stir them up to practice such duties as are by all parties
acknowledged to be essentially obligatory under the state of Christianity (as,
God be praised, principles sufficient for most of these are admitted by all
considerable parties that violate the peace of Christendom, however otherwise
disunited among themselves) and so by that means bring them to a carefulness of
their ways, and a tenderness of conscience, and an inquisitiveness after their
duty universally whatever it may be; which will prepare them for what other
instructions they may afterward prove capable of; and will be of excellent
use, both for rendering your advice acceptable and useful to them, when they
first sensibly experience its necessity before it be communicated; and for
preventing the infusion of any frivolous and unprofitable notions, which are
very dangerous to popular capacities (who are usually more passionate than
judicious, and are too prone to impose their own private sentiments in things,
they do not understand, as well as those they do, on others, and so to make
them the badges and characteristicks of subdividing parties) and will be the
best measure for suiting and proportioning their knowledge to their capacities;
for they are certainly capable of so much knowledge whose usefulness they are
capable of apprehending; and no more is necessary, if I may not say, expedient,
to be communicated to them.

IX. I could have shown you, in Heretics and Schismatics, than that which is
ordinarily made use of, an abrupt disputation: for by this means you will find
that the only true causes of heretical and schismatical pravity, obstinacy and
perversity of will, and prejudices of the world, and the vain desire of
applause and victory, and their preingagement in a party, and that shame and
unwillingness to yield (even to truth it self, when it appears their Adversary)
which unawares surprises the most innocently meaning men, will be removed
before your reasons be propounded, which, if by them they be thought more
convincing, they must, upon these suppositions, needs prevail; and that the
want of the removal of these is that which ordinarily makes disputations so
successess; nay that the conversion it self of the persons without the
purgation of these prejudices, might indeed enlarge our party (a design too
vain to be aimed at by any peaceable pious Christian) but would never be
advantageous to the persons themselves (the charity to whose souls ought to be
the principal inducement to a rational and prudent person to engage him to
endeavor their satisfaction) because it were hardly probable that the truth it
self could be embraced on its own account, and so for virtuous motives, whilst
these humors were predominant; and to receive the truth it self for vicious
ones were a desecration and prostitution of it, which must certainly be most
odious and detestable in the sight of God, who judges impartially of the secret
thoughtss and intentions, as well as the exterior professions, of men; that, I
say, these things are true, if Reason do not, yet sad experience will, prove a
full conviction. Besides their receiving the truth it self upon humor. (and it
cannot be judged to be upon any other account where it is not embraced upon a
pious sensse of its usefulness) would both be scandalous to those that might
perceive it (as Hypocrites cannot always be so cautious in their personations,
but that sometimes the Asses ears will appear through the Lions skin) and would
render them as uncertain to any party as the cause that makes it. Nay if, after
you had reduced them to this good pliable temper, you could not prevail on them
in persuading them to an assent to what you say, either through the weakness of
their understandings, or your own unskilfulness in pleading for a good cause
with advantage; yet you must needs conclude them invincibly ignorant, and
therefore excusable before God in this regard, as well as positively acceptable
in others; and therefore must be as charitable in your demeanor to them, as,
you believe, God will prove favorable in their final sentence; which must
needs be a great secondary satisfaction and comfort (that their errors
themselves are innocent) to such as are more intent on the improvement of
Christianity it self than any subdividing denomination; for it God himself,
though he desires that good men should attain the actual truth in order to the
peace of Ecclesiastical communion, be yet pleased to admit of some anomalous
instances of his mercy, whose failing thereof shall not prove prejudical to
them; if, I say, God may do thus, and may be presumed to do so by you; I do not
see how you can excuse your self (if you dissent) from forfeiting the glory of
uniformity and resignation of your will to God, which are they alone which make
your other services acceptable, or from incurring the blame of the envious
murmuring servant, of having S^ Matthew. xx. 15.
your own eye evil because your Masters is good. Nay, for my part, I believe,
that if you can here (as you ought to do in all cases) be satisfied in an
expectation of a future reward from God; your patient and confident acquiescing
in the Will of God, even when your endeavors prove successess as to the end
immediately designed by your self, will be so far from being a discouragement,
as that it will indeed entitle you to a greater preportion of spiritual
comfort; both because you may then best satisfy your self in the integrity of
your intertien for God when you can readily acquiesce without any gratification
of your self by a victory in your discourse* and because the present little
fruits of your labors may justly encourage you to expect a more plentiful
arrear behind. Yet, I believe, this preparation of your Auditors for your
discourses by a sense of piety will not minister much or frequent occasions of
dissidence even of the event, no^ consequently of the exercise of these passive
graces, as well in regard of the Divine assistance, you may then hope for, as
your own abilities. For when the person has thus rendered himself worthy of the
favor and has implored the Divine goodness for its actual collation; there can
(...) reason to despair of the Divine assistance, so far as it may not violate
the ordinary Rules of Providence: such as are the suggesting such motives to
your mind as are most proper to prevail on the capacity of the person with whom
you deal: the fitting you with advantage of proper and persuasive expression;
the suiting all to the circumstances and apprehension of the person, and the
like, which when they concur cannot frequently fail of the desired event. But
that which does especially recommend this method, is, that these moral
dispositions of the will are so frequently taken notice of in the Gospel it
self as the qualifications that prepared its Auditors for its reception. For
these seem to be the Isa. xlviii. 8. l. 5.
the opening of the ears, the Acts xvi. 14.
touching of the heart, the S. John x. 14, 16.
sheeplike disposition, the S. Luke ix. 62.
preparation for the kingdom, the Acts xiii. 48.
ordination to eternal life, the S. John 47.
true Israeliteship, which are everywhere assigned as the reasons of the
conversion of many of them. But this only by the way.

X. That I may therefore return Practitioner, who may be secure in knowing his
own duty, in the simplicity of it, with such reasons also of it as may be
useful for rectifying his intention, which is the only thing that can
rationally be conceived to render a duty acceptable to God; but also as a
Guide, who should also be acquainted with the nature of the duty it self, and
the reason why it is imposed by God, and how it may contribute to the
improvement of mankind, and what influence every circumstance considerable may
have on the morality of the whole duty; for without these things you can never
be able to make a true estimate of those infinite cases that may occur, having
to deal with persons of different complexions, and different callings, and
different habitual inclinations. Upon which account it will concern you first
to have studied all those fundamentals, which are generally esteemed so by
persons of all persuasions (such are those contained in the That this is the
sense of the Church concerning this Creed, appears, in that this is required of
all persons to be baptized, in the Office of Baptism; of all persons dying, in
the Office of Visitation of the Sick; of all persons thought fit to be
confirmed or communicated, in the Church-Catechism.
Creed commonly ascribed to the Apostles) not that I conceive it necessary that
you deduce all consequences that may be inferred from expressions used, even by
approved Authors, even in these affairs themselves; but that you may be able,
from your own judgment, to give an account what concerning them is necessary to
be believed, and for what reasons, that so you may be able to satisfy an
inquisitive Laick, and maintain the honor of your place, which is to preserve
the Keys of knowledge as well as Discipline; and, believe it, in this knowing
age, it is more than ever necessary. But for these things I would not have you
too much trust the Schoolmen, or any modern collectors of Bodies of Divinity,
who do too frequently confound Traditions with Opinions, the Doctrines and
Inferences of the Church with her Historical Traditions, the sense of the
ancient with the superadditions of modern ages, and their own private senses
with those of the Church. If therefore you would faithfully and distinctly
inform your self herein, I do not understand how you can do it with security to
your self that you do not misguide your flock, in affairs of so momentous a
concernment, without having recourse to the Originals themselves; wherein you
should cautiously distinguish what is clearly, and in terms, revealed by the
Apostles, and what only is so virtually and consequentially; for it cannot be
credible that God has made the belief of that necessary to salvation, which he
has not clearly revealed (so as to leave the unbelievers unexcusable) and that
cannot rationally be pretended to be clearly revealed, which is neither so in
terms, nor in clear and certain consequences. Now these Originals are the
Scriptures as the Text, and the Fathers of the first and purest Centuries as an
Historical Commentary, in controverted passages, to clear its sense. First
therefore the reading of the Scripture is a duty, in all regards, incumbent on
you; For these are they that Joh. xx. 31.
are written that we might believe, and that believing we might have life in
the name of Christ; that Luke i. 4.
are certainly to assure us of those things wherein we have been Catechized;
that are able to make us 2 Timothy iii. 15.
wise unto salvation. And particularly, in reference to your Calling, the
Scriptures are said to be necessary for making 2 Timothy iii. 16. 17.
the man of God (an appellative especially proper to the Clergy 1 Timothy vi.
11.) perfect in teaching, in reproving, in correcting, in discipline (so (...)
signifies) acts also peculiarly belonging to the Clerical Calling. And
accordingly our Also that every Parson, Vlcar, Curate, Chautery, Priest, and
Stipendary, being under the degree of a Bachelor of Divinity, shall provide
and have of his own, within three months after this Visitation, the New
Testament both in Latin and English, with the Paraphrase upon the same of
Erasmus, and diligently study the same, conferring the one with the other. And
the Bishops and other Ordinaries by themselves or their Officers in their
Synods and Visitations, shall examine the said Ecclesiastical persons how they
have prostred in the study of Holy Scripture. Injunct by K. Edward VI. Anno
1547. (...). 11. of Dr. Sp^r^ow p. 6 7.

Also that every Parson, Vicar, Curate, and (...) Priest, being under the
Degree of a Master of Art, shall provide and have of his own within three
months after this Visitation, the new (...) both in Latin and English with
Parap^ra^es upon the same, conserring the one with the other. And the Bishops
and other Ordinaries by (...) or their Officers, in their Synods and (...),
shall examine the said Ecclesiastical persons how they have prfited in the
study of Holy Scripture. Injunct by Q. Elizabeth, Anno, 1559. p. 72. 1. 16.

I shall read daily at the least one chapter of the old Testament, and another
of the new, with good (...), to the increase of my knowledge. Pro^^^^^ to be
made, promised and subscribed by persons to be admitted to any Office, Room or
Cure, or other place Ecclesiastical, among the Articles of Q. Elizabeth, Anno,
1564. p. 127.


Church does oblige the Clergy to read two Chapters, at least, every day,
concerning which, according to the old rules, they might have been examined by
the Bishop, as also in Erasmus's Paraphrase; which seems to have been
Instituted to make amends for the length of the Roman Offices (enjoined by
them on their Clergy under pain of mortal sin) above that of our Liturgy; as
conceiving the skill of the Clergy in the Scriptures of more moment for the
discharge of their duty to the public than their prayers themselves. Besides
your skill herein is looked on as so necessary as that it is one of the
severest charges laid on all in the very collation of their Orders, that they
be In the (...) thire orders
diligent in reading the Scriptures.

XI. But you must not think this Ordination. For you must remember that you are
then to be a Teacher, not a Scholar; besides that you cannot pass a prudent
judgment of your own abilities till you have already experienced them, and
thereof (...) must have begun before. As you therefore read the Scriptures, it
were well that after reading of any Chapter you would mark the difficult
places, at least in the New Testament, and, when they may see^^ to concern any
necessary matter of Faith or Practice (for you must remember that I am now
speaking of the meanest qualifications that may be expected in him who would
prudently take this calling on him) afterward consult Commentators, such as
are reputed most excellent in their kind; and read them, not cursorily, but
carefully, examining their grounds to the uttermost of your capacity; seeing
that you are to enquire, not only for your self, but also for as many as are
to be led by you. First therefore, after you have read the Commentator, either
in writing, or, if that be too tedious, in meditation, recollect the sum of
his discourse, by reducing them to Propositions; then apply the proofs to the
Propositions they properly belong to. Then examine the pertinency of his proofs
so applied, if they be reasons, from the nature of the thing; if Testimonies,
from the Authors from whom he borrowes them, by which means alone you may
understand whether they mean them in the sense intended by him. And at last see
how his sense agrees with the Text it self, by comparing it with the
cohaerence, both antecedent, and consequent. And for this occasional use of
expounding Scripture, it were necessary to be skilled in the Originals; for all
Translations being performed by fallible persons, and being capable of such
aequivocations which may frequently have no ground in the Originals; the sense,
as collected from such Translations, may very probably be misunderstood, and
therefore cannot be securely trusted. But, of the two Originals, the Greek is
that, which can with less security be neglected upon the principles already
praemised. For, supposing that your obligation is chiefly for matters of Faith,
and so transcending natural means of knowledge; and moral duties, not evident,
nor deducible, from the light of right Reason, as being special degrees,
peculiarly due to those manifestations of the Divine love in the Gospel,
greater than could have been expected from the Divine Philanthropy, as it
appears from reason alone; both of these are proper to the Gospel-state, and
therefore are only to be expected from the New Testament, which, though in
other things it may require the Hebrew, for understanding the Hellenistical
s^ile; yet in these things, being so peculiarly proper to the Gospel-state, and
being many of them merely new Revelations, it cannot be so extremely necessary,
and therefore the Greek may be here sufficient. Yet I must withal needs
confess, that (for the Government and Governors of the Church, and the rituals
adopted into Christianity by the positive Institution of the Gospel, the two
Sacraments and other Solemnities of the Service of God) the knowledge of the
Jewish Antiquities is very necessary for clearing some things of so momentous a
consideration, and so ordinary practice, as that you may not be able, without
them, to give a fall satisfaction to your Parochia^ cure, in doubts that may
nearly concern them, which will therefore require a skill in the Rabbis, if
not in the Hebrew Tongue wherein they are written.

XII. And upon the same account, the Fathers of the first and purest Centuries,
especially those that are, by the consent of all, concluded genuine, and that
lived before the Empire turned Christian, who consequently were free from those
secular enjoyments, which, in a short time, sensibly corrupted that generosity
and exemplary severity, which were so admirably conspicuous in the Infancy of
Christianity. For, though it be confessed that the Scriptures are indeed clear
in all matters indispensably necessary to Salvation (which are the only
subjects of my present discourse) yet I conceive that perspicuity to have been
mainly accommodated to the present apprehensions of the persons then living,
many of the phrases being taken from doctrines or practices then generally
prevailing among them, and obviously notorious to all, the vulgar, as well as
persons of greater capacities. But that all things, that were then clear, might
not, as other Antiquities have done since, in a long process of time, contract
an accidental obscurity by the abolition, or neglect, of those then notorious
Antiquities on which that perspicuity is supposed to depend; or that, supposing
this perspicuity still to depend on such Antiquities, Providence should have
been obliged to keep such Antiquities themselves unchanged, or any other way
notorious than by the monuments still extant of those ages; cannot, I conceive,
with any probability be presumed: either from the nature of the thing; or the
design of the Scriptures, which both seem to have been written in accommodation
to particular exigences, and on particular occasions; and rather to intimate,
than insist on, such things as were already presumed notorious, and must needs
have been either more intricate, if brief; or more tedious and voluminous, if
accurate, in explaining so numerous particulars. Now, if this perspicuity were
accommodated to the apprehensions of them to whom they were, more immediately,
revealed; then certainly the Holy Ghost must needs be presumed to have intended
such senses as he knew them ready and likely to apprehend (especially in such
cases wherein the terms were taken from something already notorious among them,
and wherein they could have no reason to suspect their misapprehensions, much
less, ordinary means to rectify them) and therefore, on the contrary, what we
can find to have been their sense of the Scriptures, in things perspicuous and
necessary, that we have reason to believe verily intended by the Revealer.
Besides that this is the usual practice of our most accurate Critics, to
expound their Authors, where difficult, by comparing them with other writers of
the same time, or Sect, or Subject, which mention the thing doubted of more
clearly; and therefore cannot prudently be refused here, where we are speaking
of the ordinary moral means of finding out the true sense of the Scriptures. I
do confess that the Fathers do not write in a method so accurate and fitted to
the capacities of beginners as our modern Systemes, but withal, I think, it
cannot be denied but that they are, even upon that account, more intelligible
than the Scriptures, so that they who are obliged to be skilful in the
Scriptures cannot, upon any account, be presumed incapable of understanding the
Fathers. Nor ought it to be pretended that the writings of the Fathers are too
voluminous and tedious a task for a young man to undertake before his entering
into the Clerical calling; for both I do not see how that way can be counted
tedious, which is necessary, and only secure, how long soever it may be; nor
is it indeed true, that the Fathers of the first three Centuries were a task so
very tedious (for as for others afterward, the more remote they are, the less
competent also they must be for informing us of the sense of the Apostles in an
Historical way of which alone we are now discoursing; nay seeing that the later
writers can know nothing this way, but what has been delivered to them by the
former, it will follow that they cannot be able to inform us of any thing new,
after the reading of their predecessors, and therefore, though it might be
convenient, yet, after the Primitives, the reading of the later Fathers cannot
be so indispensably necessary) especially if the counterfeited Authors and
writings be excepted, together withal those that are liable to any just
suspicion, and are reputed such by learned and candid men; and if their time
were improved, as it might by most, and would by all, that would undertake this
severe Calling upon these conscienti^us accounts I have been already
describing. Besides I do not know why they should complain for want of time
either before, or after, the susception of holy Orders, when as we see other
Callings require seven years learning before their liberty to practice, whereas
a much less time well improved would serve for this, even for ordinary
capacities, that were grounded in the necessary rudiments of humane learning;
and they have afterward a maintenance provided for them without care, that
they might addict themselves without distraction to employments of this nature.
All things therefore being considered, I do not see how this requisite (how
much soever it may amuse some by its seeming novelty) is either unnecessary or
unpracticable.

necessity, I might produce others of convenience why young practicioners of
Divinity should deduce their Doctrine more immediately from the fountains. As
first, that by this means they may be best able to judge impartially, when they
are less possessed with the favor of a party; whereas it is, I doubt, too
frequently, the practice of those that do otherwise, first espouse a partly,
afterward to see with no other perspectives than what prejudice and interest
will permit, not so much to enquire what does indeed appear truly derived from
the Apostles, as what these conveighers of Apostolical Tradition say in favor
of their own, and discountenance of their Adversaries faction. And Secondly,
this would certainly much contribute to the infusing a peaceable Spirit into
the Catholic Church (a blessing vigorously to be prosecuted and prayed for by
all good Christians) which certainly could not choose but considerably
contribute further to the actual peace of Christendom, whose principles might
undoubtedly in many things be better accommodated, if their Spirits were less
exasperated. This it would do, partly by the inevidence of the reasons, when
examined; for it is generally the unexperienced confidence that is most bold
and daring; partly in deriving principles of accommodation from those fountains
which all do so unanimously applaud, and wherein therefore they are most likely
to agree, if ever Providence reduce them to a reconciliation: and partly
because by this means they will be less likely to broach any offensive
Doctrines, seeing that for this end, not only the Church of Rome, but our
Mother the Church of Imprimis vero videbunt, ne quid unquam doceant pro
Concione, quod a populo religiose teneri and credi velint, nisi quod
con^entaneum sit doctrinae veteris aut Novi Testamenti, quodque ex il^a psa
Doctrina Catholi^i ^atres and v^teres Episcopi (...) Lib. quo^und Canon. An
15^1. Ed. II. D. Sparrow p. 238.
England, has required that no other expressions of Scriptures be urged
publicly but such as are agreeable to the Doctrine of the Fathers: your
observation of which Canon I do not see how you can secure without knowing what
they hold, nor know what they hold without reading them. Besides Thirdly, that
the very conversing with such admirable monuments of Piety, where most of their
very errors seem to have proceeded from a nobly designing excessive severity,
and their practices rather exceeded, than fell short of, their doctrinal
severity, must needs, like the conversation of God with Moses in the Mount,
affect them with a proportionable splendour: to see them devoring all their
worldly interests for the Service of the Church, exposing their lives and
fortunes for the faith of Christ, I do not say, willingly and patiently, but
even joyfully and triumphantly, Tertul. ad Scapul.
wearying their Judges cruelty, and blunting their Executioners Axes, with the
multitudes of such as, without any enquiry, offered themselves, crowding and
thronging to the Catastae, the Vngulae, the stakes and gridirons, and other the
most terrible executions that were ever heard of, with as much earnestness and
emulation as was ever shown in the Olympic exercises, impatiently striving for
the honor of that which the World thought penal and calamitous. And lastly
that they must needs from hence make a truer estimate concerning the real
design and duties of Christianity, from those times wherein it was undertaken
upon choice and a rational approbation, and against all the contrary
aversations of worldly interests, merely for its own sake, and when it was
preached in the simplicity of it, without any compliances or indulgences
gratifying either the humors or pretended necessities of a worldly
conversation; than now when fashion and education and worldly interests are the
very inducements inclining many to profess themselves Christians, who otherwise
take not the least care of fulfilling their baptismal obligations, and wherein
the vicious reserves of the World have prevailed so far as to corrupt their
very Casuistical Divinity, and to make them believe those things impossible,
and so necessarily requiring the Divine favor to excuse them, which yet were
then universally performed. And to see how peculiarly the Clerical Calling was
then honored: that none were chosen to it but either such as were designed by
the more immediate inspiration of the Dr. Hammond on i. Tim. 1. 18.
Holy Ghost to their Ordainer; or by the general Suffrages of the Lamprid. in
Alexan. Severo and ibid. Casaub. S. Cyprian. Ep. 34.
People concerning their unspotted lives, when that extraordinary way failed;
or by some extraordinary experiment of their excellent Spirits: such were So S.
Cyprian. Pont. in vit. Cyprian.
renouncing all their possessions, and resigning them to the common use of the
Church, or some So Aurelius S. Cyprian. Ep. 33. Celerinus Id. Ep. 34. Numidicus
Ep. 35.
exemplary suffering for the faith of Christ (which though not extending to
death was then called Vid. Pamel. in Ep. 9. S. Cyprian. and B. Rhena. and ali^s
ad Tertul a^ Martyr.
Martyrdom) besides that zeal and incessant diligence in providing for the
necessities of their cure, and those persecutions which were sometimes as
peculiarly their lot as they were Gods, must needs imprint a Sacred awe and
Reverence for the Calling, which, if measured by present either precepts or
precedents, cannot be deservedly esteemed.

XIV. But to proceed. Besides this knowledge of the prime necessary
fundamentals it will also be necessary for to be skilled in all such
controversies as separate any considerable Communions of Christians. For these
also your flock, illiterate as well as learned, are obliged to practice. For it
is certain that they must be obliged to make use of the Sacraments as the
ordinary channels where Grace may be expected, and therefore must communicate
with some Church; and seeing every Church does not only assert its own, but
censure other Communions differing from her, and therefore will not permit any
person that enjoyes her Communion to Communicate with any other; it will follow
that they must all be concerned, as far as they are capable, to understand a
reason, not only of their Communion with ours, but their consequent separation
from other Churches. For seeing Schism is a sin of as malignant an influence
to Souls as many others which are more infamous in the vulgar account; it must
needs be your duty to secure them from that, as well as other sins. Now the
formal imputable notion of Schism as a sin being the no-necessity of its
dividing the Churches peace; that any party of men may be excusable from it,
they must be satisfied: either that not they, but their Adversaries, were the
causes of the division; or that, if themselves were, yet it was on their part
necessary; which it is impossible for you to do even to your own prudent
satisfaction, if you do not understand the true state of the Controversies, and
the full force of what is produced on both sides. And for knowing the true
state of the Controversies, you must remember, that the Obligation incumbent on
you for knowing them does not concern you as they are the disputes of private
Doctors, or even tolerated Parties, but as they are the Characteristicks of
Communions; and therefore they must be the Councils and Canons, or such other
public Authentic Records of the Churches, or their acknowledged Champions as
explaining their Churches sense, and not their own* and the conditions
practiced among them without which their Communion cannot be had, that you must
be presumed skilful in. I do not think it so indispensably necessary that you
be skilled in all the particular Controversies of meaner concernment even
betwixt different Churches themselves, but those that are mutually thought
sufficient to separate Communion; nor in all those themselves, but in any. For
as, for joining in a Communion, it is necessary that all the Conditions
prescribed for it be lawful; so on the contrary, if only one be unlawful, it
is enough to prove the separation not unnecessary, and so not culpable, nay,
that it is necessary and obligatory; and so sufficient to satisfy him in as
much as he is concerned to practice. Your skill in these things will every way
be obligatory on you: for their sakes that are capable, that you may satisfy
them; for those that are not, that you may secure them, (who, by how much they
are less able to he^p themselves, must consequently more rely upon your
conduct, which will therefore lay the blame of their miscarriages heavily on
you, if they be occasioned by your negligence) and for the reducing such as are
misled, a duty too generally neglected among the poor superstitious Natives,
though expressly required by the Can. of the Church of Ireland xl.
Canons of our Church; so that you are obliged, not only to be able to teach
your Flock, but also Tit. i.
to resist gain sayers, to Tit. ii. 5.
rebuke them with all Authority, Tit. i. 11.
to stop their mouths, to convince and persuade the modest, and to confound and
shame the Incorrigible. But, in dealing with Adversaries, it were fit, that, in
accommodation to the method already prescribed, of fitting them for rational
discourses by first bringing them to a conscientious sense of their duty; you
would therefore fit your motives to those preparations, by insisting not only
on the Truth, but the Piety, of embracing what you would persuade them to, and
the Impiety of the contrary; how directly, or indirectly, it countenances or
encourages licentiousness; at least of how mischievous consequence the sin of
Schism upon such an account would be, and how inconsiderable the contrary
palliations are for excusing it: that Schism is a breach of Peace, and so a
violation of the very Testament of our Lord; of love, and so a disowning the
Characteristick badg whereby Christians are peculiarly distinguishable from the
Infidel-world; a subdividing the Church into Factions and Parties, and
consequently chargeable with the guilt of the scandal of the common
Adversaries, who by these means are induced to dishonorable thoughts of the
Institutor of so confounded a Profession, and are by these mutual exasperations
enabled to see the infirmities of all Parties by their mutual recriminations;
and so their minds become exulcerated and impregnably prejudiced against all
the Rhetoric of the Gospel, and incapable of those ends designed by God in
it is publication (and oh how heavy an account will such dishonor of God, such
frustrating of his Evangelical designs, and the miscarriage of such a multitude
of Souls, so dearly purchased by him, amount to!) besides the internal
mischiefs following from it: a weakening the common strength by dispersing it
into multitudes of inconsiderable fractions, singly considered, and so
disabling it for any generous designs of taking care of that great part of the
World which never yet heard of the Gospel, besides the dissolution of
Discipline, the contempt of the Authority, and weakening it, and so the great
liberty made for all the vices and scandals of wicked men by a consequent
impunity. I would heartily recommend this consideration to our conscientious
dissenting Brethren who are affrighted from our Communion by the scandalous
lives of some of our pretended Conformists, how much themselves contribute to
the Calamities they so seriously deplore by bringing a disrespect on that
Authority which should, if entertained with due veneration, either reform them,
or make them cease to be scandalous by their perfect exclusion from her
Communion.

too much neglected, because too little experienced, among Protestants, that of
Casuistical Divinity. For unless your general Sermons be brought home and
applied to particular Consciences; I do not know how you can be said to have
used your utmost diligence for the Salvation of particular persons, and
therefore how you can clear your self from particular miscarriages. I am sure,
this is the way the Apostle St. Paul vindicates himself from the blood of all
men. Act. xx. 26. that he had not spared to declare unto them the whole counsel
of God, v. 26. and that, not only publicly, but also, from house to house v.
20. nay that for three years, night and day, he ceased not to warn every one
with tears; which expressions do certainly denote a greater frequency than that
of their public Synaxes, where their Preaching was in use; besides that the
words (...), used for every one, cannot be understood of them Collectively, but
Distributively and singly. There is a remarkable saying quoted by Clemens
(...). Trad^e. sub nomine S. Matthiae Apostole apud Clem. Alex. Strom. vii. p.
537. Edit. Lugd. Bat. 1616.
Alexandrinus from an ancient Apocriphal work: that the companion of a good man
can hardly perish without involving the good man himself in a participation of
the blame; which is certainly, in a more severe sense, verifiable of a person
engaged in the Clerical Calling, because of the charge with which they are
peculiarly entrusted. The charge it self you may read in Ezech. xxxiii. (a
passage I conceive very well worthy some serious thoughts before you undertake
Orders) If the destruction come, and take away any of your charge, whosoever he
be, he dies in his sins; but you, if you have not warned him, are responsible
for him. Now I do not see how you can be said to have warned him, when you have
not taken the pains to inform your self of his condition; for considering that
you are not now to expect Revelations, but to judge a posteriori, by the
appearances and ordinary course of things; you cannot warn any of danger but
such as appear in a state of Demerit, to whom God has threatened it, and that,
how culpable it is, cannot be judged without examination of particular
circumstances. For do not believe that the Pulpit-denunciation of judgments can
suffice, or that it can reach the end of these warnings, the terrifying men
from their sins, so as not only to make them entertain some struggling
velleities against them, but also to endeavor an effectual relinquishment of
them. For either they are Indefinite and Hypothetical, involving ^deed all
sinners in the danger, but not telling who are such, so that the application
(which is of the most effectual influence for the reduction of any particular
person) is left entirely to the too-partially-affected disposition of the
person himself (whose very judgment being either diverted or depraved by his
vices, so that he is unwilling or unable to discern them to be so, and his very
conscience by that means either actually or habitualiy seared) he can be never
likely to condemn himself, unless he be reduced by a particular consideration
of his own, for which he is not beholding to the Ministry; or they are so
managed as that indeed no man can have reason upon that account to be
particularly terrified. For considering that those denunciations that are
general do concern those remainders of sin which are as long-lived as
themselves in the most pious persons; and accordingly that the Public
confessions of sins, wherein the pious as well as the impious are concerned to
join, and that without dissimulation or falsehood, are such as are confessed, in
the very same forms, to deserve the penalties so denounced, and yet it is most
certain that no condemnation does belong to them; nay, though they constantly
commit the like sins, and therefore periodically have need of reiterating the
same Confessions, as not being encouraged to believe it possible to relinquish
all such sins, but only to strive against them; by this means persons are
accustomed to confess themselves sinners, nay, and great ones too, and to
deserve the severest of these Comminations, and yet all this without any
terror, supposing all this to be common to them with the Holiest men living,
to whom undoubtedly no terror does belong; these things, I say, being
considered, they cannot hereby be obliged to believe themselves actually in
danger of these threats, and therefore cannot, for fear of them, be obliged to
relinquish utterly their endangering demerits. I doubt many a poor Soul does
feel this experimentally, who, though they have lived for many years under a
terrible Ministry, yet never have been thereby actually terrified from those
vices to which themselves acknowledge the curse of God to be due, especially if
they were secret, and so might escape the censures and particular reproofs of
men. Besides that by this means of only Pulpit-reproofs you cannot pretend to
say that you have warned such persons as either through Irreligion, or
Profaneness, or contrary persuasions (occasions too frequent now a days, and
comprehending multitudes of Souls) forbear the Church, or consequently clear
you from being accountable for them. But, though in public Preaching sins were
particularized more than they are, and charged with that peculiar severity they
deserve; yet you must remember that they are very few that can prudently be so
dealt with: such as generally prevailed, and such as were notorious; so that
for all others that are not reducible to these heads, (many of which may prove
of as dangerous consequence to the concerned persons themselves as these, if
they perish in them.) I do not see how you can choose but be Responsible, if you
do not reprove them by a more close and particular address.

believe this way, though more severe, yet certainly, more excellent and more
secure, and therefore though it were only doubtful, yet it were more
conveniently practicable. But for my part, I think it so little doubtful, as
that, laying aside that unwillingness that either interest, or the surprisal of
a Novelty, may create in many against its reception; I think there can be
little pretended that may cause a rational scruple to an unprejudiced
understanding person. For if a general denunciation of Gods anger against
impenitents had been sufficient, and no more particular application had been
necessary to have been made than what had been the result of the guilty
Consciences, or the good natures, of the persons themselves, or the peculiar
Providential preventions of God; I do not see what necessity there had been of
the Prophets, as Watchmen, of old; or of Preachers now. For that God is a
rewarder and punisher of the actions of wicked men, none ever yet denied that
held a Providence, much less such as owned any written Revelations, which were
able more distinctly to inform them what these rewards were; and we know it is
the reply of Abraham to Dives, S. Luke. xvi. 31.
that if Moses and the Prophets were not able to assure them of the certainty
of these future rewards on supposition of their impenitency, neither would they
be convinced though a Preacher were sent them from the Dead, so that upon this
account the sending of Prophets must have been needless, especially of such as
were distinct from the penmen of the Canonical books, and were sent on
provisional messages, for concerning such alone I am at present discoursing.
Besides the credibility of these rewards depended on the credit of the Law it
self, which was antecedent to the mission of Prophets, as being that by which
they were to be tried, and therefore could not in any competent way be proved
by their Testimony; which will appear the rather credible when it is remembered
that temporal calamities were the usual subjects of these ordinary Prophetic
messages. The only thing therefore that they must have been sent for must have
been a particular application to the parties concerned. And accordingly this is
their method still to deliver their message to the persons themselves: when to
the People, as it was most frequently, in their public Assemblies; when to
their Princes, or to other particular private persons, still their practice was
accordingly. Nor did they ever excuse themselves (as too many are apt to do
now) when persons apprehended themselves particularly concerned, by pretending
that the application was none of theirs; but still they owned it, and were
ready to suffer the inflictions of those whom they had thus exasperated. And
accordingly we find it reckoned among the principal qualifications of a Prophet
even by the Jews themselves, that he be, not only wise, and rich, but also
valiant. And Jeremy is thus encouraged to harden his face like brass, and that
he be against the Jews like Jer. i. 18. vi. 27. xv. 20.
an impregnable fortress, that he should not v 8.
fear their faces neither v. 7.
be dismayed; and Esaias, as a Type of our Savior, hardens his face like flint,
Isa. l. 7. which I do not know of what peculiar use it could prove in this
case, unless it were to embolden them that they might not fear the threats or
malice of the great ones in the performance of their duty, which they had not
been in such danger of without this application. Besides, if this application
were not the peculiar employment of an ordinary Prophet, I do not understand
what it was that was blamed in the false Prophets, who Jer. vi 14. viii. 11.
Preached peace when there was no peace. For that ever any of them was so
impudent as to deny the truth of Gods denunciations against sinners
indefinitely is no way credible; or that doing so, they could find credit in a
Nation so signally convinced of a Providence. Their crime therefore must have
been, that they flattered the wicked, and either made them believe their faults
to be none at all, or not so great as indeed they were; or that God would
either excuse them particularly, or not punish them in this life, or not
suddenly, or not severely. And accordingly also in the New Testament we find
Act. vii. 51. 52
S. Stephen and the Act. ii. 36 iii. 13. 14. 15. iv. 10. xiii. 10. 11.
Apostles charging their crimes home on their Persecutors; and to this end
endued with an admirable Act. iv 13 29. xlii 46. vid nam. xix.
(...), among other gifts of the Holy Ghost then dispensed for capacitating
them for their office. And that this particular application was not grounded on
such particular Revelations whereby those extraordinary persons might have been
enabled to judge particularly of their cases, for which we, who have none but
humane fallible means of knowing the wickedness of men's hearts, may now be
thought less sufficient; may appear from the frequent mention of this use of
particular reproof as an 2 Timothy iv. 2. Tit. ii. 15.
ordinary qualification for the Clerical Calling, and from the like practice of
the most ancient Fathers and Martyrs, who every where ^S. Justin. Martyr
against Crescens a Cyni^k. Philosopher, and the Romans Apol. and Tertullian ad
Scap. and Apol. S. Cyprian ad Demetrian, etc.
freely inveigh against the particular scandalous persons of their times, and
their Persecutors. But these things are in themselves obvious, and are a
subject too copious to be insisted on at present.

Casuistical Divinity. For if you must particularly apply you must particularly
know the state of the Conscience you have to deal with. And that you may judge
it when known, you must know the means of acquiring all virtues, and of
avoiding all vices and sins, and the stress of all Laws, and the influences of
all circumstances considerable, and the way of dealing with all tempers; that
you may never judge rashly, that you may advise pertinently and successfully,
that you may so provide for the present as that you may foresee dangerous
consequences, that you may not run Consciences on perplexities by making one
duty inconsistent with another; all which do some way or other belong to
Casuistical Divinity. Especially it will concern you to be some way skilled in
all Laws more immediately relating to Conscience: the Law of nature, and the
Positive Laws of God and the Church, which are to be your Rules in affairs of
this nature. And, because the Law of nature entirely, and all other Laws as to
their particular influences and applications to particular Cases, as indeed
also all useful humane learning, do some way depend on the accurateness of your
method of Reasoning; therefore here it were convenient that you be provided
with those requisites for ordering it which are mentioned in my Letter of
advice for Studies; for without this your inferences will be same and
imperfect, and not secure to be relied on by a person in your dangerous
condition. XVIII.

an experience and prudence in the Ars voluntatis (as Nierembergius calls it)
an undoubted courage and confidence in enduring all difficulties that may, and
undoubtedly will, occur in the performance of your duty; a sweet and sociable
behavior that may win, yet grave and serious that may awe, the hearts of men;
but above all, even for the sake of your Cure, as well as your own, a holy and
exemplary life. Of these in their Order. First therefore your first
qualification of skill in the Ars voluntatis, the Art of Mat. iv. 19. Mark. i.
17. 2 Cor. xii. 16.
catching men, that I may speak in the language of our Savior, and S. Paul,
will require both experience in the nature of these mental diseases, for your
information; and prudence in the application of their cure; for without these
you can with as little rational confidence venture on their cure as the
Physician that were neither skilled in Symptoms or Diseases or the virtues of
herbs and minerals which are their usual remedies; and were as responsible for
their miscarriage under your hands as the law makes Empiricks and unskilful
persons. For understanding the nature of these mental diseases, you must
remember that, as virtue is the improvement, so, vice is the debauching of the
rational faculties, and therefore you cannot expect to prevail on men's
interests and inclinations by a bare representment of the unreasonableness of
their actions; for it is clear that Reason is no measure of the actions of
Brutes; and therefore whilst men live not above the Brutal principle, that
which is animal and sensual; Reason is as little valued by them as the richest
Indian gems by the Dunghill Cock in Aesop. So that indeed your work must be
first to make them reasonable before you propound your reasons to them; and it
is half done when you have made them capable of hearing reason. Whilst
therefore they are unreasonable, you must deal with them as we do with children
(it is a similitude excellently urged and illustrated to this purpose by Port.
Moss. Edit. Oxoniens. 1655 p. 38. 139. 140. etc.
Maimonides) first allure them by motives proportioned to their present
capacities, to perform the material actions of virtue, till by use they be
confirmed into a habit, which when it is well rooted, it will then be easy by
showing the rational advantage of them (which they will then be capable of
understanding and perceiving) both to endear their duty, and rectify their
intentions, and so to make them formally virtuous. And the prudent managements
of this affair are the (...), mentioned by apud Pl^ton. in Phaed.
Socrates, the Pl. lviii. 5.
wise charming in the Psalmist, the S. Mat. x. 16.
Serpentine wisdom commended by our Savior, the craft and catching with guile
mentioned by 1 Cor. xii. 16.
St. Paul. Now for this it will be necessary, in point of experience, that you
be acquainted with those difficulties in your self (for thus our Savior
himself is observed, by the Author to the Hebrews, by his Heb. ii. 17. 18.
fellow feeling of our infirmities, to be qualified for his being a merciful
High Priest, and being able to succor them that are tempted) and in others;
both as to their tempers, and habitual inclinations, and callings, and daily
conversations, and the temptations likely to occur: to know the material
virtues they are inclined to, and to lay hold on the mollia tempora f^ndi,
their good humors, and lucid intervals, and Providential impulses; for without
these things you cannot know either how to win them, or how to keep them, and
secure them from Apostasy especially if of a fickle and variable humor, as
most men are in their spiritual resolutions. Besides Prudence will be necessary
as to all its requisites: Circumspection, to discern the whole case as to all
the Precepts and Prohibitions to which the Action may be obnoxious; all the
Inclinations, and those many times very different, if not contrary, in the same
persons; all the circumstances accusing or excusing, of which allowance is to
be had; Caution, in a foresight of all dangers, which upon the aforesaid
considerations may be probably expected, and in allowing for future probable
contingencies: Judgment, in accommodating the Laws, and the Actions, and the
Inclinations of the Patient in a due proportion, and providing for their
seemingly-contradictious necessities.

Boldness and Courage is another qualification for this purpose, seems clear,
not only from the Old Testament passages intimated formerly concerning
Prophets, but also, from the New Testament where it is usua^ly mentioned as a
(...) of the Spirit that was to fit them for the discharge of their Clerical
Calling. Thus the confidence of St. Peter and St. John was admired by the
Sadducees Act. iv. 13. which is intimated to have proceeded from the Spirit* v.
8. and accordingly this was also prayed for for the future v. 29. And this is
also observed concerning St. Paul after his addresses to the exercise of his
office, that he was Strengthened in his disputations with the Jews, Acts. ix.
22. which is Paraphrased by his speaking boldly in the name of Jesus v. 27. And
this I conceive to be that Mat. vii. 29. Mark. i. 22 Luke iv. 32.
Preaching with Authority mentioned concerning our Savior; and that 1 Cor. ii.
4.
Preaching with Power, in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit,
concerning the Apostles. And indeed without this you can never expect to be
able to undergo the difficulties you must engage in, in the performance of your
duty. For how can you tell the great ones of their scandalous Sins, or reprove
gainsayers, or shame the guilty, or destroy the confederacies of the Wicked,
without exasperating many vitiously disposed minds against you? And if you fear
shame, or the spoiling of your goods, or the pain of your body, or death it
self; you must needs fear those in whose power it is to inflict them on you;
and if you do so, then, considering that they are so fondly enamoured of those
things that tend to their ruin as that they bear their deprivation with
impatience, and, like madmen, prosecute their benefactors with detractions and
hostilities (so little sensible they are of the favor conferred on them, in
dissuading and restraining them from them) you can never, upon those terms, be
able to rescue them from their danger. This is a qualification, though now
extremely neglected, of so very momentous consequence, as that I shall beseech
you to be tender of it, for your Flocks sake, if not for your own. For, believe
it, their everlasting welfare depends more nearly on the fidelity of your
admonition; and it is to little purpose for you to keep the watch if you do not
give warning at the approach of danger; or, with the Dog, to observe the flock,
if you do not bark when the Wolf is ready to devour them. Let not therefore the
pretense of youthful modesty, or the danger of petulancy or unmannerliness, or
the accusation of incivility, or a slavish comp^iance with the ceremonies of
the World, or whatever other pretenses may be produced by such as are either
willing to Apologize for their neglect in this kind, or are conscious of
something in themselves that may deserve the exercise of this dreaded severity
(as men are generally too ingenious in palliating the occasions of their own
ruin) rob you of a jewel wherein the security of so many Souls is so nearly
concerned. You may, I believe, think it difficult, how to bring your self to
it, and when you have it, how to beware of offending on the opposite extreme,
of being petulant and impertinent, and rendering your self unsociable. For
acquiring it I should advise you to take care of spending your Tyrocinium under
the wings of a Patron, at least such a one as would be offended with your
Freedom; but rather in a management of an inferior little Family. 1 Timothy iii.
4. 5. And this may serve for acquiring an habit of confidence. But then for the
reason of it, if I may take you for the person the former qualifications have
supposed you to be, you cannot be unprovided: for he who values not any Worldly
enjoyment as great, can never be awed by any worldly Pomp; and he that
undervalues even death it self, the King of Terrors, can never be affrighted
by the means of any mortal, how great soever, whose power can extend no
further, from the performance of his duty. But then for avoiding the other
extreme of petulancy; believe it First, that, if you could not avoid it, yet it
were much the safer excess both for your flock, and for your self: for your
flock, who must needs be less prejudiced by being charged with fau^ts they are
not guilty of, or unseasonably, than by being permitted in a total ignorance of
such as are unquestionably dangerous, a false alarm being sometimes more secure
than none at all; and for your self, your imprudences in this kind being
alleviated by many commendable ingredients, a zeal for God, and a conscientious
sense of your duty, and a good intention, and the preservation of a vigilant
and active Spirit, which is more frequently useful in your profession than its
restraint. But Secondly, for avoiding it, if you take care that neither your
self, nor the person concerned, be in a passion when you advise him, you will
both find him more tractable, and your self more ruleable, and more steady, in
observing the prescriptions you have resolved on before. And then for
furnishing you with such rules of restraint of anger other ordinary books may
be sufficient; and therefore I forbear.

XX. So also for your Conversation, Sweet and Winning, may appear from the
supposals already premised. For, considering that the persons, you have to deal
with, are not as yet supposed capable of reason; and your very prescriptions
themselves, bluntly proposed, are sufficient to make them averse from harkening
to you, and so to frustrate your whole design by an unseasonable precipitation;
you must therefore first allure them, not by the reasons of the duties
themselves, but by that great good will you are to show to them, whereby they
may be induced, as Children are, upon account of their Parents, or other
friends they are fond of, to believe that you would never advise them such
things if you were not very confident that they would effectually conduce to
their good. Now to convince them of this your good will, you must condescend to
their Childish apprehensions as far as is lawful, that is, you must show it by
a sweet and willing readiness to promote that which themselves conceive to be
for their good where it may not prove really inconsistent with it, by an
avoiding all needless occasions of offending them, and by that means showing an
unwillingness to impose any thing on them to which they are averse, without a
great conviction of its being useful for their greater interests. But for this
end you need not imitate them in all their actions; for that were not to reach
them out of the ditch, but to fall in your self for Company. But you must bear
with their impertinencies, and still (as near as you can) proportion their
present duty to their present habitual abilities, not discouraging them in
their faylings, but rather thence taking occasion to stir them up to a greater
future diligence; and have a care of making them entertain harsh and unworthy
notions of Religion: that it is a state of life, melancholy and sad, and a
perpetual valediction to all joy and comfort; that it renders a man burdensome
to himself, and troublesome to all the Society with whom he does converse; that
it is so wholly designed for future hopes as that it can have no portion in
present enjoyments. Rather let them know by your doctrine and behavior, that
it is not an exchange of joy for sorrow, even in this life but of inferior,
baser, less solid and less lasting ones for such as are incomparably more
valuable and more secure; and that it is so far from disturbing or embittering
Societies as that, on the contrary, it obliges both to love and to be worthy to
be beloved, to do all the good we can to all mankind, which must needs mutually
endear them; and qualify them for a mutual renunciation of their own wills in
compliance with each other, and that indeed, not only by way of complement. By
all means therefore be cheerful before company, that you may not bring an ill
report upon the pleasant land of Promise, like the murmuring spies Number. x^ii.
xiv.
but take a special complacency in seeing others cheerful as well as your self
(it was Recorded as a saying of our Savior in the interpolated Gospel
according to the Nazarenes: Nunquam laeti sitis nisi cuns fratres in charitate
videritis) and do not willingly give any offense to any, but where justice and
their own greater interest require it; and even then, take care that their
offense rather be, at their own guilt, than your way of admonition, at least
beware that they may have no just reason to do so. But especially take care to
behave your self cheerfully in your exercises of austerity that they may
understand that there are indeed other joys besides those of sense, and that
they are chiefly then to be expected when the mind is freest from worldly
solaces. But that which will be a special endearment of you to Society, will be
neither to speak evil of any behind their backs your self, nor to hearken to
such as would; to prevent all quarrels before your presence, which will be
easier, either by preventing the occasion or increase of passion, which will be
also so much easier if it be taken before it grow unruleable; or by diverting
the discourse, or withdrawing one from the other; or, if they be already fallen
out, by endeavoring their reconciliation, and a good understanding among them
for the future; to be the common preservative of peace among your flock, and
the Arbitrator of their differences. Yet you must withal take heed that this
compliance be not prejudicial to that gravity and seriousness which is
necessary for preserving that Sacrd respect to your Office primarily, and to
your Person in regard of your Office, which is necessary for deterring many,
even in a mute way, from their sins, by virtue of those unobliterated
impressions of Conscience and Modesty, and that slavish honor of virtue and
shame of vice, which naturally seize on the most debauched persons imaginable.
And seeing that the whole recommendation of your Doctrine is, as I said before,
in accommodation to these Childish apprehensions of the vulgar, resolved into
their esteem of your person; you ought above all things to be tender of those
requisites that are necessary either for acquiring this esteem, or its
preservation. And this seeming contradiction that seems to be betwixt this
Compliance and Awfulness may thus conveniently be reconciled, if you observe,
that your Compliance be in your Censures, but your Awfulness in your Practice;
by being a mild Judge of other men's Actions, but a severe censurer of your own;
condemning only evil things in others, but the very appearances of it in your
self (as you must needs do if you would be exemplary, and you must be exemplary
if you would awe) for in order to your own practice, you must consider, not
only the nature of the thing, but the Decorum of your person (which, because
it is so necessary for capacitating you for the discharge of your Calling, you
must be obliged to observe under pain of Sin) so that that may be lawful for a
Laick, which cannot be so for you. For your own persons sake therefore you are
to forbear, not only such things as are unlawful in their own nature, but such
as are inexpedient; not only such as are inexpedient, but such as are
indecent; not only such as are indecent for others, but such as are so for
you; not only such as are so, but such as may appear so; not only such as may
appear so on just and reasonable grounds, but such as may be thought so by
others, and so may engage them in sin, though unjustly and unreasonably. Nay,
even in things that were lawful for you, it were well that, it they be any
thing light and trivial, as exercises and recreations, or telling of merry
stories: that they were either not done before the vulgar Laity; or if they be,
that they be managed with such sparingness and abstemiousness, that it may
appear that they are rather used for their profit than their pleasure, and
therefore that you be neither tedious nor eagerly concerned in them. But most
of all you are to take care of jeasting with the inferior Laity themselves,
who, as they are less capable of reason, and so more awed by these ceremonial
distances, are also more apt to despise you, when they see them transgressed by
you.

XXI. But that which is the first second and third requisite for this Calling,
as the Orator said concerning Pronunciation in Rhetoric, is a Holy and an
exemplary Life. For seeing that the vulgar is thus to be decoyed to embrace
your Doctrine, not for its Reason, but for the respect they are first to
entertain for its Preacher; as you must maintain your own credit among them,
that they may be ready to believe what is taught them by you, so you must also
let them understand that what you teach them is indeed believed by your self,
and they can have no reason to believe you do so unless they see you practice
it. For do not the same duties oblige, and the same menaces belong to you, as
to them; and cannot you (even by your own confession) expect a more favorable
hearing (if you may not fear one more severe for the reasons already mentioned)
and is Hell and Damnation the acknowledged reward of those actions you are
guilty of your self? If you were fearful that this were true, certainly you
would not venture on them; if you be not, how is it credible that you do
believe them? If you do not believe them your self, how can you persuade others
to believe them for your sake, who are (as I said before) incapable themselves
of judging of your solid Reasons. How little solid soever this way of arguing
be in it self, yet assure your self, it is that on which the practices of the
vulgar, to whose apprehensions you are to accommodate your self in this affair,
are mainly grounded. I might have shown you also further, what influence this
would have in procuring the qualifications already mentioned, that belong to
Morality. For Experience; you must needs be better acquainted in dealing with
other men's conditions, when you had first tried their weaknesses in your self.
This would inform you how tender a thing Conscience is, and yet how ticklish;
how many misunderstandings it is obnoxious to, and how it is influenced by the
difference of men's humors and constitutions. And this must, at least, make you
tender and cautions in dealing with them. For Prudence also, that being nothing
else but the impartiality whereby right Reason is able to judge concerning
circumstances; and the rectitude of Reason consisting in the immunity of the
understanding from all prejudices, either intellectual or moral; holiness of
life contributing to this immunity, removing those moral prejudices which are
of greatest concernment here, must also be considerably advantageous for
enabling it to judge prudently. So also for Courage and Confidence, how can he
fear the faces of men who undervalues all that for which they fancy themselves
so very terrible, even Death it self with whatsoever aggravations; who has the
encouragement of glorious future hopes, and present visitations; who is fully
confident of the good will of God (from whom he receives them, when incurred in
his Service) that his Tribulations shall be proportioned to his abilities; and
accordingly that, if they be great, his Consolations shall be the more, which
are so much valuable beyond them, that the severest Tribulations prove in the
event the greatest Blessings, as intitling him to them? So also it has been
already shown how a sweet and sociable, yet grave and serious, behavior is
either the express duty of Religion it self, especially that of a Clergieman,
or a necessary consequence from that excellent temper Religious exercises are
likely to bring its Practitioners to.

Sanctity of life, as in you, must also be Exemplary, it will therefore be
necessary that it have two qualifications: that it be Excellent, and that it be
Conspicuous. For an Example must be understood, in regard of them to whom it is
propounded, to have the notion of a Rule; and a Rule must be able to rectify
the Actions that are to be ruled by it; which it cannot do if either there be
any obliquity in it self, or if its rectitude be unknown to the party concerned
in it. Its Excellency must be necessary in respect of the Vulgar, who are
concerned to imitate it; and therefore must exceed the strict duty of a Laick;
for usually Learners do allow themselves a liberty of falling short of their
Copy, and therefore if ever the Laity do reach the severity of their Pastor;
either they must thence forward not make his Practice their Precedent, or be
incurious of a further progress. The former I have already intimated, how
disproportionable it is to their ordinary apprehensions. And how dangerous the
later is, every man's experience may inform him; that whilst he grows
negligent, he looses what he has, as well as fails of the gains he might have
made; and besides that is never likely to reach to that perfection, at which,
it is the duty of a Laick, as well as a Clergieman, to aim. And you must
remember with what savor they are likely to judge their own having reached
your example. Besides, you should consider that they will not measure their own
perfection by the multitude of duties, but the excellent manner of performing
them; and that they are all sensible (of what is truth whether they were so or
not) that you are obliged to some duties in which they are not any ways
concerned; and that therefore they discharging their own duties as well as you
do yours, though they be fewer, yet that they are equal with you. You must
therefore so behave your self as to neglect no part of your duty: whether as to
your general, or your particular Calling; as a Christian, or as a Clergieman,
that may be subject to the observation of men (for this kind of Perfection is
acknowledged possible by all Protestants) and that, not only in omitting no
duty, but in performing all the good that may be expected from your Profession.
Otherwise how can you S. Pet iii. 16.
silence Blasphemers with confusion and shame whilst they may have any just
occasion of carping at you? How can you Tit. ii. 10. i. Pet. ii. 12.
adorn your Profession, and bring even Infidels to an acknowledgment of the
glory of God by the excellency of your Conversation. Remember that these
expressions now mentioned from the Apostles are set down as the duty of Private
Christians; and what severity must then be necessary for them who are to be
patterns, not only to the world; but also to those who are to be their
Precedents? And besides your greater duties, it will concern you to be punctual
even in small things; in fulfilling your duty, and performing your promises,
how frivolous soever the matter were; for this was it that gained the Pharisees
such a reputation of Sanctity, and yet not blamed by our Savior; but their
Hypocrisy in observing these minute things with a scrupulous severity, but
neglecting the weightier matters of the Law without reluctance. But especially
it will concern you to be cautious and severe in such virtues as concern a
moral civil Conversation, and in matters of worldly interest, for these are the
peculiar objects of the Love, and consequently of the jealousy of the Vulgar,
and therefore here you may expect to find them most severely Critical. And if
these virtues be taken care of, you may expect to find them more favorable in
censuring vices of the Spirit; for this is that which so ingratiates the
Quakers and other Ent^usiasts with them, whose other vices of uncharitable
censoriousness, and Spiritual pride, and Imperious dogmatizing, are so far from
being noted by them as that, when they gain Proselytes it is not upon rational
accounts (which they disclaim under the opprobrious name of carnal reasonings)
but by a recommendation of their Persons, upon account of their severe
observation of secular Justice.

Excellency be conspicuous. And this qualification, though of Excellent use for
your Flock, may prove of dangerous consequence to your self, if not discreetly
managed. The use of it for the good of others appears from those passages of
Scripture, wherein Christians are called S. Ma. v. 13. Mark. ix. 50. Luke xiv.
34.
the salt of the Earth, Mat. v. 14.
the City that is placed on a hill, and cannot be hid, (...) Phil. ii. 15.
the Luminaries of the World, Mat. v. 15. Mark iv. 21. Luke viii. 16. xi. 33.
not to be concealed under bushels, but placed in Candlesticks; and where they
are commanded Mat. v. 16.
to let their light so shine before men, that they might see their good works,
and glorify their Father which is in Heaven; many of which are spoken indeed
to private Christians as well as others; but especially concern the Clergy,
who are to be luminaries to the Commonalty as they are to the Gentile World.
And upon this account (the necessity of the Church requiring it) St. Paul
himself (...).
becomes a fool (it is his own expression) even in publishing the materials of
his own praise: the sufferings, and miracles, nay the Revelations which were
such as might not only prefer him before the false Apostles, but equal him to
the true ones themselves. And most expressly he persuades them Romans xii. 17. 2
Cor. viii. 21.
to provide for things honest, not only before God, but also before men.
Accordingly the Bishops by the Ancient Canons were not to go any where without
the attendance of some of their Clergy that might be able to give Testimony of
their behavior; and St. Ambrose, Augustine. Lib. vi. Confess. c. 3.
that severe distributer of his time, prohibited none for coming to him at any
time, though he supposed that persons would not be so unmannerly as to disturb
him unnecessarily when they saw him better employed, as St. Augustine
witnesses; and another Bishop, in Acacius Berae^rs Soz^m. Eccl. Hist. Lib. vii.
c 27. Ni^eth. Call. Lib. xii. c. 17.
Sozomen is mentioned to have kept open house that any might at any time
surprise him if engaged in any indecent Action. You must not therefore think
that when our Savior reproves the Pharisees for doing their Actions so S. Ma.
vi. 2. 5.
that they might be seen of men, and on the contrary seems to prescribe such a
secrecy as that Ib. v. 3.
the right hand may not know what the left hand does, that it is in all cases
forbidden that our good Actions be known, or that we are always obliged to
conceal them; but that it is expedient that we conceal them when their
publication may not be peculiarly serviceable for the edification of others;
not to publish them for any complacency we are to take in them our selves, but
merely for that Service to God for which we may be enabled by our Reputation
among men. I confess the publication of virtues is very disadvantageous in
several regards for the person: partly because Experience shows that the heats
of Religious Passions themselves, as well as others, evaporate by being vented;
partly because it exposes us more to the inspection and Censures of men, which,
whatever they be, may prove dangerous to us if they be intended by us. For it
is hard to intend them without some complacency and concernedness in them,
which, whether it be for God's sake or our own, is alike dangerous. For if we
be concerned, then we must needs be discouraged if they fall contrary to our
expectations; or if they prove favorable, it will be very hard to distinguish
what is useful for the Service of God, and what only gratifies our own humors
in the object of our complacencies; which difficulty is by so much the more
dangerous, inasmuch as it is more Spiritual, and less easily discernible,
virtues either supposed or real being its most dangerous temptation; which is a
deplorable case, to be at the expense of denying our selves, and suffering all
the difficulties of materially virtuous Actions, and yet to loose the reward of
them by seeking it unduly and preposterously. But on the other side, the
conveniences of having your Resolutions and several of your Actions known, are:
that exposing your self hereby to public censure, you may, if true, take them
for warnings and admonitions; if false, for trials and exercises of your
Patience; that you may therefore terrify and awe your self into a greater
caution, when you remember so many Critical eyes ready to observe your lapses;
that you may avoid many impertinent temptations which all will be ashamed to
motion to a person unlikely to entertain them. And assure your self that it
were much more beneficial for the edification of your Flock, that you were
Hypocritical than Licentious; and that it is the safer extreme to e^r in
professing too much than too little, as long as it does not appear that your
Profession is not real. For the Hypocrite only perishes himself, but may
notwithstanding save others though himself be Reprobate, as the Apostle does 1
Cor. ^^. ^7.
imply, and he honors Religion even in counterfeiting it, which must needs
alleviate his condemnation. But the scandalous licentious person is like the
Dragon in the Revelations, (...). 4.
that involves the very Stars in his own ruin, or like him in the Gospel, who
not only breaks the Evangelical prescriptions himself, but also teaches others
to do so too, who though he do it in the most frivolous instances, yet our
Savior himself threatens that he should be the least in the Kingdom of Heaven,
that is, none at all, as it is usually understood S. Matthew. v. 19. though, for
my part, I had rather understand by the Kingdom of Heaven, the Gospel-state
(for this seems to be the notion of it S. Matthew. iii. 2. iv. 17. x. 7. xi. 11.
xiii. 24. 31. 33. 41. 44. 45. 47. 52. xviii. 23. xx. 1. xxii. 2. xxv. 1. and of
the Kingdom of God S. Matthew. xii. 28. xxi. 43. Mark i. 15. iv. 26. 30. Luke iv.
43. vii. 28. viii. 1. x. 9, 11. xi. 20. xiii. 18. 20. and accordingly the
Gospel it self is called the Gospel of the Kingdom, and they who are interes^ed
in it, the Sons of the Kingdom, upon several occasions) and by the being least
therein, the least participation of its privileges, according to which the
meaning will be: that he who teaches men to despise the least injunctions of
the Gospel (who yet may still own himself a Professor of it, which cannot
justly be pretended of him that teaches to despise the greatest) shall enjoy
least of the Gospel privileges, whether it be in a diminution of his reward,
or a mitigation of punishment, or in enjoying exterior privileges only in
opposition to the interior. I have the rather mentioned these persuasions
because I verily believe the fear of being noted of Singularity and Hypocrisy
and Affectation does dete^r many, not only of the Laity, but the complying
Clergy themselves of our Church, from making an exterior profession of what
they do most conscientiously practice in private; to whose consideration I
shall only at present recommend that severe threatening of our Lord, Mar. vii.
38. Luke ix. 26.
that of them who are ashamed of him before men he will also be ashamed before
his Father and his holy Angels. Now that you may accommodate these difficulties
together, and so let your other virtues appear, as that their appearance may
not prove prejudicial to your modesty; you must take heed that that public
applause do not provoke you to think better of your self than you really
deserves which you may have reason to avoid, if you remember: that whatever men
think of you, yet you are really no greater than God knows you to be, and that
by this measure you must expect your reward; that men are fallible in their
judgments, judging according to Fondness, or Affection, or Charity, which will
not only provoke, but oblige, them to judge well when they find no reason to
the contrary, though indeed there be; by which means good men themselves may be
mistaken in judging too favorably of you, and that commendably, in reference
to themselves; and in their Informations, knowing nothing but the bare action,
but not the intention from whence all its morality is most properly, and most
securely, estimable. Be sure therefore that this showing your works to others
be like the Exodus xiv. 14.
Cloud in the Wilderness, which on the one side enlightened the Israelites, but
on the other darkened the Egyptians. So let their excellencies appear outwardly,
that they may stir up your Spectators to the praise of God, and the emulation
of your Example, as that, at the same time, only their Imperfections may
appear inwardly to your self, which may prostrate you to as low a Humiliation.
Besides, it were well that besides what they knew, you would reserve some
greater Excellency unknown, for which you might only have regard to God, who
sees in secret what he will openly reward. For if you can do any Excellent
action for which you can have no motive or design in this World, then it will
be clear that, even in those whereby you may gain secular applause, yet that is
not your either only, or ultimate, motive. And in general, where you find
their commendations exceed your merits, let it stir you up to a virtuous shame
of being less worthy than you seem.

Resolution of persisting in them all firmly and unmoveably for the future. For
this is the prudent consideration of the builder so much commended by our
Savior, (and you must remember that the Analogy holds very well in the
Clerical Calling, for as himself is called an Architect, 1 Cor. iii. 10. so his
employment is called Edification, not only there, but also Romans xv. 20. Gal.
ii. 18. 2 Cor. x. 8. xii. 19. xiii. 10. Ephesians. ii. 20. 21. iv. 11. 12.) that
built his house upon a Rock, against which neither the rainy Torrent, nor the
violent Rivers, nor the Tempestuous Winds, were able to prevail. S. Matthew. vii.
24. 25. For you must remember that not to maintain your building is as great an
Inconsideration as not to finish it; though indeed, final Perseverance being
the only accomplishment of this building, it cannot be finished if it be not
maintained. You must therefore besides the former qualifications, which are
requisite to this purpose, remember that the Calling, you are undertaking, will
oblige you for your life, and therefore your choice, if imprudently made, will
therefore be of worse consequence, because it is irrevocable; so that your
chief care must be to foresee whether you be able to persevere afterward in
maintaining what you have begun, and that for your whole life. And for this end
you must consider your qualifications themselves: whether they have appeared
only in single Acts or in Habits; or if in Habits, whether they be newly
acquired or strongly confirmed and rooted by custom; for you cannot trust any
other Habits for their duration for so long a time. Besides you must consider
whether your Temper be fickle, or stable; if it be fickle, you can trust no
Habits themselves longer than you persevere in the same humor, or till they
may decay gradually according to the method of their acquisition. Then also you
must consider the difficulties you may have occasion to conflict with, which if
they be less than those you have already dealt with or equal, you may hope to
persevers but if greater, you cannot conclud^ that, because your Habits have
bee^ so confirmed as not to yield to smaller difficulties, therefore they would
be able to hold out in greater trials. And for those you must not only foresee
such as you are likely to encounter at your first entrance upon this holy
Calling, but such as you may probably meet with in the course of your whole
life, but still with regard to the proficiencie you may make in confirming
those Habits you have against the time you may have occasion to meet them in,
if you be not deficient to your self. Nor would I have you think that I herein
make your future hopes of the grace of God a Cipher, in requiring you to
foresee all future difficulties, and to measure them by ^roportion to your
present strengths; or you see I do not deny the ne^essitie of the grace of God
for ^ringing you to this excellent frame ^f Spirit I have been hitherto
des^ribing; nor all such hopes of Grace ^or the future as may be grounded ^n
Covenant-conditions, your cooperation and improvement of what you have at
present; so that the only Grace whose hopes I have seemed to exclude, is that
which is extraordinary and uncovenanted, such as is all that which is necessary
for overcoming those difficulties, which you have voluntarily incurred your
self, and which were not likely to befall you in an ordinary course of
Providence, nor are brought upon you by an extraordinary. But as for other
difficulties, which cannot be foreseen, but are merely casual in respect of
second causes; you need not be so anxious, but leave them confidently to that
Providence which has prohibited your carefulness for them; and do not fear your
being disappointed in such dependences as are not rash and imprudent, as long
as you are otherwise careful^ of performing those duties on which your title to
these promises does depend.

particular Rules; for if you be thus called by God you shall be taught by him
in the performance of the duty to which he has called you (I mean this Teaching
as well as the Call in an ordinary Providential sense, which is that wherein
the Prophesies concerning it are verified under the Gospel) for both this
Prudence and other abilities will be able to guide, and this Piety to suggest,
what is fit to be done upon all particular exigencies; and as those themselves
are gifts of the Spirit, so their improvement will entitle you to greater, so
that their direction and influence is rather to be imputed to God than man,
though it be true, that now by virtue of the Evangelical Covenant they are
usually conferred in the use of ordinary means, and this reaching particular
circumstances must needs make all rules unnecessary. If you do not understand
this coherence, you may more clearly by this chain of principles: First, the
Providential teaching and direction of God is that of right reason, so that
they that are led by it are led by God; Secondly, that we may be led by right
reason two things are necessary, and these two are perfectly sufficient: First,
that the rational faculties be rectified; and Secondly, that the lower appetite
and other executive faculties be in a ready disposition of being obedient to
reason. And both these must needs have been supposed in the qualifications now
mentioned. For the rectifying of the rational faculty does require only: that
nothing be taken for granted precariously, and that the understanding be not
diverted from its ordinary natural course of examining things to the full; for
it is from the first principles of reason impossible that the understanding
taking no principles for granted but such as deserve to be so, and proceeding
orderly in deducing consequences from them, should be mistaken. I do not mean
that the understanding proceeding thus is always infallible as to the nature
of the thing, because it may mistake some principles for self-evident that are
not so, merely upon an account of that natural dullness it contracts from the
body; but it is always infallible as a rule of Morality, that is, the lower
faculties conforming to it can never be guilty of any Immorality, because the
error, if any be, must needs be invincible, and so inculpable. And upon this
account God, who does not undertake, nor is concerned, to direct the
understanding any further than it is necessary for the saving of the person,
cannot be reasonably conceived to have any other Infallibility in his design
than this moral one, at least, is not obliged to have it. Now for the
rectifying of the rational faculties you are First, supposed to have used means
for informing it by your skill in those several Studies which have been
hitherto advised; you are Secondly, dissuaded and prevented from imbibing any
prejudices, or any corrupt affections for one party by your immediate recourse
to the Originals themselves; you are Thirdly, advised for the most accurate
improvement of your judgment in a clear and advantageous method of reasoning;
and Fourthly, in the use of all these means you have been shown how you may in
an ordinary way be confident of the assistance of Divine Providence in such
cases as you cannot secure your self in by your moral diligence: whether for
removing such prejudices as you could otherwise hardly discover to be so; or by
Providential placing you in such circumstances wherein those reasons may offer
themselves to your cognizance which you could otherwise never have discovered;
or by capacitating your judgment for a more equal censure concerning them;
whether by improving your natural capacity to a more than ordinary perspicuity;
or by rendering intellectual objects more intelligible by your greater
experience, and familiarity, and fixation of your mind upon them; or by fitting
them to such times when your judgment may be less distracted, and consequently
more quick and apprehensive; and by giving his holy Spirit by virtue of which
they are to be discerned. Now when all these things are thus secured, certainly
there cannot be more probable humane means thought on for finding even the
truth it self, and therefore the rational faculties must have the greatest
security they are capable of, and to greater they cannot be obliged. And then,
considering that natural reason thus purified is Prove. xx. 27.
the candle of the Lord, and that the Spirit which may thus be expected is the
Joh. xvi. 13.
Spirit that leads into all truth, and the (...) Joh. ii. 20. 27.
Divine unction that teaches all things; I do not see why it may not be said as
truly here as it was falsely said of Act. xii. 22.
Herod, that the judgment of Reason thus rectified is not the voice of man, but
of God. And then for the second thing required to this rectitude of Reason, the
subjection of the lower Appetite to the superior part of the Soul thus
rectified, that is the whole design of a good life, a qualification already
sufficiently recommended, which therefore needs not to be further spoken of at
present.

to take a care of keeping your Garment that none may see your shame, and
reteining your first love (the very warnings of our Savior himself to those of
your profession Rev. iii. 18. ii. 4.) to persevere in those excellent
dispositions that you have so happily begun, and from thence to deduce Rules
for your following practices. For rendering these requisites a little more
useful, I shall only add two things more, and so put an end to your present
disturbance. The first shall be concerning the manner either of acquiring, or
exercising th^se gifts, especially relating to practice, that may be most
beneficial both to your self, and the public; the second concerning the manner
of dealing with your Parishioners that may make them capable of your
Instructions. Concerning the former, it has been already intimated before, that
the most proper way of persuading mankind is first to allure them to the
performance of actions materially virtuous, and by a frequent repetition of
them to beget an easiness and delight, and a rooted habit, which, when
acquired, and that averseness and sensuality, which before had rendered men
incapable of good counsels, being removed, you may then propound your reasons
with success, and rectify their intentions, and render them formally virtuous.
That therefore which will most concern you for the Public as well as your own
Soul, is, the rectifying your intention. Seeing therefore right intention is to
be measured from the due end, you must take care that all your Religious
actions in general be designed with an intention so habitual and deeply rooted,
as that all particular ones may, according to the degree of deliberation they
proceed from, partake of the same either virtually and interpretatively, or
explicitly and particularly. Now the proper end of Religious actions being the
service and pleasing of God, you must take care that they be performed with
that design which you know to be most pleasing to him: and that is the doing
them purposely for his sake; and that they are so done you may best satisfy
your self by examining whether they proceed from a principle of Divine love.
Exercise your self therefore daily to bring your self to this habitual sense of
the Divine love, which will even in this life abundantly recompense the pains
you may be at in acquiring it. For both in respect of your self and of your
Flock you shall find it advantageous. To your self the advantages will be: that
by this means you shall best secure the reward of your virtuous actions, when
you do not only perform them, but perform them upon a virtuous motive; that by
this means your duty shall become, not a task, but, a real pleasure, proceeding
from such a pleasing and endearing principle; and having the omnipotence and
good will of God to secure you from the fears of disappointment when your
desires are reasonable; and as a sure refuge and Sanctuary to have recourse to,
when they are not; and that you will not be subject to the slavery of such
desires themselves, which are the Originals of all misery even in this life;
and your performance of your duty will be more universal; not only in things
agreeing with your humor, but even in those which are most contradictory to
it, which will be so much the more acceptable to God by how much it is less so.
to our selves. Besides, it were well that you would endeavor to render your
love as rational as you can, and as little dependent on the passions of the
lower appetites; for by this means your tranquillity will be continual, and not
depend on the vicissitudes of humors; seeing, if you be led only by reason,
that being always true, must consequently be always seasonable; and that the
reason whereby you judge concerning your own condition were rather grounded on
your Actions than your Affections, so as never to think better of your self
when you find your affections warm, if your actions are not correspondent; nor
the worse, when your affections Flagg, your actions still continuing
conformable. This rational rectifying of your intention would still oblige you
to keep an habitual attention and watchfulness over your actions, and yet would
make attention it self less necessary by being habitual, and make it less
affected. It would make it less necessary, because virtuous habits, as well as
vicious, would breed a facility and inclination to virtuous actions even
antecedently to deliberation. It would make it less affected, because Piety
would appear in such actions where affectation could not take place, as well as
where it might (for indeliberate actions are not capable of affectation) and
because it would make an uniformity in all actions of your life, which were
remarkable. Which must needs make your life exemplary with more advantage to
your self, as well as to the vulgar: to your self, because observing of Rules
could not be practiced but in actions deliberate, which are but few, and must
be handled more tediously; whereas this way of securing acts by habits and
habituallyright intentions, would at once provide for all, by diminishing their
number, and by directing such as would remain: to the multitude; who by this
means must better be convinced of the truth and sincerity of their Pastor, when
their most accurate inspection could discern no affectation, and that by all
appearances it seemed real, not hypocritical.

XXVII. For. managing your Cure it were well that you would constantly allot
some time daily from your Studies for visiting them, when you shall think them
best at leisure. And because the particular persons may be more than you may be
able to deal with in an ordinary way, therefore for their ordinary Cure you
should first win Parents and Masters of Families to a sense of Piety, which
being once performed, you may then easily induce them to a care of the Souls of
their This was required from all Ecclesiastical persons: Item, That every
Holy Day throughout the year, when they have no Sermon, they shall immediately
after the Gospel, openly and plainly recite to their Parishioners in the
Pulpit, the Pater Noster, the Credo, and the Ten Commandments in English, to
the intent that the People may learn the same by heart, Exhorting all Parents
and Householders to teach their Children and Servants the same as they are bound
by the Law of God, and in Conscience to do. Injunct* by K. Edward vi. in the
Collect. aforesaid p. 23. Injunct. by Q. Elizabeth A. 1559. p. 69 ib. Item,
whether they have charged Fathers and Mothers, Masters and Governors of Youth,
to bring them (...) in some virtuous study or* occupation. Arti^l. of
Visitation by Archb, Cranin, under Eow. vi. p. 26.
Children and Servants, by showing them how their Religion would conduce to
their verry secular interest (that hereby their Servants would prove more
faithful, and their Children more obedient and comfortable to them) that
therefore they should keep up their Family Duties constantly: their Morning and
Evening Prayers; that occasionally they would instill an instruction in their
duties, by having some good book read to them all, especially the Whole duty of
Man, according to the method of the Partitions therein prescribed, every Sunday
one; that they would, by your advice prescribe some select This was enjoined on
all Teachers of Children: 41. Item, That they shall accustom their Scholars
reverently to learn such sentences of Scripture as shall be most expedient to
induce them to all godliness, Injunct. by Q. Eliz 1559. p. 78.
passages of Scripture fitted for their practical use, to be gotten by heart by
them; to instruct them, as they find them capable, in the Art of Holy
Meditation and mental Prayer; to stir them up to a frequent Communion, and to
desire your Advice upon occasion of any important scruple, whether in order to
the Sacrament, or upon any other occasion; and to influence them all by their
word, and example, and exhortation, and peculiar encouragement. Then endeavor
what you can, to abolish the Nurseries of vice and public Debauchery, not by
imploring the Magistrates assistance (that becomes secular persons rather than
your self, and would be apt to harden the hearts of the persons concerned
against you; when they should find your exhortations backed with no better
arguments) but by persuasions; partly by dissuading the multitude of such
Callings as are interessed in men's vices, (such are Taverns and Alehouses,
especially the most debauched of them) to give over that kind of Calling, and
betake themselves to something more profitable for the Commonwealth, and more
secure for their own Souls. Concerning this you may make use of the advice and
assistance of your more able Parishioners, who may be best experienced in the
commodities of the Country, and may be able to employ them even in raising new
advantageous Arts of Trading, if it be necessary. But for those Trades that are
directly unlawful, if they be not able to undertake any other, it were better
that they were maintained on the public Charity than that they should be
suffered to return to their former employments. You may see for this St.
Cyprians Epistle ad Eucratium L. j. Ep. 10. So also it were well that those
Taverns and Alehouses, which might be permitted after the detraction of their
superfluous number, were confined to Inns who by their paucity might gain
sufficiently and virtuously a convenient maintenance. And to this purpose you
might persuade them to keep small drink, that none may be necessitated to use
their strong; and to take care of either tempting or permitting any to drink
beyond their measure, as they would tender the security of their own Souls from
a participation of their Sins. Then it were well, in the next place, that you
frequented the Schools, if there be any, and according to the Authority the Law
allows the Clergy in such cases, examined the care and method of their
Masters, and especially to take care of a method of instilling Piety into their
Children, which their Masters may practice them in; 41. Item, That all Teachers
of Children shall stir and mobe them to a love and due reverence of Gods true
Religion, now truly set forth by public Authority. Injunct. by Queen Elizabeth
1559. p. 78.

Et quoties habebitur sacra Concio, e^s vel emittent, vel deducent a^ templum,
ut statim a teneris incipiant erudiri ad pietatem etc. Lib. Quoru^d. Canon. An.
1571. p. 240. and Can. lxxix. An. 1603.


or, if their Masters be negligent, you should allure and encourage them your
self. Do not despise this mean employment; for both you will find them more
capable of virtue than such as are confirmed in vicious habits, by a more
inflexible age, and longer custom; and by this means you may more easily
secure the hopes of the next Generation, which you may live your self to see
grown up according to your own desire. Then for giving them more particular
prescriptions you should stir them up to a particular Confession of their Sins
and Temptations, according as our Mother the Church of England visit. of the
sick Can. cxiii. An. 1603.
Church of England and Ibid. and Can. xix. lxiv.
Ireland approves it, but to give them no formal Absolution till a long
experience has let you understand their stability in keeping their Resolutions,
which will both keep them careful in their daily practices, when as yet they
are uncertain of their condition; and will come with more comfort, either in a
time of Spiritual dejection, or the hour of Death, when they shall find that
you are neither precipitant nor favorable in judging concerning them; ^esides
that their pardon before God in order to the Sacrament will be never the less
valid because you do not assure them of it. And, in doing this it were well
that, with advice of your Ordinary, you would retrive the Canon of this Church
of Can. xix.
Ireland for tolling your Parish Bell the Evening before the Eucharist, and
waiting for such in the Church as are desirous to Confess themselves, or ask
your Ghostly counsel, withal warning them of those crimes which you are not
obliged to conceal, that they may not think themselves betrayed under pretense
of Religion. Besides, you should be ready to take all occasions of Peoples
seriousness and melancholy, whether for Temporal discontents, or for fear of
Death, and upon such occasions to warn the Spectators to beware of deferring
the care of their Souls to such exigencies, who will then most probably be
affected, and so to behave your self to the person principally concerned as
that the standers by may understand the ground of his comfort to be rather his
past life than any indications he can give of his present penitence. And upon
occasion of your visitation of sick persons, you should remember what the
Rubric of the Office requires you to put them that are rich in mind of laying
up a good foundation for the time to come 1 Timothy vi. 17. 18. 19. So also the
Injunct of K. Edward vi. p. 10, the Articl. of v^sit. by Arch^, Cr^^mer p. 20.
Injunct. by Q. Eliz An. 1559 n ^^. p. 74 Articl. of visitat. An. 1559. p. 178.
of showing their gratitude to God who has blessed them by paying him an
acknowledgment out of their gains; and showing themselves not to be Proprietors
but faithful Stewards, especially if the Riches be justly gotten; otherwise you
must refuse their very Oblations, till they have first made satisfaction to the
persons injured by them. But what is justly gotten, and may be lawfully
accepted, it were better bestowed in a considerable sum ( for houses of
Correction for maintaining idle Vagabonds, and raising them to do something
profitable for a livelihood; for educating and raising necessitious persons to
an honest Calling; for helping those who are reclaimed from a scandalous
course; for all those good uses, which in the Primitive Church were supplied
out of the common Treasures of the Church) than in transient Alms. Many other
things might have been added, but that, you may Remember, I did not promise you
an enumeration of all particulars of this kind. Only these seem more necessary
for reducing your People to a ruleable Temper, without which your other care
will not be so significant. I hope you will excuse the freedom I have taken;
for my own part I thought I could not have discharged the duty of a faithful
friend, if I had not done so. Otherwise I have been so far from imposing on
you, that I have not advised any thing, which either is not evident, or has not
its reason insinuated with it in the body of my discourse; and so may freely be
judged of either by your self, or any other whom you shall make use of either
for its Correction or Improvement. Whatever the event may prove, assure your
self, it was undertaken with a good intention, by

Your assured well-wisher, especially in such Christian Services, H. D.

Ad Number. XII. XIII.
BEcause I have there shown the necessity of studying the Fathers of the first
and purest Centuries, as a qualification for the susception of Orders; it has
been by some friends, that perused it, conceived convenient for the Instruction
of Novices, for whose use this Advice was principally calculated and designed,
that I should adjoyn a Catalogue of the Christian Authors and writings, such as
are genuine, during that Period, till the Conversion of Constantine to
Christianity, together with good Editions where they might find and furnish
themselves with them. I was soon satisfied of the reasonableness of this
request, and have accordingly endeavored its performance, wherein if I may
seem decretory in resolving positively somethings controverted among learned
men, without producing my reasons; I desire that it may be remembered that my
design was not to prejudicate against skilful dissenters, but to advise such as
were unskilful; and that even in regard of them, the reason why I do not
produce my reasons is not that, by concealment of my evidence, I might oblige
them to depend on my Authority, but partly to avoid prolixity, and partly
because I do not conceive such unskilful Readers competent Judges of them, and
partly because such as are, may consult many others who have undertaken it
professedly; and that, though the reasons be not produced, yet the degree of
assent, whether certain, or doubtful, or probable, is warned, which was the
most cautious way I could imagine of dealing with such persons, especially
these things themselves not being delivered from my own private sense, but of
such as have most learnedly and impartially managed this subject. I do not
intend as much as to mention such Authors or writings which I conceive
undeservedly to pretend to my prescribed Period (what my thoughts are
concerning such may be sufficiently concluded from my not mentioning them) nor
to explode such works as are falsely inscribed to the particular persons whose
names they bear, if upon other regards they may seem genuine in respect of the
time intended, that is, if it be probable that their Authors who ever they were
flourished within the Period intended, about the time wherein they are ranked,
that so they may be presumed competent Testimonials of the state of the Church
in those Ages, which is the end for which I produce and recommend them. Nor
shall I trouble my self to recount such genuine truly-inscribed works
themselves, as either are not at all extant at present, or extant only in
Fragments quoted at the second hand from other ancient Authors; for these will
be in order met with in the places from whence they are respectively produced,
and references to those places will generally be found in their good and
accurate Editions. Nor lastly do I pretend to give an account of such Histoans
as have described the Acts of the Martyrs, and are conceived ancient; for both
many of them are Anonymous, concerning whom it would be very hard to resolve on
their particular Age; and it is a work particularly undertaken by it self by
Surius, Lippomannus, etc. In those Authors therefore which shall, after these
deductions, remain proper for my purpose, I shall signify the time they
flourished in (which is most necessary for my present design of discovering
their Testimonial Authority) not by years, which would be obnoxious to many
further disputes, but by the beginning, middle, or end, of their respective
Centuries since the Incarnation.

A Catalogue of the writings of such Christian Authors as flourished before the
Conversion of the Roman Empire to Christianity.
I.
CLemens Romanus. Cent. i. mid. and end.
His i. Epistle to the Corinthians, undoubted. His 2. Ep. to the same, though
questioned whether his, yet certainly is of an Author very ancient; flourishing
within the Period intended. Edit. of a Fragment of the later, and the former
almost entire, by Patricius Junius at Oxford, Anno. Dom. MDC. XXXVIII.
II.
I Gnatius. Cent. 1 mid. and end. Cent. 2. beg.
His vi. Ep. of Primate Usher's Latin, and Isa ac Vossius's Florentine Greek
Editions, viz. Ad Ephesios. Ad Magnesianos. Ad Trallianos. Ad Smyrnaeos. Ad
Romanos. Ad Philadelphienses. questioned only, I think, out of interest by the
Presbyterians, because he is decretory against them. His Epistle ad Polycarpum
is thought by Isaac Vosfius in his notes, undeservedly questioned by our
Primate. Edit. by Primate Usher at Oxford, partly An. Do. MDCXLIV. partly
MDCXLVI.
III.
BArnabas. Cent. 2 beg.
His Epistle, if not of the Apostle, yet certainly written about this time,
seeing it is quoted under his name by Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. ii. p. 273.
274. 285. 290. 300. v. 417. 421. and Origin. L. 1. Cont. Cells. L. iii.
Periarch. and others. Edit. together with Ignatius's Epistles by Isaac Vossius
A. D. MDCXLVI. or alone by Hugo Menardus. Paris. MDCXLV..
IV.
ESdras. Cent. 2. beg.
His iv. Book Apocryphal counterfeited by some Judaizing Christian about these
times.
V.
HErmes Trismegistus. Cent. 2. beg.
His Poemauder thought to be a Christiancounterfeit, by Casaubon, Exercit. i.
in Baron. number. x. Edit. the best by Hannibal Rosellis Colon. Agrip. MDCXXX.
fol.
VI.
POlycarpus. Cent. 1. end. 2. beg. mid.
His Epistle to the Philippians, undoubted. Edit. with Ignatius by Primate
Usher as aforesaid.
VII.
ECclesiae Smyrnensis Epistola, Cent. 2. aft. mid.
concerning the Martyrdom of St. Polycarp etc. larger than in Eusebius. Edit.
the same.
VIII.
JVstine Martyr. Cent, ^ mid.
His undoubted works. Paraeneticus. Oration adversus Graecos. Apologia I. ad
Antoninum Pium etc. Apologia II. ad Marcum Antoninum etc. Dialogus cum
Tryphone. Epistol. ad Zenam and Serenum. His works, though doubted, yet most
probably genuine. De Monarchio, not much questioned. Epistol. ad Diognetum,
questioned, I think, only by Sylburgius. Edit. Paris. MDCXV. Graeco-Latin.
IX.
HErmas. (...)
His Pastor in III. Books undoubtedly ancient, and about this time, at least,
as appears by the antiquity of the Authors that quote it. Edit. Bibliothec.
Patr. Colon. Agrippin. MDCXVIII. Tom. I. p. 27.
X.
PIus the I. Cent. 2 mid.
His III. and IV. Epistles in the order of Blondells Edition not much
questioned. Edit. David Blondell. Epistol. Pontific. Genev. MDCXXVIII.
XI.
A Thenagoras. Cent. 2. aft. mid.
His works, though mentioned by none of the Ancients yet never questioned that
I know of. Legatio pro Christianis. De Resurrectione Mortuorum. Edit. with St.
Justine Martyr as aforesaid.
XII.
TAtianus. Cent. 2. aft mid.
undoubted* Oration ad Graecos. Edit. with S. Justine Martyr, as aforesaid.
Diatessaron, thought to be the same with. Harmonia Evangelica extant under the
name of Ammonius Alexandrinus. Edit. Biblioth. Patr. Edit. Colon. Agrip. Tom.
III. p. 22.
XIII.
THeophilus Antiochenus. Cent. 2. aft. mid.
undoubted. Lib. III. ad Autolycum. Edit. with St. Justine Martyr as aforesaid.
Commentaria or Allegoriae in Evangelia, somewhat doubted of by St. Hierome in
Cant. who quotes them. Edit. Biblioth. Patr. Colon. Agrip. Tom. II.
XIV.
I Renaeus. Cent. ^. near the end.
undoubted, Adversus Hereses. L. V. Edit. the most complete that I have seen is
that of Fevardentius, having (besides as much of the Original Text in Greek as
could be had from the quotations of ancient Authors) V. whole chapters restored
at the end not extant in any former. His notes tend rather generally to abuse
the Protestants than to explain the sense of his Author. It is in fol. Colon.
Ag. MDXCVI. I hope we may, ere long, expect a better Edition from Oxford.
XV.
ORacul. Cent. ^. near the end.
Sibyllin. L. VIII. A counterfeit Christian Author, quoted by St. Justine
Martyr and Theoph. Antiochenus, but not reduced into the form wherein we have
it now till about the time of the Emperor Commodus at least. Edit. Opsopoei
Parisijs, MDCVII.
XVI.
TEstamenta Patriarcharum counterfeited by some ancient Judaizing Christian,
Cent. 2.
about this time at the uttermost; for it is quoted by Origin, in Genes. Edit.
Biblioth. Patr. Colon. Agrip. Tom. I. p. 173.
XVII.
CLemens Alex andrinus. Cent. 2. near the end.
undoubted. Protreptic. Paedagog. L. III. Stromat. L. VII. The VIII. Book as
also the Greek Eclogae annexed at the end of it, thought to belong to his
Hypotyposes, the main body whereof is long since lost. Edit. Parisijs MDCXL.
His (...); published under the name of Grigen's XX. Homily on Jerem. is
accordingly extant in Mich Ghislerius on Jerem. Tom. III. p. 262. Comment. in
I. Ep. S. Petr. in Epist. S. Judae in Ep. Canonicas S. Joh^nnis. Are probably
the same accounted his by Cassiodore, Div. L. by whom they are all recounted
excepting that of S. Jude. They seem rather to have been collected out of his
works, especially his Hypotyposes now lost, than drawn up in this form by St.
Clement himself. Edit. of the Comment. Bib. Patr. Tom. I. p. 1235. Ed. Secund.
XVIII.
REcognitionum L. X. ad Jacob. Cent. 2. near the end.
Fratrem Domini, translated by Ruffinus, and by him dedicated to one
Gaudentius. I do not suppose it to be the genuine work of Clemens Romanus whose
name it bea^s; for it is certainly later than Bardesanes Syrus, a discourse of
whose quoted from him by Eusebius Pr. Evang. L. VI. c. 10. is here transcribed
at large; and yet considerably ancienter than Origin, Philocal. by whom it is
attributed to Clemens Romanus himself, which is the reason why I place it about
this time. Edit. Colon. Agrippin. MDLXIX. by Lambert Gruterus.
XIX.
CElsus. Cent. 2 near the end.
His Altercatio Jasonis and Papisci. A Preface to it is extant under the name
of St. Cyprian ad Vigilium de Judaica Incredulitate. Edit. Tom. III. of S.
Cyprian's works according to Pamelius's distinction. But the work is ancienter
than Origin, by whom it is quoted, L. IV. advers Celsum Epicuraeum.
XX.
TErtullianus: Cent. 2 near the end and 3. beg.
undoubted. De Pallio: Apologeticus: De Testimonio Animae. Ad Scapulam. De
Oratione: Ad Martyras: De Spectaculis. De Idololatria. De Habitu Muliehri. De
cultu Faeminarum L. II. Ad Vxorem suam L. II. De Corona Militis. De velandis
Virginibus. Ad Nationes, L. II first published by Jacobus Gothof^edus in 40.
Genev. MDCXXV. and therefore not to be expected in former Editions. Adversus
Judaeos. De Praescriptionibus adversus Haereticos. De Baptismo. Adversus
Hermogenem. Adversus Valentinianos. De Anima. De Carne Christi. De
Resurrectione Carnis. De Fuga in Persecutione. De Pudreitia. De Patientia.
Adversus Asar^ionem, L. V. Carminum adversus eundem, L. V. Scorpiacon adversus
Gnosticos. Adversus? r axeam. De Exhortatione Cas^itatis. De Monogamia. De
J^junto adversus Psychicos. A^^ th^se are in Ludovicus a Cerda's Edition,
Paris. MDCXXIV. etc. in three volumes fol. with Notes. Or if you would have an
Edition of an easier price, get that of Franeker, MDXCII. rather than many
others, though later. Books probably his, or of some other of his Age. De
Poenitentia, Edit. as aforesaid. Genesis. Sodoma. Ad Senatorem conversum. These
three last are in verse, and are usually extant both among Tertullian and St.
Cyprian's works, being ascribed to both of them. Books conjectu^ed by (...) to
be his, from the likeness of their Style. Ad amicum agro^^^. De (...)
Circumcisio^e. (...). of S. Hierome's works. Edit. Basil. MDLIII. the former at
page 36. the later at page 119.
XXI.
EPistola de Cibis Judaicis. Ce^^. 3. beg.
Not Tertullian's, though ascribed to him, but of some Bishop, who probably
flourished about this time. Some think of Novatian the Schismatic. Edit. with
Tertullian as aforesaid.
XXII.
(...) aduersus Graecos (...)
inscripta Contra Platonem, De Vniversi caus^. A Fragment of it published by
David Hoeschelius in his notes upon Photius's Bibliotheca, Ad p. 15. by him
attributed to a Christian Josephus, by our Primate Usher to Caius, about
Alexander the Emperor's time. Wh^ever he was that was Author of it, he seems
to have flourished within our Period, and to have been a Platonizing Christian.
XXIII.
M^^ucius Foelix. Cent. 3. beg
His Octavius, undoubtedly his since discovered by Fr. Balduin. Edit. Lugdun.
Batav. MDCLII. with notes.
XXIV.
HIppolytus ^ishop and Martyr, Cent. 3. (...).
commonly called Portuensis, if they be the same; whether they were or no, yet
they seem to have flourished about the same time, and have the same works
indiscriminately ascribed to them Such are: De Antichristo, and consummatione
Mundi, though questioned by several, yet most probably genuine, seeing it is
mentioned as such by St. Hierome de Script. Eccl. whose Authority I conceive
alone sufficient to countervail all those suspicions rather than (...) against
it from the matter. Edit. Bibliothee. Patr. Graeco. Latin. Tom. ii. p. 342.
Canon Paschalis not doubted that I know of. Edit. Joseph. Scalig. Lugd. Batav.
MDXCV. Books probably his: De Deo Trino and uno and de Mysterio Incarnationis,
contra haeresius Noeti. Edit. Gerard. Vossis in miscell. Sanctor. Patrum ad
^in. Gregor. (...) and Helicem haereticos. Edit. Heur. Canisii Tom. V. Antiq.
Lect. Part. 1 p. 153. Both of th^se, if his, are probable to have been
Fragments of his work against H^resyes mentioned by the Ancients. Demonstratio
contra Judaeos. Edit. Possevin. Apparat. verb. Hippolytus.
XXV.
ORigenes Adamantius. Cent. 3. beg. mid,
His undoubted works: 1. Such as are extant in Greek: Cont. Celsum. Lib. viii.
Philoca^^a, (...) his works by St. (...) St. Gregory Edit. (...) VIII. Comment
on St. Matthew. and on St. Joh N^w. Commentaryes on Jerem. formerly published by
the (...) of St. Cyrill. of Alexandria, restored to Origin, together with
several parts of Philocalia (...) to the Scriptures to which they relate, etc.
Edit. in 2 vol. fol. by Petr. Dan. Huetius, together with large and learned
Prolego^^na. A Fragment of his Epistle ad Julium Affricanum concerning the book
of Susanna. Edit. by D. Haeschelius Augus^. Vindelic MDCII. p. 86. We may, I
hope (...) long, expect more of his Tractates in Greek in an Edition by
themselves by the same Hu^tius. 2. Such as are extant in Latin, in a Tomes,
according to Genebrard's Edition, MDCIV.
Genuine in Tom. 1.
In Genes. Hom. xvii. In Exodus Hom. xiii In Levitic. Hom. xvi. though formerly
attributed to S. Cyrill, yet undoubted since their restitution. In Josu^ Hom.
xxvi. Hom. ii. in Cantic. Canticorum, interpret. S. Hieronymo. In Isaiam Hom.
ix. In Jeremiam Hom. xiv. In ^zechielem Hom. xiv. Periarch^u L^v.
Genuine in Tom. 2.
In Lucam Hom. xxxix. In Epist. ad Roman. Lib. xxxvi. Cont. Celsum L. viii.
Philocalia collected, as aforesaid, out of his works. Epist. ad Jul. Affrican.
entire in Latin. Other works probably his, and only doubted of because of the
Liberty taken by (...) in translating them, of adding frequently interpolations
of his own: In Number. Hom. xxviii. In Judi^. Hom. ix. In Lib. Reg^or. Hom. i. Hom
in Ps. xxxvi xxxvii xxxviii. In Cantic. Canticer. Hom. iv. cum (...). In
diverse. Hom. i. iii. iv. v. vi. ix. x. Note that learned men do not r^^y so
confidently on any thing (...) by Ruffinus because of the difficulty of
distinguishing the Original Text from his interpolations.
XXVI.
JVlius Affricanus. Cent. 2 beg.
His Epistle to Origin concerning the story of Susanna, undoubted. Edit. with
Origen's Answer to him, in Greek in Haeschelius in Latin Tom. 2^. of Origen's
Latin works, as aforesaid. A great part of his Chronography extant from
Eusebius in Georg. Syncellus Edit. Paris. MDCLII. from whence, not being then
published, it was borrowed by Scaliger in his Edition of Eusebius's Chronicon
in Greek.
XXVII.
GRegorius Thaumaturgus. Cent. 3 mid.
His undoubted works. Charisteria or Panegyric. ad Origin. Graeco-Latin.
Metaphrasis in Ecclesiasten, extant only in Latin. Epistola Canonica in
Latin only in Vossius, but in Greek also in Balsamon, Edit. Graeco-Latin.
Parisijs, MDCXX. p. 902. His Confession of Faith recited by St. Gregory Nyss^n
in his life, as revealed to him by St. John Baptist. Graeco-Lat. Such as cannot
be easily disproved: De Anima ad Tatianum. In Annunciationem B. Virginis,
Sermones iii. Sermo in S. Theophania. Edit. of them all by Gerard. Vossius
Praepos. Tungrens. Mogunt. MDCIV.
XXVIII.
AMmonius Alexandrinus the matter of Origin. Cent. 3 beg.
undoubted. Canon, or Harmonia Evangelica mistaken by Victor Capuanus for
Tatianus 's Diatessaron. Edit. under the name of Tatianus, Bibl. Patr. Colon.
Agrip: MDCXVIII. Tom. ii. p. 183.
XXIX.
Cornelius Romanus, Cent. 3 mid.
undoubted. Two Epistles to S. Cyprian, among St. Cyprian 's Epistles, XLVI.
XLVII. Ep. ad Lupicinum Edit. among Blondell's Ep: Pont. doubtful.
XXX.
CYprianus Carthag. Cent. 3 mid. and after.
His undoubted works: All the Epistles, LXXXIII. according to Pamelius's
distribution, who has placed them according to the time wherein they were
written, are certainly his, and the other Author 's, to whom they are
inscribed. De Disciplina and habitu Virginum. De Lapsis. De Vnitate Ecclesiae.
De Oratione Dominica. Contra Demetrianum. De vanitate I^lolorum. De
Mortalitate. De bono Patientiae. De Opere and Eleemosynis. De Zelo and Livore.
Books most probably his, and thought certainly to be so by Pameliu^. Libri III.
Testimoniorum ad Quirinum, quoted by St. Hierome. De Exhortatione Martyrij. De
laud Martyrij ad Moysem and Maximum and catero^ Confessores. De Spectaculis.
De Disciplina and bono Pudicitiae. Ad Novatianum haereticum, quod L^psis spes
veniae non sit deneganda. Books, if not his, yet certainly of ancient Authors
about his time. De singularitate Clericorum. De Aleatoribus. De moutibus Sina
and Sion. Adversus Judaeos qui insecuti sunt Dominum nostrum. Edit. S.
Goulartij MDXCIII. The names of Authors whose certainly genuine works are
extant among St. Cyprian's, for the direction of young Students, who might
otherwise meet them quoted, and not know where to find them. Donati Ep. I.
somewhat doubted of, Cleri Romani ad Clerum Carthaginiensem, Ep. III. ad
Cyprianum Ep. XXXXXXI. Confessorum universorum ad Cyprianum, de pace Lapsis
danda. Ep. XVII. Caldonij ad Cyprianum Ep XIX. Ad Clerum Carthag. Ep. XXXIX.
Celerini ad Lucianum Ep XXI. Luciani ad Celerinum. Ep. XXII. Moysis and Maximi
and caeterorum ad Cyprianum Rescript. Ep. XXVI* L* Synodi Affrican. ad
Cornelium, Ep. LIVE. Firmilian. ad Cyprianum Ep. LXXV. Nemesiam ad Cyprianum,
Resp. Ep. ^XX^III. (...) ad Cyprian. Resp. Ep* LXXIX. Felicis and caeterorum ad
Cyprianum Resp. Ep. LXXX Concilium Carthaginiense sub Cypriano, concerning
Rebaptization of Haereticks.
XXXI.
Pontius Diaconus His life of St. Cyprian, Cent. 3. aft. mid.
undoubted. Edit. with S. Cyprians works as aforesaid.
XXXII.
AN Author about that time against Rebaptization of Haereticks. Cent. 3. aft.
mid.
Edit. among the Notes of Rigalitus, in his Edition of St. Cyprian.
XXXIII.
Dionysius Alexandrinus. Cent. 3. ast. mid.
His undoubted works: Epist. Canonica ad Basiliden. Edit. with Balsamon on him,
apud Balsamon. Edit. as aforesaid, p. 879. Ep. adversus Paulum Samosatenum,
translated by urrian. Edit Graeco Latin. MDCVI^. Latin. Bibl. Patr. Colon.
Agrip. Tom. iii. p. 67.
XXXIV.
MEthodius Bishop of Olympus, Cent. 3. ast. mid
and afterward of Tire, commonly called Patarensis by the Greeks. undoubted
works: Excerpta ex Libr. de Resurrectione. Ex Lib. de Creatis, Ex Lib. de
Symposijs, Ex Lib. contr. Porphyrium, etc. All these improved above what had
been extant of them formerly in Epiphanius, Photius and Damascen. Liber de
Libero Arbitrio. Oration in Simeon. and Annam. Oration in Ram^s Palmarum, most
probably his, though by some formerly ascribed to St. Chrysostom. Edit Fr.
Combesis cum Amphilochio etc. Graeco-Lat. Paris. MDCXLIV.
XXXV.
DE Trinitate, Cent. 3. near the end.
a work ascribed by some to Tertullian, by others to Novatian the haeretick;
but of an Author later than either of them being certainly after the rise of
Sabellius the haeretick whom he mentions, and yet in all probability before
Arianism. Edit. with Tertullian, as aforesaid.
XXXVI.
ARnobius Afer. Cent. 3. end.
undoubted. L. VII. contra Gentes. Edit. Lugd. Batavor. MDCLI. with notes.
XXXVII.
LActantius Firmianus. Cent. 3. en^. 4 ^eg.
undoubted: Divin. Instit. L. VII. De Ira Dei. De Opificio Dei. Epitome in
Libros suos. Edit. Lugdun. Batavor. MDCLXIV.
XXXVIII.
PEtrus Alexandrinus. Cent. 3. end. 4. beg.
undoubted: Epistol. Canonica. Edit. Balsamon. p. 887.
XXXIX.
PAmphilus Martyr. Cent^ 3. end. 4. beg.
Apologia pro Origene, I verily believe genuine, notwithstanding what St.
Hierome objects against it. For Eusebius himself pretends the assistance of
Pamphilus in his writing that Apology of his, Hist, Eccl. L. VI* c. 36. ^at.
(...) Graec, Edit. Christophorson and it is observed by Photius ^od^ XVIII. who
tells us* That the first V Books had the assistance of Pamphilus, the VI nly
after his Martyrdom composed by Eusebius alone; so that the contrary testimony
of Eusebius produced by St. Hierome, that Pamphilus wrote nothing but some few
Epistles, if it were rightly quoted (for it do, It may be he had it from his
III Books de vita Pamphili, now lost.
not appear, I think in Eusebius as extant at present) was in all likelihood to
be understood of such works as he alone was Author of, whereas in this he had
the Assistance of Eusebius himself. This is the only objection insisted on by
St. Hierome. Out of St. Hierome it appears, That this was only the first book
of those V. wherein it appears from Photius, that Eusebius had the assistance
of Pamphilus; so that it seems, that this alone was selected by Ruffinus out of
the whole work, because this, as it should seem, was alone employed in
vindication of the Opinions of Origin, the rest, as may be conjectured from
their contents mentioned in Photius, spent in a Historical Elogy, and
vindication, of his life. I have the more particularly insisted on this, and
given my reason why I believe it genuine, because the Authority of St. Hierome
has swayed the generality of the learned world in this particular. Edit.
usually in Origin and St. Hierom's works. Note that for the understanding and
judging of these Authors and their works, it would be very expedient to read
the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius, where also many more considerable
Fragments of the Authors already mentioned, and several others not mentioned,
will be found, very well worthy perusal in order to the design intended.
Letter II.
A Letter of Advice for direction of a young Student in Divinity, especially
such as is Rational, related to in the former, Numb. XVII.
SIR,
1. I am sorry that your bashfulness has hitherto denied me the more familiar
oppotunities of your acquaintance during your residence among us; but am
withal glad that these present disadvantageous circumstances themselves of
time and place have now at length, though unexpectedly, emboldened your modesty
to such a welcome, and never^unseasonable, motion. But neither the interest of
friendship, nor my own inclination, nor the copiousness of the subject wherein
you have employed me, nor my little leisure for things so unsignificant, will
permit me to retaliate your complements; and therefore, I hope, you will excuse
me though I be abrupt in my addresses to the resolution of your proposal. And
that I may avoid that generality and unpracticableness and obscurity to which
immethodical discourses are very obnoxious; and may contrive my thoughts in as
few words and as little time as the ordinary frequent avocations of my other
Studies will allow me, and withal more usefully and distinctly to your
purpose: I conceive it most convenient to show 1. the design of Scholastical
Divinity, and the general requisites thereunto; and thence Secondly, the more
particular influence of saecular learning in order to it; and Thirdly, some few
books to initiate you herein, and general directions that are advisable in
your studies of them; and Lastly, the order wherein I conceive them most
successfully intelligible; in prosecution of which method you will have, not
only my counsel, but my reasons, which I most willingly submit to your censure
to be followed or rejected as you shall find them more or less convincing.

II. For the first, that I may prevent Scholastical Divinity I do not intend
that only which is rigorously so called, but more largely all, wherein there
is required skill for the deduction of inferences; whether for the resolution
of Controversies, or doubts of Conscience^ as it comprehends that which is
Textuary as well as what is purely Rational in opposition to that which is
Practical and Inartificial, as Oratory. For concerning this later, affectation
being a vice most repurgnant to its end, which is serious persuasion; and to
which Scholars are usually too much addicted for this very reason of their too
Critical observations of the rules of Art; I conceive it most expedient that it
be contrived as natural as is possible, to which it will be necessary that all
things which may have an influence on your particular end be prudently
considered, your Subject, and your Auditory and your own Genius, and your very
manner of delivery, to which every thing may so agree as if they had been your
only incentives, and what you said had been without any deliberation; and to
this purpose though you may read ancient and late Authors that are respectively
commended in their kind, I should not advise you the imitation of any
particularly, but let your own disposition choose for it self without any
designed reflections. But this only by way of digression, though I believe
pardonable, because possibly pertinent to your purpose. Scholastical Divinity
in the sense now explained is that which I conjecture more principally intended
by you; and to which I shall therefore confine my future discourse. Its design
therefore being for the clearing of such propositions as, although they be
necessary for faith or practice, yet their evidence depends upon the
explication of such terms as are not obviously intelligible by the vulgar: the
most convenient way for determining the requisites of this will be by showing
the nature of those principles from whence it deduceth its particular
Conclusions. For whatever is requisite for understanding the true sense of
them, must also be so to the certainty of their Illations; and therefore
Religion objectively taken being a Revelation of the Divine will as the measure
of ours, whereby we may be competently informed of our duty in order to
happiness* the difference of these principles which are per se nota in their
kinds must arise from the different lights under which they are manifested,
that matters concerning Religion are discovered by a supernatural Divine light
as exceeding that of our natural Reason, the only measure of all our natural
knowledge (which yet is not to be understood, as some dangerously conceive, of
the light of the faculty, as if Reason were not able certainly and evidently to
know the credibility, at least, of what is so propounded; nor of the light of
the formal object of assent, as if that were not always proportioned to the
faculty (which if it were not, it were both impossible to be discerned, and
unsafe to be assented to, seeing many things may and do very falsely pretend to
such a plausible title) but rather in regard of the material object, which
sometimes has a natural connection with the formal, and sometimes only by
voluntary institution) for so, that I may clear my mind by an instance, when we
know God from the Creatures, this whole light is natural, not only in regard
of the faculty, nor of the creatures which have a natural proportion to it, but
also of the naturally-dependent connection of the Creatures on God, who is known
by them, but when we know the Trinity from Divine Revelation propounded by men,
and attested by miracles, although both of them are natural in the two former
senses; yet neither this humane proposition nor these attesting miracles have
any natural or necessary connection with the doctrine of the Trinity, which is
propounded as credible by them; but with the supernatural will of the Divine
Proponent, upon which account also this Light in relation to this object is
called supernatural. These things though possibly as yet you may not see the
use of, yet hereafter you may perceive to remove the very material
misunderstandings of most Schoolmen in this question, and to be very
fundamental to what we shall hereafter advise consequentially to these
principles.

III. Seeing therefore that from light of the faculty is absolutely necessary
for the improving all that is objective, whether natural or supernatural; I
conceive it very convenient to exercise frequently your discursive faculty in
Theses upon some difficult Question which you may meet with in your studies,
and especially in such as are intricate and subtle; for these will best enable
you to conceive aright in others of a like nature, though of a different
matter. The time for this, if you shall think fit to design a particular one,
were I believe fittest in the morning, when the Spirits are more clear and
subtle, and your thoughts more composed, and so every way more apt for
Contemplation. In the performing hereof I would not have you insist on your
Authors method. (For which purpose it were well your morning-Thesis concerned a
Question you had studied the night before) but rather endeavor upon full
deliberation of what has been produced for both opinions, to deliver your own
conceptions, and to exercise your own invention as much as is possible; and
withal in your method, not to mind only the private concernment of the
difficulty you are then handling, but also the general of others of the same
kind, so as that your experience in this may capacitate you for others: as to
consider the true sense of the terms, if there be any material ambiguity that
is suspicious of being misunderstood by the contradicting parties; but not to
spend time on them when they are obvious and trivial, and of none or little
moment for determining the principal Question; and then faithfully to enquire
into the true state of the Question, which you were not to think you
understand, and so not to define your own thoughts concerning it, before you
have first heartily examined the true sense of both Adversaries, the want of
which you will find to be an original of most of those Logomachyes which are so
frequent in the Schools, and I believe generally received in very many of those
Controversies which divide the Communion of whole Churches; whence it proceeds
that many of the arguments of both parties need no other solution than the
clearing of their Adversaries meaning, which being once performed, they are
found impertinent and unconclusive, And for the attaining of this I would not
have you rely on violent Bigots, or the followers of factions, who speak only
by roat, and besides the design and reason of their Masters, and are resolved,
nay and many times obliged, to defend them in whatever they say, though never
so Paradoxical, and are frequently put to their shifts to invent defensible
glosses, how expressly soever the Author has explained his meaning, and where he
is the least obscure, are much more favorable to what is more easily
defensible; nor on the bare words of the first Authors, it being ordinary for
Controvertists to overspeak themselves, and to bring in many things ex
abundanti, which though they might think probably true, yet might well be
spared without prejudice of their cause; and much less from the partial
relations of their Adversaries: but rather from the rise and occasion of the
Question, from the design and disposition of themselves and their Adversaries,
where, if on either side you will allow any thing for violence, you will have
more reason to suspect it of the later Assailant than the first Proponent, who,
no Adversary appearing, may reasonably be presumed to have delivered his mind
with less design, and more simplicity; and from the connection with their other
Principles. And never satisfy your self of your success in this enquiry till
you have found out some great verisimilitude that might very plausibly persuade
a judicious and ingenuous man to your Adversaries opinion, if swayed with his
prejudices; for it is hard to be so generally uncharitable as to believe that
there are not some such that maintain all much received opinions. And to this
purpose I conceive it very convenient that you be conversant with other works
of the Author from whom you dissent, that you may thence perceive what
principles he does otherwise much rely on, and what his moral disposition is,
for this may be very effectual for swaying him when the main arguments used are
popular and declamatory; and of that nature are most of those Questions which
divide great and numerous Ecclesiastical societies, as were easy to instance
and evince if I were not afraid of being tedious. When you have thus gained
the true sense and use of the Question, your nearer approaches to its
resolution you may make in this order: First to consider the nature of the
prejudices, for though in some cases they may contribute, yet they are never to
be the only motives for determining your assent; and therefore you are to see
that First, they never hinder you from embracing a contrary evidence more
convincing than that on which themselves are grounded; nor Secondly, from
impartially considering the force of that which does only pretend it, though
in the event it do not prove so; but only Thirdly, when upon full inquiry you
find the contrary but equally probable with what you do at present believe,
there you may securely submit your self to Providence, that has placed you in
such circumstances as thus incline you rather than hazard your present peace
for an only equal contentment in the contrary, so that it be done modestly,
without any censorious reflections on such as dissent from you; and that you
would consider what they are distinctly, and if you find your self partially
affected to either of them, there to be cautious that it do not betray you to
any thing unreasonable. And in general, for the avoiding of them all, I
conceive it very advisable that you be not too prodigal in uttering your
thoughts concerning any Theological Question of moment before a multitude with
any concernedness and vehemence before you have first examined it by these
forementioned Prescriptions. After this, for the most faithful discovery of the
nature and force of the proofs, you should distinguish from their differences
those things wherein both parties are agreed, and on which as on common
principles they ground their arguments. For these you will find to be of very
great use for judging the particulars, unto the which, if you be satisfied with
them, you may descend more closely, assuring your self that, however their
opinions may, yet, it is impossible that their reasons should, be really
contrary: That you may therefore find distinctly how far they are conclusive,
and to whether opinion they are more favorable; it were well that First
omitting that multitude of particular ones that are produced for both, the
whole force were summed up in one a priori; wherein you might at one view
perceive the whole series of their principles: and then that you divide them
into so many Propositions, disposed in the order wherein they follow from each
other, which when you have done, you may then examine First, the absolute truth
of these principles distinctly; and Secondly, their consequence from each
other; and then Thirdly, the truth of these premises relatively: what sense is
requisite to be true that these consequences may be inferred from them; and
whether they be indeed true in these particular senses that are requisite; and
by these means you will most probably find the true and faithful measure of
discerning how far they are conclusive, which you may then compare with the
true sense of the contrary Opinion as you have formerly explained it, and so of
the contrary proofs with this, and an you find them exactly agreeing so you may
determine. These rules I have the more particularly insisted on, because, as
they are rarely taken notice of, and more rarely observed by our modern
Controvertists, so, to me they seem the most successful for the avoiding those
mistakes and fallacies which are too frequent among them; for by this means you
will more probably understand the Question, your proofs will be more directly
levelled against your Adversary, and his main objections will be supposed
resolved before you are determined, and for others which stand in need of more
particular answers (they being weaker) you may be less solicitous. Nor do I
think all of these necessary in all Questions to be distinctly considered, but
principally for the most important ones of Divinity; and some, at least, to be
necessary to all of what nature soever; and that such regard be had of those
which are not, that before you neglect them you be assured that they are indeed
impertinent. And in the management of the whole, especially where you do
endeavor selfsatisfaction, it were well you were as brief, as clear, as
distinct, and as methodical, as is possible.

Studies that you may be furnished with materials. And this I shall attempt in
pursuance of my formerly designed method, in both those kinds of Principles, by
which, as I said, all Theological Controversies are to be determined. For the
first, those which are rational, I would commend that too much decried Study
among most Protestants of School Divinity: for considering that the very
foundations and principles of all Religion are natural, that all supernatural
Revelations are but accessory complements to these, where Nature was actually
debauched, or originally insufficient, but never undertake to give a complete
digest of them; and indeed do either not mention them at all, or where they do,
yet not professedly, but upon occasion of others; and then it self they are
rather supposed than prescribed, or, where prescribed, yet rather as to the
circumstances of their exercise than as to their moral and universal
obligation; so that here, Reason is wholly left even by God himself to the
evidence of its own inquiry; and this not only as to those particulars which
are so plain and obvious as that they even offer themselves without inquiry,
and it is impossible to be ignorant of them without a gross negligence, or a
resolved obstinacy, but such wherein some great Philosophers themselves have
been mistaken, as the universal Providence of God over mankind, which not only
Epicur^s. but for any thing that I know, the Jews themselves did hardly
believe, by whom we find God's care of the Salvation of the Gentiles admired at
as a Act. xi. 18.
strange and incredible thing, and a great argument of his not being an Act. x.
34.
accepter of persons, as it seems they had thought before, and their most
favorable sentiments concerning them seem to have been, that God had indeed
appointed Ra^. Israel de A^^m. c. xxv.
Tu^elary Angels for other Nations, but that himself was their own President^
that their own Souls only were (...): Sy^agog. Juda c. c. ^ip. 25.
immortal, and that none others had any portion in the World to come; that
therefore their Proselytes were truly Rab. Isr. Disp. Cab. de Anim. c. 21. and
ibid Jos. Voysin. in Not. D. Hammond on S. John ii^. 5.
transubstantiate, whence those phrases of being John iii. 3.
born again, and ib. v. 5. 6.
of the Spirit, wherein our Savior wonders at the ignorance of ib. v. 10,
Nicodemus, as being notorious among the Rabbis; and yet the whole
Old Testament seems so particularly designed for their Commonwealth as that
they have little occasion for mentioning God's Providence over other Nations;
but especially also in secondary instances of the Law of Nature, which though
it appears that they have been for time and place dispensed with, and therefore
their universally-obliging reason being more circumstantial, is less easily
discernible; yet their severe penalties without any new positive prohibition,
and their having been looked on as abominable in the very Gentiles, show that
the Church reputed them unlawful for this very reason, as in the question of
Polygamy, of marrying the Brothers relict, and of Usury, and other instances
wherein I believe I should not be unwarrantably consident if, notwithstanding
what others have endeavored concerning them, I should say that they cannot be
clearly disproved by any particular prohibition in the New Testament. And the
general indefinite way of propounding those which are moral and those which are
not in the Old Testament, and the New one never descending to particulars, but
only in general teaching us that what was Typical must needs disappear at the
real exhibition of what they signified, and that all accommodations even in
what otherwise was moral, must now under larger Grace, and greater means, and
clearer Revelations, in all reason be evacuated; the only way of determining
here any thing particularly must be, omitting all Testimonies, to examine the
nature of the Precepts themselves, and thence to discern whether the reason of
their obligation be Temporary or Eternal. To which I may add, that many
Counsels are urged in the Scriptures, many things in compliance to the present
circumstances, and some indulgences to present prejudices even in the New
Testament, and this without particular provision for future observance, which
are not any other ways distinguishable but by Reason. And of the same
necessity it is for all Cases of Conscience, and many other emergent
difficulties which you will frequently encounter in the practice of Divinity:
and it were easy to show how very useful it is for the most important
controversies that divide the Communion of Christendom; and how its greatest
Adversaries, those of Rome, do ground themselves mainly on it in their
exigencies; as in the necessity of a visible Judge of Controversies, in their
detaining the Cup from the Lait^, which themselves cannot deny to have been
granted them in the first and purest Centuries, and in the doctrine of the
resolution of Faith; so in the Remonstrant and Jansenist opinions, in all with
the Socinians, and most with the Sectaries, which are such instances wherein
our men prove it unreasonable to expect particular proof from Scripture; and
the same, I think, might be proved concerning most of the definitions of the
Church against the enemies of the Trinity and Incarnation, as to particular
expressions whereby she disowned their innovations, that they were grounded on
these so Tragically declaimed-against Theological reasons, if I were not
afraid of being redious. But in short, if it be considered that hither all
Controversies are finally resolved, even all Authority into the reason of its
credibility; that all other ways of arguing are plausibly excepted against by
some Parties; but this cannot, there being no opposing it but by it self, which
is a contradiction; that this at length when all is done will be found most
satisfactory, these will sure be sufficient prejudices to invite you, till you
shall find something as plausible alleged for the contrary.

rational Divinity I would not persuade you to imitate the Schools themselves
any farther than as they are rational; for I must confess that one fundamental
defect seems to me generally ingredient in their discourses; that they seem
rather to endeavor the outwitting of their Adversaries than their own
satisfaction: which may be very suspicious both from their making use of
reasons which themselves confess unsufficient for the conviction of Infidels,
which yet they take for strong Consolations of Believers, which might indeed be
tolerable if the efficacy of such proofs depended on any proper principles
which were admitted by Believers and not by Infidels, but depending on pure
Philosophical reasons, as most of these do, which are produced by Aquinas, who
speaks for them L. I. Cont. Gent. c. 9. they seem less excusable; but
principally their determining the Question by, and conforming their reasons to,
some Authority, and that sometimes very contemptibles as of some Heathen
Philosophers, or late Doctors, or at the uttermost particular Fathers (for they
seldom meddle with Councils) and their laying too much stress upon their very
forms of speaking, though not mentioned in the Scriptures, to the very decision
of Articles of Faith, as, I think, might easily be proved in the Question
concerning the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son against the Greeks,
nay often on their very mystical expositions, without the least examination of
their design, or sense, or credibility. Nor is it needful to mind you how very
unsufficient they had been for it though they had attempted it; partly because
of their ignorance in the Greek Fathers, and so being necessitated to rely on
ignorant Translations for those they had (for Greek learning was continually
decaying in the Latin Church from the time of the removal of the Empire, an
early but very remarkable instance whereof (that I may not now particularize
others) we have in that famous cheat put upon the whole general Council of St.
Hieronym. adv. Luciferiferian. and alij.
Ariminum by Valens and Vrsacius and some few other Eastern Bishops of reading
(...) for (...) in the decree of the Nicaene Council; but especially after the
open breach betwixt the Roman and Constantinopolitane Patriarchs, whereby
intelligence with the Orientals was exceedingly interrupted, long before the
rise of the Schoolmen; but mainly because of their great unskilfulness in
Critical learning, to know their original, and their sense in other places,
which yet had been necessary to their design. And therefore I should advise you
to be more ingenuously rational than they are, in the proof of your Principles
as well as in the inference of your Conclusions; that you do not strain your
wit to make any Testimony desensible before you are otherwise convinced of its
credibility, and at least let it not be as a principal motive of your
determination; that you never trouble your self much with those reasons
themselves which, as they are only propounded as probable, so they, are
confessed to be unnecessary; but First, consider the nature of the Question,
whether the arguments, whereon the whole stress of its assent can only be
surely grounded, and which if they be weak the definition cannot be certain, be
Reason, or Authority; and if it be Reason grounded on Authority (as most of the
School-Questions are) that then you urge the Reason no farther than the
Authority will warrant you; and remember that a less will suffice, when all the
use of reason is for rendering the Conclusion it self defensible, for that
proceeds on particular evidences whereby it appears to us, and therefore does
not require a real, but every-way apparent, credibility; but where the reasons
grounded on these phrases and manners of expressing the Article are drawn to
the direct proof of its real truth, or are taken as principles for the
probation of others; it were then reasonable to have recourse to Lombard's
Text, and to examine First, whether that doctrine be really taught by that
Father, who is by him quoted for it? and Secondly, whether it be delivered by
him as his own private opinion, or as the sense of the Church; and whether
dogmatically, or in heat of controversy? if as the sense of the Church, then
Thirdly, what was the ground of it, whether the evidence of universal
Tradition, or aequivalencies in the Scriptures; or the general sense only of
the learned? and whether they took it up for the evidence of its proper reason,
or originally from the Authority of some private person, who was commended in
these controversies, and from whom it was derived by the rest without any new
examination? for in some of these things you will find most of Lombards
principles to be deficient, they being for the much greater part transcribed
from St. Augustine. But it may be a more direct way for knowing the rational
modes of expression, whereon the Church grounded her arguments (in those
Articles which are generally and surely believed for Revelation, and wherein
ancient and universal Authority may be presumed more securely expressive of the
genuine sense of Tradition than our private reasonings, as in the Trinity and
Incarnation) will be by examining what principles of this kind are supposed in
her discourses with the ancient Heretics in the first general Councils, most
of her definitions there being, as I formerly said, grounded on Theological
reason. And therefore I would advise you in general before your particular
enquiries, to satisfy your self how far your resolution is to be grounded on
particular reason, that so, if they should fail, as they will certainly in many
things which yet upon other accounts are very reasonably credible, you may not
presently condemn the Conclusion as simply false because of the falsehood of
their improper principles. And what Questions are only determinable by reason
you have several instances in the beginning of the former Paragraph.

VI. But it remains, for the accomplishment Divine Revelation. And here seeing
the resolution of no Parties is against the plain words, or at least the sense,
of the Scriptures; and it is farther agreed that the bare Grammatical
signification of the words is of no other force for expressing the speakers
mind than as it is ordinarily reasonable to presume that he intended this where
there are not particular suspicious of believing otherwise; therefore for the
bringing these things home to the decision of our present Controversies, it
will be requisite to enquire First, what sense of them is aequivalent with the
Conclusions to be proved by them? and Secondly, what reason there is to believe
that this sense was designed by the Speaker; and where this is ambiguous and
both of them seem applicable without absurdity, the only way for determining
which of them was intended by him must be by examining all those things which
may be supposed as notorious to that Auditory to whose understandings he was to
accommodate himself, and what was only likely to prove efficacious in
reference to his design. And though this later be to be performed by reason. by
examining their misapprehensions; and then considering what were in Prudence
most proper for their correction, and which particular sense is most rationally
reducible to this design; yet the former will be most satisfactorily resolved
by Philological learning: by enquiring how the same Author used the same
expression in other clearer parallel places; how the Auditors themselves
usually understood it, and so to examine the Idiomes either of the place or
Country from other their contemporary writers; and if the notoriousness of the
Speech depended on a matter of Fact, to which it alluded, and of which none of
them could probably be presumed ignorant; then the most sure way both for
understanding that particular phrase and all other discourses whatsoever of the
same subject, will be by clearing the thing it self, and poynting at those
instances, in allusion to which those expressions might have been occasioned,
which had been otherwise unintelligible. And to this end you may more easily
discern First, the necessity of the Tongues wherein they were originally
written; for it is very possible, either by reason of the affinity or homonymy,
or for want of answering words in the other Tongues, for Translations to be
mistaken, at least, not to be so secure as to ground arguments, which may be
very much endangered by the very uncautiousness of the expression; and
Secondly, the Idiomes of those Tongues, which are frequently occasions of
mistakes in them that rely on Translations that render them verbatim, without
considering their importance in the Originals, as is usual both in the reputed
LXXII and the vulgar Latin, which were generally followed by the Greek and
later Latin Fathers, and many perplexities might be instanced which are raised
by them from thence, which have no difficulty in the Originals. And for this it
will be convenient to be acquainted, not only with the sacred Text it self
(which, especially in the Old Testament, are all the records remaining of the
purer ancient Hebrew, and therefore can give little light to the (...) but also
with those Tongues, which seem at first derived from it, as most of the
Orientals are; but those especially into which it afterward degenerated after
the ruin of their Government, by reason of their mixture with other conquering
Nations. Such was the Chaldee, on occasion of the Babylonian captivity, as
appears from part of Jeremy, Daniel and Ezra, and those parts of the Chaldee
Paraphrases which are truly inscribed to Jonathan and Onkelos; and Syriack in
the time of our Savior, as is observed by learned men from most of these
Hebrew words mentioned in the New Testament, by mixture of the Syro-Macedones
after the prevalency of the Grecian Monarchy; for in these it seems more
probable that the words which were afterward imposed in stead of the genuine
Hebrew without any interruption where the things were practiced, and whilst
the Notions were fresh in memory, did more exactly answer them than those that
wanted these advantages; and Thirdly, the Idiomes of the Person himself, of his
wit, of his Country, of his education; for it is clear that the Style of the
Scriptures is very different: either lofty, or low; or eloquent, or rational,
in accommodation to the writers natural abilities. For thus the New Testament
writers have many Hebraisms, and St. Paul some Cilicianisms, as you may find
instanced by St. Hierome ad Algas. Q. 9. and Origin on the Romans. And these
are of great moment both for varying the signification of the same phrases, and
making them more or less-accurately intelligible in grounding arguments on
them; and Fourthly, the Antiquities alluded to; and these not only such as are
directly aimed at, and with approbation, but also such as are purposely
opposed; for thus Maimonides More Nebok. Part. iii. c 29. etc.
conceives the rites of the Zabij very beneficial for giving light to many
positive Levitical precepts, which now, for want of them, seem strange and
impertinent; and it would doubtlessly much contribute to the clear distinction
of those which were moral or judicial, grounded on temporary or eternal reason,
to have known all the Ceremonies of the Chaldaean and Phaenician Idolatry,
though, I think there are no very great assistances for it in our now-extant
writers; and what is related occasionally either by the credulous Greeks or
ancient Talmudists, or the later Arabians, being exceedingly intermixed with
fabulous and conjectural assertions, will need a very prudent and judicious
sagacity to separate what is credible from what is not so. But for what may be
performed from our present assistances in this subject, I shall refer you to
the excellent discourse of our famous Antiquary Mr Seldom de Dijs Syris. And
for the better understanding of these, and the main design of Historical or
Prophetical writers, and those very considerable seeming differences even in
the circumstances of what is only upon several occasions related in themselves
as well as in exotic Authors, and this not only in some frivolous instances,
but in such whereon depend the greatest arguments for Religion; the
accomplishment of remarkable promises and prophesies whose truth was to warrant
very considerable alterations, as in the LXX year's Captivity, and Daniel's
weeks, whence is derived one of the strongest grounds of Christianity; neither
of which can be determined without the auxiliaries of the Heathens; it will be
necessary to study and compare their History, and Chronology, and Geographical
descriptions of those Countries. And for the traditional doctrines of the Old
Testament, because the best means for their discovery seem to me to depend on
saecular learning, I shall therefore defer them to their proper place. In the
mean time for particular and occasional expressions of the new, it were
convenient to be acquainted with the first Haeresyes, and the conveyance of its
traditional doctrines in their plain, and genuine, and unmixed practice, which
will be the best way of making them applicable to our present Controversies,
will be most probably derivable from the Fathers of the immediately succeeding
Centuries; which is the design I would have you principally aim at in reading
them. And concerning those general Cautions to be observed in following them, I
presume you have before your departure heard my thoughts in some of our
Colledg-exercises; and therefore I shall not need to be large in them, only in
general, you may observe a vast difference betwixt what they deliver either as
their private thoughts, or as a generally-received opinion, and what they
assert as the doctrine of the Catholic Church delivered to them from the
Apostles; and here it self betwixt what they reputed such from some judicial
inferences of their own, and what they were more competent Judges of, in that
pure Historical evidence which must have been obvious to them without any, or
at least any difficult, in Commonit.
Illations, and this with Vincentius Lerinensis's Rules; in all times, all
places, and all Ecclesiastical Societies that were founded by Apostles or
Apostolical persons. For in the former I then endeavored to show their
fallibility from that unaccurate way of arguing which prevailed generally among
them; and those unsecure principles on which they relied, which though I then
only touched, as willing to consine my discourse to the time allotted for it;
yet possibly they might be of some use in your reading of the Fathers, inasmuch
as that to some of them I believe you will find most of those errors which in
many instances, by the Confession of all, prevailed in the first three
Centuries, to be easily reducible. Other Rules were advisable for the discovery
of these Testimonial from Judicial traditions, but because the mentioning of my
own thoughts concerning them together with my reasons, would engage me in many
and great Controversies which cannot possibly be dispatched in few words, and
that I have already insensibly exceeded my first designed brevity, I forbear.

Study of Divinity, I shall insist on the method already observed in that. And
though it were easy by an induction in all humane sciences whatsoever, to show
this serviceableness; yet because so large a task might possibly discourage
you, as not being attainable in one life; and their usefulness is very
different in its degrees, some being only convenient, and some absolutely
necessary; some necessary for your own satisfaction, and some for the
information of others; some for more rare and casual, and some for your
ordinary Auditories: and you will find their use in your observation of these,
and may accordingly more or less engage your self in them as you shall find
your self invited by your own Genius, or Curiosity; I shall therefore mainly
meddle with such as are introductory and general, and are of use for the most
necessary ends; your own satisfaction, and that of your ordinary Auditory. And
first, for that which is rational, and rigorously called School Divinity, most
of the terms wherein its Questions are expressed being Philosophical, the use
of Philosophy, especially that of the modern Peripateticks, which in later Ages
has so universally prevailed in the Schools, is so obvious as that I cannot
suspect you ignorant of it. But yet, I believe you may be desirous to be
informed of the distinction of those parts which are necessary from those which
are not; that so you may know at present where to fix your thoughts more
closely in subserviency to your future Studies. For your satisfaction herein, I
think This advice was addressed to a Graduate, who was therefore to have been
presumed to have read over his Course already once. This is warned that others
to whom it does not belong, may not imprudently apply it to themselves.
you may securely give over your reading it distinctly by way of Course, and
apply your self more immediately to the Study of School Divinity; for the
Schoolmen allowing themselves that liberty of largely discussing Philosophical
Questions on the Sums and Sentences; as you shall by this means want none of
them that are necessary, so you will be disengaged from many of them that are
purely heterogeneous. But because they do frequently use this liberty
licentiously, therefore it will be convenient to determine more distinctly what
parts are necessary, and to what ends. First therefore, for that natural
Divinity which is supposed true antecedently to Divine Revelation, and which is
therefore only intelligible by reason; it being commonly reduced to two main
principles: the Divine nature and existence, and the Soul's immortality; and
the nature of its faculties and the manner of its operations, in accommodation
to which all the Divine Precepts and Auxiliaries are designed; the former will
be best advanced by Physical arguments drawn from the nature of the caelestial
motions, and the necessity of an universal ordinator of the second causes both
to their own ends, in th^se that are inanimate, and at least to that of the
Universe, in those that are not; etc. which as they are evidently more
persuasive and sensible, and of a more general accommodation to ordinary
capacities, and such as we find principally made use of by St. Paul himself,
not only in his popular discourses Romans i. 20. but even in his disputes with
the Philosophers, Act. xvii. 27. 28. and xiv. 17. so I do really conceive them
more strong than those Metaphysical ones, that have been lately again urged and
improved with the general applause of our late Philosophers, by the famous Des
Carts. And there is one Question, which as I confess exceedingly intricate,
and yet omitted by most that I have seen of our late ingenious Authors that
handled the argument, at least not considered with that accuracy it deserved;
so I conceive it very necessary for the conviction not only of Atheists (which
yet the unhappiness of our Age has rendered not altogether unseasonable) but
also of some subdivided Christians, those especially of the Roman Communion,
and that is the distinction of true from counterfeit miracles, which will
require natural Philosophy, wherein the notion of a true miracle, by the
confession of all, requiring that it be above the power of natural Agents, for
the determining of that it will be necessary to show how far that does extend;
and because it is yet farther agreed, that all sensible effects of created
substances must depend on matter and motion; therefore this will require two
things to be examined; their utmost efficacy in general; and then particularly
the uttermost efficacy of those that are present at the production of the
supposed effect that is to be tried; the knowledge of which I presume you are
not ignorant to be the very design of natural Philosophy; wherein
notwithstanding you are not now to be confined to the Peripatetick Principles,
but may more ingenuously examine others, and accept what you your self shall
conceive most satisfactory. But the investigation of the particular Divine
Attributes will be best performed by Metaphysics, wherein all the terms
requisite to this way of arguing are prosessedly handled: the nature of Entity
and Bonity in general; the notion of those Perfections, which are called
simpliciter simplices; and the examination of what are particularly such by
their compatibility with others greater than themselves, and which are not
reducible to any other Sciences, from whence it has even in Metaph I. vi. c. 1.
Text. 2.
Aristotle himself the name of Natural Divinity. And from hence also depend all
those terms whereby even supernatural Revelations are made reconcilable with
natural Reason, and upon which most of those objections depend that are indeed
material, and necessary to be answered; for the whole force of these relyes on
such Principles as are universally conclusive in all sorts of Entityes; for
otherwise the confessed Analogical participation of the same perfections in God
and the Creatures will be sufficient to invalidate all Inferences drawn to him
from particular experiments in other Creatures, which are the uttermost that
all other Sciences are able to reach. And to these ends you will find the
General Part very necessary; and the particular, where it goes no further than
the perfect explication of their Nature, and confines it self within it own
most immaterial abstraction. And therefore you may observe this Part most taken
notice of by Protestants, and you will find it most generally serviceable to
the whole design of School Divinity. But then for the other Part that concerns
the nature of the Soul, and of its operations; the supernatural assistances
being proportioned to them, it will be necessary to know them for the
understanding this proportion. And because some of these assistances are
extended as well to the nature of their Acts as their Morality: and the moral
manner of the operations is most answerable to the nature of the Agent, and
accordingly best intelligible by its relation: therefore it will be convenient
to know them, first Physically, as they are handled in Aristotle's books de
Anima and there especially the rational and intellectual degree, and others no
otherwise than as they conduce to the better understanding their present
organical dependent way of operation, and that discourse de Anima separata
which you will find adjoined at the end by some Authors; and then Morally, in
Ethics, from whence you are directly to deduce all those obligations that are
purely moral; and the necessity and design of those that are positive and
supernatural, and generally all those universal Rules, on which depends the
prudential practice of Casuistical Divinity. For Controversy Logic I mention
nothing, because I believe there is little in it necessary to your purpose but
what is borrowed from Metaphysics, or some few things concerning Faith and
Opinion and Demonstration, which you will find sufficiently to your purpose
discussed on the Sums and Sentences. And as it will be thus serviceable in
general to know the main design of those Sciences, and their influence in
Divinity, for discerning the necessity of particular Questions, how far they
are reducible to it; so in particular you may consider, First, whether it was
first raised from any Theological occasion, accordingly to the Rules formerly
prescribed; or whether it be capable of being used as a principle for the
deciding any Theological Controversy? and if it be, then Secondly, whether
that Theological Controversy it self be of any moment? and then Thirdly,
whether that Philosophical Principle be capable of any certain resolution, and
especially in that sense that is requisite for this decision? But for the
improvement of principles of this kind in proving the immortality of the Soul
(not now to reflect upon the piously-designed attempts of several ingenious
persons in this regard) for my part, how convincing soever they may prove in
the event, I can discern no great necessity of having recourse unto them, or
relying on them. For though indeed the existence of God cannot be proved by
Revelation, it being so antecedent to it as that he that doubts of it cannot
admit of Revelation to prove it by; yet is there not the same necessity here,
seeing the Soul may really be immortal, though its immortality could not be
made out from any natural appearances falling under our cognizance (daily
experience furnishing us with instances of most certain truths which are yet
incapable of being proved from such appearances) in which case we may yet be
assured of it by Revelation. For our doubting concerning the proof of the Souls
immortality by reason does not upon any rational pretense oblige us to question
the existence of Revelations; and supposing that the real immortality of our
Souls is attested and revealed by God, our own antecedent ignorance of it upon
natural accounts cannot ground the least suspicion of the Divine Infallibility
concerning it; nay it is from our prime a^tions of such a being most certain
that infinite truths are evident to him which are not obvious to our grosser
observations, and it cannot be disproved that this is one. Supposing therefore
that God has revealed the immortality of our Souls; and that he is in this, as
well as in other Revelations, veracious; and that he certainly does, though we
do not, know the truth even in this particular affair; it must needs follow
that we must be obliged to believe it upon account of such Divine Revelation,
though antecedently we could never have known it by natural discoveries. This I
have only observed by the way, to show the no-necessity of insisting on such
proofs, and to let Atheistical irreligious persons understand how little indeed
Religion is concerned in their weakness; though, I think, I might have added
that deserting this way of proof, and insisting only on Revelation in this
case is not only more secure, but in many regards more convenient and more
aggreeable with the principles of Christianity, and better sitted for solving
difficulties which are less intelligible on other principles. But what I have
to say to this purpose is both subject to be misunderstood, and too tedious for
my present design, and therefore I forbear.

Tongues and Phrases, which will be gotten by reading ancient Authors in their
own words upon other occasions, and for which your own experience will
hereafter be your more satisfactory directory; for the understanding of the
doctrinals of the Old Testament (which you will find very necessary for the
New, there being nothing pretended to be revealed in the New, but what was at
least mystically presigured in the Old, and there being many doctrines at that
time generally believed by the Jewish Church which were not so clearly
expressed in the Old, which as they seem to be connived at by our Savior, so
they seem generally to have been received without any New Revelations by the
Primitive Christians (and yet the way is certainly as fallible in some
instances as true in others, and therefore ought to be accurately
distinguished) the only way will be to examine the credibility of doctrines
that pretend to be originally Jewish Traditions. And for this you are not only
to trust the Rabbis, both for their notorious fabulousness, and their little
Antiquity, and their plain imitations of the Grecian Philosophers even before
our Savior's time, upon occasion of their acquaintance with them by the
Macedonian conquests, whom yet together with Philo and Josephus. I would
recommend to you for the Historical Relation of those opinions and practices
that afterward prevailed, and are frequently alluded to in the New Testament;
but that which is the main design of the primitive Christian Apologies, what
the Graecians had either preserved entire from the division of Babel, or in
after-Ages derived from the Jews, which yet are both more numerous and more
ancient than those that are now extant of the Jews themselves; for by this
means as you shall discover much of that truth which was mystically involved in
the Old Testament, though otherwise certainly intended, where otherwise there
is no clear mention of the Immortality of the Soul, of the Resurrection of the
Body, or the future Judgment, which are the very foundations, not only of
Christian, but of all rational, Religion; but also the Original of many errors
both among the later Jews and Christians. For this therefore I conceive it
convenient to read the ancientest Greek Poets together with their Greek
Scholiasts, and that you do not look on them barely as idle Romances, but as
grave Philosophers and Historians; for such they were reputed not only in
their own times, but also by all their followers, as involving Divine, and
Natural, and Historical notions of their Gods and Heroes under mystical and
Parabolical expressions. Thus the name was used for makers of Laws, for
Establishers of Commonwealths, for Discipliners of youth and women, as you may
see proved from the Testimonies of Homer himself and others by the excellent
Heinsius in his Prolegom. ad Hesiod. Hence they were after imitated by the
Oracles, and accounted Sacred, and Prophetical, and inspired with a Divine
fury, as were easy to prove if I had leisure. But yet because those things are
related on the faith of much later Authors, and are mingled with their own
inventions, and are expressed in dark, and designedly-obscure, resemblances;
therefore two things will be requisite to be inquired into: First, whence they
originally proceeded, whereby will appear both how far they are credible, and
what was after superadded by the Grecian affectation of vain glory; and
Secondly, what was their distinct sense. For the former, I confess the ancient
Grecian Barbarism, their late incorporations into civil Societies, their then
it self being divided into little Republics, which could not choose but
continually allarm them with perpetual Factions and mutual jealousies of one
another, and leave little time for encouragement for Studies, and their late
invention of Letters, or of any means for communicating Tradition to Posterity,
make me unwilling to advise you to trust them for any thing ancient that is
Historical. And therefore I believe your best way were to examine with what
other ancient learned Nations they had commerce, from whom they might probably
derive their Philosophical or Theological learning, and particularly concerning
such notable Persons as were acknowledged to have had some especial influence
in their improvement; such were Orpheus for the old, and Pherecydes Syrius for
the later Theogonyes; whether they were Indigenae or foreigners, whether they
traveled, and to what Nations? And because the ambition of the later Greeks
has endeavored to suppress those testimonies that might seem to make them
beholding to other Nations for what they gloried themselves to be the first
inventors of; either by confounding foreigners of the same name with their
own, and by that means arrogating the glory of their actions to themselves, or
by deriving their Original from their Gods, and those such as were Historically
many or uncertain, as they do with Orpheus, when they make him the Son of
Apollo and Calliope, it were well to collect out of creditable Authors what is
mentioned concerning them, that so you may from other circumstances conjecture
whence they did most probably derive their learning. And there are three
Nations especially, who, by reason of their undeniable Antiquity, and their
established government, and their estimation of Learning, and their
encouragement and opportunities, and public deputation of some orders of men
for that end, might be very credible for the conveyance of the Traditional
Divinity, and who, by reason of their familiarity with the Jews, might easily
have corrected themselves where they had been mistaken: the Chaldaeans, the
Phoenicians and the Egyptians; whereof the two later must needs have been
known to them as anciently as their ancientest inventions: the Phoenicians by
occasion of their notorious trafficking at Sea; and the Egyptians, as appears
both by the affinity of their Tongues and Letters, from the Grecian Apis,
whether the Sicyonian or Argive, supposed after his death to have been
Canonized in Egypt, from the stories of Aegyptus and Danaus in Egypt, of
Tithonus and Memnon and Phaethon in Aethiopia, mentioned by the most ancient
Grecian Mythologists, from the testimonies of very many of themselves, if I
had leisure to produce them; and especially in that most of their Gods and
rites and mysteries were thence borrowed, as is clear, besides others, from
that full confession of Biblioth^^. L. i. p. 86. Ed. Graeco Lat.
Diodorus Siculus related also by Praep. E^. L. x. c. 8.
Eusebius. But that all of them were frequented by the later Philosophers is
abundantly proved by the Primitive Christian Apologists. And therefore it will
also concern you to be acquainted with the opinions of the Philosophers, those
of them especially that are traditional, and who are known themselves to have
traveled to these Countries: for the later subdivisions seem generally to have
been built on the private wits of particular factious persons; concerning whom,
especially the Stoics, what my thoughts are you may easily discern from my
Prolegomena to my dear Tutor's Book de Obstinatione: that if their Rational
discourses be considered as conversant about such instances as are incapable of
solid demonstrations from purely natural principles, such as the Platonic
notions of the Trinity, and the Hierarchyes of good or evil Demons, and the
state of the Soul after death, and the rewards and punishments of the other
World; these will further admit of a twofold consideration, either as to that
use and Authority that may be grounded on their Reasons, and that cannot be
acknowledged very considerable, both because the cases are supposed such as are
incapable of any solid proof of that kind; and the reasons they produce are
therefore at the best only conjectural, and frequently Captious; and they are
unnecessary for us Christians, who have securer arguments from Divine
Revelation; and for affairs of this nature their Antiquity gives them no
special advantage over us, and they are more clearly and closely managed by
later Authors: or as to that purely Historical use which may be made of their
Opinions, how weak soever their reasons are, for explaining those passages of
Scripture, which are expressed in their language and allude to their sense,
whether as approved or rejected. And thus howsoever conjectural the proof of
such Propositions might have been supposed formerly, yet it might merit a
confident assent as grounded on the surer word of Prophecy; nay though they be
rejected in the Scripture as false, yet so it self they may help us to
understand those very Scriptures that were supposed to condemn them. For the
terms being supposed Philosophical, the Philosophers themselves must needs be
presumed fittest to explain their own sense of them (which is most likely to be
the sense intended by the Holy Ghost) and by understanding the terms we come to
understand the Propositions resulting from them, so condemned; which being
apprehended will help us further to discover what is necessary for bringing
such a discourse home to the purpose, which must needs be very advantageous for
discovering the design of the Holy Ghost in it, as that is also for judging of
consequential modes of expression, of which kind are many provisional
definitions of the Church, and doctrines of the Schoolmen. But then supposing
the Rational Discourses of the Philosophers conversant about affairs within
their own reach, whereof they might be presumed competent judges, they may
again be two ways considered: either as to their intrinsic conclusiveness, or
as to the actual reputation they had gained among the Jews, and those other
Nations among whom they were dispersed, for whose use the Scriptures were
primarily designed, and to whose defects they may therefore be presumed to have
been originally accommodated. In the former regard their discourses will have
so much and no more credibility than what a particular examination of their
solidity will afford to a person competent to judge of it; or than the fame of
their skill and integrity in affairs of this nature, might have been conceived
sufficient to persuade to such as were unskilful themselves, and so exposed to
a necessity of relying on their bare Authoty. But in the later, their Authority
may be much greater as far as it may be thought to have been further confirmed
and approved by the Holy Ghost himself. For the Holy Ghost undertaking in an
extraordinary way to supply the defect of ordinary means in the discovery of
such truths or falsehoods as might prove necessary or pernicious in order to the
salvation of mankind; it is to be presumed that wherein he did not offer a
correction, there he presumed the use of ordinary means sufficient. And then
the only ordinary means of discovering their present duty and their future
interests (especially for the vulgar for whose use Revelations were principally
calculated) being natural reason as managed by its ablest Professors, the
Philosophers, they having no other light antecedently to Revelation; it will
further follow, that nothing taught unanimously by such Philosophers, if
uncorrected by the Holy Ghost, was by the Holy Ghost himself thought dangerous
to the salvation of persons obliged, in prudence, to rely on such an Authority;
nay that all things so unanimously agreed on, in matters necessary to be
resolved in order to salvation, if the Holy Ghost did not undertake a new
resolution, were supposed by him to have been already resolved rightly by the
Philosophers themselves, which no less than Divine approbation of such
discourses must needs add more than a bare Humane Authority to them. This is
the sum of what I have more largely discoursed and proved in the forementioned
place, which you may perceive principally to concern such Philophers as are
professedly moral, who as they are also generally applauded by Scholars for the
generosity of their temper and principles; and their aggreeableness to
Christianity; so they are not indeed guilty of that unpracticableness wherewith
they are charged by some less considerative persons. It is true indeed that
they thought the Soul alone to be the essential man, and the body the Organ and
prison of it, and indeed praeternatural to it, upon which account they made its
imprisonment here a consequence, if not a punishment, of its degeneracy, and
its restitution to its primitive prosperity to consist in its complete
purgation from all corporeal faeculencies. But this is not so to be understood
as if they had thought the soul incorporated (upon what account soever) to be
as free from being affected with corporeal impressions, as the Musician is from
those of his instrument, or the Prisoner of the place of his Captivity; or had
accordingly persuaded the Soul to her duty by a naked proposal of its
reasonableness without any prudential praescriptions for making her capable of
reason. For it is plain that they themselves conceived the Soul to be more than
locally united to the body by virtue of the Nephesh as the Jews; or (...) (in
opposition to (...) or (...) or (...)) as the Platonists and primitive
Christians, and it may be St. Paul himself; or the (...) as the Chaldee
Oracles, or the umbra, as Virgil, calls it; which being thought of a middle
nature betwixt material and spiritual beings, and participating of the
qualities of each, was thought to bind the Soul inseparably to the body, and to
subject it to a sympathy in corporeal passions. Thence that forgetfulness of
all its old notions, the (...) or flagging of her wings wherewith she could
formerly freely mount at her pleasure, the (...), the unreasonableness of
matter, the drunkenness with the cup of Lethe represented by Cebes, which made
their so frequent exhortations to be sober and vigilant, imitated also by the
Apostle himself so very necessary. And in compliance hereunto it was that they
held that the truth it self was undiscoverable and unintelligible by impure
persons, and accordingly they were as solicitous in concealing the secrets of
their Philosophy from the profane vulgar as the Pagan Priests were in
discovering their Idols to uninitiated persons; and as the revealers of the
mysteries of the Gods were punished with death, so Hipparchus the Pythagorean
had a monument erected for him by those of his own profession signifying his
death in a moral sense for divulging their Acroamati^ks. So that, though they
held not the body to be any part of the man, yet they held so near a connection
with it as was conceived sufficient to render it incapable of pure and naked
reason (which would indeed have proved unpracticable to such persons) and were
therefore as well obliged by their principles, as they did observe it in their
practice, to accommodate their persuasions to the opportunities and abilities
of the persons concerned, which being considered must needs make them
practicable. All this might have been shown and proved at large if it had now
been seasonable. Nor is this practice proceeding on the principles of the
Philosophers, repugnant to the formal and fundamentally-virtuous motives from
whence only actions are denominated supernaturally-good in the sense of
Christianity: such as Humility, and a sense of our own weakness, and a
perpetual actual dependence on the Divine favor, and a pure and primary
intention of his glory, and no satisfactory reflections on our own condition
here; but a resolute preparation to endure anxieties of mind, and deprivations
of the Divine comfortable presence, and the peace of our own Conscience, and
solicitous apprehensions concerning our eternal welfare, and frequent occasions
of disquietude in the rational Soul, as well as in those outward goods of the
body or of Fortune. For it might have been easily shown how that all these
things as far as they are truly subservient to the designs of Christianity are
admitted and applauded by the Philosophers themselves, and that which is indeed
disapproved by them is not approved by our Christian Revelations. That
humility, and a sense of our own weakness, and a perpetual dependence on the
Divine favor, must needs have been owned by the Philosophers, appears from
what I have said to evince their acknowledgment of the necessity of the Divine
assistance in all good performances, in my Proleg. Sect. LV. LVI. LVII. LVIII.
LIX. to which I shall add nothing more at present. And if doing good actions
for the glory of God, be First, to do them out of a sense of our duty of
obedience to his commands, and a subjection to his Providence (however notified
to us, whether by the light of nature and Conscience, or by positive
Revelations, can make no difference, if the light of Nature and Conscience be
owned for the voice of God) and Secondly, to testify by them our honorable
sense of the wisdom and goodness of God in his Providence even where they
seem to carnal sensual judgments most absurd and rigorous; and Thirdly, not
only to entertain and manifest this honorable opinion in our selves, but also
to endeavor by such our Actions to propagate the like honorable opinions to
others; and Fourthly, to renounce all vain glory of our own, whether as it
signifies a complacency in other men's opinions; or an ascribing to our selves
those actions which had been indeed performed by the Divine assistance; if, I
say, these things be meant by acting for the glory of God; then these
Philosophers, how rarely soever they mention the word, most certainly have
owned the thing, concerning which alone learned and candid persons would be
solicitous. And it may be they who would make more necessary would find it more
difficult to prove than to assert. So also for our unsatisfiedness with our
condition here; if thereby be understood a murmuring and repining at the
condition allotted us by Providence, however ungrateful it may seem to flesh
and blood; that is so far from being commendable in the repute of Christianity
as that it is indeed a very great Rebellion and Perverseneses against the
Divine dominion. But if by our unsatisfiedness here that alone be meant (which
only can be meant the former sense being excluded) an opinion of the
unsufficiency of sublunary fruitions for the satisfaction of our more noble and
capacious Souls; the way of bringing men to such an opinion seems to be the
principal; if not the adaequate, design of this moral Philophy I am now
discoursing of. The greatest seeming Paradox is how to explain how Philosophy
does dispose persons for enduring the deprivation of those good things of the
mind which have an intrinsic moral goodness, such as anxieties of mind, a
senselessness and dullness in the performance of duties, and the other instances
already mentioned. And the difficulty here seems the more considerable because
the two fundamental principles of these persons in this affair, seem, if not
utterly false, yet, very unsecure: First, that God never exercises good men
with the loss of any thing that is really good; and that such are all, and
only, the goods of the mind, which is the only seat of happiness. For by this
means persons are taught not to expect evils of this kind, which must needs
both render them more secure and unprovided for their reception, and the
unexpectedness of such evils would also aggravate, their vexatiousness. And
Secondly, that it is in the power of good men to avoid even all surprisals to
any thing indecent that might deservedly procure by way of punishment any
intervals of Divine displeasure, wherein all their disappointment must tend to
their further disquietment. Besides that by the former principle, God never
inflicting spiritual evils on arbitrary accounts, but in case of demerit; and
this demerit, by the later, never agreeing to a good man (seeing its very
supposition does ipso facto make him cease to be such) good men will not seem
obliged to expect it, and therefore not to be provided for it. But
notwithstanding all this, I conceive it certain First, that understanding all
these things concerning him whom the Philosophers call a wiseman, and we
Christians a perfect man (though they, as well as we, did question the actual
existence of such a person, as I have already shown in my aforesaid Prolegom.
Sect. LXII.) yet I say supposing such a person, all that they say on this
subject would be true concerning him; he would never be obnoxious to
disturbances of this kind, as never deserving them, and therefore would need no
defensative against them. But then Secondly, for those other ordinary persons
who do most frequently occur in ordinary practice, I do confess that to apply
these principles to them would indeed be subject to the mentioned
inconveniences; but I must withal profess that I think it never was their
design to make such an application; and therefore they must needs have been far
from diverting others from such expectations, or from providing against them.
For these weaker persons therefore, it is plain First, that they did acknowledge
such not to act rationally, and therefore unlikely to be moved by rational
arguments; so that their discourses on this account could not have been
unpracticable as if they had only shown them their duty, but not considered
their abilities for practicing it. And Secondly, that in persons acting so
irrationally, passions were not so avoydable, nor their irrigularity easily
separable from themselves, nor their demerit from their irregularity, nor
consequently that th^se dissatisfactions and punishments necessarily-consequent
to such demerit so hardly separable from such passions (such as are most of
those mentioned) could be easily avoiedd. For First they acknowledged a (...)
resulting necessarily from the mere mechanical impressions of exterior objects,
in the inferior Soul; and Secondly, a Sympathetical influence of the inferior
on the superior Soul, upon account of the praeoccupation of sense and sensitive
judgments and performances during the minority of reason, which, according to
their principles, might by virtue of the former impression, incline the
judgment it self to a (...): or (...) to the first (...) or (...), that is, to
believe the things really correspondent, to their appearances, to be such as
they seem, which must needs infer a parity of resentment in the rational, which
had before possessed the sensitive appetite. And thus much they do not deny
concerning their wiseman himself, of the second order, such as was conceived
existent in this life. But further Thirdly, in weaker inferior persons they
thought this sympathy so naturally-consequent to those exterior impressions as
that it could not be prevented by particular ordinary reflections, but by long
exercises, and solemnly-premeditated resolutions. So that to sensualists or
weakly religious persons they both allowed reasons to expect such disturbances
of mind, and the same latitude of providing against them as could have been
advised by any other prudence whatsoever. For though indeed they might say that
God would not permit any real evil to befall Religious persons, yet they never
undertook (^ay they warned the contrary) that no apparent evil should do so
too; or that imperfectly virtuous persons should always value things according
to their real worth, and not be seduced sometimes to mistake their appearances
for realities; or that doing so, they, as well as others, would not prove
liable to dissatisfactions of mind, was never intended to be affirmed by them.
And it might have been shown how most of the disturbances now mentioned are
imputable to the mistakes of weak understandings, and either are no realities
at all, or, at least, not really such as they are conceived to be. Thus those
anxieties of mind, and dullness and distraction in the performance of spiritual
duties, which are usually represented as so discouraging to piously designing
persons, are no more originally than a mere revolution of their humors and
complexions, and mistakes adequately occasioned by the indisposition of the
recipient, not by any malignity of the things themselves. For indeed what
reason is there to conclude their condition bad because their complexion is
clouded with melancholy, a thing as little in their power, and as obnoxious to
vicissitudes, as the vainest of those exterior fruitions so solemnly renounced
by all pious persons? And what else but complexion can be the reason why they
are within a while (without any accession of new guilt) disquieted with
jealousies and scrupulosities concerning that which not long before in a mature
process of judging they had pronounced perfectly innocent, and recover
periodically, when the cloud is over, without any further rational conviction?
Yet this is that which melancholy persons miscall the fruition or desertion of
the Divine internal visitations. For if it were a real consciousness of demerit
that were the reason of such an alteration of judgment concerning their own
condition, either the demerits must be supposed frailties and inadvertencies,
and those are known unsufficient to put us out of a state of grace; or they are
great and habitual, and such cannot agree to persons supposed Pious, who only,
according to the principles of these Philosophers themselves, are entitled to
solid joy and comfort. And the same untowardness of complexion seems to be the
principal, if not the only, cause of that unquietness of Conscience of which
such persons do complain, for if the guilt were rationally grounded, they could
not be the persons we are supposing them. So also for solicitousness concerning
perseverance, it is certain that by the promises of Christianity, he that does
improves his present grace shall not be left destitute in any future exigences,
but shall either have his abilities enlarged, or his temptations proportioned
to his present abilities; which he that believes (as he must who professes to
believe Christianity) can have no reason for solicitousness, and a
solicitousness without reason can be imputed to nothing but complexion. So that
the most likely means of prevailing on such persons practicable in pursuance of
their principles, are; both to persuade the persons that their present actings
are unreasonable and erroneous, and to remove such prejudices as may
immediately be removed upon conviction, and to comply with such as cannot till
in process of time they may be made more capable of better impressions, and in
the mean time prescribing such Rules and exercises as may at once make their
present condition most tolerable, and put them in a state of most probable
proficiency for the future, The only thing therefore that may be complained of
in this moral Philosophy is, that it wants those advantageous arguments for
comforting persons which are afforded by Christianity; which will be no reason
of neglecting, but improving, it by such auxiliary superadditions. And it may
be that want of compliance which is complained of, may upon thorough
consideration be found to be, not such as may so minister comfort for the
present as that it may withal tend to the conviction of his error, but such as
might nourish and confirm it, and detain the person perpetually in so imperfect
a condition, an inconvenience to which Novices in a Religious life are too
frequently obnoxious. For certainly a state of Religion prudently managed would
be obnoxious to fewer disturbances of the rationally superior soul than now we
find it, if indeed to any at all. And lastly it might have been said, according
to sense of the mystical Divines as well as the Stoics, that these
visitations, which are so eagerly aimed at by beginners in devotion, are merely
indifferent, and no real rational excellencies, neither as making the persons
enjoying them better nor more honorable, nor as arguing them more acceptable
to God, both because of the difficulty of distinguishing Divine consolations
from Diabolical illusions, and because they dare not say that true consolations
themselves are distributed in proportion to their personal excellencies, but
many times greater to the weaker, who need them more for their encouragement,
and lesser and fewer to more excellent persons; so that still the doctrine of
these Philosophers may hold, that good men are not arbitrarily exercised with
the loss of any thing truly excellent; Nor are the remedies of these
Philosophers only so stupefactive as they are by some conceived, as if they
were only addressed against the pungency, but did not eradicate the malignity
of the distemper, the same way as a natural bold complexion, nay sometimes
distemper of the brain, does free from the sense of evil at present, which
notwithstanding on sober thoughts will prove as afflictive as ever in this
life, besides the more severe consequential inconveniences. For it was their
professed doctrine that virtue was the only solid security of happiness, which
must needs have obliged them not to accept of any other indolency but what must
arise or be conformable thereunto, which no prudent considerate person will
deny to be not only a solid cure of present maladies, but also a secure
prevention of future miscarriages. And it is really a mistake of the true sense
and design of these excellent persons to think that they made their present
satisfaction so adaequately the end of their Philosophical performances as that
they should make no Conscience of committing those vices which were less liable
to present molestations, or of acquiring those virtues which were either
contrary or not contributive to present happiness, and that solid purity was
hardly intended by them, they being more solicitous for sensual than spiritual
purity; for purity in exterior appearance, than in the intention. For it is
plain that happiness was by them thought necessarily consequent to virtue, and
misery to vice under their very formal notions, which, whatever sensualists
might think, could not leave them any ground of such a distinction of any
virtues that were at present afflictive, or, vices that might advance any
present real satisfaction, which must have obliged them to a prosecution of all
virtue, and a detestation of all vice, without any exception. And then the
advantages they proposed to themselves being only grounded on the intrinsic
nature of the duties themselves, and not being thought the least promoted by
other men's opinions, must needs have made such duties desirable independently
on common fame; besides that they did expressly decry, and teach men to despise,
other men's opinions, than which nothing can be thought more effectual for the
eradication of all vain glory and hypocrisy and conceitedness, of which
uncandid censurers ancient as well as modern have been so forward to condemn
them. I will not undertake to justify their persons in these particulars; but
I think I may very justly except against this way of proceeding to censure
their principles from their practices, both because affairs of this nature
concerning their secret intentions are impossible to be known by men who cannot
discern their hearts, and in such cases common humanity as well as charity
obliges to believe the best; and because there were some of them so wary as
that they never appeared guilty of the least affectation as far as humane
observation could discover them, nay gave evidences of the contrary (it had
been easy to have produced instances if I had not been afraid of being too
tediously digressive) and if the uttermost for which any show of proof can be
pretended were granted, that they had been vain glorious and been so
universally; yet what is that to discredit the goodness of their principles,
(for the defense of which alone I am concerned) the best professions of the
World being apt in their own case to think themselves hardly and unkindly used,
if their principles should be condemned for their unconformable practices? And
I have already shown that such practices, if they had been, must needs have
been unconformable. Thus much may suffice at present for vindicating the
rational use of these ancient Morallists. For as for that pedantick use which
some less prudent persons seem mainly to design in reading them, that they may
upon occasion produce them as Patrons of sentences in themselves, so
intrinsecally rational as that they need no Patronage, I think it needless to
warn considerative persons of its insignificancy, of which the generality of
Scholars are by this time sufficiently convinced.

IX. But then for the discovery of mystical senses which were designedly thus
involved by the Poets and Philosophers, and withal for unridling their public
Idolatries, the ground of these intricacies being that language of the Gods
mentioned by Homer, and instanced in many particulars by Clemens Alexandrinus
Strom. IV. the best means, where there be any regular ones possible; will be to
examine what these were both among themselves, and other Nations from whom they
received them. And these, according to the two ways whereby the Gods were
thought to have revealed themselves to men: either by visible representation of
things whose natures had some Analogy with what they intended, or more directly
and familiarly by way of voice; may seem also to have been twofold. For the
former, you may, I believe, get much advantage from that otherwise reputed late
and unprofitable as well as superstitions, learning of the Grecian
Oneirocriticks, which as they were evidently thought Divine, and the main
instance of that sort of Revelation among all ancient Nations; so they had
incomparably greater advantages for their conveyance to Posterity than any
other kind of learning. And the Graecians being confessedly none of its first
Authors, but the Asiatick Telmissij (whether those of Caria or of the city
Telmissus in Lycia) as Orat. in Graec.
Tatianus and Strom i. p. 224.
Clemens relate, I suppose on Greek testimonies, it seems evident that they
derived it Easterly. And for the Lycian Telmissus, it being, according to
Suidas, founded by Antenor's Posterity, it is impossible that they should be
its first Inventors, seeing that from Homer it appears that it was practiced by
the Graecians themselves before that; and for the other, most of those Asian
colonies being acknowledged to have proceeded Easternly (for most, if not all
the Grecian colonies, that were there, were planted there after the
destruction of Troy) may probably give much light for discovering the secrets
of the Eastern learning, and of those Nations especially that were anciently
famous for it, the Chaldaeans, and the Phaenicians, from whom in all
probability they derived most of their Traditions. And another advantage of
this, above all other, sorts of mystical learning is, that, whereas the
explication of others was either reserved with the Priests themselves, or
afterward communicated to some few initiated persons after very severe and
rigorous trials of their secrecy, as you may see in Lucas Holstenius's notes
upon Porphyry de vita Pythagorae, which it is probable very few would undergo,
and might therefore be more obnoxious to corruption or forgetfulness, which I
suspect to be the true reason of those corruptions among the Graecians
themselves, till they were again repaired by the Philosophers by a new
intelligence with those Nations from whom they had originally derived them; the
ordinary practice and profession of this made its explication also not at all
subject to those inconveniences. So also you will, I believe, get much
assistance from the Egyptian Hieroglyphics (though that also be thought by
many an unprofitable learning) for understanding the ridiculous So Cellu^: (...)
statues of their Gods, and their sacrifices, and vivaria of sacred animals,
and their mystical caeremonies which afterward even they themselves that were
initiated knew not, and many of the Pythagoraean Symbols, and the mystical
Philosophy. For that this was a sacred manner of expressing themselves, besides
many others, in Romans c. II. and cont Cells L. I.
Origin expressly affirms; and that Circumcision was necessary for initiating
them that were desirous to learn it is very probable, upon which account
Pythagoras may be thought to have endured that rite, according to Strom 1. p.
221.
Clemens Alexandrinus (and probably that opinion of many mentioned by Ep. 6. ad
Iren.
St. Ambrose, making him a natural Jew, contrary to the general consent of
others who make him a Tyrrhenian, or of Asia, might hence have had its
original, whereas it is evident not only from the former testimony of Origin,
but also from A charnens.
Aristophanes and Enterpe^ c. 36. 104.
Herodotus, which later place is also quoted by L. I. ^ent. Appion.
Josephus, nay from the very instance of Appion himself, that notorious and
bitter enemy to the Jews, who is yet reported by the same Josephus to have
dyed of it, that Circumcision was afterward derived to many other Nations, and
particularly to the Egyptians from whom Celsus thinks the Jews to have
borrowed it apud Orig. L. I.) and he could not legally have retired to his
Gentile course of life, if he had been Circumcised by the Jews, it being only
administered by them to their Proselytes of Justice whose recidivation was
counted as piacular as that of the natural Jews themselves; which by the way
being appropriated in the Scriptures to the Jews so as that the uncircumcised
and the Gentiles are used synonymously, yet being, before the travels of the
Philosophers, borrowed by other Nations, will give a strong suspicion of their
conveying their doctrines together with their caeremony of initiation. This
observation may indeed confirm the vulgar opinion concerning the Phaenicians,
both because it hence appears that they did not use Circumcision anciently, nay
seem to have abhorred it, which made themselves abhorred by the Jews, and
therefore their receiving it afterward seems to argue them better affected to
the Jews, from whom upon that account it seems probable that they received it
(besides that their good affection to the Jews appears from the very friendly
league of David and Solomon with Hiram, that I may not mention the marriage of
Ahab with Jezabel the daughter of Ithobalus, and that uncircumcision is never,
that I remember objected to them in the Scripture after the time of Saul) so
that together with that it is not improbable that they might receive other
things to which they were less averse, especially if any credit may be given to
the pretended Sancho^^athon. But for the Egyptians and Aethiopians, I do not
think it so easily proved that they received their Circumcision from the Jews.
For First, I know no ground of believing it an innovation among them, the
Scripture it self never upbraids them with uncircumcision. And Secondly, the
Circumcision it self was differently practiced among them from the customs of
the Jews. It was not as with the Jews administered the eighth day, nor as with
the Arabians in imitation of Ismael, the thirteenth year, but to persons fully
adult; such as was Appion when he dyed of it; nor to all persons of their
nation or superstition, but only to some eminently qualified persons that were
sit to be initiated in their mysteries; not only to men, nor indeed to any but
such a^ I have already mentioned, but also to women, and that rather for a
natural cause proper to the women of those Countries, as Physicians conceive,
than any matter of Religion, whatever is pretended at present to the contrary
(for I look on the fable of Maqueda their pretended Queen of Sheba's
institution of it related by Zaga Zabo in Damianus a Goes as not worthy to be
taken notice of) so that at least in regard of them this argument for their
deriving other things from the Jews together with their Circumcision will not
hold. Nor do I think the customs of the modern Aethiopick Abyssens, though
they may indeed argue a Judaizing disposition in their first converters to
Christianity, sufficient to argue any communication of theirs with the Jews in
the time of their Paganism, which is the only thing I am at present
discoursing of. For the other way of expressing the mind of their Gods to them
articulately by voice, as some of them seem to have been seigned purposely for
their obscurity; so I believe you will find very many of them significant in
other Tongues. And for this purpose I conceive it convenient that you were
acquainted with the Theory of the ancient Magic; for, besides that the ancient
Philosophers did by all means aim at the nearest and most familiar conversation
with their Gods, and that the name was not then, as it was after, counted
infamous, and even after it was, they are strongly suspicious of their too good
affections to it from the strange stories of Apollonius Tyaneus, Prophyry, and
Jamblichus, and those (...) they s^ much speak of; many of the primitive
haereticks, who exactly insisted on their footsteps as their Patriarchs, as
Tertullian calls them, did plainly practice it, as Simon, and Menander, and
Marcus, and Basilides, and most of their names of their Aeones, and some of
their sacred rites mentioned in Irenaeus, are merely Magical. And as the true
Religion was by degrees perverted into Idolatry, so Magic in the bad sense
seems to have been nothing but a further degeneration of ancient Idolatry.
Only the notion is creater here than among the Graecians, that they being
applied only to such whom they thought properly Gods: the several virtues of
him that is supreme, or the influence of the Stars, or the president Demons
(not to the inanimated elements of nature) or canonized Heroes; most of them
are exotical (which is the reason of their strangeness in the Greek) nay in
Oriental Tongues which have an affinity with the Ehrew, and may therefore the
more probably give light to the Idolatry of those Nations that are alluded to
in the Old Testament; that these people were especially inquisitive in all
Religions, for the names of their most powerful Gods, and so sometimes of the
true as well as false; for thus I am apt to suspect those imitations of the
Tetragrammaton to have been derived to the Occidentals; thus the name Jovis
among the Romans, which from Suidas and Ennius and Iucius Ampelius, and most
ancient Authors, appears to have been the Nominative case, whence they derived
their Vejoves and Dejoves, and, which brings it yet closer to my purpose, as I
remember, Varro in St. Augustine, makes him worshipped by the Jews. So (...)
and (...) and (...) which you may see instanced and excellently discoursed of
by Mr. Nicholas Fuller in Miscel. Sacr. L. ii. c. 6. and iv. c. 13. 14. which
Author I shall recommend to your reading on vacant occasions, and the God (...)
is by Bibliothee. I. I. part. 1.
Diodorus Siculus also said to have given the Law to Moses. And that these
names were divulged by the Magicians, besides the words of Origin (...)
(produced out of a Greek M S. by the forementioned I. IV. c. 13.
Mr. Fuller, though now not extant, that I know of, nor by what appears after
the diligent search of Petrus Origen^an.
Daniel Huetius the Author of the late collection of Origen's Greek
Commentaries, nor any thing, as I remember, answering it in the Latin
Translation of Russinus, who yet is not famed for rendering the Greek exactly,
nor does himself pretend to it) confirming my conjecture; will be reasonable to
believe: whether we consider that there is no plausible Author pretended for
it, none of the Philosophers; or those wicked uses it was put to in the rites
of Bacchus and Apollo, or that commendation given it by the Devil himself in
the Oracle of Apollo Clarius, wherein he confesses, apud Macrob. Sat. L. I. c.
18.
(...) sure for some such mischievous purpose. So also the God of Abraham Isaac
and Jacob is mentioned by cont. Cells. L. I. and L. iv. p. 183. 184.
Origin as invoked by Magicians, nay and the name of Jesus himself, not only
in him, ib. I. I.
but also by the Sons of Sceva in the Acts. Act. xix. 13.
To which I might add that security of conveyance in them, their superstition
forbidding them the liberty even of a Translation, which was a great reason of
their strangeness among the Graecians, and yet is professedly maintained as
reasonable by De Myster.
Jamblichus, as great an enemy as he seems to Magic, and it seems to have been
the opinion of the Stoics defended by Origin. L. I. p. 20. And for this you
may see the necessity of the Oriental Tongues, which if you cannot spare time
for your self, I would advise you to be acquainted with some that is excellent
in them, whom you may consult upon occasion. But that which I believe would be
most serviceable for this design among the Greek Idolatries, is the Coptite or
ancient Aegyptiack, from whom, as I said formerly, they borrowed very many of
them, wherein though both the likeness of the Character, and the signification
of many of their words, may be easily discernible; yet both in some, the
Idiomes of the Tongues will make the difference more apparent, and where they
do not, it would at least concern you to know their convenience, for the
Historical enquiry, whether among the others there was any thing
proportionable? And possibly you will find some assistance this way for the
understanding those hard mystical words used by the Romans, mentioned by L.
VII. adv. Gent.
Arnobius, though seeing Tages, and the Hetrurians the reputed Indigenae, were
thought to be the Inventors of most of those sacred rites wherein they were
used, I conceive the right knowledge best deducible from the ancient Hetrurian
tongue before it was corrupted by those numerous Greek Colonyes that overspread
afterward a great part of Italy. And for this your best conjectures will be
drawn from those obsolete old Latin words in Ennius, Plautus, Festus, Varro
etc. and other later Antiquaries and Grammarians. And in this whole way of
deriving unknown words to their primitive originals, you must allow many
variations, either for want of answerable letters, or the ignorance of later
transcribers, wherein, that you may not be irregular, it would concern you to
be critically acquainted in both tongues, the borrower, and the borrowed, that
by comparison of both you may conjecture what alterations were likely to
happen. But besides this use of Oneirocriticks and Hieroglyphics and the other
Pagan mystical arts of concealment for understanding the hidden senses of their
Poets and Philosophers, and their public Idolatries; I have observed another
use made of them by some very learned persons, for explaining the Prophetic
books of Scripture, which because it may seem something strange at the first
sight and is not cleared particularly (...) those Ingenious Authors that use
it, and may withal be very apposite for the use of a Scholastical Divine; it
may be seasonable on this occasion to give some account of it* First, therefore
I suppose that God did intend that these Prophesies which were committed to
writing, and enrolled in the public Canon of the Church, should be understood
by the persons concerned in them. For otherwise it could not properly be called
a Revelation, if after the discovery things still remained as intricate as
formerly, and it is not credible that God should publish Revelations only to
exercise and puzzle the industry of humane enquiries, or as an evidence of his
own knowledge of things exceeding ours (though indeed that it self cannot be
known by us unless we be able to discern some sense which otherwise could not
have been known than by such Prophesies) or to give occasion to Enthusiasts and
cunningly designing persons to practice seditions and innovations under the
pretense of fulfilling Prophesies, without any possibility of rational
confutation by the Orthodox, who, upon this supposal must be presumed as
ignorant of them as themselves; and there is no prudent way of avoiding this
uselesness and dangerousness but by rendering them intelligible to the persons
concerned. And Secondly, the persons concerned in these kinds of Revelations,
cannot be the Prophets themselves or any other private persons of the ages
wherein they were delivered, but the Church in general also in future ages.
For as Prophecy in general is a gratia gratis data, and therefore as all
others of that kind given primarily and originally for the public use of the
Church, so certainly such of them as were committed to writing, and designedly
propagated to future ages, must needs have been of a general and permanent
concernment. And Thirdly, the Church concerned in those Prophesies, cannot
only be those Ages which were to survive their accomplishment, but also those
before; and therefore it cannot be sufficient to pretend, as many do, that
these Prophesies shall then be understood when they are fulfilled, but it will
be further requisite to assert that they may be so before. For the only
momentous reason, that must be conceived concerning these, as well as other,
Revelations, must be some duty which could not otherwise have been known, which
must have been something antecedent, for all consequent duties of patience and
resignation are common to them with other Providence, and therefore may be
known in an ordinary way. Now for antecedent duties, such as seem to be
intimated in the Prophesies themselves where any are mentioned, nothing can
suffice but an antecedent information. Besides to what end can this post-nate
knowledge serve? for satisfying Christians of the Divine prescience upon the
accomplishment of his predictions? This is needless; for they already profess
themselves to believe it. Is it therefore for the conviction of Infidels? But
neither can this be presumed on a rational account. For how can it be known
that a prediction was fulfilled when it is not known what was predicted? or how
can it be known what was predicted when the prediction is so expressed as to be
capable of many senses, and no means are acknowledged possible for
distinguishing the aequivocation? Nay will not such a design of ambiguity seem
to such a person suspicious of that stratagem of the Delphick Oracles, to
preserve the reputation of a Prophetic Spirit by a provision beforehand for
avoiding the danger of discovery? For indeed this kind of Prophecy will be so
weak an argument for proving Divine Inspiration, as that indeed it may agree to
any natural man of ordinary prudence. For in public affairs (the subject of
these Prophesies) which proceed more regularly and are less obnoxious to an
interposition of private liberty, the multitude who are the causes of such
evolutions generally following the complexion of their bodies, and therefore
being as easily determined, and therefore, predicted from natural causes as
such their complexions; it will not be hard, at least, very probably, to
conjecture future contingencies from present appearances of their natural
causes. And then by foretelling them in ambiguous expressions he may provide
that if any of those senses, of which his words are capable, come to pass, that
may be taken for the sense intended, so that a mistaking in all but one would
not be likely to prejudice his credit. And at length if all should fail, yet a
refuge would be reserved for the superstitious reverencers of his Authority,
that themselves had rather failed of understanding his true sense than that had
failed of truth; especially if among a multitude of attempts, but one hit in
one sense (as it is hard even in a Lottery that any should always miss, much
more in matters capable of prudential conjectures) that one instance of success
would upon those accounts more confirm his credit than a multitude of faileurs
would disparage it; because in point of success they would be confident of
their understanding him rightly, but in miscarriages they would lay the blame,
not on the prediction, but their own misunderstandings. Now seeing this way is
so very easily pretended to by Cheats beyond any probable danger of discovery,
it cannot to persons not already favorably affected (who only need
conviction) prove any argument of a Divine inspiration; and therefore will,
even upon this account, be perfectly useless. Supposing therefore that it is
necessary that these predictions be understood before, as well as after, that
they are fulfilled; it will follow Fourthly, that where they were not explained
by the Prophets themselves, there they were intelligible by the use of ordinary
means, such as might, by the persons to whom the Revelations were made, be
judged ordinary. For that they should be explained by new Prophets to be sent
on the particular occasion, there is no ground to believe; and if these
Prophesies were so expressed as that they needed a new Revelation for
explaining them, they must have been useless, and indeed could not have
deserved the name of Revelations, they still transcending the use of humane
means as much as formerly. For if they had been revealed formerly what need had
there been of a new discovery? and if this need be supposed it must plainly
argue that the former pretended Revelation was not sufficient for the
information of mankind in the use of ordinary means, and that which is not so,
cannot answer the intrinsic ends of a Revelation. This therefore being
supposed that old Revelations are thus intelligible without new ones, it must
needs follow that their explication must be derived from the use of ordinary
means. And then for determining further what these ordinary means are that
might have been judged such by those to whom these Revelations were made, I
consider Fifthly, that this whole indulgence of God in granting the Spirit of
Prophecy was plainly accommodated to the Heathen practice of Divination. This
might have been exemplyfied in several particulars. Thus first, the very
practice of revealing future contingencies, especially of ordinary
consultations concerning the affairs of private and particular persons, cannot
be supposed grounded on reason, (otherwise it would have been of eternal use,
even now under the Gospel) but a condescension to the customs and expectations
of the persons to whom they were communicated; and Secondly, that an order and
succession of Prophets was established in Analogy to the Heathen Diviners is by
a very ingenious person Dr. Stilling-fleet Or. Sacr. L. II. c. iv. N. 1.
proved from that famous passage of Deuteronomy. XVIII. 15. 18. to which purpose he
also produces the concurrent Testimony of Origin Cont. Cells. L. I. and Thirdly,
that the sense of the Platonists and other Heathens, concerning Divine
Inspiration, its nature and parts and different degrees, and distinction from
Enthusiasm does very much agree with the notions of the Rabbis concerning it,
will appear to any that considers the Testimonies of both produced by Mr. Smith
in his excellent Discourse on this subject. Hence it will follow Sixthly, that
as this Divination of which they were so eager, was originally Heathenish, so
they were most inclinable to make use of those means of understanding it to
which they had been inured from the same principles of Heathenism, especially
where God had not otherwise either expressly provided for it, or expressly
prohibited the means formerly used, and those means, others failing, were most
likely by them to be judged ordinary. And that Oneirocriticks were the proper
means among the Heathens for explaining their Divinatio per somnium answering
the Jewish degree of Prophecy by Dreams; and indeed the principal art of the
Harioli and conjectures concerning Visions as far as they held Analogy with
those representations which were made to other less prepared persons in their
sleep, will not need any proof. It might have been shown how the principal
Rules of the Jewish Cabbala (...) among the Heathen was a curious mystical kind
of learning contrived for maintaining a conversation with their Gods ^ wherein
they were im^^ated by the Gnostics, so they were derived from the Heathen
Occult Philosophy. And certainly it is most likely to have been some kind of
expressing and explaining Prophesies, and some kinds of learning subservient
thereunto, which was so solemnly studied by the Jewish candidates for Prophecy
in their Schools and Colleges, and which made it so strange that persons
wanting that preparation, such as Saul and Amos, should be by God honored with
it; besides that we find the punctual fulfilling of several predictions of the
Chaldaeans by virtue of their Oneirocriticks (those most eminent transactions
of the conquests of Cyrus and the death of Alexander the great were thus
foretold) plainly implying that God himself as he designed those Dreams to be
Divinatory, so he observed the Oneirocritical rules in their signification; for
it is not probable that revolutions managed by such special designs and signal
interpositions of Divine Providence could have been foreknown or signified by
the Devil, he being frequently put to his solemn shifts of aequivocation for
concealment of his ignorance in affairs of greater moral probability, and
consequently of easier prediction. And it cannot seem more strange that God
should observe the Rules of Oneirocriticks and Hieroglyphics in his Responses
when made use of with a pious design by his own people, than that he should
answer the Heathens themselves in their own practice. Thus he observed the sign
proposed by the Philistines for discerning the true reason of their sufferings
1 Samuel vi. 2. 9. 12 and met Balaam in the use of his enchantments Numb. xxiii.
4. 16. and revealed our Saviors Nativity to the Magi by the means of a Star.
And particularly for Oneirocriticks, their suitableness to this purpose will
not be scrupled by them who admit the testimony of Trogus Pompeius ^omniorum
primus intelligentia^ condidet. Trog ap^ Justin Hist. L. xxxvi.
who ascribes the first invention thereof to the Patriarch Joseph, which will
be very congruous to that prevailing opinion among the Fathers and many late
excellent Authors, that all Arts were derived originally from the Jews.
Besides Daniel who was so famous for expounding Dreams, though he was thought
by the Heathens to do some things by the Inspiration of the Holy Gods Dan. v.
11. yet had Chaldaean education, Chap. i. 4. and was a great proficient in it
v. 17. and was accordingly included in the decree for killing the Chaldaeans
Dan. ii. 13. and was therefore after his miraculous interpretation of
Nebuchadnezars dream, promoted to be Master of the Magicians, Astrologers,
Soothsayers and Chaldaeans. Dan. v. 11. and therefore certainly was thought in
things not exceeding the power of the Art to have proceeded according to its
prescriptions; that is, in the interpretation, though not in the discovery of
the dream it self. And they as well as the Jews being concerned in the event
of his prediction must also have been so in the understanding of them. So also
Moses being expressly affirmed skilful in all the learning of the Egyptians,
must therefore be presumed skilful not only in their Hieroglyphics, for which
they are so commonly famed, but also in Oneirocriticks to which they were also
addicted as appears Genesis xli. 8. And methinks that challenge made in the
Revelation Rev. xiii. 18.
concerning the name of the beast, that here is wisdom, and that he that has
understanding should exercise himself in counting the number thereof, (as it
seems plainly to allude to the Cabalistical way of finding out names by
numbers, whereof we have among the Heathens a precedent in L. ii.
Martianus Capella who thus sits the names of Mercury and Philology to show the
congruity of their Marriage besides very many more in the Gnostics in St.
Irenaeus, so) seems to imply that it was, though hardly, in the exercise of
this Art, discoverable even by humane wisdom. Certainly St. Irenaeus
understood him so when he attempted to unriddle him by finding out names, whose
numeral letters, in the Greek tongue wherein the challenge had been made, might
amount to such a number. I do not, by all that has been said, intend that all
Prophesies are explicable by any Rules of Art or suitable conjectures. I know
many of the Heathen Oracles themselves were not. The Oracles expounded by
Themistocles, Curtius, Nebrus etc, did not depend on Art but luck* My meaning
is only concerning the Prophetic visions, and only those of them which are
left unexpounded by God himself; for that these are to be presumed sufficiently
intelligible in the use of ordinary means, may thence be conjectured, that
seeing that, according to the Jews, this is made the Characteristick
distinction betwixt true Prophecy and Enthusiasme, that though both of them
(the gradus Mosaicus of Prophecy only being excepted, which is extraordinary)
do imply a mixed influence of the Intellectual and Imaginative facultives, yet
that in Enthusiasme the Imaginative were predominant, but in Prophecy the
Intellectual; whence also they further inferred that though Enthusiasts might
have Prophetic Instincts as little understood by themselves as others, yet
true Prophets perfectly understood their own condition, and made prudential
reflections, and were inquisitive after the sense, and were therefore
importunate with God for a further Revelation of what they understood not, and
therefore what they did not enquire after, nor consequently was not upon such
their solicitations revealed to them, was in all probability to be supposed
already rightly understood by them without Revelation, and therefore in the use
of ordinary means. Indeed it might so fall out that what was in the use of
ordinary means intelligible might yet actually not be understood, and God might
for that time be pleased that it should not be so, especially where no duty
antecedent might be prejudiced by such a concealment; yet is not so late an
understanding of such Prophesies grounded on their obscurity, but that of the
event, which when come to pass will be found, without any new Revelation,
exactly correspondent. Besides all this for the discovery of Tradition I think
it would very much conduce to be conversant with the Heathen Oracles,
especially the That these also are mystically to be understood, we have the
word of Origin: (...) (says he) (...). cont (...). iv. p. 189.
Chaldaean and Magical; for from them you will most probably understand their
sense, and from them the ancients, Plato and Pythagoras, seem to have borrowed
their opinions, and Porphyry professedly did gather from them a body of
Philosophy in his (...) mentioned by St. Augustine and o- And for your more
clear and satisfactory proceeding in these enquiries, it would, it may be, be
very available to know the common opinions that generally prevailed in the
world upon the decaying of Idolatry, when the Mysteries began to be divulged,
and the Philosophers themselves to speak more plainly, and by the former
Prescriptions to examine how far they were intended by the Ancients, and from
History, and the manner of their expressing it, from what Nation it is probable
they derived them, and what means those Nations had either for preserving them
from the beginning, or after of learning them from the Jews, and always
presume that nearer the Original you shall find them more pure from after
invected superadditions. This method many may think something strange, and I do
confess I dare not warrant it all upon my own experience, and therefore I have
not at all been decretory, and have withal insinuated my reasons, and I
believe no candid Scholars will censure them without a trial, and if upon
examination they be found unsatisfactory, I here profess my self very willing
to be corrected by those that are more experienced and judicious; and you shall
find the main design of them to be the same with that of the learned Fathers
for the first Centuries, only with some additional directions for their
further improvement. But I proceed.

X. The third particular then purely rational, I do not conceive it necessary
for you to trouble your self with variety of Authors, but with those only that
are commended for their ingenious managing it, or who proceed on different
Principles; and for the greatest part of it you shall find it intermingled with
School Divinity, and therefore will not need any different Prescriptions. For
School Divinity therefore, according to the Principles already laid down, for
the Testimonial part on which it is grounded (and the same you may also
understand of the Canon Law: for Burchardus, Ivo, and Gratian, are guilty too
of relying on inconsiderable, and counterfeit, and corrupted Authorities, for
the which in Gratian you may read the Emendations of the excellent Antonius
Augustinus) I advised you after the Text of Lombard, to read the Fathers and
Councils, for the use I told you formerly, but principally for the Historical
discovery of New Testament. Tradition, especially the earliest of them; those
that are counterfeit as well as what are genuine, if they be truly ancient. And
your best order in reading them will be to begin with the Apologeticks against
the Heathens; for these will advance your Humanity studies, and will show you
their design in Divinity; and will be best intelligible by you as least
depending on Ecclesiastical learning, and are most accurately penned as being
designed against the Grecian wisdom, and the saecular Philosophy. And the
names of those pieces of this kind, according to their succession as near as I
can ghess (for it were convenient that you read them continually and in order,
both for your own memory (for the later usually transcribe the former) and for
your better comparison of their conveniences and differences together; and
possibly you may not know them) are these: St. Justine Martyr, his Paraenetick,
Apologies I. and II. De Monarchia Confutation of Aristotle, if his. his Legatio
pro Christianis, De Resurrectione mortuorum, an excellent rational piece.
Tatianus, his Theophilus Antiochenus, Lib* III. Clemens Alexandrinus, his
Protreptick, The greatest part of his Stromat^^, wherein his main design seems
to be to prove the principal tenets of Christianity by the Testimonies of Poets
and Philosophers, though mingled with many excursions against the Gnostics who
seem to be the greatest enemies of the old Philosophy. This Author I would have
you read attentively, both because his style is intricate, and he is full of
quotations, which will otherwise be hardly remembered, and he is one of the most
learned that managed that cause. Tertullian, his Lib. II. Ad Scapulam, De
Idololatria, De Spectaculis. Minucius Faelix, his Octavius. St. Cyprian, his De
vanitate Idolorum, put of which is out of Minucius Faelix, transcribed
verbatim; Ad Demetrianum; Ad Senatorem conversum, either his or Tertullian' sin
verse De vit. Laps. Carm. Origin, his Cont. Celsum. Lib. VIII. Arnobius, his
Cont. Gent. Lib. VII. Lactantius, his Divin. Institut. L. VII. besides that
most of his other works tend that way. Eusebius Caesariensis, De Praeparatione
Evangelica, L.XV. to be read with all diligence. Contra Hieroclem. Athanasius
M. his Contr. Gent: his De Erroribus Profanarum Religionum. St. Gregory Nazian
L. his Steliteutic. in Julian. St. Ambrose, Cont. Symmach. Aur. Prudentius, his
Contra Symmachum, and several passages in his Peristephan^n occur to this
purpose. St. Chrysostom, his Oration adv: ^^nt. St. Augustine his De Civitate
Dei L. XXII. an excellent work. St. Cyrill of Therapeutic. Apologists has been
promised from Leiden, but they have not, that I know of, performed it in any
more than Minucius Faelix and Arnobius, and Lactantius with notes.


These are all that I can at present remember, together with those two Jews,
Josephus cont. Appion. and several pieces of Philo. The writers also of the
saecular History of the Romans from the time of our Savior, which may
contribute much to the understanding them are Suetonius, Tacitus, and the
writers of Historia Augusta usually bound together, Herodian, Xiphiline, Dio
Cassius, and afterward Ammianus Marcellinus, and Zosimus. For understanding
their Ecclesiastical writings, and their full design, and how far what they say
is to be taken for the sense of the Church, it will concern you to know the
condition of the writers: both how they were qualified for knowing it, and how
affected for following it? what violence they used in their style, and
therefore what regular abatements were to be allowed? And really, I think, you
shall find no doctrines firmly relied on by them as the sense of the Church
Catholic but such as were opposed by some of the then extant Haereticks, as
you may see in the account given of it, by Origin in his Praeface to his (...)
and in Pamphilus his Apology for him, by Adv. Hae. LI. c. 2.
St. Irenaeus, De (...). c ^. and ad Praxeam c. 1. and de (...) c. 1.
Tertullian and Alexander Alexandrinus in his Encyclical Epistle against Arius,
before its augmentation on occasion of that Haeresie, by St. Cyril of
Jerusalem also and St. Epiphaniue, and Ruffinus. For this end therefore it
will be requisite to read first those Ecclesiastical Historians that are
ancient: Eusebius with the additions of Ruffinus, Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret,
Evagrius, and the Collections of Theodorus Lector, as you shall, find them
together bound in one Graeco-Latine folio, or in the Translations of
Cassiodorus and Epiphanius Scholaris in the Tripartite History; but especially
take notice of Eusebius, both because the rest do not meddle with what he
handles, but only begin where he leaves of; and because you shall find i^ him
fragments of many ancient and excellent Fathers whose works are otherwise lost;
and because the Ages described by him are the most considerable in this affair.
And then Nicephorus Callistus, who though himself otherwise late, and mingled
with many counterfeits, and so of no considerable Authority alone, yet very
likely had truer Copies of the Authors followed by him that are extant, and the
assistance of some that are not. Then for understanding the Arian
Controversies, which were the principal that employed the Fourth Century, you
may read Gelasius Cyzicenus, and Philostorgius the Arian Epitomized by Photius,
more largely than in his Bibliotheca, and published by Gothofredus. These are
the principal Historians for the first four Centuries and upwards within the
time of the first general Councils, into which I would have you principally to
enquire, this being the uttermost Period that is owned by the dissenting
Communions of Christendom as the most aequal Arbitiator of their Controversies.
But the sullest account of this as also of what Authors deliver concerning it,
and a discussion of the Historical Controversies, and most of what can be
desired in this kind you will find in the learned Cardinal Baronius. But for
his mistakes, either through oversight or prejudice (for he is extremely
addicted to the driving on the Papal cause) besides what Casaubon and Bishop
Mountague, and others of both Parties have performed, you may read that useful
and elaborate piece of the Protestant Magdebur genses, though written before
him, and examine both their quotations, and determine impartially as you shall
judge reasonable. Next, for understanding the Haeresies, besides what you must
be presumed to have met with in the Historians, they that handle them
professedly are: St. Irenaeus, in his first book. Tertullian, Contra
Valentinianos, and in the Appendix to his Praescriptions, if it be his.
Epiphanius. Philastrius. S^. Augustine. Theodoret. Leontius Byzantinus in his
Schola. Theodorus Presbyter de Incarnatione, and others.


After this the works of the Fathers themselves that are genuine, and those
that are not according to their true Antiquity; which that you may know and
distinguish (besides those Ancients: St. Hierom, who transcribes most that he
has from Eusebius, only translating him, and Gennadius etc.) I shall referr you
to Erasmus and others in the Editions themselves, to Possevine's Apparatus,
Bellarmine de Scriptor. Eccles. Cocus, Rivet's Critica Sacra, and Gerhard,
which it were well that you had by you to consult upon occasion as you are
reading them. And what I have here advised you for the four first, after you
have observed them, you will your self be able to improve farther in the later
Centuryes, My design at present is only an Introduction. For the Councills
(which I would advise you to read before their contemporary or later. Fathers,
both because their Authority is greater, and will be necessary to understand
the allusions of particular Fathers to them in opposing the Haereticks
condemned by them, and what Fathers are most to be relied on in what
Controversies; for that is not to be determined by their greater personal
learning, but rather by their approbation in the Church as her chiefest
Campions. Such were St. Athanasius against the Arians, St. Cyril against the
Nestorians, St. Augustine against the Pelagians etc.) you may make use of the
same Praescriptions proportionably applied, for knowing which are counterfeit,
and which are genuine; which Ecumenical, and which only Provincial: which are
very fundamental enquiries to what must be grounded on them; for which you will
find an account, for the Papists, in Binius's Tomes who usually borrowes what
he has from Baronius and Bellarmine; and for the Protestants, from the
aforesaid Centurists, who through every Age bestow a Chapter on that purpose.
The greater Fathers you will find by their names, but for those that are less
voluminous, you must have recourse to the Bibliothecae: both Graeco-Latine and
Latin, especially in the last Editions, though you may find some in the first
that were afterward expunged out of the later by the Popish party. For the
Schoolmen, I should rather counsel you to read the prime Authors than the
abettors of Parties, unless it be, when you have satisfied your self of their
sense, for the closer prosecution of their arguments; for they are indeed very
much improved by their ingenious Commentators. For Aquinas, you need hardly
read any thing but his Sums, which you will find to contain the Sum of his
works (which mount to that voluminousness they have, very much by repetitions)
as well as of Divinity, and that with this advantage, that these were his last
and most praemeditate thoughts, seeing he dyed before he completed them. These
you may read with Cajetane. Then Scotus on the Sentences together with
Lychetus; and for the Nominalists Occham and Ariminensis, if you can get them;
if not, Biel, who is more easily procurable. If you would read any more of the
ancient Schoolmen, let them be such as are not addicted to Factions, or those
that are moderate; such are Bonaventure, Durand, Gerson, Almain, Aliaco and
Cameracensis. For Critical learning you are to take notice of the unusual or
ambiguous Phrases of Authors, and mark them on the margents of the books
themselves, if they be your own, and when you shall meet with any thing
parallel, compare them together, and, if they be rarely observed, note them in
MSS. prepared for that purpose. For the Antiquities of the Old Testament, and
the Jewish Customs in the New, you may read the Talmud, the Chaldee
Paraphrasts, the Old Rabbis, with Josephus and Philo. For the New Testament
sects, the Pharisees, Sadduces and Essenes, besides what you will meet in the
Authors already prescribed and Epiphanius, who had himself been formerly a Jew,
you may read the Trihaereses of Scaliger, Serarius, and Drusius; and others
upon Baronius's Apparatus. But the Praxis of all matters of this nature is
sufficiently contained in those late Editions of the Polyglotta and Critics,
that I need not trouble my self to give you an Inventory of any more Authors,
than what you will find quoted upon several occasions. The knowledge of the old
Egyptian Divinity and Tongue you may have from Herodotus, Plutarch de Isid.
and Ostride, and Aristotle, the Prodromus, Oedipus and Thesaurus of Athanasius
Kircher; the Phaenician from Sanchoniathon in Eusebius de Praep. Evang. from
those Fragments of Pherecydes Syrius in ancient Authors; for he is said to have
borrowed them hence by Suidas, though possibly with alterations of his own, and
the works of Porphyry who was their Countryman; the Chaldaean from their Magic
Oracles bound up with a collection of all the rest of what nature soever, with
the Greek Scholia of Psellus and Pletho by Opsopaeus, and Jamblichus de myster.
Aegyptior. and Chaldaeor. For the Lives and Histories of the ancient Poets you
may satisfy your self from Gerardus Johannes Vossius de Poetis and Gregorius
Giraldus in his Dialogues, concerning the same subject. The Lives and Opinions
of the ancient Philosophers you may read in Diogenes Laertius, Plutarch de
Placitis, the Greek Lexicographers, and very many other ancient Authors,
particularly in what is remaining of Porphyry's work on that Subject, his V^^a
Pythagorae and of Plotinus, and very much of that Eastern, both Babylonian and
Indian learning in the expeditions of Apollonius Tyaneus written by
Philostratus, and the late Mr. Stanley; especially for their Opinions you may
consult the excellent collection of Stobaeus. And though all the three Sects of
Philosophers, both Jonick, Italick and Eleatick, seem originally to have been
derived from the Barbarians, (as you may see learnedly discoursed by Clemens
Strom 1.
Alexandrinus) and so would be beneficial to your design; yet I think there are
hardly any professed works remaining of any of them but the Pythagoraeans and
the Platonists. For the former you may read the golden verses with Hierocles,
and his Symbols with Giraldus on them, usually both bound together with
Hierocles's works, together with the late Collection of Pythagoraean Authors
and Fragments at Cambridg, MDCLXX. For the later, you may have Plato's works
and doctrine cleared by Marsilius Ficinus, and others that have endeavored to
reconcile him to Aristotle. The mystical senses of the Poets (besides what you
shall meet with commonly in the Ancients) you have explained by N^talis Comes,
Vossius de Idololatria, and Giraldus de Dijs Gentium, and among the Ancients,
by Phurnutus and Palaephatus professedly. Their Oracles I have already
mentioned. For their Oneirocriticks, there are Artemidorus and Achmedes alone,
and Astrampsychus at the end of the forementioned Edition of the Oracles. For
their Historians and Geographers, I refer you to Bodinus his Methodus
Historiae, at the end whereof he has a Catalogue of them, and an account of the
times which they lived in, but above all to their late Princes: Scaliger and
Petavius for the one, and Ortelius and Bochartus for the other. And this may
serve for your initiation in these Studies, which is, at present, my uttermost
design.

confusion and distraction in such a variety of them, which will belong to the
Fourth particular of my propounded Method, will be to show which of them are
not necessary to be Studied at the same time, but in order; and for them which
are so, what times distinctly are most seasonable. For the former, you may,
from what has been said, perceive what Studies are requisite for others, and
therefore necessary to be first prosecuted; and besides what are more necessary
for your present uses, and what may as yet be more conveniently omitted: only
it were well you would endeavor to overcome the rudiments of whatever you
design as soon as you can, though they be not of present use, for you will find
them more tiresome when you are older. Of these therefore it will be
unnecessary to speak any more. That therefore, in those that are at present to
be followed, you may avoid distraction, and yet loose as little time as is
possible: you may distinguish them into such as are more easily apprehended,
and entertained with more present and sensible pleasure, and so leave a more
tenacious impression on the memory; and these you may apply your self to
immediately after your recreations, and afer a little reflection, you may
proceed to those that are more serious, and require a greater recollection: for
such I esteem History and Geography; for which I would have you begin with the
Ancients in their own tongues, with the Annotations of noted Critics, who both
may put you in mind, and satisfy you in difficulties which you had not
otherwise expected, and refer you to Parallel places in other Authors, where
you may find that which probably you may sometimes be desirous of, some things
discussed more largely which in your present Author are more briefly intimated,
which it will be very beneficial to read immediately whilst the other things
are more fresh in your memory; and when you are so far skilled in them, you
should have your Paper Books by you, to note, and compare, and exercise your
own conjectures concerning what is singular, and worthy of especial
observation; or such as will more exercise your judgment, and require a mind
more composed and serious, and therefore afford less pleasure in reading, and
upon that account will require more meditation: for such I intend
School Divinity, for which I think it were well you allotted your
morning-Studies wholly, allowing only some time before Dinner for Meditation;
wherein also I would have you not only exercise your memory in reflecting on
what was produced by your Author, but also your judgment, in examining what
means may be used for the determination of the whole Controversy. And the same
way you may take at Night which is another convenient time, in preparing
materials for your morning Thesis according to the Praescriptions already
mentioned. The rest of the Afternoon you may design for the Apologies, and your
other humane Studies. And I think it very commendable if you would employ the
Praxis of your Grammatical Studies for the understanding of the Scriptures, and
therefore that you would with them, together with your Devotions, begin and
conclude your Morning and Evening Studies, but so as that you may afterward
draw from them some moral and practical observations that may be of use for the
ordering or examination of your behavior for the whole day. And the same
advantage you may get by reading the Lessons at Public Prayers in your Greek
or Hebrew Bible, and noting in the Margent with Blacklead the unusual Idioms,
or obscure passage you may meet with, that so, if afterward you remember, or
find, any thing that may contribute to their explication in your other Studies,
you may know whither to refer them. And thus, I think, I have gone through all
the particulars of your present proposal: both how to order your Studies to
Divinity, what were most conducing to that end, and what first to be taken in
hand, as briefly, as was possible, conveniently, though, I confess, very much
more largely than I had originally intended, and I must ingenuously acknowledge
that, as I have already professed my self willing, so I am my self suspicious
that it will be necessary, that I be corrected in some instances, wherein I
cannot pretend to any considerable experience. I believe you may your self
easily guess what they are, for I cannot now stay to enumerate them
particularly; and as I should be willing my self, so I shall advise you to
consult men whom you know to be skilled in each of them severally (if you have
any convenience) before you practice them. But if in any of the rest, wherein I
am able, or in any of your particular Studies, you shall meet with any
important difficulties, I hope you will use the Ingenuity of a Scholar in
freely communicating them to

Your very affectionate Friend and Servant, H. D.


