REMARKS ON Dr. SHERLOCK 's SERMON OF The Danger of corrupting the Faith by
Philosophy.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Lately Published,
AN Apology for the Parliament, humbly representing to Mr. John Gailhard some
Reasons why they did not at his Request enact Sanguinary Laws against
Protestants in their last Session. In two Letters by different Hands.

Sold by Richard Baldwin.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE Catholic Church, AND OF THE CHURCH of ENGLAND, CONCERNING
THE Blessed Trinity, Explained, and Asserted, Against the Dangerous Heterodoxes
in a Sermon by Dr. WILLIAM SHERLOCK, before my Lord Mayor and the Court of
Aldermen.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin in Warwick Lane, 1697.

Remarks upon Dr. WILLIAM SHERLOCK's (False and Treacherous) Defense, and
Explication, of some principal Articles of Faith; in a Sermon, before my Lord
Mayor and the Court of Aldermen, on April 25. 1697.
I No sooner saw the Title of this Sermon, The Danger of corrupting the Faith,
by Philosophy; and the Text, Let no man spoil you, through Philosophy; but I
imagined what was the Author's design. To protect himself from, and to be
revenged upon, the Oxford-Heads, and the famous Decree there made; by an Insult
upon the Learning of the Place, upon Philosophy it self.

He addresses his Sermon against Philosophy, and Reason. Against Philosophy, on
the Authority of a (mistaken) Text of Scripture. Against Reason, on his own
Authority, but not without a just provocation we may be sure; because he found
Reason was first against him.

Reason, Sagacity, Knowledge, Wisdom, are but only several names of the same
thing; and I never heard of any thing that Reason was against, or that was
against Reason, but only Folly or Falsehood. Therefore, tho there have been
some, as particularly great Erasmus, who jestingly wrote Encomium moriae, the
Praise of Folly: I did not expect that a Dean of St. Paul's would have preached
for Folly, because I took preaching to be a serious Exercise.

Dr. Sherlock had a mind to declaim against Reason, and against Philosophy:
Why? For the sake, he says, of certain Articles of Faith, that are in great
and present danger, from Philosophy and Reason, What, Man; will thou say then
that there are Articles of Faith which disagree with Reason, and with
Philosophy? Reason being nothing else but Wisdom; nor Philosophy, but the
Observations and Experiments that have been made concerning the nature of
things, in one word Experience: This Undertaking, to defend the Articles of
Faith, by decrying Reason and Philosophy, is to say in effect, the Articles of
Faith are not consistent either with natural Wisdom, or with experimental
Knowledge. Than which a more dangerous, or more opprobrious thing could not be
said, by Vaninus, or Hobbs, or other the rankest Atheist in the World: In very
deed, it is the whole that Atheists and Infidels would persuade; they reckon,
and so far forth they reckon truly, that they gain their point by such a
Concession.

This kind of Defense therefore, is as false and treacherous, as our Author's
Explication, of the Articles intended, is heretical and antichristian. Non tali
auxilio, non defensoribus istis; the Articles of Faith lack no such Defenses,
or Defenders. Tho all of them are not discoverable by mere Philosophy, or by
natural unassisted Reason, yet they perfectly agree with both; and receive
light and confirmation from 'em.

Well; but seeing the Doctor had taken a conceit against Philosophy; Why did he
choose this Text, so contrary, in the opinion of all Interpreters, to his
purpose? For they are all of opinion, that the Apostle speaks not of Philosophy
in general, but of the Platonic Philosophy; and more especially of the notions
of that Philosophy, concerning a Trinity of Divine Spirits and Substances:
which Notions are the very same with Dr. Sherlock's, as is not only confessed,
but most largely proved, by the chief Assertor of them, Dr. Cudworth. See Mr.
Pool's Synop. Critic. in loc. and Dr. Cudworth's Intel. System, p. 546, and
deinceps.

But let us make an Abstract or Summary of this Sermon: of the Points or
Doctrines, it advances; and of the Reasonings, that are used here, to support
them. And afterward, consider briefly, both the one and the other. He observes,

1. That, Philosophy and Reason are the only things, which those men adore, who
would have no God at all. And that, what makes some men Atheists and Infidels;
even the Philosophic Tincture, and their adherence to Natural Reason: the same
makes others to be Heretics; that is, to be Arians, Socinians, and Pelagians.
Page 1. and 6. and 9.

2. That, to find the true Christian Faith, we must attend only to Scripture.
Not to the mere Words, or Phrases, there used; for such a Confession or
Declaration of the Faith would leave all the Heresies untouched, and all
Heretics in quiet possession of their Opinions; because they all submit to the
Words, and Phrases of Scripture. But for ascertaining what is the true Faith,
we must attend to Scripture only, in this Sense; namely, to what is the true
Meaning of Scripture-words and Phrases: to that Meaning which the Phrase and
Words do imply; rejecting all mixture of Philosophy and natural Reason, in our
Disputes and Inquiries, concerning the Meaning of Scripture. P. 7, 8, 9.

3. That, as we are Christians; and unless we will be understood, to reject the
supreme Authority of Revelation, we must believe those Doctrines that are most
mysterious and unconceivable: notwithstanding any Objections from Natural
Reason, and from Philosophy, against 'em. Whereupon he has this Aphorism; He
that believes no farther than natural Reason approves, believes his Reason, and
not the Revelation; he is a natural Philosopher, not a Believer. P. 11, 12.

4. That, Difficulty of conceiving a thing, nay the absolute Vnconceivableness
of it, must not hinder our Assent to what is contained in Divine Revelation:
because we do not disbelieve what is made known to us, by Sense, or by Reason;
notwithstanding any Difficulty, or Vnconceivableness, adhering to it. And as to
Contradictions, so often objected in these cases: it is an easy matter, to find
Contradictions in what we do not understand; when we will be reasoning on what
we do not understand, there will be Contradictions and Impossibilities
innumerable, in our Guesses about 'em. P. 13, 14, 15, 16.

After this, he answers to two Objections; whereof the first is, That it seems
very unnatural, that God having made us Reasonable Creatures; and thereby
having made natural Reason the measure of Truth and Falsehood to us, we should
notwithstanding be required to believe without Reason. If we must believe with
our Understandings; how can we believe what we do not understand? To this he
answers, by saying; when an Objection is made against any thing, or that it is
(as we apprehend) without Reason, or against and contrary to Reason: the
Objection is of no value, if such thing is not the proper Object of Reason;
such as the Natures and Essences of things, their essential Reasons, their
Unions, Operations, and Properties: which no Man (he says) can pretend, are
the Objects of Reason, or that any Man living can know any thing of them. And
this, he adds, is all the Incomprehensibility and Contradiction that Men can
charge on the Doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation. P. 17, 18, 19.

The second Objection is; To what purpose can such a Revelation serve, or of
what use can such a Faith be, which is concerning things we cannot comprehend
or understand; and to which Reason disagrees? He answers, First; we may use the
World, and every thing in it, as fully and to as good purpose; as if we
understood the Reasons, and internal Natures of things. The Objection, if it
has any force, takes place, as much against created Nature, or the Complex of
things called the World, as against the Gospel-Mysteries of the Trinity and
Incarnation: for the former is all inconceivable Mystery, as well as the
latter. He answers again, Secondly; Tho we understand not the Trinity, the
Incarnation, or the necessity of the Satisfaction by the Death of the Son of
God: it is for all that a very useful Knowledge, even this, that God so loved the
World, that he gave his only begotten Son; to the end, that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life. P. 21, 22, 23.

This is the Substance, and Force of the Sermon. And one would think, on a
general View of this Discourse; that all Dr. Sherlock's Care and Concern were
for the poor distressed Articles of the Christian Faith: that there is nothing
in his Thoughts, however nothing equally in his Thoughts; as the Defense and
Patronage of the (Catholic Doctrines of the) Trinity, the Incarnation, and
Satisfaction. But I know no body but himself, and his Party of Realists, as
they call themselves, that question the Articles of the Trinity, the
Incarnation, or the Satisfaction, in the Sense they are held by the Catholic
Church. It is even necessary to caution his Hearers, and Readers, what this
Doctor's true meaning is, when he pretends to plead for the Trinity, and the
Articles thereon depending. For when he cries Trinity, he means three Eternal
and Infinite Spirits; that is, he says Trinity, and means Tritheism: and this
is the Reason, why his Defenses of the Catholic Doctrine of the Trinity, are
as false and weak, as his Explication of that Doctrine, that I may use the
words of the Oxford-Decree concerning it, is heretical and impious.

The whole Catholic Church believes; that Almighty God is one Infinite and
Eternal Spirit. That the Divinity was so incarnate in the Humanity of the Lord
Christ, as to exert in it the Divine Attributes: as Omniscience, or the
Knowledge of the Thoughts, and of the Future; and Omnipotence, or the Power of
Miracles. Whereupon there followed (as Divines speak) a Communication of
Idioms: Which is to say, in consideration of this Incarnation, we say God was
made Man; and the Lord Christ is true God. But by the former, it is only meant,
that by his Incarnation or Indwelling in the Humanity, it may be said,
(somewhat Catachrestically or improperly) that God became Man: by the other,
that the Lord Christ is true God, is meant; he is God (and whatsoever may be
said of God) in respect of God in him. Farther, that our Blessed Savior by his
active and passive Obedience, did reconcile Men to God, and God to Men, and
satisfied whatsoever the Justice of God required for the Pardon of Sin, and the
Donation of eternal Life; on the Conditions however (on our part) of Faith,
Repentance, and Newness of Life.

As to the Divine Persons, that the Divine Essence or Substance, or the
Divinity it self, can be no otherwise distinguished or diversified, but only
(as the Bishop of Worcester words this matter) by different Modes of
Subsistence, or relative Properties: which, being considered together with the
Divine Essence and Attributes, are named Persons.

In this Faith all the Denominations of Christians do acquiesce. As it is the
Churches Doctrine, and her whole Doctrine about these Matters; it is also
embraced, by all the Sects of Christians, except only the Arians: of which
Persuasion there are none (I think) in England; nor in the Dominions of any
Christian Prince or State. But Dr. Sherlock, and with him some few others,
endeavor to disturb this happy Agreement and Consent; they would divide us by
novel Doctrines, and a new Explication of the Trinity: an Explication which is
as manifest Polytheism and Paganism, as any of the (old or modern) Heathens
were ever guilty of. He has not indeed in this Sermon declared expressly, what
kind of Trinity he pleads for; but he intimates it, and plainly points to it,
at p. 7, and 10. He owns (at p. 10.) it is the new Explication; and at p. 7. the
real Trinity: by which Names (all Men know) he and his Party call their Trinity
of Spirits and Substances, in all their Books. Therefore, tho if another Man
had preached this Sermon; the Errors and Weaknesses, for which it is so
remarkable, might have been charitably overlooked: yet coming from him who
designs to establish a Heresy, that subverts the grand Design of Christianity,
and revives Paganism, under the disguise of a (false) Zeal for the Catholic
Doctrines of the Trinity, the Incarnation, and the Satisfaction; it would be a
very drowsy Neglect, not to give notice and warning of this Wolf in Sheeps
Clothing; or not to detect the Falseness of his Reasonings, as well as the
Impiety of his Principles and Doctrine. I come therefore now to a particular
Discussion of the several Parts of his Sermon, which I have already represented
in distinct Propositions.

The first was: Philosophy and Reason are the only things which those Men
adore, who would have no God at all. And what makes some Men Atheists, and
Infidels; even the Philosophic Tincture, and their Adherence to
natural-Reason: the same makes others to be Heretics; that is, to be Arians,
Socinians, and Pelagians.

He intended it, without doubt, as a mighty Prejudice against Reason and
Philosophy, that Atheists and Infidels pretend to both; and that they seem to
esteem nothing else. And, in truth, a notable Reasoning it is, for a Sermon; as
Sermons ordinarily now go: but from the Press, or in a Book, it is a
contemptible Weakness. Atheists, and Infidels, magnify Philosophy, and Reason:
therefore Divines, and good Christians, must be hence cautioned, that
Philosophy and Reason will despoil 'em of their Piety toward God, and their
Faith as Christians. Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam, is often quoted, for a
contrary Aphorism, namely this: that indeed a smattering in Philosophy,
inclines Men to Atheism and Irreligion; but a Mastery in it, begets and
nourishes Piety and Faith. And surely, Experience has shown, he was in the
right. For those Divines, who have also been Philosophers, are the Men, that
have by their Writings done the greatest and most successful Service to
Religion. Which, in such an Age as this, would hardly have stood its Ground,
under the Management of Divines, that were not Philosophers also.

The Weapons of Atheists and infidels, Dr. Sherlock says, are Philosophy and
Reason: I am of opinion, they must be beaten at their own Weapons; or they will
never be beaten. Yield but to them Philosophy and Reason; the Advantage, I
fear, will be judged to be on their side. I wonder how this Doctor, who is for
excluding Reason and Philosophy, as Enemies to Divine Truth, would deal with
the Atheists and Infidels. But it may be, he would buy him a massy
Quarto-Bible, with Clasps and Bosses, and knock 'em down with it.

And it troubles him sadly too, that Philosophy and Reason are the Weapons of
Heretics; of Arians, and Socinians, and Pelagians: as well as of Atheists and
Infidels. And from hence he infers, as before; that it was this same (scurvy)
Philosophy, and Reason, that made 'em Heretics. Without doubt this was
intended at the Oxford Heads. Those morose old Gentlemen that could not let a
Man alone, in a small slip, but must be decreeing, and censuring, as soon as
ever it is said or printed that there are three Eternal and Infinite Spirits:
it is but fit they should be told their own; that it is they, with their
Philosophy, and their Logicks, or Art of Reasoning, that make all the
Heretics. And yet it is thought, by some odd Fellows, on the other hand; that
Philosophy and Reason never caused that Mischief that our Preacher pretends:
and they offer, to confirm what they say, by the Example of the Arch Heretic
Socinus: Who never understood Philosophy; nor so much as Logicks, or the Art of
Reasoning, till the latter part of his Life. Toward the latter part of his
Life, he got some Skill in the Sophismatical part of Logic, and wrote a little
Treatise about it. However it be; I find, it is like to go hard with Philosophy;
whatever becomes of Reason. For Dr. Sherlock warns, in effect, my Lord Mayor,
and the Court of Aldermen, that they take care, that their Children may never
see Oxford or Cambridg; for there they will catch the Infection of Rhilosophy;
and after that, it is certain they will be Heretics, Arians, or Socinians, or
Pelagians. The Heretics on the other side, many of them, are no less bitter
against this same (damnable) Philosophy: they protest, especially in their
Latin Works; that it is Philosophy that corrupted and debauched Divinity. I wish
in my heart these Gentlemen (the Doctor and the Heretics) do not play booty,
into one another hands: for as angry as they would seem against one another,
it is plain, they join Stocks against Philosophy.

As for poor Reason, and the Hurt she does, in seducing Men from the true
Faith; I will consider what may be said in the case, in another part (a more
opportune place) of this Answer; and content my self to make here this one
Reflection. It Is very surprising to me, that this Doctor should turn
Heretick-taker; when he himself stands censured of Heresy, and in the very
point of the Trinity, by Decree of the most famous University in the World. Not
only so, but some Learned and Orthodox Writers, as great Anti-pelagians as
himself, pretend to a Discovery, that he and his Party of Realists are
Socinians; and start just from the same place, from whence L. Socinus, Ochinus,
Blandrata, and other Founders of Socinianism, first set forth. They prove this
Charge, by two things: First, that the Doctrine of Dean Sherlock concerning the
Divine Persons, is exactly the same, with the Heresy of Laelius Socinus, B.
Ochinus, G. Blandrata, V. Gentilis, and other Founders of Socinianism: they all
teach alike, three Divine Essences, Substances, and Spirits. And whereas,
against this everry one would be ready to object; that three infinite
Spiritual Essences, three Eternal all-perfect Spirits, must needs be three
Gods: against which the Scripture is positive; asserting every where, that
there is but one God. They answered, there is but one God; the Father is that
one God, the true God, the most High God, and God of the other two Divine
Persons. The reason is, the Father only is unoriginated; the Son and Spirit are
originated from the Father, as their Fountain and Cause: this (...), or
Pre-eminence of the Father, does entitle him to the name of the God by way of
Excellence, the one God, the true God, the most High God; nay and of God of the
Son, according to that of our Savior himself, I ascent -- to my God and to
your God. Dr. Sherlock dissolveth the objected Difficulty after the same
manner. For when he has said, three Infinite Essences, three Eternal Spirits;
he says also but one God: and interprets those words, I ascend to my Father
and your Father, to my God and your God, as L. Socinus (and that Junto) did;
namely thus, in these very words. There is no Inconvenience in owning, that the
Father is the Head, and the God, of the Son, as the Son is a Divine Person: for
the Father is the Fountain of the Deity. The Son being only God of God, [that
is, God originated from God, namely from God the Father] therefore the Father
may be called his God. Vindic. of the Trin. p. 154. The other Proof of the
Charge of Socinianism against the Dean; and of a design to introduce it, is;
that the Doctrine of three Essences and three Spirits does lead, by necessary
and unavoidable Consequences, to the Socinianism that is now so called. For tho
Laelius Socinus, Blandrata, and the rest, did abide a while in it; that three
Essences, and Spirits are one God, because only the first of them is (...),
unoriginated as to his Being and Godhead, the other two derive Being and
Godhead from him: yet after some time, it was perceived by 'em, that three
Infinite Essences, three all-perfect Spirits, are not the less three Gods,
because the second and third are originated from the first; for it can be only
said in the case, that the first God generated two other Gods. Originated or
not originated is not what makes a God, but Omnimodous Perfection; therefore
if the second and third Spirits are each of them All-perfect, he is not lefs a
God, than the first is. This Reflection gave birth, to the modern Socinianism,
or the Socinianism that now is; for Laelius Socinus soon dying, his Nephew
Faustus Socinus convinced Blandrata, and the others, that they must no longer
say three Essences and Spirits; but one Essence, one Spirit; and also, but one
Pers Faustus Socinus took Person, and intellectual Essence or intellectual
Substance, to signify the same thing; he thought them, equivalent terms:
therefore, because he plainly saw, that three (Infinite Allperfect) Essences or
Spirits are certainly three Gods; he contended, being neither a Critic nor a
Metaphysician, that as there is but one Divine Essence or Spirit, we ought also
to say there is but one Divine Person. In short; the Dean's more warm Opposers
say, his Doctrine (of a Trinity of Essences and Spirits) is the same that was
affirmed by Laelinus Socinus, and other Founders of Socinianism: and that in
its Consquences, it leads to the modern (or present) Socinianism, the
Socinianism of Faustus Socinus; for the Unity of God, or that there is but one
God, can never be defended, by these Men who hold Person and intellectual
Substance to be the same, but only on the Principles of Faustus Socinus, and
the modern Socinians. Thus, I say, some Orthodox Writers argue; they are
persuaded, that as this Doctor maintains the Heresy of Laelius Socinus; he
must, of necessity, by attending to the Consequences of his Doctrine, make a
Coalition or Closure (in the end) with Faustus Socinus, and the present
Socinianism; if it be not already his Opinion, and Aim. As for Subscriptions,
Protestations, and such like; Dr. Sherlock may multiply them, as much as he
pleases: but they are resolved, never to believe him; for they pretend that his
Predecessors (L. Socinus, G. Blandrata, etc.) never stuck at such Matters; but
made use of 'em as Artifices, to get into Acquaintance and Esteem with the
Orthodox, and then seduce them. But, for my part, I judge the Dean, tho most
certainly a Disciple of Laelius Socinus, may easily be brought off, from the
Imputation of being a Socinian, according to the Model of Faustus Socinus, and
the present Socinians. For, it is true, he holds three Essences and Spirits;
and he thinks, Person and intellectual Substance signify the same thing, so
that in multiplying the one you necessarily multiply the other: and it is no
less true, that on these two Principles, or in consequence of these two
Principles; he can never defend the Unity of God, but on the grounds of Faustus
Socinus, and the modern Socinians; namely, that God is indeed but one Person. I
say, I grant, both these Imputations on the Doctor, are true: and yet it will
not follow, that in very deed he is a Socinian after the Model of Faustus, or
aims to introduce the Socinian Scheme, as it is held by the Modern Socinians.
For having disclaimed the use of Reason, in Matters of Religion, he is bound up
by no Consequences, tho never so clear or certain: for all Consequences are the
Children of Reason; against which (in Disputes of Religion, and the Articles of
Faith) the Doctor has protested, before my Lord Mayor, and the Court of
Aldermen. If it be never so certain, that he holds as Laelius Socinus did; and
never so evident, that the necessary Consequence from thence, is the Scheme of
Faustus Socinus: this can never affect him; who disclaiming Reason, is
therefore discharged of the foolish Trouble, of attending to Consequences;
which are mere Brats of Reason. He may be as clear of any Design to introduce
the Scheme of Faustus Socinus; notwithstanding these Suspicions, of some right
Orthodox Men; as he is, of bringing in Presbytery; which, in my heart, I cannot
think he intends, now he is become a Dean. We have said enough, to his first
Proposition; that Reason, and Philosophy, are the two Idols of Atheists and
Heretics: and that make Atheists to be Atheists, and Heretics to be Heretics.

To the Second.
He says again: That to ascertain what is the very and true Faith, we must
attend only to that Meaning of Scripture which the Words and Phrases do imply:
rejecting all mixture of Reason, and Philosophy; in our Disputes about
Religion, and our Inquiries concerning the Meaning of Scripture. That is, he is
for giving up the Protestant Religion; to the Old Gentleman at Rome; and the
Christian Religion in general, to the certain Triumph of Deists and Heretics.
Reason and Philosophy, he says, must not be admitted into our Disputes about
Religion, or our Inquiries concerning the Meaning of Scripture: no, the Words
and Phrases of Scripture, in their obvious and natural Sense, are the only
things, that must determine our Disputes, form the Articles of Religion, and
settle the meaning of Scripture. For instance, the Question is, concerning the
Transubstantiation: the Words and Phrases are these; This is my Body. My FLESH
is Meat indeed, my BLOOD is Drink indeed. He that eats my FLESH, and drinks
my BLOOD, the same dwells in me, and I in him. Yes, say Reason and
Philosophy, the Lord Christ had a Body, and that Body was Flesh and Blood: but
when Bread is called his Body or his Flesh, and Wine his Blood; it could not be
intended that Bread is Humane Flesh, or Wine is Blood, in reality of the thing,
but only in signification or sign. Bread is the Flesh of Christ, and Wine his
Blood, by way of sign and signification: and to say otherwise is a
Contradiction to the nature of the things spoken of, that is, to Philosophy,
and also to Reason; which assures us that the real Body of Christ cannot be in
Heaven, and on the Altar, at the same time. Exclude, now, Reason and Philosophy
out of this Dispute, and from the Enquiry concerning the meaning of the words
and phrases of Scripture, about this matter, and it will be undeniable that the
advantage is wholly on the Popish side: a Protestant Doctor, and he too a Dean
of St. Paul's, gives away our only Strengths against the common Adversary. Our
Savior says of a piece of Bread, This is my Body; if now Reason and Philosophy
must not interpret, How will Dr. Sherlock avoid, either the Papist on the one
side, or the Lutheran on the other? He cannot have recourse to Sense, in the
case; it is only Philosophy or Reason that must help him out: for tho the
Apostles who saw and tasted that it was Bread only, and not Flesh, might have
appealed also to their Senses; yet we that never saw or tasted the Substance
which Jesus gave then to the Disciples, can know by Reason and Philosophy only,
by nothing else, that it was not his Flesh and Blood.

We argue, He took Bread, and blessed it, and gave to his Disciples; and said,
Take, eat, This is my Body. The Text expressly says it was Bread which he
blessed and brake, and called it his Body; therefore, it was his Body in sign
and signification, not in reality. All this is arguing; it is Reason that
convinces us, not Sense, that the Substance he divided to them was indeed
Bread, not his Flesh, which he neither blessed nor brake.

But if our Preacher says, he believes it was only Bread, because the Text it
self calls it Bread; let him consider, that seeing what was called Bread,
before Christ blessed it; after the Blessing he calls it his Body: We cannot
know, by Sense or by the Text, but by Reason and Philosophy only, that it was
not changed (by the Blessing) into what now he calls it, namely his Body.

The Papists believe it was Bread that Christ took: but because when he had
brake and blessed it, he calls it his Body; they conclude, that by the Blessing
it was changed into the substance of Flesh, but without change of the
Accidents. I say now, tho Sense might interpret the words this is my Body to
the Apostles, who saw it and tasted it, yet to us (who neither saw nor tasted)
those words cannot be rightly interpreted, but only by Reason and Philosophy;
because, tho the Text also calls it Bread, yet not after it was blessed.

I might give a hundred the like Instances, but I think it is not worth while;
for there is no man of any consideration but will acknowledge, from the force of
this one Example, that Philosophy and Reason may be very useful in the Disputes
about Religion, and for ascertaining the meaning of Scripture; and that by no
means should they be wholly excluded, as this Noveller pretends.

To the Third.
As we are Christians, and unless we will be understood to reject the Supreme
Authority of Divine Revelation, we must believe those Doctrines which are
thought to be most mysterious and inconceivable, notwithstanding any Objections
from Reason, or from Philosophy, against 'em. He that believes no farther than
Natural Reason approves, believes his Reason, and not the Revelation; he is a
Natural Philosopher, not a Believer. He believes the Scriptures, as he would
believe Plato or Tully; not as they are inspired Writings, but as agreeable to
Reason, and as the Result of wise and deep Thoughts. I shufft my Candle, and
put on my Spectacles, when I read this; I could not believe but that I mistook,
for want of a better sight: but Spectacles and Candle both stood to it, that my
Eyes had not deceived me. I entreat therefore the Dean of St. Paul's, to
reconcile what he says here, with as clear a Passage, in Dr. Sherlock's
Vindication of the Trinity, page 151. where the Doctor says: Suppose, that the
natural Construction of the words of Scripture import such a Sense, as is
contrary to some evident Principle of Reason? Then I will not believe it. How, not
believe Scripture? No, no; I will believe no pretended Revelation, which
contradicts the plain Dictates of Reason. Were I persuaded that the Books
called Holy Scripture did contradict the plain Dictates of Reason, I would not
believe 'em. If this Vindication of the Trinity was written, as the Doctor
intimates in the Preface to it, by Divine Inspiration; it would tempt one to
think that his Sermon, before my Lord Mayor and the Court of Aldermen, was
composed by Diabolical Suggestion; for no man, not the Doctor himself, will
deny, that they directly contradict one another. The Sermon says, we are to
believe the most mysterious and inconceivable Doctrines, notwithstanding any
Objections of Reason: the inspired Vindication says, we are not to believe
Scripture if it contradicts Reason. The Sermon says, to believe no farther than
Reason approves, is to be a Philosopher, not a Believer: the Vindication
(divinely suggested) says, if Reason approves not, but gainsays or contradicts,
we are not to believe whatsoever Revelation.

As to that, which he intended (I imagine) as a choice Thought; that to believe
no farther than Reason approves, is to believe the Scriptures but only as we
would believe Plato or Tully. It will not help the Preacher in the least. For
when the Vindicator, or any other man, sees cause, to disbelieve somewhat in
Tully or Plato; he considers that, tho they were indeed great men, yet being
but men, they were fallible; it might readily happen that they oversaw in some
particular matter, oversaw what less able Persons might happen to discern. But
when Reason cannot approve Doctrines, said by some to be contained in
Scripture; as suppose, three Infinite Spirits, each of them a God, and yet all
of them but one God: an honest man will easily find a great many Expedients,
much better than the Vindicator's downright I will not believe the Scriptures; He
will say, for example: Let us examine very carefully, whether this
contradictory impossible (and heretical) Doctrine; three Infinite Spirits, each
of them a perfect God, all of them but one; is indeed affirmed any where in
Scripture? It is not found there, besure, in express words; it only seems to
some few Upstarts, to be implied in some Passages of Scripture: therefore, says
the honest Christian, if those Passages bid any thing fair, toward such a
Doctrine; it is better however to suppose, it is more congruous to think, that an
Inspired Writer uses a figurative, or it may be a catachrestical Expression or
Phrase, than that he delivers flat Contradictions, or downright Impossibilities.

In short, I say; there is an honest Medium, between Dr. Sherlock's Impious I
will not believe the Scriptures, and between believing what Reason and Philosophy
do absolutely reject. It is this, That we know the Inspired Writers do often
speak figuratively, nay often catachrestically or improperly: All Interpreters
confess so much. There is hardly a Chapter in the Bible where they do not
observe it more than once; and therefore mollify the words or phrase by a
dexterous Interpretation. So that neither the Vindicator, after all his
pretenses to Inspiration, is to be heard, when he cries, I will not believe the
Scripture: nor yet the Preacher, when he cants to my Lord Mayor and the Court
of Aldermen, That no Objections of Reason can be admitted against the mere
Phrases and words of Scripture. A Rule of Interpreting, that would let in the
Transubstantiation, and a hundred more absurd and heretical Doctrines.

On the Fourth.
He tells us next. Difficulty of conceiving a thing, nay the absolute
unconceivableness of it, must not hinder our assent to what is contained in
Revelation; because we do not disbelieve what is made known to us by Sense, or
by Reason, notwithstanding any Difficulty or Inconceivableness adhering to such
things. And as to Contradictions, so often objected in these cases; it is an
easy matter to find Contradictions in what we do not understand: when we will
be reasoning on what we do not understand, there will be Contradictions and
Impossibilities innumerable, in our Guesses about 'em.

I sincerely believe that God may reveal to us many things, impenetrable or
unconceivable, not only by the Humane Understanding, but by the Angelical. But
it is not true, what our Preacher here adds, by way of confirmation or proof;
namely, that we believe what is made known to us by Sense, or by Reason,
notwithstanding any difficulty or inconceivableness, adhering to some such
things. For Sense tells me, that the Oar in the Water is crooked; that all
distant Bodies for Color are dark, and for Figure round; it tells me also a
great number of things in my Sleep; it presents me (in Dreams) with abundance
of Scenes; all which I disbelieve, for certain Difficulties, or an
Inconceivableness in the things. In like manner, I know but few Men who believe
Reason when it is not clear, but perplexed with Difficulties, or darkning
Doubts, but especially when there is a remarkable and manifest
Inconceivableness. In that case we do not use to call it Reason, but, at best,
Probability and Opinion. Great Difficulties, and a too dark Vnconceivableness,
are such a Balance to whatsoever Reasons; that they lose the name of Reasons,
and are detruded into the rank of Likelihoods: and a very honorable rank it
is, for such kind of Reasons.

But he plainly shows what he would have, and what his desperate Cause
requires, when he so carefully adds: As to Contradictions, and Impossibilities,
there will be many; whenever we will be reasoning about such things, as we
understand not. I shall tell him; not, if there be many, as he says: but if
there be any Contradictions, or Impossibilities; the thing proposed becomes
thereby, incredible. But if we will be reasoning, he says, about what we do not
understand; there will be many Contradictions, and Impossibilities, in our
Guesses concerning such things. I answer, if those Guesses do imply
Contradictions, or Impossibilities; they are such Guesses, as none but Fools
would make: for an Impossibility, or a Contradiction, is an obvious thing; of
which, none but Philosophers of Gotham will be guilty. If we are reasoning
about things, that we do not understand; and there is no occasion, that I know
of, to reason about any thing else: Why must we needs be overseen as far as
Contradictions and Impossibilities? are there no Mistakes to be made, but those
gross ones, Impossibilities and Contradictions?

It has been ever held, by the soberest Divines, that Contradictions cannot be
verified by the Divine Omnipotence, or Omniscience, it self: and that, when we
say, all things are possible to God; we ought to mean it, of possible things;
for as for Impossibilities, they are not the Objects of Omnipotence: God can no
more do impossible things, than he can know false things to be true things,
which (most certainly) is not knowable. A Sermon therefore, on behalf of
Contradictions and Impossibilities, cannot be more absurd, than it is Heterodox,
and universally condemned, by Divines of all Persuasions. But this Dean has
outfaced a Decree, of the University of Oxford, in a matter, in which, if they
had mistaken, all the Universities of Christendom had been obliged, to declare
against them, and would have declared: therefore we need not to wonder, that
now in a Sermon he as little scruples to contravene the known and agreed Sense
and Judgment, of all the several Denominations, or Sects, of Christians. I
shall confess, I am for an ingenuous Liberty; and that too, in Questions of the
greatest Importance: but every body knows, how bitterly Dr. Sherlock has always
opposed (and still opposes) all Dissenters, either from the Doctrine or
Discipline of the Church: therefore, tho I should not object it to another; yet
to him, it is but his due, to tell him of the unparalled Immodesty of his
Dissent, and Separation from the Catholic Church. That he has advanced a
Heresy, concerning the Blessed Trinity; condemned by General Councils, Decrees
of Universities, and Consent of Writers: and he maintains it by Pleas, against
Philosophy and Reason, and for Contradictions and Impossibilities; no less
generally reprobated on all hands, than his Heresy it self is.

On his Answer to the first Objection.
AFter such a Defense of his Heterodoxies, as never was before heard; he
proceeds to answer to two Objections, that never were made; or however, by none
but himself. And tho it is a very injudicious, and needless Confession, of a
conscience to a Man's own Insufficience; to pass over known, and very dangerous
Objections: and answer only to Chimeras, and Follies, never suggested, or
thought of, by any. Yet Dr. Sherlock is overseen, much farther, and worse, than
that; for he not only overlooks the Objections of the Socinians, and replies to
some Weaknesses, that no body would have thought of, but the Answerer: but his
Answers are not, to those Objections; but to something else. The Reader shall
not again rely upon me, if I do not satisfy him; and without the trouble of an
intent Application; that this Maintainer of Paradoxes, had forgot his
Objection, when he came to his Answer. He objects, first:

It seems very unnatural, that God having made us reasonable Creatures; and
thereby made Reason to be to us, the Measure of Truth, and Falsehood: we should
be required, to believe without Reason. And if we must believe, with our
Understandings; how can we believe what we do not understand? I do not believe,
as I said; any Sect of Religious, ever made this or the like Objection. For
it is very obvious to be seen, and understood; that tho we are made reasonable
Creatures, and do believe (or assent) with out Understandings: yet because we
cannot but be aware, that our Reasons and Understandings are finite and
imperfect, often short-sighted, and as often overseeing things; and the Wisdom
and Power of God, seen in the Contrivance and Structure of the World, most
perfect; therefore, he may reveal many things to us, to be believed by us, tho
we understand them not, nor have any other Cause of our believing them, but
only God's Revelation of them. We ought to believe God, as Children do their
Parents; or as we our selves believe sage and sober Persons, in Matters
belonging to their particular Art or Craft; that is to say, believe them on
their Word; and for the just Opinion we have, of their superior Knowledge in
such Matters. To dispute against this, is such a degree of Folly; that, tho I
dare not answer for every particular Man: yet I know well, and any reasonable
body will suppose; there never was any Party of Men, or Sect of Religious, that
could be so overseen. I grant indeed, as it is in the Objection; that, Reason is
the measure of Truth and Falsehood: but not the frail, fallible Reason, of Men;
but the infallible Wisdom of God. And in this, all Sects agree. The Objection
therefore is Chimerical, and was never made by any sort of Opposers: it is only
a loose Thought of this Preacher; and advanced, to help sill up a crude Sermon.
Well, but what is the wise Answer, to a silly Objection? Why, this.

When an Objection is made against any thing, that it is (as we apprehend)
without Reason, or against and contrary to Reason: the Objection is of no
value, if such thing is not the proper Object of Reason. Such as the Natures
and Essences of things, their essential Reasons, Unions, Operations, and
Properties: which no Man can pretend, are the Objects of Reason; or that any
Man living can know any thing of them. And this, he adds farther, is all the
Incomprehensibility, or Contradiction; that any can charge on the Trinity, or
Incarnation. By the Trinity, meaning his Trinity of Spirits. As I said, in the
name of Goodness, what is this Answer, to that Objection? The Objection is; why
should reasonable Creatures be obliged to believe things, without Reason? The
Answer is; an Objection is of no value, if the Matter under dispute is not the
Object of Reason. Plainly, this Answer is not to that Objection; but concerning
quite another thing: namely, that we must argue by Reason, only for or against
such things as are the Objects of Reason. But that this wild Answer might look
life somewhat, he adds; the Substances, Essences, Reasons, Properties, Unions,
and Operations of things, are not Objects of Reason: and no Man living can know
any thing of them. Then, there is nothing, that is the Object of Reason; and no
Man living knows any thing at all: for this Enumeration (Substances, Essences,
Reasons, Unions, Properties, Operations) comprehends all things; even the whole
of created and uncreated Nature. It is certain, and confessed by all Men, but
this Gentleman; who seems to delight in nothing so much as Paradoxes, and
thinks the Pulpit and Press the likeliest Places, to make 'em famous and
remarkable: that, our Reason can be no otherwise employed, but either about
Substances, or their Unions, essential Reasons, Operations, or Properties. What
is it, Sir, I pray; but either, it is a Substance, or the Property, or
Operation of a Substance? For as to essential Reasons, and Unions; the former
(as well as Modes and Accidents) come under the general name of Properties.
Risibility (for instance)is an essential Reason, of Man as he is Man; and yet
it is reckoned among the Properties: as well as Gracility, Grossness, Agility,
Slowness, Whiteness, Redness, and such like Modes and Accidents, are called the
Properties of particular Men; Properties by which they are distinguished from
one another. As essential Reasons are but Properties; so Unions are but the
Operations, of Substances or their Properties. In short, I say, that without
being needlessly nice, Substances, with their Properties and Operations, will
denote the whole Complex of things: their Reasons and Unions are superfluously
added. And if these are not the Objects of Reason, Reason has no Objects at
all: In truth, they are the only things about which Reason is conversant.
Metaphysicians consider spiritual Substances, their Properties, and Operations:
Natural Philosophers consider Bodies or corporeal Substances, their Operations
and their Properties: Particular Arts and Crafts are conversant about
particular Bodies; as Physicians and Chirurgions about the humane Body;
Chemists about Plants and Metals; the Lapidary about Jewels; the Apothecary
about Drugs. Do these Artists know nothing about the Substances, their
Properties or Operations, their Unions and essential Reasons; about which, both
their Minds and Bodies are every day employed? Assuredly, when the Court
desired Mr. Dean of St. Paul's to print this Sermon; they could not have done
him a greater Disservice; than thus to prompt his Vanity, to expose his
scandalous Inadversions, to the View (and Scorn) of every body. It is well
seen, why this Dean has preached against Philosophy; Because he has very
little himself. He has heard of Essence, Properties, Operations, essential
Reasons: and not knowing well what they mean, he guesses, they are things, that
a zealous Preacher ought to bestir himself against. A little more Zeal and
Ignorance might have qualified him, to be one of my Lords the Inquisitors; in
the Inquisition-Office at Lisbon: where lately they condemned an English Mare,
to be burnt as a Witch; because she could signify the Hour of the Day, on a
Watch or Clock, could dance to a Fiddle; with several such little Feats, as are
easily taught to Beasts. Some Persons interceded with the Holy Fathers, for the
Mare; telling 'em, she had been shown all over Christendom: and that these
Tricks had been often taught, to other docile Beasts, especially to Elephants.
But the Fathers, as zealous as some body else against what they did not
understand, answered; she shall be burnt: for admitting she is not a Witch; be
sure, coming from England she is a Heretic.

He says, Lastly: This (that the Question is about Essences, Unions,
Properties) is all the Incomprehensibleness, that can be charged on the
Doctrines of the Trinity, and Incarnation. For my part, to deal frankly; after
all the bustle and noise that has been made, on both sides, about Mysteries and
Incomprehensibles: I know no Incomprehensibleness, or Mystery, in the Catholic
Doctrines of the Trinity, and the Incarnation. I mean, as they are explained
and declared by the Church; and now received, by the Unitarians themselves:
not, as they are perverted, and misrepresented, by a (little) Faction; that
have learned, from Dr. Cudworth, to call themselves Realists; as if their
Tritheism were the only real Trinity.

The Church teaches, that there is but one Eternal All-perfect Spirit; but one
infinite spiritual Substance: and this is what we indifferently call GOD, the
Divinity, the Deity, the Divine Nature, the Divine Essence or Substance. As to
the distinction of Persons in the Deity; to use the Words of the Bishop of
Worcester: When we consider a Divine Essence, there can be no distinction
conceived in it, but by different Modes of Subsistence; or (what is the same)
different relative Properties. The Trinity then is the Divine Essence, Godhead,
or Deity, considered under three different Modes of Subsistence; which are
called Relative Properties, because they distinguish, and because a threefold
Relation arises (in the Deity) from them: and Persons they are called, because
distinguishing characterizing Properties; whether in a common Nature, or in
particular Natures or Substances; when considered with the Nature or Substance,
make what ancient and constant Custom names Persons. These Modes or Properties
are by some more particularly described; St. Austin, and (from him) the Divines
of the Schools, insist upon Intellectus, Notitia, and Amor: or Original Mind or
Wisdom; the Logos or reflex Wisdom, generated by Mind; and the Spiration of
Divine Love. The first, as generating, is named the Father; the second, being
generated, by a condescension to humane Language, is called the Son: the third,
being a Spiration, has the name of Spirit. I know not, as I said, what Mystery
or Incomprehensibleness there is, in this account, which has been the Language
and Explication of the Church ever since St. Austin: and not of the Latin
Church only, but of the Greek; as I intend to prove at large, whenever leisure
and a fit opportunity shall serve.

I see plainly, that the occasion of calling the Trinity a Mystery; except only
among the Unlearned, or not Learned in Scholastic and Philosophical Terms, and
the various Acceptations of them. I say, the occasion of calling the Doctrine
of the Trinity, a Mystery, was this; because the term Persons; and again,
Father, Son, and Spirit, are used concerning the Deity, in a very different
Sense, from their Import or Meaning, when used of Men, or other created Beings.
For all humane Persons, and Father, and Son, among Men, are distinguished not
only by different Modes and Properties, but by distinct Substances, Intellects,
and Wills: but the Deity is but one Essence or spiritual Substance, with one
Understanding, Will, and Energy in number. Thus the Idea of Persons, and of
Father, Son, and Spirit, in God, implying a Notion so very different, from the
meaning of the same terms, when spoken of Men and created Beings: 'twas thought
sit, to say, they are used concerning God, in a mystical Sense; concerning
other Beings, in a profane or common Sense. A Sense of Words or Terms, not so
usually applied; or rather, contrary to the vulgar and secular Use of them, was
named Mystery: at first, I judge, only by the less Learned; afterward, to
conciliate the greater Reverence to the Article, by the more Learned also.

As to the Incarnation. The Doctrine of the Church, has nothing in it, in the
least unconceivable or mysterious: viz. That the Godhead, (as St. Paul speaks)
(...); or (as St. John) (...), tabernacl'd and dwells in the Lord Christ. Not
as in Prophets, occasionally, and in measure: but as the Soul in the Body, viz.
always enlightening and actuating him; and exerting by him and in him the Divine
Attributes, Omnipotence and Omniscience; so that it is truly said, God was made
Man, and the Lord Christ is God. Yet not as Eutyches exceeded in the case; so
that God was changed into Man, and the Humanity was Deified; which, besides
that it is blasphemous, is also contradictory: but so, that the Terms used are
to be interpreted by the Doctrine; not the Doctrine by the Terms: That is to
say; We believe, that God is essentially Omni-present: but dwelling in the Lord
Christ, as the Soul in the Body; that is, always inlightning and actuating him,
by an eternal indissoluble Union; exerting also in him and by him the proper
Characters of the Divinity, Omniscience (the Knowledge of the future, and of the
Thoughts, etc.) and Omnipotence, that is the Power of Miracles, and of
Creation, as was seen in the case of the multiplied Loaves and Fishes;
therefore we rightly affirm a Communication of Idioms, as to the terms: Namely,
that in respect of such an Incarnation, God became Man; and the Lord Christ was
true God.

I say, there is nothing in these two Explications, that is incomprehensible,
or mysterious: there was no reason, that F. Socinus, or (that very learned
Person) J. Crellius, should cry Jargon, and Mystery; and as little that
Catholic Writers should defend these Doctrines, under the name of great
Difficulties, mysterious and inconceivable Articles. There is nothing in them,
that can puzzle either a learned or a discerning Man; nothing that shocks our
Reason, or to which any System of Philosophy yet known makes any opposition. If
what is intended in the Terms of these Articles, is made intelligible, nay
obvious; and if the Explication implies nothing, contrary to Philosophy or
Reason, that is, to experimental or to natural Knowledge: I shall be glad to be
taught, why these Articles must be called Mysteries; a name that offends so
many, and in which others so much delight, both (in my poor Judgment) without
Cause.

To his Answer unto the last Objection.
THE Second Objection is this: To what purpose can such a Revelation serve, or
of what use can such a Faith be; which is concerning things that we cannot
understand, or cannot comprehend? I do not think, any Sect of Religious ever
made this Objection: for how could it escape them, that, on the one side, the
Articles of Religion are not altogether inconceivable, or unintelligible; and
that on the other hand, there is scarce any thing in Nature, or in Art, that is
altogether conceivable and intelligible?

But let us hear what the Preacher says upon it. He says: 1. We may use the
World, as fully; and every thing in it, to as good purpose; as if we understood
the Reasons, and internal Natures of things. No, Trisler; not so fully, nor to
so good purpose, as if we better understood the Natures of things. Nay, we can
make no use at all of it; but only so far forth, as we understand the Nature,
and Reasons of things in it. We can use nothing, to any purpose, till we know
or understand something of its Nature: and no farther can we apply it, and use
it, than we understand its Nature, and know its Properties and Powers. The
matter is so plain, I will dwell no longer upon it.

He says, Lastly: The lapsed State of Nature, makes supernatural Knowledge
necessary: when Man had sinned, he forfeited the Favor of God, and his natural
Immortality; and the Light of Nature could not teach him, how to make Atonement
for Sin; or give any hope that God would bestow Immortal Life. True, but not in
the least to the purpose: it is no Answer, to that Objection; but to another:
namely, to this; why Revelation, or a supernatural Knowledge, is necessary; or
however, highly requisite? The Objection was, concerning a Revelation, and
Faith, not intelligible, or not conceivable: The Answer is, only concerning
Revelation (or supernatural Knowledge) in general, why it was given to Men?
There is a great difference between supernaturally revealed, and unconceivable:
the whole Christian Religion, the Precepts as well as Faith of it, is a
supernatural Revelation; and yet a System so intelligible, that it must be
taught to the Women, to the Poor, and even to little Children. It was not made
the matter of supernatural Revelation; for its Difficulty, Mysteriousness, or
Transcendency of the humane Understanding: but to ascertain the Truth of it;
and to enforce its Authority, in the World.

I have done with the Sermon; and shall hope that such Apologists for the
Articles of the Catholic Church, as first corrupt those Articles by an
Heretical Sense put on them; and then betray them, by a Defense partly false,
and partly weak; will no more be encouraged to print, as well as preach, their
Errors and Follies. I know, it is an usual Civility of the Court, especially to
such Divines as are Dignified, Doctors and Deans; to desire them, to print
their Sermons: I know too, that some heard this Sermon, and moved the printing
of it; who understood well the Heretical Aim of the Preacher, and expected it
would be answered by some or other that understood the Doctrine of the Church,
and how to defend it. Notwithstanding, it were better, that treacherous
Defenses, and false Representations, of the Articles of our Faith, might not be
countenanced out of a (dangerous) Civility to the erroneous Person: or Poison
be sold, and even cried about the Streets; from an expectation of some good
Antidote, that may be found against it; I mean, that it might not be sold and
cried about, by direction of an Honorable Court, only in compliment to the
mere Station or Post, in which Mr. Preacher happens to be.

As for him, we know beforehand, what his Defense will be; the same that he
always makes, on this occasion: as he has answered to the Oxford-Heads, to Dr.
S -- th, and to the Author of A Judgment of the Controversy, between Dr. S --
th and Dr. Sher-Iock; that his Opposer is a Sabellian, or a Socinian. By which
Insolences, and Falsehoods, he has at last so provoked every body; that the
Charge of Socinianism is now brought home, to himself: and may it be left,
where it is so well deserved; and so truly imputed. There is nothing more true,
than that his Sentiments about the Trinity are the same, with those of Laelius
Socinus, V. Gentilis, G. Blandrata, J. Lismaninus, and other Founders of
Socinianism: and that he can never defend the Unity of God, on those
Principles. He will be led, by a necessary Chain of Consequences, to the Scheme
of Faustus Socinus: which is built on this Mistake, common to him and Dr.
Sherlock; that Person and a particular intelligent Essence or Substance, are
equivalent terms, so that in saying three Persons, you say also three Essences.
The Ground of Faustus Socinus, and which if true, all Men grant that his Scheme
also of Religion would be true, is, that Person and a particular intelligent
Substance are the same; that as often as you multiply one, you multiply the
other: from whence Faustus concluded, we must not say three Divine Persons;
because it is a granting three Divine Substances or Essences, which would be
three Gods. Lest Dr. Sherlock should deny, that he takes the same Ground with
Faustus Socinus; and therefore, that in consequence their Schemes are
coincident; I will subjoin his very Words: A Person, and an intelligent
Substance, are reciprocal terms: and three distinct Persons, are three distinct
numerical Substances; and one numerical intelligent Substance, is but one
numerical Person. Vindic. p. 69. Again, How can three distinct Persons have but
one numerical Substance? What is the Distinction, between Essence, Personality,
and Subsistence? p. 139.

To conclude; All the Difference between F. Socinus and this Man is; Socinus
saw the Consequences of his Principles, without a Monitor: the other, even when
admonished, does not, or (as some think) will not see them.

A POSTSCRIPT By another Hand.
THIS Author has told his Reader, p. 7. that Dr. Sh. has not indeed in this
Sermon declared expressly, what kind of Trinity he pleads for; but he intimates
it, and plainly points to it, at p. 7, and 10. But besides what is there said,
for making known the Dean's Doctrine of a Trinity of Spirits and Substances, I
conceive it may give greater Evidence of it, to cite a Passage or two
concerning it out of his Book, The Vindication of the Doctrine of the Blessed
Trinity, etc. where we find, p. 66. It is plain, the Persons are perfectly
distinct, for they are three distinct and infinite Minds. -- To say, they are
three Divine Persons, and not three distinct Infinite Minds, is both Heresy and
Nonsense. They are three intelligent Beings. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are
as really distinct Persons as Peter, James, and John, (p. 105.) They are three
Holy Spirits, p. 258. There is no Contradiction that three Infinite Minds
should be absolutely perfect, in Wisdom, Goodness, Justice and Power; for these
are Perfections that may be in more than one, p. 81. And p. 47. We must allow
the Divine Persons to be real substantial Beings -- the three Divine Persons
are substantially distinct. This now is that Doctrine which Dr. Sherlock must
be understood to plead for in this Sermon. It is the Mystery of this Trinity,
of which he says, p. 12. The Inconceivableness can be no Argument against the
Truth of the Revelation, or that Sense of the Words which contains such
Mysteries. These are the things (he says) we must believe, tho we do not see;
things which we have no natural Notion or Conception of, things that are not
evident to natural Reason. The meaning is plainly this; We must believe his
Doctrine of three distinct and Infinite Minds and Spirits, however it does in
our clearest Reason, improved also by most evident Revelation, introduce the
Worship of three Gods; for what is so evident both in Reason and Revelation, as
that God is one Infinite Mind and Spirit, and not three? But Dr. Sh. has
devised some pretty new terms, such as Self-consciousness and mutual
Consciousness, whereby to elude the Testimony of Holy Scripture concerning the
perfect Oneness of God: but Reason contradicts him, and will not suffer him to
destroy that glorious Attribute under the notion of unconceivable Mystery: She
says, it is not Mystery, but a plain Inconsistency; therefore Dr. Sh. would have
her Mouth stopped, or our Ears stopped, that we may not hear what Reason says,
tho in consent with Revelation; or at least that we should give no heed to what
she says.

Our Author has told us, that the Oxford-Decree condemns this Doctrine as
Impious and Heretical; contrary to the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and
the Church of England. But if we will believe this Preacher, the Oxford-Heads
have passed that Sentence, because they give too much heed to natural Reason
and Philosophy; and exalt what those say, even above Revelation. This brings to
my mind what the late Archbishop of Blessed Memory determined in the Dispute
between Reason and Revelation. Dr. Sherlock did him a great deal of Right in a
Sermon upon the sad occasion of his Death, I hope he will not now despise his
Judgment. That great Man upon 1 John 4.1. says, 1. That Reason is the Faculty
whereby Revelations are to be discerned. 2. All supernatural Revelation
supposes the Truth of the Principles of natural Religion. 3. All Reasonings
about Divine Revelations must necessarily be governed by the Principles of
natural Religion, that is, by those Apprehensions which Men naturally have of
the Divine Perfections, and by the clear Notions of Good and Evil, which are
imprinted upon our Natures. Because we have no other way to judge of what is
worthy of God, and credible to be revealed by him, and what not, but by natural
Notions which we have of God, and of his essential Perfections -- and by these
Principles likewise we are to interpret what God has revealed; and when any
doubt arises concerning the Meaning of any Divine Revelation, (as that of the
Holy Scriptures) we are to govern our selves in the Interpretation of it, by
what is most agreeable to those natural Notions which we have of God; and we
have all the Reason in the World to reject that Sense which is contrary
thereto. 4. Nothing ought to be received as a Revelation from God, which
plainly contradicts the Principles of natural Religion, or overthrows the
Certainty of them. Under this Head that excellent Man concludes; That a Miracle
is not enough to give credit to a Prophet that teaches any thing, contrary to
that natural Notion which Men have, That there is but one God, who only ought
to be worshipped. Thus we see that in the Judgment of the late Archbishop, Dr.
Sherlock's Trinity would not be made credible, tho a Miracle should be wrought
in Testimony of it, because it contradicts the Principles of natural Religion,
that is, of natural Reason.

FINIS.

