ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Mr. John Gadbury's ALMANAC, OR DIARY FOR The Year of our
Lord 1682.

BY THOMAS DANGERFEILD.

And Printed for the Author.

Published by Langley Curtis, at the Sign of Sir Edmund-Bury Godfrey, in
Goat-Court on Ludgate Hill. 1682.

MEeting with Mr. John Gadbury's Almanac, or Diary, for the year 1682. Printed
for the Company of Stationers (with more consideration of Gain than Loyalty) I
could not but take notice of his scandalous Reflections, by them Printed, and
by him, according to the Old Papistical Method of Lying, thrown upon my self:
Of which I take not so much regard under my private Circumstances, as under
that public Circumstance of being the King's Evidence against him the said
Gadbury, and several of his Fellow-Conspirators against the Life of His
Majesty, and the Peace of the Kingdom; I say Conspirators; for what I then
swore, I am ready still to maintain and justify. The Company of Stationers,
when they saw Mr. Gadbury's famous Lines, might have been so kind to have
consulted me, before they Printed such scandalous Aspersions upon my Evidence,
and the Discoveries I made. But since they have made them public, Gadbury
shall not think to wipe off so easily the Stains and Blurs of his denied
Complyances with Treason, by calling me Buffoon, and Scoundrel. But it is so
natural for an Astrologer to Lie, that I am in very great hopes that the World
will give no more credit to him than is his due; which is in verity none at
all. It Is a strange thing to me, that He who, when he was accused by my self
before the King and Council, and was then asked this Question by the King
(viz.) If he had consulted his Stars, to know whether he should be sent to
Newgate or to the Gatehouse, and could tell no more what Answer to make, than a
Horse: Or that He who can tell not so much as a common Shepherd, when 'twill
Rain, when 'twill Snow, when 'twill Hail; and has made such a silly Conjecture
of the present Raging Storms, by crying, Somewhat Windy at the beginning,
should be so impudent, as to prognosticate the Changes and Alterations of
Supreme Councils, and National Governments, and bring the Planets and Stars to
vouch his paltry Impositions upon the People. For this reason it was that the
Chaldeans and Mathematicians, (for by those names the Fortune Tellers, and
Scheme-Erectors of those Times, commonly assumed to themselves) were several
times expelled Italy; particularly in the Time of Tiberius, who ordered one
Thrasyllus by name, for his Lying, to be thrown into the Sea. Secondly, in the
time of Claudius, at what time one of their Ringleaders, called Pituanius, was
cast headlong from the Tarpeian Rock into Tybur. And then again in the Time of
Vespasian; certainly the Chaldean, Gadbury, cannot pretend to any more Art than
they did; and how he a Professor of an Impostor, infamous, we find as well to
Heathenism as Christianity, should now aspire to spit in the face of Truth, I
cannot easily understand, unless it be that he is an utter Enemy to that which
he never did, or could write in his Life. Surely he forgot to consult the
Stars, whether I would answer him or not; for if he had, he would never have
had the Impudence to deny what he does. And now Mr. John Gadbury to the point,
in the management of which I shall address my self to your Chaldeanship, in the
common terms of You and I, for brevities sake; and you shall have the honor
to have your You put into Dominical Letters, because You are an Almanack-maker,
and signally black is the Dominican Color.

You say that meeting with the Earl of Castlemaines Manifesto, and in p. 96.
your Name mentioned as subpena'd to testify at his Lordships Trial, with this
mark, That You never had any discourse with Dangerfeild about his Lordship, as
the said Dangerfeild pretended, And being demanded by many of your particular
Friends, and others, whether the thing his Lordship said there were true. You
did and do aver it for a truth, and as true as truth itself. And also You
farther aver, that You never had discourse with Dangerfeild, either about his
Lordship, or concerning any matter or Person else, as having never seen him but
twice in your life before he appeared against You at the Council, and then but
transiently neither.

As to his Lordships reflection upon your assertion, there is little or no heed
to be given to it. For it is well known of what credit his Lordships writings
are in reference to the Popish Plot, to which, the World well knows how zealous
a W^ll Wisher he was, by his discreet management of the St. Omers Evidence. Now
as to your avowment and farther avowment, You shall hear what I swore, and then
set it be brought to Trial when You please, viz.

That You and I, upon or about the 2d of September 1679. entering into
discourse, I perceived your countenance to change, when looking very angrily on
me, You told me, that You wondered I would offer to displease the Lords in the
Tower, and especially the Lord Ca(...)emaine, (then out upon Bail and who
designed to advance me in the World, and help me to make my Fortune. To which I
repli^d, that I was not a little su^priz'd to hear such words from You, and
asked You, if You knew the ground of their displeasure. You then replied, yes,
yes, You did; and then ^alling into a great passion, said, 'twas because I
would not kill the King; said You to me, I admire at your Ingratitude, that
when you could not prop^se to your self any possible way of getting out of
Prison, etc. you should offer to ref^se it. Nay said You to me, I might have
done it with all the ease in the World, for no manner of hurt could have
befallen me. Why said I, would not Death unavoidably have been the Consequence
of it? No said You, for before I was released out of the Kings Bench, You had
an exact account from Mrs. Cellier of the Year, Month, Week, Day, and Hour I
was born in. And the Countess of Powis ordered You to calculate my Nativity.
And it is so clear, said You to me, that you are by all adjudged, the Person
allotted for that hold and daring enterprise.

Now I appeal first, to your own conscience, if you have any, and then to all
the World, whether this were not an absolute discourse between You and I, about
the Lord Castlemaine. For it is all most sacredly true, notwithstanding all
your confidence to deny it. But here lies the knack of the business, You mean
that I never had any discourse with You about the Lord Castlemaine in the Year
1641. or in the year 1681. had you said so, there You had hit the nail of the
head: but alas, I did not swear to any of those Years, but only to the Year
1679. and that I Will stand by to the last. And therefore neither You nor the
Lord Castlemaint must think to Sham the world with impertinent Manifesto's and
Averments, to which there is no more credit to be given, than to your own
observations upon the weather: it is only two Papists in a bad cause vouching
one for another, like two Horse-stealers in Smithfield. For my part, I was
certainly and entirely upon a conscientious discovery of the Truth, and before
those Persons who were not to be ^lamm'd, or imposed upon, neither did I make,
or offer at the least, Capitulation for my life, till the King, after full
satisfaction given concerning the truth of my discovery, out of his Majesty's
great clemency and wisdom, gave that (...) order for a pardon for me, in whose
power my Life was, whether I spoke truth or no: and which I had most assuredly
forfeited, had they found me as^rologizing like your self, Mr. Gadbury.

But You go on, and avow that You never had any discourse with me concerning
any matter* or person, as having never seen me but twice in your life, etc.

This is another most notorious falsehood: and this I must tell ye, in all your
three capacities; as a Tailor, a Quack, and a Figure Caster. For You saw me
once when I came to give you notice of the meeting between the Lord
Peterborough, and Sir Robert Payton, and three times within the space of six
weeks before that: once upon a Tuesday in the evening, which was about the 23d
of September. 1679. at what time I called for Dame Cellier, whom I left at your
House while I went she knows where, once at your own House, by your own
appointment, which was about the 27th day of September. and in the afternoon
about three of the clock, where we discoursed about Sir Denzell Hollis, etc.
and after that in some short time, at Mrs. Cellier's House in Arundell Street,
and all this I will prove to your face, by several Witnesses, which perhaps you
may in good time hear more of, for all your pardon. Then let me put You in mind
of that extraordinary rainy day, when You came to Mrs. Cellier's House, and
told her You were just come from the Tower, that You had dined with the Lord
Powis, and had brought her a note from the Lord Arundell, to go to a certain
place mentioned in the said note, to receive a Sum of Money. And further to rub
up your memory, for to use your own Words, I find it very much bruised of late,
You know I gave you two Books, entitled, Traitors Transformed into Martyrs,
which I told you were wrote by one Dormer, upon the Execution of the five
Jesuits. What weather is it now friend John? Here are no less than eight times,
which are six more than twice, and if You consider the Circumstances, more than
transiently to boot.

So then that You were privy to the design intended by the Papists against the
Kings Life, and had made your self an equal Conspirator with them, and did
discourse with me concerning the Lord Castlemaine is undenyably true. Now for
further satisfaction, I shall refer the Reader to your own Evidence at Mrs.
Celliers Trial, where You swear, that she desired you to consult your Art, to
know how long the King would live, (His Majesty being then sick at Windsor) and
that she asked You something about me: and being asked by the Court what that
something was? You replied, to get me out of Prison. Then being again asked by
the Court, if You did nothing for Cellier at that time when she so earnestly
importuned You to consult your Art about the Kings Life, You replied, You did a
Scheme then, but since You found it to be for me, but You knew not for what it
was when you did it. Then being asked if You could apply one Scheme to any
body? You replied, When Mrs. Cellier came to You, she gave You the time of a
Persons Nativity, and You set the figure of Heaven to that time, to know
whether he were a Person fit to be trusted to get in money, her Husband being a
French Merchant.

Now what were the remarks of the Court upon these shuffling, cutting,
equivocating answers of yours? Why, truly that You talked as like a Papist as
could be -- That You made all the company laugh, etc. And passed many Sarcasmes
upon your baffling discourse, which showed how much they were dissatisfied with
the bruises of your memory.

But to come more particularly to the point, You confess that Dame Cellier did
desire You to consult your Art, how long the King would live. Which being so
confessed, all the world will believe that Mrs. Cellier would not have
importuned You about a business of such a dangerous consequence, had she not
had a more than an ordinary Conjuring confidence in You. Whence I infer, that
being so intimately, if I may not say desperately engaged with Mrs. Cellier,
You could not choose but have seen me more than twice transiently.

Next You confess you did a Scheme which afterward you found to be for me, to
know whether I were fit to be trusted or no, to get in old debts. A very
probable story this! This French Merchant, Husband to Mrs. Cellier, had been
broke for many years before, and was as poor as a Rat, till his industrious
Wife found the way to the Plot; and yet will any man of Reason believe that two
or three hundred pounds should be raised and disburs'd to procure my liberty,
for no other end or purpose, than to gather in the debts of a Banckrupt that
was some hundreds of pounds worse than nothing? and more than this, I defy any
Man, Woman, or Child in the world to say to my face that ever I demanded a
shilling from them as a Debt to Mrs. Cellier, or any Person entrusted for him,
Ah, friend John, friend John, these are mere flams, and stories badly
contrived, and worse put together; surely you never consulted the Stars about
this? But lay your discourse and mine together. That I had displeased the Lords
in the Tower, and why? your expostulating with me about ingratitude, and for
what reason? Your securing me from danger, by the countenance of the Stars, and
upon what account; and then it will appear why Mrs. Cellier was so kind a
solcitress for me; who they were, that had been so liberal, and why? Then it
will appear that you did erect a Scheme for me, and that your business was of a
higher nature than to trouble the seven Planets, and the Dragons Tail about
such a silly Question, as whether I were fit to be trusted to gather in the
sweepings of a Banckrupt's Estate, who as such, seldom or never have any thing
they can call their own. Then it will appear, or at least be vehemently
suspected that you did do a Scheme for the King. For Mrs. Cellier was a Woman
that would not be flamed, and that you know well enough, Mr. John; she
understood Men, and would not keep a correspondency of ten or twelve years with
a Conjurer for nothing. Then, that I may touch you to the Quick, compare her
letter to me, (after I was committed by the King and Council) for you must
allow her the honor of the first invention) viz. I have said you were taken
into my House to get in desperate debts, etc. It cannot worst you. And your
answer, That you did the Scheme to know whether I was a Person fit to be
trusted to get in desperate debts, and then it will appear your answer was a
sham, because the invention from which it was borrowed was the same, a mere
contrivance and forgery to obscure the Truth, The two Questions arise thus;
Mrs. Cellier, why did Dangerfeild lodge at your House? Answer. To get in my
Husbands desperate Debts. Mr. Gadbury, why did you erect a Scheme for
Dangerfeild? Answer. To know whether he might be trusted to get in those
desperate debts.

Now then, Mrs. Celliers excuse for me being a most devilish lie; it follows
that Mr. John Gadburies answer must be of the same stamp, as coming out of the
same Mint. And so the excuse failing the charge remains more clear than before.

Now then, since it is so plain, that You did draw a Scheme of Ensurance for
me, to Kill the King, and proffered me all the spangled Host of Heaven for
Bail, if there be any person that will believe that You never did discourse
with me about the Popish Lords in the Tower, that I never discoursed with You
about the Lord Castlemaine; and in short, that You, being one Confederate,
never saw me your Brother-Confederate, but twice transiently in your life; that
man is no rational Creature, till he have sucked his reason from the Pope's
Toe. Now how You came to play these pranks, and escape the Tridentine Figure, as
You call it, is past my Astrology to tell, unless it were that the Stars had
given You their Minion, better security than You could impose by their warrant,
upon my belief.

But now I think on it, I have one Question more to ask You, very pertinent to
the matter in hand: For if we had never seen one another, and that You had not
been very instrumental in the Cause wherein You found me engaged, to what
purpose was the two hundred and ten pounds given You, and that was collected
for You immediately after You were discharged out of the Gatehouse. I know your
wish will be (as it was, when the same Question was put to You by another hand)
viz. That You may go to Hell immediately, if ever you saw or told one penny of
it, or ever heard of any such thing: That is, You wish You may go to Hell
immediately, that is, to Hell in the Palace Yard, if ever You saw it with the
Observators Eyes, if ever You told one penny of it, with your Thimble and
Bodkin; or if ever You heard of any such thing, with Cowzers Ears. But
notwithstanding all this, it is true enough, You had this money, and it was
given you for your sufferings and fidelity to the Catholic Cause, and you had
as good confess, or else your neighbor M. G. will maintain and prove it to
your face. Now that in all your Travels and painful Visits which you made to
earn this money, that you should never see me but Twice, and that transiently;
is a thing so much without the Verge of Belief, that you might as well have
sworn me invisible. And that both you and the Lord Castlemaine must do, before
all the Averments, Avows, and Manifesto's in the world will do any good, unless
it be to the Company of Stationers, and they --

To draw a little more from your own mouth, I will apply one Plaster more to
your bruised memory; For being asked when you knew the Scheme was for
Dangerfeild? you answered, never before you came to the King and Council, for
said you, he went by the name of Willoughby before. Now how far that before
reached backward, you must give the thinking part of the world leave to judge,
by what has gone before. And thus we have discovered the Spring that moves this
whole frame of Astrological equivocation: and thus you have cut more work out
to batch up against next Year. For this Year you have only avowed that you
never saw Dangerfeild but twice transiently: that you never discoursed with
Dangerfeild, about the Lord Castlemaine and the Lords in the Tower.

Next Year You must write an other short Epistle to the Candid Reader, and m^ke
the same strenuous avow in reference to Willoughby, Come, come, friend John,
these devices will never do your work; I perceive you understand Proverbs; soft
and fairly goes far: He that Damns himself but once a Year, I Will warrant him
shall go soon enough to the Devil. I commend your Providence; you thought one
full mouth*d, Cannon-bore equivocation would last twelve months, and so
reserved Willoughby for the next Year. But the worst on it is, the Lord
Castlemaine must alter his Manifesto too: a cursed trouble, but that we find,
he has a good quick hand at his Pen.

Having made your avow 's you come to ask Questions, and demand, upon what
account I made my self so familiar with you, and swore you into the knowledge
of the Honorable Lords in the Tower, whose faces you never yet saw that you
knew of. His conscience, if he has any, can best inform him.

This it is to be casting the Figures of other Men's consciences, and not mind
your own. For look ye now -- I must yet mind ye once more of the Rainy Day
before mentioned, when you your individual self said, you came from the Lords
in the Tower; That you dined with the Lord Powis, and brought a Note from the
Lord Arundel. Did the Lord Powis sit at Table Alamode du Dumbshow? mute and
vizarded? If you will not believe your self, can you expect that other People
should believe ye? It Is a likely story that you could dine with a man and not
see his face. In the next place I am to put you in mind, that upon your
examination before the King and Council, you confessed, That you had cast the
Lord Powis's Nativity. For which I refer you to the Council Minutes taken upon
Sunday, November. 2. 1679. Which being true, it is most rational to believe that
you were admitted to the Lord Powis's Table, either in acknowledgment of what
you had done, or in order to what you were to do. For Lords are curious, and
not understanding your Astrological snatches, cannot but have a natural desire
to understand the exposition of your marks and signs, and the reason o^ things:
And it cannot be imagined but the curiosity of the rest of the Lords must bring
them all in a hurrey to hear great news from the Heavens, were it for no other
reason, but out of a Complement, either to congratulate the happiness, or
condole the misfortune of their fellow sufferer. Now is it likely that you
would hazard your self upon such dangerous enterprises, without knowing the
faces and feeling the Purses too of those that employed ye? Then again the
Persons for whom the Schemes were erected, and the juncture of time, plainly
demonstrate the concatenation of the Causes of these solicitous enquiries. The
Kings life was sought, but hearing he was sick, a Scheme must be erected to
know whether he would outlive the distemper or put them to farther trouble.
Then Mine in the nick of time, for encouragement to proceed, in case of His
Majesty's Recovery. Then the Lord Powis's, to make a discovery of the issue of
the business by his good or bad Fortune. Now that the Popish Lords in the Tower
should be unacquainted with their Delphian Oracle, especially you your self
confessing you had dined with one, received a note from another, and telling me
that the Lords in the Tower were displeased with me, and that you knew the
reason of it, is a thing never to be controverted.

There is one thing more which I cannot pass by, and that is, that you call
your self a Protestant. It was a thing which the Court would not believe, nor
can any unbsass'd person in the world have any reason to believe it, by that
which follows.

The Court demanded of you, if you knew of any attempt to change the
Government. To which you answered, you knew of no Plot, unless it were a Plot
to bring Sir Robert Payton over to the Kings Interest. That Plot you had some
concern in.

But why a Plot to bring over Sir Robert Payton to the Kings Interest you will
say, because Sir R. P, was a great stickler against the Duke of Yorks Interest,
and took great pains to incense the People against it. Now to show how like a
Protestant you managed this design, it is well known that you procured a meeting
between the Lord Peterborough, and Sir Robert Payton at your own house, and
this under pretense of a long continued Friendship, and there they met so
often, that at length Sir Robert Payton, was persuaded to wait upon the Duke,
and did kiss his Hand, and was from that time forthwith taken into favor. And
this you call a Plot to bring over Sir R. P. your great Friend to the Kings
Interest, by getting of him received into the Dukes favor only. What said the
Court to this? Not a tittle. For they understood better things than to believe
you spoke a word of Truth. Well knowing, that the Kings Interest is altogether
Protestant, the Peace and Quiet of the Religion and Government in Church and
State, as it is now by Law Established: the Interest of the Duke of another
nature, as having been declared a Romish Catholic. So that it was Sir Robert
Paytons loss, that out of your seeming Protestant Friendship, you betrayed him
to your own Romish Catholic party; whose Interest is so Diametrically contrary
to the Interest of His Majesty, and to the Genius and Interest of the whole
Nation. For which kindness would Sir R. P. but take upon him the so much abused
Character of the Kings most Loyal Evidence, I am of opinion, I might see you
translated from your habitation in Brick Court to another place. And now
whether He that professes himself a Protestant, and acted so like a cordial
Papist, can be believed, to be what he only says he is, I leave to all the
Candid-Readers in the world to judge.

As for your praying for the King, it is to be looked upon as a mere piece of
convenient and time serving flattery, a pretense to cover the malignity of your
black Soul. Were it real, it were highly to be commended; but as it is not,
there are many that pray for the King with their lips, yet curse him in their
hearts. As for all your hatings, and abhorrings of this and that, while you
pray for the King, you curse his Loyal and best Subjects under the names of
Juggling Nonconformists, Papists in Masquerade, and Narrative Writers, and all
this, merely because they obviated your Hellish Designs. And indeed he that
will betray his friend, can never be true to his King. And this is demonstrable
by your Plot to bring over Sir Robert Payton to the Kings Interest. For if that
were your design, why did you not do it? if you did it out of affection to the
Popish Interest, you were a Traitor to your Friend, unfaithful to your Prince,
and consequently an absolute Papist, however you may pretend your self to be a
Protestant. So that your Honoring Monarchy signifies nothing. For England was
Monarchical in time of Popery as well as now, and under that Circumstance you
expected it would ere now have been so again. Your professing your self to be a
Member of the Church of England, signifies as little. For in the Ages of
Peter Pence, we know the Church of England was then Established by Law, and
that no question, is the Establishment you mean, and as you have confirmed by
your own practices.

As for your Astrological Observations, they are not worth the leanest louse
that ever suffered under the violence of your needle. you speak irreverently of
the very Stars you get your Bread by. Say you in your Observations upon
January, The angry Stars do belch out enmity faster than the Planets can breath
forth Unity* A strange and unseemly accusation of the Stars; as if you were
indebted to the Planets for rent, and therefore thought to pay your Landlords
with good words, you speak scandalously of the Justice of the Nation in these
words; When is there hopes of Unity? When we shall hate Violence, Fraud and
Perjury. As if they who by their Oaths and Testimonies had brought the
Conspirators against His Majesty to condign punishment, had done it by Fraud
and Perjury, and that nothing but Castlemaines Compendiums, and Manifesto's
were to be believed. Every page of your Observations breaths forth nothing but
malice against the Kings best Witnesses, advancement of Popery, disturbance of
the Government, and the raising of fears and jealousies between the Prince and
his People. What have you to do with the Councils at Whitehall, or the Councils
in Scotland, but only to amuse the unthinking, and most giddy People of the
multitude? For most certainly you knew no more than Cowzers dead Broom. Tell
the Country Gentlewoman when she shall sow her Pease, and set her Sweet
Marjerome: tell the City Haberdasher of small wares, when Bristol and Exeter
Fairs will be, and tell him how far it is between London and St. David's: This
is your business Friend John. Can any Man of reason abstain from loud laughter
to hear you apply your nonsense to State Affairs? as for example, in your
Observations upon the Suns ingress into Aries. What shall I say? Can Saturn the
great enemy of nature bode any good this Year to Mankind? Is he not in the 7th
angle, and the house of his Enemy too? What if he be? there let him stay, who
cares a rush? But when he shall be Lord of any revolution, and in Leo having
Northern Latitude, he renders the designs and projects of many men frustrate.
What stuff is this? And yet the intent of it is mischievous, to keep the minds
of men addicted to folly, and superstitious imaginations in suspense. And that
this is the design at which you drive is plain, by your quoting a silly
Prophecy of that Popish Wizard Nostre-Damus, in derision of your enemy Geneva.

In short such Figure-Casters as you, are not fit to be suffered under a
Protestant Government, nor indeed understand. For as your Art is fallacious,
and consequently impious, so when those fallacies and impieties are used to a
seditious end, they are the more to be abominated. None but the Superstitious
believe ye, and never any that did believe ye, but perished through their
folly. A sort of People, says Tacitus, Treacherous to Princes, deceivers of
them that believe them, and therefore always prohibited from our City. And
therefore it is a shame that they are so publicly tolerated to hang out their
amusing signs in This, and to give our their bills about the Streets, to
inveigle, and many times undo wanton and inquisitive Youth.

After all this I admire what unlucky Star influenced you to make this
unfortunate vindication, and to provoke me to collect these Truths in my own
defense, to encounter your lies and equivocations. For certainly Men are not to
live in this world, that will hear themselves abused, and taxed of Villainies,
and Perjuries, by those that are the Criminals themselves. If you have your
pardon, thank God and the King for it, but in my opinion it is a breach of that
Grace, to side anew with those that seek all they can to stifle the Plot, and
vindicate their Conspiracies, to the disparagement, and high dishonor of the
Kings Justice. Friend John, when you become honest, I shall be glad to be yours,

Thomas Dangerfeild.


