BETHLEHEM Signifying The House of Bread: or War.

Whereof informs, Whoso takes a small Roll to taste cures forthwith
Distraction in the supreamest Nature; with such virtue indu'd.

By those TORMENTERS Fiery SERPENTS as they when stung, were healed a view by
taken of the Brazen ONE.

Ezekiel 16* Cause Jerusalem to know her Abomination, etc.

Printed in the Year, 1652.

Touching the healing of the present Evil.
Shows (as not unknown their influence) the better that we may judge of things
to come; from Examples in vain not recorded of things past: Achan as his story
for one Epitomizes: By whom the golden Wedge or Tongue hid, which trespass until
discovered of his, thus and thus, etc. no peace or presence of the Lord any
more. So whence as follows, Cause the city to know, etc. for recovery of
health, to have knowledge of the disease since the first step thereto.

Acters or consenters, know ye or be informed, of one and the same nature: that
of the one Talent buried also by him or not improved, etc. where so much for
the better ordering the Medicine or prescribed Rule: showing how in days of
those late high Priests it came to pass Anno Dom. about 36. By them after what
execrable manner Crucified the Oracles of God, their late Altars for that
purpose prepared; to be short, over which a Giant Crucifix being erected: The
value not of a Napkin to cover, etc. exposed to the view of all to kneel before
it: like as in Golgatha that Fridays dismal Day bowed the knee: Then his humble
Servants also.

Which Goliath portray'd with the Crown of Thorns, wanting neither its
Superscription, done by that in his Holiness Chapel, a true Copy brought over
by Father, etc. VVhilest that Original as shamefully covered the Ten
Commandment at the East end placed: to their low obeisance at every turn, least
an Eyesore.

Had contrived under color of an Altar Hanging, fastened down to the wall of
course purple Woollen, even to Eclipse that Light of Lights: whereby to cover
the Ten Commandments no obscure business as befell: Brocht in Litchfield
Minster: where this Monster Table appointed with the Centurion, armed at all
points, mounted on this Courser: the Beast worshipped too.

Unsufferable to behold, the one not more ignominiously exposed, then the other
obscured: to give free passage to whatsoever abomination.

VVhereupon, O accursed, as obliged for bringing to light the same Court and
Ci^y to awaken: Their Lord Major that year a Litchfieldman: resolved to set
some mark upon their purple Covering, whereon she cast a Confection made but of
Tar, mixed with wheat Starch, with fair Water heated, etc. Them possessing with
such outrage-flocking about it, some Gunpowder Treason as though: upon whose
fright, post a Sergeant at Arms was sent down at Candlemas to carry her up:
Carriers unable to pass after that Summers drought, when as much wet again: At
whose Arrival, though Higher Powers certified by the Sergeant at Arms, of such
causless Panick Terror: yet said, in regard who knows what she may do in other
Mother Churches: Held it fit to commit her to the Cities Custody; one as it
were buried quick in Bedlems loathsome Prison, infected with those foul Spirits
day and night Blaspheming: where was shut up by the space of two years
sufficiently published or bruted by that time.

When began, the War kindled in Scotland: And so much for that designed place
Bethlehems Hospital, alias Bedlem: Bethlehem the House of Bread signifying, or
War, etc. undergon in behalf of that crying cause, causless Jealousy of hers.

Never that was called to appear or answer whether Guilty, but surprised in
that sort, or the Adversary against her appearing: Conscious of their
abominable Cause, of whose proceedings by Luke thus recorded: in which
aforesaid City dwelt a Judge, saying within himself not difficult to judge when
Though I fear not God nor reverence Man: yet least this never ceasing Widow by
her VVriting, etc. enlarged thus no ordinary Assessment were mentioned: who by
casting into their Treasury those two mites, from that seeming Paradox
outstript them all, as Englefield Manor for one devoured, etc. accompanied with
the unparalleld last troublesome times Description: when that Famine of Faith a
forerunner of his coming.

Return shall to the former of those precious Tables, able to dissolve
Millstones: Like as when rent the Templevail, Stones and Graves unable to
contain, etc. men whilst more obdurat as in the Bladder of uncircumcised
Hearts, which nothing penitrates.

Oyes, himself Westminsters Crier, in the mean while much People gathered,
several So^ls those, proclaims Earth, Earth, in relation to her Ears not few:
how difficult to bring forth fruit in kind, three for one miscarrying: He that
has ears, etc.

Which Ten Commandments lastly how were Restored; although yielded not to
pluck down the aforesaid Cloth that Altar Ornament, appointed nevertheless in
an Azure Table the Law engraven to be in gold Letters: Hanged up in all
Churches, bearing date, Anno 37.

To be buried in silence neither, where by accident in the Prisoners Chamber:
when brought into it, beheld on the wall the two written Tables in Moses hand
coming down out of the Mount, the only Ornament or Picture there, hanged up on
a Nail: not long after rent down by the Keeper; because unto some showed or as
a token then what done by them in Churches: not calling to mind; As visits
unto the third and fourth Generation, That hates them, so mercy shows to
Thousands that love his Commandments.

And so return to their sufferings: As testifies (Apocalips cap. 11.) The
Tables of the Law those Lights inclusive with the two invincible Witnesses,
Where the Lord Crucified, etc. Waters converting into Blood: whose insulting
Enemies rewarded thereafter with Core and his Companions in that Earthquake,
etc. as when Prebends and clerk Vicars forced, were afterward for fear of the
Parliament Forces to bury it in a Donghil, not one would harbor it, so low
obeysances had made thereto before: And this in Staffordshire their Lord Major
aforesaid of that County, fulfilling what honor his anointed ones to expect: If
the Master of the House called Devil or Beclzebub: Bedlem no dishonor for them,
especially whilst Grandees in that measure their House infected.

As moreover for that aforesaid Shire or entire County of Stafford, not long
since belonging to whose Ancestors the house of Audley of no obscure
Denominations. Audley of England from whence derives her Antiquity. Touchet of
France, the Paternal Name. Castlehaven in Ireland, thence her Precedence alike
concerned in each. From the Province of Wales that of Davis: and Douglas of
Scotland the Doughty: such a one of the several Nations as intimates no less: A
Prophet shall the Lord like unto me raise up unto you of your Brethren, him
shall you hear, etc. And every soul which will not hear, shall be destroyed
from among the People: (Acts 3.) so a Deliverance time, whose word a Law:
stoops to no Bulls or other like actings: Prophets howsoever buried in the Land
of Oblivion: which Nations, as much to say, avenge her shall of her Adversary
thus supported: My hand shall hold him fast and my arm shall strengthen him,
nor gates of Hell shall not prevail against her: O Hell or Fleet-Prison (to
wit) where is thy Victory now.

And for a leading touch, these suffices for this spreading soar, its swellings
to assuage threatening, no less then Ears and Throat: By our Achans for the
accursed thing put among their own stuff, as upon his Humiliation showed them:
And for this Analogy between the Times of spiritual Egypts Map. And for that
prophet paralleled with Moses, by whom the Golden Calf conjured down by his
Serpent Rod: Those first and last of Prophets. Containing a Brief of a like
Dispute as between them about Moses Body. Jude.

June. Elea: And: Touch: Castleha: Da: and Do:


