Love to Christ, Necessary to Escape the CURSE AT His Coming.

By THO. DOOLITTLE, M. A.

Mat. x. 37. He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me;
and he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me.

Mat. xxv. 41. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey, over
against the Stocks-Market. 1692.

THE EPISTLE TO Non-Lovers OF CHRIST, Lamenting Their SIN and MISERY.
THat Glorious Person, who is both Lord and Jesus, and Christ, has suffered,
and done, and promised, such things that might gain the love of Sinners to
himself; and by these does Plead with them, to set their Affections upon him.
In opposition to him, the World, and Sin, stand in competition with him, for
the love of man's Heart. Christ calls, Sinner, Love me. Sin and World, cry
aloud, Place thy love on us. The Spirit, Word, Ministers, Mercies, and a
Well-informed awakened Conscience, press hard for the Love of Man to Christ:
The Devil, and the Flesh, solicit for the Heart of Man, for Sin and World.
Love man has, and one of these he will Love; both he cannot, at the same time,
with a predominant Love, for either he will hate the one, and love the other,
or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot [Love and]
serve God and Mammon, Mat. 6.24. Predominant Love to the one, is inconsistent
with such Love unto the other. 1 John 2.15. Love not the world, neither the
things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father
is not in him.

This considered, what Thinking man can forbear to grieve, abstain from floods
of Tears, and bitter Lamentation, when he sees that the Love of Man, such a
Noble Affection in it self, is set so much on Sin, that is so bad in it self,
and unto its Lovers, and upon the World, that proves a vexation to those that
are so fond of it, who Love and vex, who vex at it, and yet still continue and
increase their Love unto it, and their vexation by it, does not abate their
inordinate Affection to it; while Christ, that is the primary, principal, and
most delightful Object of Love, is slighted by so many, even by the most? Blind
Sinners! Do ye thus love Sin so vile, and the World so contemptible, and not
Christ, that is altogether lovely and desirable? What perverseness is this,
that Christ, that is best in himself, and best for them, should be refused, and
Sin, that is worst in it self. and worst to them, should be embraced? What
folly and madness is this, that Christ should be kept out, standing at the
Door, when Sin and World are admitted in, and Lodged, and kindly Entertained in
the chiefest Room of their Hearts? Cursed doings! When Sin should have no Love,
shall it have all? When Christ should have all, shall he have none? When the
whole World, like that part, [the Earth] should be as your Footstool, shall it,
or any thing in it, be set up in your Hearts, as in its Throne? How is it that
ye are so much mistaken, as to think ye see Beauty in Deformity, and Deformity
in Beauty it self? Why is odious Sin so lovely, and a precious Christ so
unlovely in your Eyes? Have ye considered what Sin is, and what Christ is, that
ye have greater Love to that Work of the Devil, than ye have to Gods own Son?
And this, when Sin is so bad and vile, that as Sin, it cannot be loved by the
worst of men, till it be first disguised, and dressed up with the appearance of
Good, and Christ so good, that as Christ, he is to be loved most of all? When
called, invited, and charged, in the Name of God, by the Ministers of Christ,
showing you God's Call, Invitation and Charge, to love this lovely Jesus, why
do ye retort, and say, What is your Beloved above another Beloved, (O ye
Teachers of Christ?) What is your Beloved more than another Beloved, that ye
so charge us? How long will ye say, He has no form or comeliness? We see ^o
Beauty in him that we should desire him? How long shall Christ complain of you,
that ye hate both him and his Father? And is not this complaint more grievous,
when ye hate him without a cause, and do not love him when there is so much
cause and reason why you should? What has Sin and World done for you, and
what did ever Christ do against you, that ye love your sorest Enemies, and hate
him that would be your surest Friend? Has Sin afforded you Pleasures? But how
long will they last? And what will ye do when the Pleasures of Sin are past and
fled away, and the Pains and Punishment for Sin are come, and shall never,
never, pass away? Has the World allowed you its Profits? But whose shall
these be, when ye are Dead, and Lodged in the Dust? What profit is there in
all your Profits, if ye gain them, and lose your Souls? Will not your Gain be
your Everlasting Loss? Is Christ the Admiration of Angels, and is he your
Derision? Do they Adore him, and do ye thus Despise him? Do Holy Saved-Souls
above, delight and joy in their Love to him, and in his to them, and do ye turn
away your Love, and Alienate your Hearts from him, and Love Sin, and Rejoice in
that your Love? Do Holy Souls beneath, in this Imperfect State, cry ou^. Whom
have we in Heaven but Christ, or what is there on Earth that we desire, like,
or love, in comparison of him? and do ye prefer your Lust, and Fleshly
Pleasures, and Worldly Profits, before him? Have ye done so, and will ye still?
Are ye so resolved? Are your Hearts so hardened? Your Minds so blinded? And so
enslaved to Sin and Satan? Alas for you! Were ye Born without love to Christ?
And have ye lived so long without love to him? And will ye Dye at last without
love to him? Where are the Mourners, that they may with flowing Tears bewail
your Sin and Misery? Why your Sin? Because ye love not Christ. Why your Misery?
Because you must be ANATHEMA when MARANATHA; be Accursed when the Lord shall
come. Alas for you, that are Ignorant of Christ; for can ye love whom ye do not
know? Alas for you, whose Hearts are full of love to a vain, deluding World,
and empty of sincere Love to Christ, for ye must all be ANATHEMA when
MARANATHA; Accursed when the Lord shall come. Let Angels blush: Let the Heavens
be ashamed: Let good men weep: Let the Earth mourn: Let all the Creation of God
sigh, and sob, and groan, that the Son of God is not beloved by so many of the
Sons of Men! O my Soul! where is thy love to these Souls empty of Saving-love
unto thy Lord? Where is thy sorrow for want of their Love? Where are thy Bowels
of compassion, to them that have no pity to themselves, in that they will have
no love to Christ? Do not thou know MARANATHA, the Lord will come? And art
thou not sure, that then they will be ANATHEMA, under a bitter and an eternal
Curse: Do thou see how the Devil turned men's hearts from their Lord-Creator,
and how he keeps their love from their Lord-Redeemer, for which the Devil
insults over them, and wilt not thou be grieved for them? Blessed Jesus! I am
ready to blame them, because they love not thee, and I do blame my self for
want of grief in me; for want of love to thee. Methinks that Godly Parents
should mourn, because they have a Child, or Children, that love not Jesus
Christ, and say, What! they love us, but not the Lord! What pleasure can we
take in their love to us, when they have none to Christ? Methinks the Children
that have love to Christ, should weep, and bitterly lament, to be loved by
their Parents, with a greater love than they have for Christ; and the Wife that
is a Lover of Christ, should be filled with sorrow, that has one so near, that
is so far from loving of the only Savior, and say, Alas! alas! MARANATHA, and
then my Child, my Father, Mother, Husband, will be ANATHEMA. Weep then, weep,
weep abundantly, for any in your House, among your Relations, Friends,
Acquaintance, and Neighbors, that are not Lovers of Christ. Oh that your Heads
were Waters, and your Eyes Fountains of Tears, that ye may Weep Day and Night,
for these that Love not the Lord Jesus. How can ye go with dry Eyes, without
Tears trickling down your Cheeks, one hasting to overtake the other, when ye
behold Non-Lovers of Christ, and consider next, ANATHEMA MARANATHA? Oh! that ye
had in some Wilderness a Lodging place of Wayfaring-men, or some retired corner
in your House, that ye may leave your worldly Business for a while, and go from
them, to wash your Faces in your Tears, that your dear Relations love not that
Lord of yours, that is dearer to you than they are, or all this World besides.
Take on most bitterly, when ye think how by them your dearest Lord is
undervalued, and their precious Souls are endangered, by their not loving of
him, for they must be ANATHEMA when MARANATHA. Alas, poor Loveless Souls! The
Lord will come, will surely, quickly come, and then they will be miserable;
surely then they will be miserable Souls indeed.

But is this enough for you, (O ye Non-Lovers of Christ) that others do lament
your woeful case, while ye your selves do spend your Time, and waste your Days
in sinful Love, and carnal Delights, and sensual Joy? Were ye convinced of your
present Sin, and did ye see your future approaching Misery, could ye be so full
of Mirth, upon the very Borders of the place where there is weeping, and
wailing, and gnashing of Teeth? Could ye Laugh and Sing, so near the bottomless
Pit, where your Laughing shall be turned into Mourning, and your Mirth into
everlasting Sorrow? Were ye the Men that had your Eyes opened, would ye not,
every one of you, bitterly bewail your present danger, in the sense and
apprehension of your speedy and eternal Woe, and say, Alas, what shall I do,
when Sickness shall come, and Death shall come, and the Lord himself shall
come, when I have no love for him? Woe is me! How shall I dye, and after Death
appear at his Tribunal, whom I never loved? O my poor departing Soul! now as
full of Terror, as empty of the love of Christ; what will become of thee, when
thou steppest out of Time into Eternity? O dreadful, dreadful, this is
exceeding dreadful, to leave all that I did ever love, and go to be judged by
him, whom I did (Woe to me that I did) never love! I did love my Wise and
Children, but not Christ, and now I must leave them whom I did so much love,
and receive my Doom from him whom I did so much hate. I did love my Pleasures,
and my sensual Delights, and now there is an end of them; and now I must go
unto those Miseries, Woes and Torments, that shall never, never, end. Woe is me,
that now I am a dying man, and shortly, alas a day or two more, an hour or two
more; so shortly, for want of love to Christ, and I must be a Damned man. When
I wa^ well, and loved not Christ, (well and loved not Christ!) when I thought I
was well without love to Christ, I thought my Pleasures were sweet, my Riches
my Happiness, and my beloved Relations my Joy; and I thought my love was
rightly placed upon them, but now upon this Dying-Bed, when I look backwards
upon time now past, and forwards into Eternity, that never will be past, I see,
I find the remembrance of them does torment my departing Soul, they are as
bitter as Gall, for the more I loved them heretofore, the more they do torment
me now. Now! Woe is me! They will for ever. Oh what did I mean, to give that
love to them, which I should have given unto Christ? Had I loved him, as I
loved them, my love to him would have been as great a Comfort to me, on this
Dying-Bed, as the love of them is now a Terror to me, but I did not; O cursed
Catiff that I did not. And now the Lord, by Death, is come to me, and I after
Death must go to him, to be Judged by him, and in my Sentence I shall hear
ANATHEMA; Depart thou Cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. In that I never loved Christ, I Sinned like the Devil, and in my
Sentence, for that Sin I must be Condemned, and in Hell suffer with, and as the
Devil.

But yet all this may be prevented; may it? And will ye not endeavor it? How?
By calling off your love from other things, and placing it predominantly upon
the Lord Jesus. By Faith in him, and Love unto him, the Curse might be escaped,
and the Blessing obtained at his coming; and had ye rather be Damned, than love
Christ? Indeed! Is your Enmity so much to him, that ye had rather be miserable
for ever, than place your Affections upon him? Are ye not yet willing to
forsake your Old Love, and get New Love to Christ? Can ye be willing to be
miserable, and pained, and tormented, in extremity, to all Eternity? I know ye
cannot: And yet I know, whether ye be willing, or unwilling, without love to
Christ, miserable you must be. Oh that ye did clearly see, steadfastly believe,
and distinctly apprehend the transcendent Excellency, the amiable Beauty, the
invaluable Worth of this Lord Jesus, that ye might prize him more than Gold and
Pearls, and costly Jewels, and love him more than all. How is it when ye hear
those on Earth, that love him most, so much complain of the smalness of their
love to him, that ye do not reflect upon your selves, and say, What Sinners
then are we, that have no love at all to him, and yet are not troubled, because
we do not love him? For my own part, I do complain I cannot love this Blessed
Jesus with that strength of Love I ought, and earnestly do desire, and
endeavor to grieve more, because I love him no more, and to loath my self so
much the more, by how much I fall short of that Love I ought to have to him. Oh
that others may make up what I do want, and might be enlarged, and abound in
that love, wherein I am straightened and defective; that what degrees of Love I
cannot reach, others on Earth might attain unto, that while I mourn for the
smalness of my own Love, I might rejoice in the greatness of the Love of others
unto this lovely Jesus; and yet when all this is less than he is worthy of, let
it be some joy unto my grieved Soul, that saved Souls above, and Angels in
Glory, do love him with a perfect and eternal Love, that though I cannot love
him as they do, yet I may rejoice on Earth, that there are Ten Thousand times
Ten Thousands, and Thousands of Thousands in Heaven, rejoicing in the fullness
of Love which is in them to him, when Thousands upon Earth never will, and
Millions in Hell never can, love this most lovely Lord Jesus Christ.

But still I must grieve and groan, that when my Lord does ask me, Love thou
me more than these, sometimes I doubt, and dare not say, Lord, thou that
know all things, thou know that I love thee; but my Heart does pant, my
Soul does long that my love to him might be inflamed, that the Actings of it
might be more vigorous, and the Workings of it so sensible, that they may put
me into pleasant Pangs, and sweetest Pains of Love. Lord! I shall not account
my self to be well, till I am sick of love to thee, that so I might, from what
I feel, and find, in my own Soul, recommend the sweetest Delights, the Rational
Pleasures, and the Spiritual Comforts, to the Lovers of Vanity, to allure and
draw their Love to Christ, that I may speak more of the unspeakable Joy that
fills the Breast of a strong Lover of Christ, and more pathetically Persuade,
more effectually Plead, till God powerfully prevail with them, to turn the
Stream of their Love (which now runs waste) into the right Channel, and glide
along till it empty it self into that Sea of Love, which Saints and Angels flow
in unto Christ.

I have made a small Attempt, in this little Treatise, of the Necessity of
Sincere Love to Christ, whether God, by Me, might move the Hearts of any, to
fix their Love upon him, in which I have not studied Words and Phrases, to
recommend Christ, to wanton Wits, in their Dress, but with as much plainness,
and Gospel simplicity, as I could, in the very Words in which it was Preached,
to a People that love plain Preaching, and easy to be understood. If any for
this shall dislike it, when they have took it up, and looked into it, and see
it to be such, may as easily lay it down, and slight it as they please; I
sought not my Self in it, but the love of Men to Christ by it. I can be willing
to be accounted a Fool for Christ, and I doubt not but I shall have more
Comfort on a Dying-Bed, when I shall reflect I aimed not at vain Applause of
Dying men, but to gain the Hearts, and hearty Love of, once the Hearers, and
now the Readers, of these Sermons; and if God will please to own them in men's
Reading, as he did in the Hearing of them, by many, when not I, but the Grace
of God, did so much affect their Hearts, that they did desire it might be
Preached to them (some time after) the second time, which I did, and did Work,
and had as great Success as at the first: Not that I was any thing, but God did
all, both first and last. Many, very many, that did confess they loved not
Christ, but World, and Vanity, and Sin, before, did desire all in the
Congregation earnestly to Pray, That God would give them this love unto his
Son, which I hope they have, and are increasing and growing therein; and that
God may so Bless it to any Poor, plain Country People, whom my voice cannot
reach, and to whom I cannot go, (where this may) shall be the fervent Prayers
that one so mean can put up to Heaven: Where let the Prayers of all true Lovers
of Christ meet, that the Number of such may be increased. Amen.

Tho. Doolittle.

THE Contents.
THE Introduction page 1, 2 Anathema explained, p. 3 to 9 Maranatha explained,
p. 3 to 9 The parts of the Text p. 9 A Paraphrase upon the Text p. 10 to 14 The
Doctrine and Method. p. 14, 15 Twelve Requisites in sincere Love to Christ p.
15 to 41 Delighting, Love, p. 41, 42 Desiring, Love, p. 41, 42 Mourning, Love,
p. 41, 42 A Description of Love to Christ p. 43 The Necessity of sincere Love
to Christ, to escape the Curse; proved by ten Arguments p. 44 to 55 Ten
Properties of the Curse, due to Non-Lovers of Christ p. 56 to 69 Eight Reasons
why Love is so strictly required, that Christ must be Loved, or the Sinner
Accursed p. 69. to 75 The Uses to be made of this Subject p. 75, 76 Ten
Inferences deduced from it p. 78 to 96 Twenty Aggravations of want of Love to
Christ p. 96 to 124 The Case Resolved how a Man may know he has, or wants
sincere Love to Christ p. 124 to 143 An Attempt to gain Sinners Consent to Love
Christ p. 143 to 151 Twenty Motives, or Pleas, that Christ might have the Love
of Men's Hearts p. 151 to 176 Ten Directions to get sincere Love to Christ p.
176 to 197 Ten Springs of Spiritual Comfort, flowing into the Hearts of the
Lovers of Christ p. 197 to 210 The Conclusion and Blessing p. 210 to the end.
LOVE to CHRIST NECESSARY TO ESCAPE the CURSE At His COMING.
1 COR. XVI. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema, Maran-atha.


CHAP. I.
SECT. I. The Introduction.
HOW! Not love the Lord! Hellish Sin. How! Not love Jesus! Stupendous
Wickedness. What! Not love Christ! Monstrous Impiety. Not love him that is both
Lord, and Jesus, and Christ! What name might we call him by? A Man or a Beast?
A Man or a Devil? That does not love the Lord Jesus Christ? Do you confess him
to be Lord, and Jesus, and Christ, and love Sin, and not Him? Love the World,
and not Him? Love Relations, and not Him? This may be the Astonishment of the
Heavens, the Amazement of the Earth, the Wonder of Angels, the Joy of Devils,
the Burden of the Creation of God. The Earth does groan to bear them; the Sun
is grieved to give light unto them; the Air laments its putrefaction, to be
sucked into such filthy bodies, wherein are more filthy souls, because void of
the Love of Christ: Yea, all this world looks more like Hell than Heaven,
because of the swarms of men therein, that have no sincere Love to Jesus
Christ. Let all among you this day, that are not Sensual Beasts, or Incarnate
Devils, that have the Understanding and Hearts of men, stand and wonder, that
tho Devils will not love the Lord Jesus Christ, that a Man should deny him his
Love. Good Lord! What a thing is this! What cursed Wickedness is this! What
wonder that thou do behold such a fight as this, a Man without love unto thy
Son, and suffer him to continue to be a man; or do not make him a sick man, a
poor man, a tormented, pained man on earth, or a Damned man in Hell! But tho
thou bear with such a man, is he not a wretched, miserable man, tho he be a
rich and prospering man? Oh what Punishment waits for him? How do Devils hope
for his Death, that they might drag him down to that Hellish Crew; where there
is not one Lover of Christ amongst them all? But what is he? What shall he be
that Loves not Christ? What? Anathema, Maran-atha. What is that? The
Explication will tell you.

SECT. II. The Explication of Anathema, Maran-atha.
Anathema, where found in Scripture, is usually Translated Accursed. Acts
23.14. And they came to the chief priests and elders, and said, (...), We have
bound our selves under a great curse, that we will eat nothing until we have
slain Paul: i.e. with a Curse we have Cursed; that is, grievously Cursed, or
bound our selves with direful Curses, Verse. 21. The same word used. Gal. 1.8.
But tho we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you, than
that which we have preached unto you, (...), let him be (Anathema) accursed.
Repeated verse 9. Mark 14.71. But he began ((...)) to curse and to swear,
saying, I know not this man of whom ye speak. Romans 9.3. For I could wish my
self (Anathema) were accursed from Christ, for my brethren, my kinsmen
according to the flesh, 1 Cor. 12.3. Wherefore I give you to understand, that
no man speaking by the Spirit of God, calls Jesus (Anathema) accursed. Not to
love Jesus, is to carry our selves toward him as tho he were Anathema; but
forasmuch as he is God over all, blessed for ever; whosoever loves not him,
shall be Anathema for ever. This Greek word is used as the Hebrew word (...),
Cherem, which is Translated utterly to destroy, viz. 1 Samuel 15.9. But Saul and
the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, and of the
fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was good, (...), and would not utterly
destroy them; but every thing that was vile and refuse, (...), that they
destroyed utterly. The Greek Verb signifies such Cursing, as when a man either
swears, voweth, or wishes himself to dye, or to be given to the Devil,
except he --: And the Hebrew word that answers to it, signifies, Utterly to
destroy, to devote to destruction: As much as to say, If any man love not the
Lord Jesus Christ, let him be utterly destroyed, devoted to destruction, let
the Devil take him; and so he will by God's own Order and Command. Mat. 25.41.
Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels. Luke 12.20. But God
said, Thou fool, This night thy soul shall be required of thee. In the Greek,
They shall require, demand, fetch away thy soul. They: What they? The Devils,
that seize the souls of all that love not Christ, whenever they dye.

2. Maran-atha; two Syriack words, as some take them. Maran, that is, our Lord.
Nun finale est affixum primae personae ex pronomine (...). The word it self
(...), Mar, with Aleph, is a Chaldee word (...) Mara, Lord; and Nun only litera
paragogica; then Maran both in Chaldee and Syriack, signifies Lord. Atha,
written thus, (...) or (...) is an Hebrew word; written thus, (...) is Chaldee;
thus (...) is a Syriack word; thus (...) is Arabic; in all signifies, To
come. A man that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, shall be Cursed in all
Nations, in all Languages, by all People; all the world shall account that man
to be Anathema.

Anathema, Maran-atha; some render it, Let him be accursed till the Lord come,
or when the Lord comes; or he shall have due Vengeance from the Lord when he
comes. Some thus, Let him be accursed even till the coming of the Lord, to his
death's day, even for ever; and has reference to that Prophecy of Enoch,
recorded Jude ver. 14. Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of these,
saying, Behold, (...), the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, 15. to
execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of
all their ungodly deeds which they have angodly committed, and of all their
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. And all for want
of Love unto him.

Learned men conclude, That here is an allusion to the Jewish manner of
Excommunication; of which there were three sorts or degrees; The Lesser. The
Middle Sort. The Greatest.


1. The Lesser, called Niddui, Put out; and in the New Testament they were
called, (...), Put out of the Synagogue; and they hold that Cain was
excommunicated this way.

2. The second was called Cherem, or Anathema; when a scandalous sinner, with
Curses out of the Law of Moses, was in the public Audience of the whole
Church, without any limitation of time, excluded from the Communion of it. This
thought to be the same called a delivering up unto Satan. With this sort of
Excommunication was the Incestuous person censured, 1 Cor. 5.4. In the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my Spirit, with the
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, 5. To deliver such an one unto Satan for the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus.

3. The greatest of all they called Samatha; so called from Sem, a name which
they put for Nomen Tetragrammaton, or Jehova, and Atha, comes: Others derive it
from Sham, There, and Mitha, Death; as if they should say, There and then shall
be death to the Non-Lovers of Christ. The Syrians call it Maran-atha; by which
form added to the two former, the excommunicated person as desperate and
forlorn, without all hope of pardon or restitution, was left to the hands of
the Lord, to receive from him an heavy doom at his coming; implying, that they
summoned the Excommunicated before the dreadful Tribunal at the last coming of
the Son of God. They say this sort of Excommunication the people of God used
against the Amal^kites.

And with this highest degree of Excommunication, shall all the Non-Lovers of
Christ, at his coming be excluded, and stand excommunicated from the favorable
Presence of the Glorious God, and of Christ the Gracious only Savior, from the
Company of all the Holy Angels, and Society of the Blessed Saints, from the
Holy Place above, and from all the Joys and Happiness thereof.

The manner how the Jews excommunicated the Samaritans, was very solemn and
dreadful: They brought Three hundred Priests, and Three hundred Trumpets, and
Three hundred Books of the Law, and Three hundred Boys; and they blew with
Trumpets, and the Levites singing, accursed the Cutthaeans, in the Name of
Tetragrammaton, or Jehovah, and with the Curses both of the Superior and
Inferior House of Judgment; and they said, Cursed is he that eats the bread
of the Cutthaeans, (hence is that saying of theirs, He that eats the bread of
the Cutthaean or Samaritan, is as he who eats swines flesh), and let no
Cutthaean be a Pros^lite in Israel, neither have any part in the resurrection
of the just. These Curses they wrote upon Tables, and sealed them, and sent
them through all Israel, who multiplied also this great Anathema, or Curse,
upon them.

But the Excommunication of all the Non-Lovers of Christ, will be inconceivably
more terrible, when the Lord himself shall come with Millions of his Holy
Angels, and with Ten Thousands, yea Thousands of thousands of his Saints, and
the Trumpet sounding, the Saints singing, and the Air ringing, Christ and all
shall say, Now cursed for ever be every man that did not love the Lord Jesus:
Let them never come into the Kingdom of Heaven, nor have a share in the
Happiness that God has prepared for them that love him; and all the Saints and
Angels shall say, Amen, Amen.

There is another Text, setting forth the contrary good condition of those that
love Christ, Ephesians. 6.24. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity, Amen. Paul standing one while upon Mount Ebal, denounces
a Curse against those that do not love the Lord Jesus; another while upon Mount
Gerizzim, pronouncing a Blessing upon them that do.

Deuteronomy. 27.11. And Moses charged the people the same day, saying, 12. These
shall stand upon Mount Gerizzim to bless the people, when ye are come over
Jordan, Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin.
13. And these shall stand upon Mount Ebal to curse, Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and
Zebulun, Dan, and Napthali. 14. And the Levites shall speak, and say unto all
the men of Israel with a loud voice, 15. Cursed be the man that makes any
graven or molten image, an abomination to the Lord, the work of the hands of
the craftsmen, and puts it in a secret place, and all the people shall
answer and say, Amen. 16. Cursed be he that sets light by his father, or his
mother, and all the people shall say, Amen. 17. Cursed be he that removes his
neighbor's landmark; and all the people shall say, Amen. 18 Cursed be he that
makes the blind to wander out of the way; and all the people shall say, Amen.
19. Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger, fatherless, and
widow; and all the people shall say, Amen. Six Tribes stood upon Mount
Gerizzim, and six upon Mount Ebal, and in a little Valley between these two
Mountains, the Priests stood, one while pronouncing a Blessing upon the
Observers of the Law; and then the Tribes upon Mount Gerizzim sounded out Amen:
Another while denouncing Curses against the Transgressors of the Law; then the
Tribes upon Mount Ebal founded out Amen.

But now, though you are not unjust toward men; no Drunkards, no Swearers, yet
if Non-Lovers of Christ, the Curse lies upon you; and at the coming of the
Lord, it will be in vain to plead your praying, hearing, receiving, your moral
Conversation, if void of the Love of Christ; for Christ shall declare you
accursed, and all that shall attend him at his coming, shall say Amen.

SECT. III. A Division and Paraphrase of the Text.
The whole Text consists of these seven parts.

1. The Grace to be obtained, the Duty to be performed, or Act to be exerted,
viz. Love. Sweet, pleasant and delightful.

2. The Object of this Act, or Person to be loved, called the Lord, and Jesus,
and Christ.

3. The Subject of this Act, or who should do this Duty; Man: Beasts cannot,
Devils will not, Man ought.

4. A Supposition, if a man love not; and it is indeed to be supposed, that
many will not.

5. An heavy Imprecation, or solemn denunciation of Vengeance, Anathema; if he
will not be a Lover of Christ, let him be accursed.

6. A determination of the time when this at furthest shall be executed, and
poured forth upon him; Maran-atha, when the Lord comes; tho he prosper in the
mean time, yet when Maran-atha, then Anathema.

7. The Extent of this Curse; If any man -- let him! be he what he will, a
Scholar, a Preacher, a Professor, an Emperor, and yet not a Christ-Lover, the
Plagues of God at the coming of Christ shall light and lie upon him; and if
this any be never so many, Vengeance and Damnation shall overtake and seize
them all.

I cannot yet get off the words of the Text without another view of each term
one by one.

1. If,] This if joined to the not loving of Christ is one of the saddest ifs
you can suppose; if you should be poor, if you should be cast into Prison, if
you should be banished, if you should suffer the loss of liberty and life, it
is not so bad, as if you should not love the Lord Jesus Christ: For if you be
cast to Hell, if you should be damned for ever, it will be if you love not
Christ: If you be ever saved, if you never love Christ, God is not true, and
Christ is not true, and this Word of God is not true; if you pray till you wear
the skin from off your knees, if you cry for mercy till you waste your Tongue;
if you confess sin, and weep your selves blind; if you go as far toward Heaven
as ever glozing Hypocrite did, and all this while have no sincere love to
Christ, you never shall escape the Damnation of Hell; if you do, say I am a
Liar, say I preached falsehood and deceitful words unto you. What! will you
drive us to despair? yes, that I would with all my heart, into this despair of
ever getting to Heaven without sincere, unfeigned love to Christ; for despair
you must of having Happiness and eternal Glory any other way than God has
prescribed in his Word; and Love to Christ is one qualification of that man
that shall be saved.

And to this if relating to your not loving of Christ, I will show you another
if relating to your not entering into Heaven, Heb. 4.3. -- I have sworn in my
wrath, If they shall enter into my rest. -- 5. And in this place again, If they
shall enter into my rest. Here God uses an Oath, but concealeth the
Imprecation; when the Lord pronounces his Oath negatively, then it is to be
understood as an affirmation; as Isa. 14.24. The Lord of hosts has sworn, if
not, so it shall come to pass, that is, it shall certainly come to pass: But
when he sets it down affirmatively, then it is to be understood negatively,
as Psalm. 95.11. If they shall enter into my rest; that is, they shall never
enter into my rest. When God swears thus by himself, he mentions not the
Curse, because no Execration or Curse can fall upon him that is God
necessarily, infinitely and eternally blessed, and therefore not to be
expressed, because it cannot come upon him; neither should such a form of
speech be supplied, as some do profanely use, then let me not be God, or such
like: It is sufficient to alarm Sinners, that God does swear, if they continue
to the death without love to, and says in Christ, they shall not enter into
his rest.

1. A man] loves not Christ that has 1. an understanding to know the
excellencies of Christ, the necessity of Christ, the danger of being without
Christ, and the everlasting good and benefits that are to be had by Christ.

2. A man that has a Will to be guided by the Understanding, a Will to choose
good, and refuse evil.

3. A man that has Affections of love, desire and delight, and shall not place
them upon their proper, primary, principal Object.

4. A man that has a Conscience to walk and act by, to accuse and condemn him
when his Affections are not rightly fixed; and to comfort him, and to testify
for him, when they tend to, and rest in their proper Object.

5. A man that is capable of knowing, loving and enjoying the best good.

6. A man that has heard of Christ, that professes Christ, and has
frequently and earnestly been entreated to give Christ his love.

7. A man that is a sinful man, a lost man, a diseased, polluted man, that
stands in need of washing, cleansing and recovering healing Grace. Show me the
man that needs not Christ, and let him deny him his love.

8. A man that is a dying man, a man leaving this World, going out of Time, and
entering into Eternity; that must shortly be a damned or saved man, within a few
years, months, weeks, days or houts, be eternally happy, or everlastingly
miserable.

3. Any man] especially where the Gospel is preached, where the joyful sound is
heard, to whom the tidings of a Savior and Eternal Life are brought: The
Heathen cannot love him, because they do not know him, because they hear not of
him: but any man, especially that lives under the means of Grace, any mean man,
any noble man, any ignorant man, any learned man, any man of any sort, of any
age, of any calling, of any place or Nation, where they have so often and so
long heard of Christ, that his blessed name is become too common in their
profane polluted mouths. If any such man

4. Love not] tho he often talk of him, tho he pray to God, mentioning his
Name; tho he profess him, hear daily from him, suffer or dye for him, and not
love him that is

5. The Lord] the Lord of Lords, the only Potentate; the Lord that has the
power of Life and Death, able to take up to Heaven, and cast down to Hell, to
damn and save, that reigns over Men and Devils, that has all Power committed
to him, that is

6. Jesus] the only, mighty, alsufficient Savior, that came from Heaven to
Earth, to get and purchase for men a passage from Earth to Heaven; that
suffered, bled, and died to save Sinners from Sin, from Hell, from Everlasting
Burnings; when there is no other Name under Heaven by which Sinners can be
saved, than the Name of Jesus, who is also

7. Christ] anointed of the Father, designed from all Eternity, and sent in the
fullness of time to bring about and accomplish the work of man's Redemption;
that was furnished with all manner of qualifications to bring Souls to Eternal
Glory; and yet those that have their Names from him, called Christians from
Christ, and yet not love him, shall be

8. Anathema] cursed Wretches, miserable Caitiffs, devoted to damnation,
separated from God, cast to Devils, when

9. Maran-atha] the Lord comes; to be Anathema when Maran-atha, is to be
accursed indeed, and for ever; then cursed Men must be with cursed Devils to
all eternity.

CHAP. II.
SECT. I. The Doctrine and Method.
FRom this Text thus explained, That whatsoever man has not sincere love to
the Lord Jesus Christ, is in a deplorable condition, and shall be accursed when
the Lord comes. For his Sin is great, his Mind is blind, his Will perverse, his
Heart is hard and carnal, his Affections corrupt, and base and vile, and his
Soul and Body shall then be doomed down to blackness of darkness, to extremity,
and eternity of misery, to pains and punishment, that no Tongue can express, no
Heart conceive, no Pen can write, how great, how terrible, how intolerable it
will be found to be.

The method in treating on this Subject is cast into these five general Heads.

1. What is the nature of this love to Christ; what kind or manner of Love it
is, without which if man be found, he is Anathema, and shall be plagued with
this heavy Curse at the coming of the Lord?

2. That whosoever is without this love to Christ, is in such a miserable
condition; and dying without it, shall be damned when Christ shall come, is to
be demonstrated.

3. What are the properties of this Curse, that will make it so exceeding
grievous and intolerable.

4. Why so great a stress is put upon such Love, why the Lord insists so much
upon the love of man unto his Son, that whosoever wants it, shall be thus
accursed.

5. The improving of this Doctrine by practical application.

In opening of the nature of this Love to Christ, I shall not only mention the
formal reason of it, but also what is presupposed, and necessarily requisite to
the raising or producing of it in the heart of man; my Apprehensions concerning
it I shall give you in these twelve following Particulars, which being taking
up, and laid together, will contain a description of this Love.

1. This Love supposes the goodness of the Object.

2. It includes or implies the illumination of the Understanding to see and
discern this incomparable goodness in Christ.

3. It includes a discovery of the suitableness of Christ unto the Soul in all
respects.

4. As also a sight of the communicability of that good that is discerned to be
so suitable.

5. Highest valuation of Christ, greatest estimation of him, which is called
appretiating Love.

6. It contains the permanent volition of the Will, the settled inclination of
the heart toward the Lord Jesus Christ.

7. It includes the prevailing and predominant degrees of our love to be to
Christ more than to any thing else whatsoever.

8. In this Love is the election of the Will, choosing Christ for himself, and
for the excellency of his own Person, tho not with the exclusion of our own
advantage by him.

9. Christ as Lord as well as Savior, is the Object of this Love; Christ in
all his Offices, as Teacher, Ruler, as well as Benefactor, is beloved; in which
respect the Love of all Hypocrites and carnal Gospellers does fail and come
short.

10. This Love is wrought by the powerful special operation of the Spirit of
God upon the heart.

11. Whence follows a voluntary resignation of a man's self to Christ, without
reservation of himself, or any thing he has, unto himself.

12. When all this is done, the Soul does delighe in Christ, if present; or
desires after him, if absent; or mourns for him, if it cannot find him; for one
of these three ways Love will be working, and by these workings discover it
self.

SECT. II. The nature, requisites, and the description of this Love to Christ.
Frist, This Love supposes the goodness of the Object, as all Love does: For
nothing can be loved, but what is really good, or at least appears so unto
the Lover. This holy Love therefore being the choicest, chiefest Love,
supposes Christ to be the choicest, and the chiefest Good: That he is a good
Savior, a good Redeemer, a good Lord and Master; a Good excelling,
transcending all inferior, sublunary good; Good! not only good, but best; best
in himself, and best for us. And because he must be loved with such a love, as
that we be willing at his call to part with all other good for his sake;
therefore he is looked upon, and loved as an universal Good; whereas Riches,
Honors, Friends, and all things of this World are but particular good, no one
thing good for all things: Meat and drink are good to satisfy your hunger and
thirst, but not to clothe you; Clothes are good to cover you, but not to feed
you, etc.

But the Soul whose love is fixed upon Christ, does see and say, In poverty
Christ will be my riches, in disgrace Christ will be my honor, in bonds and
imprisonment Christ will be my liberty, in pain Christ will be my ease, in
death Christ will be my life, in the loss of all things Christ will be better
to me than the enjoyment of all these things. He that looks not upon Christ as
an incomparable Object, does not love him as he ought. Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I
in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.
Prove. 3.14. Happy is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that gets
understanding; 14. For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of
silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold. 15. She is more precious than
rubies, and all the things thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her.
The Spouse saw such goodness in Christ, that she was lovesick for him: Cant.
5.8. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye
tell him that I am sick of love. Others wonder what a gracious Soul does see in
Christ, that it is so inflamed with love unto him. V. 9. What is thy beloved
more than another beloved, O thou fairest among women? what is thy beloved more
than another beloved, that thou do so charge us? What is he? in a large
description of his Excellencies she answers to this Question: 10. My beloved
is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand; proceeds in Verse. 11, 12,
13, 14, 15. and in the 16th concludes, He is altogether lovely; this is my
beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem. What then? Does the
transcendent goodness of Christ thus displayed, draw the Heart, allure the
Affections? yes verily, for it immediately follows, Cant. 6.1. Whither is thy
beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? Whither is thy beloved turned aside,
that we may seek him with thee?

1. Christ as God is incomparably good; for so he is originally good,
infinitely good, eternally, immutably, incomprehensibly good.

2. Christ as Man, is the most excellent of all men. Adam in innocence, the
Prophets and Apostles in all their greatest dignity, and the Saints in Heaven
in perfect glory, are not comparable to the man Christ Jesus.

3. Christ as God-man and Mediator, surpasses in goodness all the holy Ones on
Earth, and all the Angels in Heaven; Ephesians. 1.20. -- And set him at his own
right hand in the heavenly places: 21. Far above all principality and power,
and might and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world,
but also in that which is to come. And though he call his People, his Brethren
and his Fellows, Yet God has anointed him with the oil of gladness above all
his fellows, Psalm. 45.7. is Christ thus in your Eyes, and to your Hearts?

SECT. III. The Second Requisite of this Love.
SEcondly, This Love includes and implies the illumination of the
Understanding, to see and discern this matchless goodness in Christ. Tho
Knowledge be not (formaliter) Love, yet it is necessarily pre-requisite to it,
for this Love is not blind: Ignoti nulla cupido; What we do not know, we cannot
love, nor desire. John 4.10. -- If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is
that says unto thee, give me to drink; thou would have asked of him, and he
would have given thee living water. You might love an UNSEEN Christ, but you
cannot love an UNKNOWN Christ. 1 Pet. 1.8. whom having not seen, ye love; in
whom, tho now ye see him not, yet believing, (and Faith includes Knowledge) ye
rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.

Therefore the Prophet speaking of graceless men, as disliking, not desiring,
nor loving Christ, brings them in as saying, Isa. 53.2. -- He has no form, nor
comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire
him. How! no comeliness in him that is the brightness of the Father's glory,
and the express image of his person! yes, there was, there is, but they had not
eyes to see it; as if a blind man should say, the Sun is dark, because he has
no eyes to behold the light thereof. How! when we shall see him, there is no
beauty in him that we should desire him! It was, because in seeing, they did
not see: How should they look upon him with an eye of Love, when they did not
discern him with an eye of Faith?

But a sanctified Soul, whose eyes are opened, sees that superlative Goodness,
Beauty, and Excellency in Christ, that all other things that are good with an
inferior goodness, seem to him as dross and dung, Phil. 3.7. But what things
were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. 8. Yea doubtless, and I count
all things but loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord: for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but
((...) quasi (...) things cast to dogs, or Dogs-meat, or) dung, that I may win
Christ.

The sanctified man, whose mind is savingly enlightened, can say, I see that
goodness in the Savior, that far surpasses all the goodness of the Creature;
tho the Stars in the coldest night might be seen, yet when the Sun arises,
they all disappear; so in the night of Ignorance, when my Mind was blind, my
Heart hard, and my Affections frozen, I was taken with the goodness of Riches,
of Honors, and of worldly Pleasure; yet when the Sun of Righteousness with his
radiant Rays did shine into my Soul, and with his warming Influences did thaw
my benumbed frozen Heart, when Christ the Day Star arose in my Soul, then, O
then, the glory of these things that did dazzle mine eyes, did presently vanish
and wither away; then, in comparison of Christ, I saw an emptiness in all the
Creatures fullness, I saw beggary in all its bravery, shame in all its glory,
and poverty in its riches. I saw its greatest resplendent luster to be
darkness, its wisdom to be folly, its beauty appeared to me no better than
deformity, when once I had got a view of Christ's transcendent loveliness.

SECT. IV. The Third Requisite.
THirdly, This Love to Christ includes a discovery of the suitableness of
Christ unto the Soul, as the most convenient Good. Appetibility is not the
formal reason of goodness, but rather a consequent of it; for a thing is not
therefore good, because it is desirable; but it is therefore desirable, because
it is good: Our Desires do not make the goodness of the Object, but the
goodness of the Object allures our Desires and Love.

Suitableness is the ground of Love. A thing might be good in it self, yet if
we apprehend no suitableness in it to us, the love of our hearts is not upon
it; therefore in pain, and sickness, a man judges ease and health to be better
for him than Gold and Silver, because more suitable; a man in hunger and
thirst, esteems Bread and Water to be better than Honors and Preferments,
because more suitable.

Love to Christ is grounded on the Apprehensions that the Soul has of the
suitableness of Christ unto him, and says, Food is not more suitable to an
hungry man, nor Physic to a sick man, nor Clothing to a naked man, than
Christ is to me, a poor, sinful, and by my Sins a lost man; an undone,
perishing and distressed man: For I am naked, and He will give me change of
Raiment. I am blind, and He will restore my sight. I am enslaved to Sin and
Satan, and He will give me liberty. I am lost, He will save me. I am guilty, He
will pardon me. I am polluted, He will purge me. I am an enemy to God, He will
reconcile me. I am ignorant, He will teach me. I am indebted, He will be my
Surety. I am poor, He will make me rich. I am a stranger to God, He will bring
me into acquaintance with him. What shall I say? I am unfit for Heaven, but He
will make me meet to be Partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.
Though I have Riches, I might be damned; but if I have Christ, I shall be
saved. Though men admire me, yet God might loath me; but if I have Christ, the
Lord will love me. Though I prosper in the World, in all my pomp, I might be
walking in the way to Everlasting Misery; but if I have Christ, He will lead me
in the paths unto Eternal Glory. Look, O my Soul, look round about thee, and
thou shall find none so suitable to thee, as the only Savior: no! then only he
shall have my prevailing love. Is there none for me like him? then none shall
have love from me like him. This suitableness of Christ unto the Soul in every
respect is to be more largely spoken to among the Arguments to persuade you to
set and six your Love on him.

SECT. V. The Fourth Requisite of this Love.
FOurthly, Love includes a sight of the communicability of that good that is
discerned to be so suitable to the person that should love it: possibility of
participation is necessary to the begetting or raising of the Affection; for
while we see a Good, though every way suitable, yet if it be impossible to be
obtained, we can have no hope of it, but sink under despondency and despair;
and though Love respects its Object without the circumstances of hard or easy
to be obtained, but simply as good; yet that which is good in it self, but
impossible to us, is not a good to us, because a good not to be possessed by
us; and such a Good cannot be loved with such a Love as we ought to have to
Christ, who is to be loved by us as good, and our good, or as attainable by us;
for good as incommunicable to us so considered, may beget vexation, anguish and
horror, but not complacency, which yet Philosophers make the formal reason of
Love.

1. And this I judge might be one reason, why there is no love in Devils to
Christ, nor can be. Why? are not Devils under unexpressible horror? and would
not deliverance be esteemed by them as a good suitable to them? Do they not
know that there is no Savior but Christ? why then do they hate him? why? the
Benefits of Christ are not communicable to them. The Sufferings of Christ, tho
sufficient to have redeemed all the Devils in Hell, yet were not ordained by
God, nor endured by Christ for any such end, or with any such intention; Christ
did not dye to make Salvation or Happiness possible for Devils, or
finally-unbelieving-impenitent Sinners. Therefore, though they know Christ to
be good, and freedom from misery would be suitable to them; yet this Good being
incommunicable to them, they neither have, nor can have sincere love unto him.
Hence it is they hate Christ with an implacable hatred, and oppose his Kingdom
and Interest with the strongest opposition; Mat. 8.29. And behold they (the
unclean Spirits) cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou
Son of God? art thou come to torment us before the time? As if they had said,
There is no good that we look should come by thee to us; we expect no
Salvation, no Deliverance from our Pain and Misery; Thou art a Savior to men,
but not to us; Thou will have nothing to do with us in a way of mercy, and we
have nothing to do with Thee, by any hopes of Redemption through thy Mediatory
Undertakings; men on Earth might have to do with Thee, and therefore have cause
to love Thee, and thou art come into the World to have to do with them, to seek
them, and to save them: they may have Thee for a Redeemer, and a Savior, but
so may not we: They are fallen, and by Thee might be restored; but we are
fallen, and must lie where we fell, without hope, without a possibility of
recovering; there is no doing betwixt Thee and us for Heaven and Salvation; no
dealings betwixt Thee and us for Life and Happiness; none of thy Sufferings are
to be for us; Thou art not come to offer us any terms of Mercy, or to make any
Propositions of Peace betwixt God and us, and therefore our recovery is
impossible; and therefore being fallen, do lie down in utter despair of any
communication of the Benefits of thy Death and Sufferings unto us; and having
no hope of merciful Redemption by Thee, we neither have, nor will, nor can have
any love unto Thee.

2. The same is now the condition of Damned Souls, as that of Damned Devils.
Men on Earth might have love to Christ, but in Hell they cannot; for on earth
Christ had to do with them, and they with Christ; and Mercy had to do with
them, and Grace and Patience had to do with them; but when once in Hell, Christ
has done with them, and the Spirit has done with them; Grace, Mercy, and
Patience of God has done with them; no offer of Grace, no tender of Peace and
Reconciliation, no overtures of Mercy more to all Eternity: But now Wrath has
to do with them, and vindictive punishing Justice has to do with them; and
they are fallen into the hands of the Living God; and being past all
possibility of benefit and advantage by Christ, they cannot love him, but have
more rooted hatred to him than ever. By the way let me note, That ye should
with fear and trembling diligently labor, fervently pray, speedily repent, and
turn from sin, sincerely believe, that ye might not at death be doomed down to
Hell, because by damned Souls Christ cannot be loved.

3. But the case is otherwise with men on earth; with the worst of you in this
Congregation this day. The Swearer might yet have benefit, Pardon by Christ;
the vilest, the greatest sinner that stands here before God this day, may yet
be saved, if he will hearken to the Voice of Mercy, to the Commands and
Invitations of the only Savior, to the Calls of Grace, and answer to those
Calls. Christ has dyed for you, for every one of you so far, that Salvation
yet is possible to you, and God reconcilable to you, and Christ and his
Benefits upon the conditions of the Gospel, communicable to you: For who dare
say there is no difference between the state of the damned in Hell, and the
worst of men upon earth? or that there is no more hope or possibility of
Salvation by Christ for the greatest sinners upon the earth, than of the Devils
themselves; or that God is no more reconcilable, and the Benefits of Christ no
more communicable to them, than to these; while to sinners on earth Commands
are given to repent, and believe, and turn to God in hopes of Mercy, and
Conditional Promises of Life, and a conditional Grant of Pardon is given to
them, which is not the case of Devils or damned Souls; and therefore we Study
in hope, and Pray in hope, and Preach in hope of your Conversion and Salvation,
when there is no hope of them that are gone down to death, and utter and
eternal darkness.

Methinks this considered, should win thy Love to Christ, and cause thee to
break forth into such Language as this, and say, O my Soul, as yet through the
Mercy and Patience of God to thee, there is a wide difference betwixt thy
state, and the state of damned souls; for tho thou hitherto have not loved
Christ, which is thy heinous sin, yet thou may, which is God's great Mercy
to thee: For tho now thou art without Christ, which is thy misery, yet thou
might have Christ, which will be thy remedy; when the Damned love not
Christ, nor can love him, for they have not Christ, nor can have him: Thou art
yet in the land of hope, and under the means of hope, and thy remedy is at
hand, if by thy wilful refusals of recovering Grace, thou do not dash this
hope, when those poor, wretched Souls, that are passed out of Time into
Eternity, from Earth to Hell, from Hearing in this world, to Howling in the
next, are now and there Christless; and because now and there Christless, are
therefore there, now, and for ever hopeless and remediless. O then, my Soul,
look toward this Christ that thou may have! Behold! This Christ and all his
Benefits, upon Gospel-Conditions, are yet communicable unto thee for thine
Everlasting Good. Do thou not hear the Offers of Pardon, Peace, and Glory,
made to thee in his name? Do thou not perceive him yet standing at thy door,
and knocking, crying, calling there, Open to me, and I will save thee? Do
thou not feel his Spirit yet striving with thee? Do thou not see Mercy has
not yet delivered thee into the hands of Justice, and to God's fiery
Indignation? Here thou stand, while others are lying, rolling in a Lake of
burning Brimstone; Does not his Grace still woo thee for thy Love? Does not his
Goodness still entreat thee, and his Patience still wait upon thee? If thou will be holy, yet thou may; if thou will have Mercy, Mercy thou may have;
and if thou will have the fruit and benefits of Christ's Death, as yet it is
not too late. Is not this enough to melt an heart of stone? To break an heart
as hard as adamant? To dissolve thee into tears? to kindle and inflame thy
love? And with admiration cause thee to cry out and say, Is this thy Mercy,
Lord, to me! to me! to me that have so long abused thy Grace, despised thy
Mercy, and slighted thy Love! To me, that have lived so long, and never loved
thee! To me, that might have been damned before this day, and so have been shut
up under an impossibility of Salvation by thy Blood, and bloody Sufferings!
Yea, have had the hatred of my heart fixed upon thee, and Love never bent
toward thee! But forasmuch as thou art pleased to this day to follow me with
thy Calls of Mercy, with the Entreaties of thy Grace; and still the voice of
Love is sounding in my ears, and thou say to me, If thou will love me, I
will pardon thee; if thou at last wilt give me thy heart, I will be thy
Savior; it is long that I have waited, but if now thou will hearken and
consent, all shall be thine own; my Righteousness shall be thine, my Merits
shall be thine, my Spirit shall be thine, and Heaven shall be thine. O Blessed
Lord! I cannot withstand this pleading Love; I can no longer gainsay this
expostulating Grace. I have, but now. I cannot; I have, but now I will not.
Thou say that Thou will yet be mine, and the Blessings of the Covenant may
yet be mine, and Heaven it self may yet be mine. Dearest Lord! thou have won my
heart, thou have got my Love, and lo I give it all to thee, I place it all upon
thee.

SECT. VI. The Fifth Requisite of Love to Christ.
FIfthly, This Love to Christ includes highest Valuation of him, greatest
estimation, which is appretiating Love; for can we love him, and not prize him?
Or can we love him most, and not prize him most? Or do you use to despise a
thing or person, and yet love him? To have mean, low, and undervaluing thoughts
of one, and yet love him more than another whom you do more highly esteem and
value? Does not the Worldling that loves his Money more than other things,
value it above other things? Does not the Ambitious person, that loves his
Honor and his Credit more than other things, stand upon it, and esteem it more
than other things? And will it not be so with him that loves Christ? Or is not
he a Cursed man that valueth any thing above Christ, and esteems it more than
Christ? As Christ is precious to him that does Believe, 1 Pet. 2.7. so he is to
him that Loves. Pearls are valued but as Pebbles, and Diamonds as Dirt, and
Diadems as Dung, by a man that loves Christ, when they stand in competition
for our Love with Christ. In the practical judgment of a sincere Lover of
Christ, Christ cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx,
or the Sapphire; the Gold and the Crystal cannot equal him, and he would not
exchange him for Jewels of fine Gold: With him no mention shall be made of
Coral, or of Pearl; for the Worth of Christ is above Rubies: The Topaz of
Ethiopia does not equal him, neither shall the purest Gold, or the most refined
Silver be weighed in the balance of his judgment, to be preferred before
Christ: For to him he is more precious than Rubies: And all the things the
heart of man can desire besides him, are not to be compared with him: For
Christ is that Treasure hid in a field, which when this Lover has found, for
joy thereof he goes and sells all that he has, and buyeth that field. He is
that goodly Pearl of great Price, which when found, all shall be left, or lost,
and parted with, that this might be obtained, Mat. 13.44, 45, 46. And what a
man gives all for, he values that more than all he gives for it.

Can that man be judged to love Christ, that values his corruptible Silver
above the incomparable Savior? That esteems Earth above Heaven? And the
Creature more than God? Or is not he deservedly to be reckoned an Anathema,
that shall esteem the Dross of this World, above the Darling of God? Or thick
Clay above him that does excel the clearest Crystal? Or the things of Time,
which are only for Time, above that Christ that is a Good for all Eternity?

SECT. VII. The Sixth Requisite of Love to Christ.
SIxthly, This Love to Christ takes in the Permanent Volition of the Will, the
settled Inclination of the heart toward the Lord Jesus Christ. For what else is
Love, but the Volition of the rational Appetite? Or the Will's Volition of
Good, apprehended by the Understanding. Or the Will's choosing of him, and
adhering to him. Aversation of the Will from Christ, is no better than hating
of him: For as Volition and Complacency is Love, so Nolition and Displicency is
hatred.

Can a man Love Christ, and yet not Will him? Can he love him, and yet not
choose him? Can he love him, and the Will refuse him? Was Nilling ever accounted
loving? or turning of the Heart from an Object, ever taken for the closing with
it? or is it not a contradiction? will not, and love not, is all one. John
5.40. Ye will not come to me -- 42. I know you, that ye have not the love of
God in you. What is the Object of the love of the Heart, is the Object of the
choice of the Will: and such as is the choice of your Wills, such are ye: If
thy Will choose the World before Christ, I dare boldly call thee a worldly man;
or Pleasures before Christ, I dare confidently declare thee a voluptuous man;
but if Christ before all other things, I may term thee a truly gracious man.

Suppose then the World, and the Riches thereof, the Honors, and the Pleasures
of it, were set on the one hand, and Christ on the other, which would you
really choose? It is an easy thing to think and say, you would choose Christ,
and not the world; but my question is, Which you would really choose? Can thou
say, and appeal to God that knows thy heart; Lord, thou that know all
things, thou know that I choose Christ before Riches, Christ before
Pleasures, Liberty, Life, or any thing that is dear unto me in this world. Thou
know that I would rather have Christ without the World, than the World
without Christ; I would rather have the Lord Jesus with Disgrace, with Poverty,
and with the Cross, than all the Treasures of the world. This must be a man's
Will, and this must be a man's Choice, or cannot be said to have sincere Love
to Jesus Christ.

SECT. VIII. The Seventh Requisite in Love to Christ; or the Sincerity of it.
SEventhly, This Love consists in the prevailing and predominant degrees of
Affections unto Christ: For if he be not loved above all, he is not sincerely
loved at all. There might be love of other things subordinate with the Love of
Christ, but not coordinate or equal with it, much less superior to it. You
might love your Friends, and love your Enjoyments, and love the Comforts of
your life, but you must love Christ more. The love of these must be swallowed
up in the love of Christ, and be subordinate unto it.

But you may say, This is that offensive Doctrine that (...) the difference
betwixt common and special Grace, to be only gradual, and not specifical; and
God forbid that we should think that God will damn a man for want of further
degrees of Grace, when he has it in truth and kind, and the degrees do not
vary the kind.

1. The degrees do not vary nor alter the kind in things natural, but they may,
and do, in things moral. For Example, The degrees of Reason, acuteness of Wit,
solidity of Judgment, that one man might have, more than another man, does not
make him more a man as to his Species or kind, than another man that is in
those respects inferior to him; for both (quoad Speciem) as to Kind, are men;
have the Human Nature, and the specifical difference whereby they are
distinguished from things of any other kind: but yet degrees might make a
specifical difference in morals, where the act as natural is still of the same
kind. For instance: In eating and drinking little or much, the natural act of
both is still the same; but in morality, if a man eat and drink for quantity
and quality according to the rules and guidance of Prudence, and no more; this
is a virtue called Temperance; but if in degrees he does exceed, and eats
more, and drinks more than that Mediocrity, quoad nos, prescribed by Prudence
(in which the nature of this Virtue does consist) does admit of, then though
eating and drinking considered Physically, be of the same kind, yet in a moral
respect it alters the kind, and is called quite by another name, viz.
Intemperance, Gluttony, and Drunkenness.

2. The degrees of Love might be considered in a twofold respect:

1. In respect of other Lovers of Christ; of which one might have degrees of
Love that is sincere, more and above what another man might have, whose Love is
yet sincere: And of this More, or degree of Love, is Christ's question to Peter
to be understood, John 21.15. Simon, son of Jonas, Love thou me more than
these? viz. Other Disciples love me; where the comparative More, respects THESE
as other Agents in Love, or Lovers; and therefore Peter answers in the
Positive, I love thee; not in the Comparative, More than they all do love thee.
But the Comparative, More, does not respect THESE, as the Object of Peter's
Love, as if Christ had asked, Love thou me, more than thou love these: To
which, doubtless, Peter could have readily replied, Yea, Lord, I love thee more
than I love these, or all men or things in this world: And in this sense God
does not damn any for want of more degrees of Love, or other Graces.

2. Degrees of Love might be considered in respect of the things loved, or the
object of our Love. That the word, More, means, Do you love Christ more than
the World, Sin, Self; or do you love These more than Christ? And then, I say,
this Doctrine is so far from being offensive, that I judge it is of great
concernment, and necessary for every man that has a Soul that must be damned
or saved, to know and understand: For I do not fear to say, for want of these
degrees of Love, whereby a man's Love is less to Christ, than to the World, and
Sin, and carnal Self, God will surely damn him. Does this grate upon any
Christian ears, That a man that loves not Christ, more than Sin, and more than
Pleasures and Profits, has no sincere Love to Christ, nor shall be saved by
him? Surely such a man would judge in another case, if he had a Wife that loves
him, yet loves another man more than himself, she had not sincere Conjugal Love
to him.

3. The plainest, fullest, and, I hope, no offensive Answer, shall be the Words
of Christ himself, showing wherein sincerity of Love to him does consist, Mat.
10.37. He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me; and
he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. 38. And he
that takes not his cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of me. 39. He
that finds his life shall lose it, and he that loses his life for my sake,
shall find it. And all the love to all inferior things, in comparison of the
degrees of love we should have to Christ, more than unto these, is rather
Hatred than Love, Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father,
and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own
life also, he cannot be my disciple. What Interpretation can these words bear?
This? That no real Disciple of Christ may or ought to have true love to Father
or Mother, Brother or Sister, Wife and Children, or to his own Life? Absurd and
irreligious sense; being contrary to the Law of Nature, and Christ's constant
Doctrine in his Word. What then? This? That a true Disciple of Christ must and
ought to love these things less than Christ, and Christ with more (till they be
prevailing) degrees; and Love in the heart to Christ (be like the Biass to the
Bowl, that) make it incline more to Christ than to all other things: This is
that which is asserted; and being the sense of Christ's Words, I hope, will not
offend any that have more Love to Christ, than to all these things; and for the
rest, that love these things more than Christ, they shall find that for this
very thing, Christ with them will be offended.

SECT. IX. The Eighth Requisite in Love to Christ.
EIghthly, This Love chooses Christ for himself, and for the Excellency of his
own Person; tho not with the exclusion of our own Benefit and Salvation by him.
Our own Benefits by Christ might be looked at by the returning soul at first,
as ordine prima, but not quoad dignitatem praecipua and ultima. The Soul might
first be allured and drawn to look after Christ, and to love him, by the
consideration of the matchless Good and Benefits it might have by him, which
the convinced sinner sees he can find in no other; but in process of time, and
in his progress in the way to Heaven, he learns and sees that Excellency and
Beauty in Christ, that he is in himself more amiable than all the Objects of
his former Love.

To ask therefore, Whether we are to love Christ for himself, or for his
Benefits we have by him? is to propound a question which yet I have not
observed in the Scripture, nor disjunctively answered therein; for one is
subordinate to the other, and subordinata non sunt opposita, nec pugnant. I am
to love Christ for himself, and for the Goodness, Excellency, and Amiableness
of his own Person; and I am to love Christ for the good I have received by him,
and for the benefits I hope further for his sake to be made partaker of; and
the one is an help unto the other: Though I am to love Christ more for himself,
than for my advantage by him; yet in loving of him, I do not conceive I am to
cast away the consideration of the benefits by him.

As we should not put the seeking of God's Glory, and our own Salvation, in
opposition, but in subordination, tho God's Glory and the pleasing of his Will
be the ultimate end, and our Salvation to be sought by us in order thereunto:
Wherefore in seeking after an evidence of Grace, and Title to Heaven, I think
it is a needless and unwarrantable puzzling of our selves; and that which has
sorely afflicted some gracious persons, and filled them with unnecessary
doubts, and fears, and torments of mind, to demand of our selves, Whether we
could be content to be damned, to go to Hell, to suffer everlasting Torments,
and the burning, fiery, flaming Wrath of God poured out upon the damned, so
that God may be thereby glorified. I shall forbear to judge the state of my
Soul by this, as a Character of Grace, and Preaching of it unto others, till
some shall show me this is propounded in the Gospel as a Condition of the
Pardon of my Sin, and the Salvation of my Soul, which hitherto I have not
observed: For how can I earnestly desire to be Saved, and yet be willing and
content to be Damned? Long to be with him, and yet content to be for ever
separated from him? I do find God threatens men with Hell, to awaken them to
look after Heaven, and deliverance from Hell, but I do not find God propounding
as a condition of Salvation, to be content to go to Hell, that we might be
received up to Heaven. That I leave and loathe my sin, repent and turn to God,
believe and love him above all, thankfully accept him for my Lord and Savior,
is plainly required from me; and upon the sincere performance of these
conditions, and persevering therein unto the end of my life, for Christ's sake,
beloved and believed on, I may comfortably, well-groundedly hope, wait for, and
expect through the Riches and Freeness of his Grace, Everlasting Happiness.

In like manner, I judge it a perplexing question, Whether we should love
Christ for himself, or for the Benefits by him. Lord, help me to love Christ
for himself, and for all the good I have and hope for by him; but the one
subordinately, the other ultimately; for such love I read there was in David,
Psalm. 116.1. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice and my
supplications.

SECT. X. The Ninth Requisite in Love to Christ.
NInthly, Sincere Love to Jesus Christ does respect him, and is placed upon
him, as he is Prophet, Priest, and King. In which respect, the love of
Hypocrites and carnal Gospellers, does fail and come short. Most will profess
love to Christ, as he is Jesus, a Savior, to deliver them from the Guilt of
Sin, and Punishment of Hell, and the Wrath that is to come; but will not love
him, nor have him, as a Teacher and a Ruler. As if a woman should love her
husband, as he makes provision for her, and does protect her from wrongs and
injuries; but as he is her Head, to guide, to rule and govern her, so she
cannot endure him: Would you not in such a case cry out against such love, and
say, this is but partial and pretended love? And do not you see you deal as
deceitfully and hypocritically with Christ, when in one respect you say you
like and love him, but indeed in other respects you do dislike and hate him?
And do you think that Christ will save you from Hell, if he do not save you
from your sins? That he will make you happy, if you be never holy? Or do you
hope that he will bring you to Heaven, without your being made meet and fit for
Heaven? Does not your own Reason and Conscience, if you consult them, condemn
such hopes of happiness, that is built upon such partial Love? Must Sin be
loved as a Lord, and Christ loved as a Savior? Do you think if Sin be your
Lord, Christ will be your Savior? What is the meaning then that the Object of
such love, that you must have, if you would not be Anathema, in the Text is set
down, the Lord Jesus Christ? What means then that slaughter at the last day,
among them that never would submit to Christ as Lord and Ruler, nor love him in
that relation? Whom Christ looks upon not as Lovers of him, but as Enemies to
him; and will deal with them, not as Lovers, but as Enemies, Luke 19.27. But
those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither,
and slay them before me. What is the meaning then, that Lord and Savior, so
often in Scripture with a Conjunction Copulative are put together, if as the
Object of your Love they are to be parted asunder? Romans 8.39. and 7.25. 1 Cor.
1.2. 1 Cor. 15.57. 2 Cor. 1.2. Gal. 1.3. Ephesians. 1.2, 3. Phil. 1.2. Col. 1.2. 1
These. 1.1. and 2.1, 2. 1 Timothy 1.2. and 2.1, 2. Tit. 1.4. Jam. 1.1. 1 Pet. 1.3.
and 2 Pet. 1.1, 2. In these Texts and many more, Lord and Savior, Lord and
Jesus, Lord Jesus Christ, are set together, and in all these respects
propounded to us, to be loved and received by us, if we would have Grace,
Mercy, and Peace from God, and Salvation by him: And as he is offered, so he
must be loved and accepted, or you must go without him and his benefits for
ever.

SECT. XI. The Tenth Requisite to Love to Christ, or the Worker of it.
TEnthly, This Love to Christ is wrought by the Powerful Operation of the
Spirit of God upon the heart. For tho there is Affection of Love naturally in
all men, yet there is not the Grace of Love naturally in any man. There is love
to sin, and to the world, and there might be love of man to man, and some
common love in man to God, by some common workings of the Spirit; but there can
be no special Saving Love to Jesus Christ, but by the special Operations of the
Holy Ghost. It is a Flower that does not grow in Natures Garden, but is planted
by the Spirit of God: Therefore spiritual holy Love is said to be a fruit of
the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. And if any, such surely is sincere and saving Love to
Christ.

SECT. XII. The Eleventh Thing required in it.
ELeventhly, This Love includes a Resignation of a man's self to Christ,
without reservation of any thing he is or has, unto himself. A Lover of Christ
does so devote, dedicate, and give up himself unfeignedly to Christ, as to his
rightful Owner, and bountiful Benefactor, that he looks upon himself to be
Christ's, more than his own; to live to Christ, and not to himself, and to seek
Christ in all, and not himself. As in Conjugal Love there is a mutual giving
each to other; the one, I give my self to thee; the other, and I give my self
to thee; so in this holy Spiritual Love between Christ and the Soul, Christ
gives himself unto the Soul, and says, I am thine, my Righteousness is thine,
my Merits are thine, and all my Benefits shall be thine: So the Soul in love
with Christ, says, Lord, I give my self to thee, my Understanding shall be
thine, my Will, my Heart, my Estate, my All shall be thine, at thy Command, at
thy Disposal, for me to have, to use, to leave or lose, as thou shall please.
Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine, and I am his. Hos. 2.23. I will have mercy upon
her that had not obtained mercy; and I will say to them which were not my
people, Thou art my people; and they shall say, Thou art my God.

SECT. XIII. The Workings of this Love, as it is Delighting, Desiring, or
Mourning Love.
TWelfthly, When all this is done, the Soul does Delight in Christ, if present;
Desires after him, if absent; or mourns for him, if it cannot find him. One
of these Three ways Love will discover it self. There are Three sorts of Love.

First, Delighting Love; If a man finds Christ's gracious quickening Presence in
his Soul, discovering and manifesting himself and Love unto him; he rejoiceth
in it more than in all Riches, and says, My Life is a Pleasure, my Heart is
filled with Comfor, my Soul with Heavenly Delights. Psalm. 4.6. There be many
that say, Who will show us any good? Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us. 7. Thou have put gladness in my heart, more than in the
time that their corn and their wine increased. Cant. 2.3. As the apple trees
among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons. I sat down under
his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet unto my taste. 4. He
brought me into the banqueting house, and his banner over me was love. John
20.16. Jesus says unto her, Mary, she turned her self, and says unto him,
Rabboni, which is to say, Master. 18. Mary Magdalen came and told the
disciples, That she had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken these things unto
her. 20. And when he had so said, (Peace be unto you) he showed unto them his
hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord.

Secondly, Desiring Love: If Christ be withdrawn, the Soul does long, does
pant, does thirst, and cannot rest till Christ returns; O whither is my Beloved
gone? where shall I seek him? when shall I find him? how long! how long will it
be! Oh stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love,
Cant. 2.5. And Psalm. 42.1. As the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so
pants my soul after thee, O God. 2. My soul thirsts for God, for the living
God; when shall I come and appear before God? Psalm. 63.1. O God, thou art my
God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for
thee. -- Psalm. 84.2. My soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the
Lord: my heart and my flesh cries out for the living God. (...) the first word
is the Radex, or primitive word, from whence comes a word that signifies
Silver: Whence I note, that as a man that loves Silver, desires Silver; so a
man that loves Christ, desires Christ. Oh blessed Love, whereby a man loves
Christ, and desires Christ with that earnest, ardent, continual love, as a
Lover of the World loves and desires the Silver, and Gold, and the Riches of
the World! the other word translated sainteth, signifies to be consumed;
anxiously to expect, q. d. My soul desires, yea also desires; is consumed
with desires after God.

Thirdly, Mourning Love: The Soul does grieve, and is filled with sorrow, when
it has not the thing that it does desire. Alas! that I should go from Duty to
Duty, to look for Christ, and cannot find him; to seek him, but cannot see him!
Alas! it grieves, it groans and weeps, for the absence of its beloved Lord. In
company you might see his tears; in secret, were you near him, you might hear
his groans, and bitter sorrowful complaints, My Lord ^s gone; my Love, the
dearly beloved of my Soul, carries himself as a stranger to me: Like Mary,
John 20.13. They said unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? she says unto them,
Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.

The sum of all these Particulars opening the nature of this Love, being
contracted and laid together, make up this Description.

SECT. XIV. The Description of Love to Christ.
LOVE to Christ is a special Grace wrought in the heart by the Spirit of God,
inlightning the mind, whereby the Soul discenring the incomparable goodness,
suitableness and communicability of Christ unto him, and in his judgment having
a superlative valuation of him, the Will does choose him before all; primarily
for himself, and secondarily for his Benefits: and giving to him the
predominant degrees of his Affections, resigneth himself to Christ in all his
Offices; delighting in him, if present; desiring after him, if absent; or
mourning for him, if he cannot find him.

This is the Love you must have to Christ, if you would not be Anathema,
accursed when the Lord shall come.

CHAP. III. Ten Arguments that prove the Necessity of this Love to Christ, for
the avoiding of the Curse.
DOES it need any further proof than the Text it self? what other construction
can you make of it? If you believe that this is the Word of God, and that God's
Word is true, how can you question, whether a Non-Lover of Christ shall be a
cursed Wretch at the coming of the Lord? but you love not Christ, and yet you
hope, to be blessed when he comes; you have no sincere love to him, and yet
persuade your selves your Condition is good for the present, and shall escape
the Curse hereafter. What! against the plain Assertions of the Word of God?
Will not you only bear me down, that you shall be blessed; but will you also
bear down Paul; nay, and God himself too, that it is well with you now, and
shall go well with you at the coming of the Lord, and after that for ever?
Miserable men! that have no other hopes that they shall escape the Curse, but
that God should not be true, and his Word should not be true, and all his
Servants that come and preach to them in his Name, and warn them of this Curse,
do not deliver the very truth unto them: But whether you will hear, or whether
you will forbear, I will proceed to evidence this truth to you by these
following Arguments.

Arg. 1. He that loves not Christ, is not in Christ; he that is not in Christ,
is in his sins; he that is in his sins is accursed, therefore he that loves not
Christ, is accursed: And being found so when he comes, shall be cursed at his
coming. He that has no sincere love to Christ, has still his old Heart, and
his old Love remaining in him; and he that has his old Heart, is not in
Christ: 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; old things
are past away; behold, all things are become new.

Can you be in Christ, and not the love of Christ be in you? Can you be in
Christ, and your heart turn away from Christ? Can you be in Christ, while your
heart is set against Christ? and is not your heart against him, while you have
no love for him? can there be any Union, where there is no liking Affection?
does not hatred keep at the greatest distance, and maintain the widest
separation?

If you be not in Christ, can you bring forth any Fruit pleasing unto God? Joh.
15.4. -- As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the
vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me: And if you bring forth no fruit,
shall you not be cast into the fire? Joh. 15.6. If a man abide not in me, he is
cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them, and cast them
into the fire, and they are burnt: And are you such as shall be cast into the
fire, and flames of Hell, and are you not in a cursed, dangerous, and miserable
Condition? Can a bad Tree bring forth good Fruit? and if it do not, is it not
for the fire? Mat. 3.10. And now also the ax is laid to the root of the trees;
therefore every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and
cast into the fire. Has not the rain of heavenly Doctrine dropped upon you,
and yet do you bring forth any thing but Briars and Thorns, when you have no
love to Christ? and are you not then rejected, and your end to be burned? and
is then the Curse far from you? Heb. 6.7. The earth which drinks in the rain
that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is
dressed, receives blessing from God; 8. But that which bears thorns and
briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned: and
when you come to that end, will you not then acknowledge your selves to be
Anathema?

Arg. 2. He that loves not Christ, is under the curses of the Law; therefore
he that loves not Christ, is accursed: For if all the Curses of the Law
lighting and abiding upon a man, will prove a man an accursed man, the man that
has no sincere love to Christ, must be the man. For tho the Law as a Covenant
be not in force, so that we are not to seek Salvation by it; yet the penalty
and threatenings of the Law are in full power against that man that submits
not to Christ, according to the Covenant of Grace; for though Christ was made a
Curse to redeem us from the Curse, yet those only have the saving Benefits of
that Redemption, that have sound-Faith in, and unfeigned sincere love to Jesus
Christ. If by the Law you would escape the Curse threatened by the Law, you must
do every thing contained in the Law. Gal. 3.10. -- Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are written in the book of the law to do
them: You cannot do any one thing required in the Law, as prescribed by the
Law, and yet so slight Christ, that you will not so much as love him, and still
think you are exempted from the Curse of the Law. God will convince you to the
contrary; and except you hasten to love Christ before you die, the Flames of
Hell will convince you to the contrary; but it would be your safer way now by
the Word of God to be convinced to the contrary.

Arg. 3. He that loves not Jesus Christ sincerely, is under condemnation by
the Gospel; Therefore he that loves not Christ, is accursed. The Gospel taken
for the whole Doctrine of Christ, has its terrible tidings, as well as
comfortable; Threatenings as well as Promises; a Sentence of Damnation, as well
as of Absolution; and more dreadful and intolerable than those of the Law: And
to whom do they belong, and upon whom shall they be inflicted, if not upon the
Contemners of the Message of the Gospel? and who contemn the Gospel-message
more than they, that will not be persuaded to love the Lord Jesus Christ?

Does not the Gospel set forth Christ in his Excellency and Beauty to you? Does
it not declare what he has suffered for you? Does it not tell you what he has
purchased for you, and will bestow upon you? and is not all this to gain your
Love, to win your Hearts and Affections to Christ? yet after all you slight
him, and for his Love, and for his Sufferings, you will not so much as love
him. Consider seriously what Christ says concerning such: John 3.19. And this
is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
rather than light, because their deeds were evil. If the Law condemn you, you
might have recourse to the Gospel; but if the Gospel condemn you, whither will
you go for succor?

Arg. 4. There is no way ordained by God for Final-Non-Lovers of Christ^ to
escape the punishment of Sin, and the Torments of Hell; therefore such are in
an accursed damnable Condition. When man had broken the Covenant of Works, God
sent his Son to die, and satisfy for the breach of that Covenant, so that
Salvation is not impossible; and the escaping of the threatened Curse, is not
impossible: And though you have sinned against the Gospel by not loving of
Christ hitherto; yet Christ has so far satisfied for sins against the Gospel,
that upon your acceptance of Christ, you might have Remission and Salvation:
but if you die without Love to Christ, and Faith in him, Christ did not satisfy
for that Sin, nor die for the expiating of the final violation of the Covenant
of Grace, or for the final-non-performance of the Conditions thereof: So that
you sin against the very remedy prepared to help Sinners out of their Misery;
and can you be saved that finally refuse the Savior? Can you escape the Curse,
that to the last gasp reject the only Remedy; for besides this there is no
other. Heb. 10.26. For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin: 27. But a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, that shall
devour the Adversaries. 28. He that despised Moses's law, died without mercy,
under two or three witnesses. 29. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye,
shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and
has counted the blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing, and has done despite to the spirit of grace.

Arg. 5. He that has no love to Christ, has no faith in Christ; he that has
no faith in Christ, is condemned; he that is condemned, is in a miserable
cursed condition; therefore he that does not love Christ, is so. Sound Faith,
and sincere Love, are inseparable Graces. Those that are Non-Lovers of Christ,
are Unbelievers, and Unbelievers are condemned men. Joh. 3.18. he that
believes on him, is not condemned; but he that believes not, is condemned
already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of
God. Oh pity your Children, your Parents, your Friends and Neighbors, that
love not Christ; for being destitute of Love, they are void of that Faith that
is a condition of Salvation; and being void of that, are condemned Persons.

Arg. 6. Those that have not sincere love to Christ, are in the same condition
in which they were born; and you all say that is an accursed damnable
condition; For by nature all are children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. and Children of
wrath are cursed Children. Some are so ignorant, as to say, they have loved
Christ ever since they were born, as if they were born with love in their
hearts to Christ; whereas love to Christ is not in us by the First Birth, but
by the Second; not by the Natural, but by the Spiritual Birth. Our State by
Nature is a State of bitterness and bonds; as bitter as gaul, Act. 8.23. And
while you are in a State of Nature, the World has your Love, and Sin has your
Love, therefore Christ is not the Object of it; for the World and Christ, Sin
and Christ, cannot at the same time, by the same man, be superlatively loved:
It must then be granted that you were born without love to Christ; and being in
the same condition in which you were born, you have lived hitherto without love
to Christ; and add but a third, that you die without love to Christ, and then
the next moment after death you will see, and say, your Condition is accursed.

Arg. 7. Deceivers in the Worship of God are accursed; those that come to pray,
and hear, and not love Christ, are such Deceivers. All such men's Religious
Duties and Services are done in deceit and hypocrisy; they are Deceivers of
themselves, Deceivers of other men, and go about to deceive God himself. What
is to play the Hypocrite, if this be not? to give God your Words, but not your
Hearts? what is deceitful dealing if this be not, to give God and Christ
outward Service, and deny him your Love? to do the outward Action, and withhold
from him the inward Affection? would you be paid what is owing to you in such
Coin? in that which has the color and resemblance of Gold, but underneath is
base Metal? Would you not cry out of such a one as a Deceiver? and is this a
fault in men to you? and is it no fault in you to God? are you ready to curse
such a man, and will not God curse you? Read Mal. 1.14. But cursed be the
deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and voweth, and sacrifices unto the
Lord a corrupt thing: For I am a great King, says the Lord of hosts, and my
name is dreadful among the heathen. You bring him some cold Prayers, have you
not an Heart to give him? you bring him some outward Expressions, have not you
inwards Affections to bring him? you offer him Words, and deny him your Love.
Are these cursed Doings? and yet not you, the Doers of them, accursed?

Arg. 8. Robbers and Thieves are accursed; Non-Lovers of Christ are Robbers and
Thieves. For whose are you? God's, or your own? Whose by right are your Hearts?
the World's, or Christ's? Who should have your Love as due, to whom does it
belong, to the World, or Vanity; to Self, or to Christ? that which you
purchase, do not you call your own? that which you pay dear for, is it not your
own? and would it not be robbery in another, without your Consent, to keep it
from you? Has not Christ bought you with a price given for you, more than you
are worth? He made your Hearts to love him, and when you defaced them, and
sinned away the love of God, did not Christ buy you? has not he paid dear to
have your Love? might you set your Love upon what you please? might you place
it upon what Object you list? for are not you, Body and Soul, Christ's by
purchase? 1 Cor. 6.19. What, know ye not that your body is the temple of the
Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? 20.
For ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
spirit, which are God's. Is it not a robbing of Christ, to deny him his own?
and is not he that is a Robber of God, and Christ, a cursed Wretch? If thou
should rob thy Father, or Mother, or a Stranger, would thou not be
accounted a vile Transgressor? how comes it to pass, that thou robbest God, and
Christ, and makes no matter of it? but God does. Mal. 3.8. Will a man rob God?
yet ye have robbed me: But ye say, wherein have we robbed thee? in tithes and
offerings. 9. Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me, even this
whole nation. They are said to rob God in Tithes and Offerings; and you, in
your Hearts and Affections. And what is the taking away of Tithes, to the
taking away of the Heart, and love thereof: and yet God cursed them with a
Curse, that is, certainly accursed them; how then will thou escape? God might
charge thee, that thou have played the Thief with him, and have stolen away thy
Love from him; and have gone and pawned it for a little Silver, or a filthy
Lust; and yet have no mind, nor serious thought for to get it redeemed, or
fetched out of pawn.

Arg. 9. Those that love not Christ, are spiritual Adulterers, and go a whoring
from God. Do not you profess to be married to Christ? what! and give your love
to the World, to Pleasures, to the Strumpet Sin? Is that a chaste Woman that
loves another man more than her own Husband? to love other things more than
God, and Christ, is called in Scripture, a going a Whoring from God. Hos. 4.12.
A playing the harlot. Jer. 3.1. Thou have played the harlot with many lovers.
-- Committing adultery, verse. 8. and are Adulterers. Jam. 4.4. Ye adulterers
and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of this world is enmity with
God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the enemy of God. A
Lover of the World is an Enemy of God; and are not those that God takes for
his Enemies, in a bad and miserable condition, and will be worse when the Lord
comes.

Some please themselves with this as an Evidence of their good Condition, and
hope of Salvation, that they are neither Whores, nor Thieves; but such as love
not Christ above all, in a Spiritual and Scriptural Sense, are both. Such a one
is a Thief in robbing God of that Love that is his due; and guilty of spiritual
Whoredom, in loving other things more than Christ; and if you think to escape
the Curse, continuing in such Sins, when the Lord comes, and you tried at his
Bar, shall find you were wonderfully mistaken, and meet with a Curse, when you
expected a Blessing.

Arg. 10. Such as shall be commanded to depart from Christ, and be driven from
his glorious presence, are accursed: Final Non-Lovers of Christ shall be
commanded to depart from Christ, and be driven from his glorious presence. Your
Heart that loves not Christ, is not toward God and Christ; and when he comes,
his Heart shall not be toward you: your Heart is alienated from Christ, and
then Christ's Heart shall be alienated from you: While you will not love, you
say in your hearts to Christ, depart from us; and Christ will say to you,
depart ye from me. As he that trusts in the Creature, his heart departs
from God; so he that loves the Creature more than God, his heart departs
from God; and he whose heart departs from God, either by trusting to, or
loving of the Creature more than God, is accursed. Jer. 17.5. Thus says the
Lord, Cursed be the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and
whose heart departs from the Lord. And when Christ shall command you to
depart from him, you shall find your selves in a cursed condition, Matthew.
25.40. Such as do not love the Lord Jesus, do not obey the Gospel, for the
Gospel commands your Love; and they that do not obey the Gospel at Christ's
coming, shall be separated from him; and they that shall be separated from him
then, shall find and feel themselves accursed. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. -- When the Lord
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels; 8. In flaming fire,
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ. 9. Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.

Are you yet convinced of your deplorable Condition by reason of the want of
love to Jesus Christ? Do you not see the Curse of God hangs over your Soul? Can
you reply to this proof, or deny it? or will you still hold to your old
Conclusion, that you shall not be thus accursed; like to what is recorded,
Deuteronomy. 29.19. And it shall come to pass, when he hears the words of this
curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I
walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add drunkennese to thirst. Behold, a
man blessing himself, whom the Lord declared accursed! But what then? Is the
Curse the further from him, or the Blessing nearer to him? Read on Verse 20.
The Lord will not spare him; but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy,
shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in this hook
shall lie upon him: and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven: 21.
And the Lord shall separate him unto evil, out of all the Tribes of Israel,
according to all the curses of the Covenant, that are written in this book of
the Law. It is but a poor shift to Iull your Consciences asleep with groundless
hopes of escaping the Curse, contrary to the express word of God, who will not
suffer one tittle of it to fall to the ground, though in the accomplishment and
fulfilling of it millions of Sinners fall into Hell. The Curse then being
certainly to fall upon the Final-Non-Lovers of Christ, the third thing in order
follows, to open to you what kind of Curse it shall be, to be Anathema when
Maran-atha, accursed when the Lord shall come.

CHAP. IV. Ten Properties of the Curse upon Non-Lovers of Christ.
1. TO be Anathema when Maran-atha, will be to be cursed with a dreadful curse.
This is more general, and the following Properties will show it to be so
dreadful; so dreadful, as will make your Joints to tremble, your Knees to knock
together, your Faces gather paleness; for you will be cursed by God himself;
and as to be blessed by God is the greatest Blessing, so to be cursed of God is
the sorest Curse: A great Emphasis is laid upon those words, where God calls a
People, a People of My Curse, Isa. 34.5. When the Church prayed against her
Enemies, it was a sore Petition; Lam. 3.65. Give them sorrow of heart, thy
curse unto them. If the Devil should curse you, yet God may bless you; if men
should curse, yet God might bless you; as David begged, in Psalm. 109.28. Let
them curse, but bless thou. As if he had said, If I have God's blessing, I will
not fear wicked men's cursings: for when they curse, God can turn it into a
blessing; Deuteronomy 23.5. Nevertheless the Lord thy God would not hearken unto
Balaam, but the Lord thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee,
because the Lord thy God loved thee. The form of the rash and wicked Speech of
ungodly men, much given to cursing, shows it to be a dreadful thing to be
cursed of God, when they say, The Curse of God fall upon you; The Curse of God
overtake you; they mean the forell, the heaviest, the greatest Curse, by the
Curse of God: but though men might wish you so accursed, yet you might be far
from it; but if you love not sincerely the Son of God, then the Curse of God
will overtake you, light, and lie upon you; and then you will be accursed
indeed. Oh now love Christ indeed, that you might then escape the Curse indeed,
which else will be a Curse indeed; heavy indeed, and indeed intolerable.

2. To be Anathema when Maran-atha, accursed when the Lord comes, will be to be
accursed totally; all the Sinners shall lie under this Curse; his Body shall be
cursed, and his Soul shall be cursed; as the Curse in this world falls upon all
that belong to the Disobedient and rebellious: Deuteronomy. 28.15. But it shall come
to pass, if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to
observe to do all his commandments, and his statutes, which I command thee this
day; that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee. 16. Cursed
shall thou be in the city, and cursed shall thou be in the field. 17. Cursed
shall be thy basket, and thy store. 18. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body,
and the fruit of thy land; the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy
sheep. 19. Cursed shall thou be in thy coming in, and cursed shall thou be when
thou go out. So when the Lord comes, thou shall be cursed in all thou art;
in thy Body, and all the parts thereof; cursed shall be thine Eyes, that were
as Windows to let vanity into thy heart; Cursed shall be thine Ears, that
hearkened to the Enticements of Sinners, but not to the Commands and Calls of
God; Cursed shall be thy Hands and Feet, that acted wickedly, and carried thee
on in ways of Sin: Cursed shall thou be in thy Soul, and in all the Powers and
Faculties thereof; Cursed shall be thine Understanding, that never was
enlightened with the saving Knowledge of Jesus Christ. Cursed shall be thy Will,
that never made choice of him for thy Savior, and thy Lord. Cursed shall be
thy Conscience, that did not effectually stir thee up to look after, and to
hasten to Jesus Christ. Cursed shall be all thine Affections, that thou shall
be constrained to confess that Love that was set upon the World, and Sin, which
should have been better placed upon Christ, was cursed Love. Those Desires
which run out after Vanity, which should have been upon the wing in moving
after Christ, were cursed Desires; and those Delights which are fetched from
the Creature, and from sinful Objects, were cursed Delights; and that Hatred,
which I had to Christ, and his ways, which should have risen against Sin, was
cursed Hatred. Thus, as now, where the Love of Christ does not rule in the
Heart, Sin is spread all over, so then the Sinner shall be cursed all over.

In this Life Spiritual Curses upon the Soul are the heaviest Curses, as
Blessings on the Soul are the best of Blessings. When men will not be persuaded
to love the Lord Jesus, but will love their Cups, and their Whores, and their
Profits and Sporting Pleasures, better than Christ; but after long wooings of
Grace, and entreaties of Mercy; after many strivings of the Spirit, and Calls
of Conscience, and waitings of patience, they will love their Sin, and not
Christ, the World, and not Christ; God, and Christ, and Holy Spirit, may give
them up to these vile and cursed Affections, and say to them as Christ cursed
the Fig Tree, on which there was no Fruit, Mark 11.13, 14, 20, 21. Never fruit
grow on thee more. Sinner, will thou not love me? never Repentance be found in
thee; never Pardon be bestowed on thee. Will thou not love me! let him love his
Swearing still, let him love his filthy unclean doings still: Let him remain
under hardness of heart to his dying day. What should I do with him? my
Ministers have begged on him to give me his Love, and he will not; my Spirit
has strived with him, but he will not: What, will he not? not love me! No,
then let him love what he will. This is a great Curse upon the Soul of a Sinner
while Christ defers his coming. Rev. 22.11. He that is unjust, let him be
unjust still; and he which is filthy, let him be filthy still. -- Some have had
great Parts, and with them they have not loved Christ, and their Parts have
withered away, Christ has cursed them. Some have performed many Duties, and
were forward Professors, but all this while they prayed, and heard, and
received, they loved not Christ, and Christ has cursed them, and they are
turned profane. Some are given to Swearing, and Whoring, and Drinking; and it
is not only their Sin, but the Curse of God upon their Souls, that he has
given them over, because they have refused to love his Son. Psalm. 81.11. My
people would not hearken to my voice; and Israel would none of me. 12. So I
gave them up unto their own hearts lust; and they walked in their own counsels.
Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone. My Spirit let him alone;
my Ministers let him alone; my Ordinances let him alone; Conscience let him
alone; let all let him alone; he is stubborn, wilful, and perverse; his heart
is joined to his Profits, and to his Pleasures; Let him alone, let him take his
course, and walk in the foolish imagination of his own vil heart: An heavy
Curse in this life.

But when Maran-atha, the Lord comes, these Curses on the Soul shall be settled,
fixed, never removed. This was the man that never loved me; now, let him never
repent, except it be with a vain, empty, self-tormenting Repentance: Now, let
him be without Holiness for ever, and without Love to me for ever.

3. To be Anathema, when Maran-atha, shall be to be cursed with a bitter Curse,
without any ingredient of the least Blessing, to allay or mitigate the
bitterness of it: Then shall he have sorrow without joy, mourning without
mirth, darkness without light, pain without ease, misery without mercy, all
evil without the least good, and all this without end, and therefore without
hope; this Cup of Cursing, because it shall be so pure without mixture, shall
be so exceeding, so inconceivably bitter. Rev. 14.10. The same shall drink of
the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture, into the cup
of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the
presence of his holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. 11. And the smoke
of their torment ascends up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day nor
night. -- A bitter Cup, a bitter Curse; more bitter than the water of Jealousy
that caused the Curse, which a woman drank that had given her love to another
man, and had trespassed against her husband; the Water was bitter Water, and
the Curse a bitter Curse; for it made her belly to swell, and her thigh to rot,
and she was a curse among the people, Numb. 5.27. This bitter Curse at the
coming of Christ, shall come into thy bowels like water, and like oil into thy
bones; it shall be unto thee as the garment which covers thee, and for a
girdle wherewith thou shall be girded continually, Psalm. 109.18, 19. It shall
imbitter thy thoughts, thy soul; thy very being, and make thee cry out, Oh this
is a bitter place! this is a bitter state, a bitter condition, exceeding
bitter! My loving of the World, and Sin, was not so sweet, as this is bitter:
That seemed to me once as sweet as Honey, but this is more bitter than Gall.
But here is my Woe, which makes it still more bitter, the sweet is gone, and the
bitter remains; the sweet will never return, and the bitter will never be gone.
I did put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter; but now I cannot: The bitter
is so bitter, that I cannot put it for sweet, nor imagine it to be so. Oh I
never thought the sweet delight I took in what I loved, would have brought upon
me this bitter Curse, or me to these bitter Torments!

4. To be Anathema when Maran-atha, will be to be accursed publicly and openly
before all the world; to be accursed before blessed Angels, and cursed Devils;
to be accursed before the blessed Saints, and other cursed men. Thou did
openly declare thy love of Pleasures, thou did openly follow such courses,
that all might see are inconsistent with sincere love to Christ, and thou shall
be openly accursed. Or though thou did openly pray, and publicly hear, and
profess the ways of Christ, but did secretly in thy heart love something else
more than Christ, yet for thy secret hypocrisy thou shall be publicly
accursed.

Before the greatest Congregation that ever eyes beheld; before a greater
number than ever yet at once were gathered together, even before Millions of
Angels, before all that shall be found alive at Christ's coming; and all that
have been dead, that shall then be made alive, even all People, of all Nations,
and before them shall thou stand, and be declared a cursed wretch, because thou
did never love the Blessed Son of God. What shame shall then confound thee,
and what confusion shall then cover thy face, when thou that thoughtest thy
self a blessed man, and others thought thee to be blessed, that thou and they
were quite mistaken! When Christ before them all shall pronounce a sentence
upon thee, whereby thou art published to be accursed, and commanded with all
the Plagues and Curses of God upon thy soul and body, to depart into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels, Mat. 25.41.

5. To be Anathema when Maran-atha, is to be cursed Positively; sentenced down
to positive pains, to real politive torments; so great, so grievous, so many,
so extreme, continual, and universal, that shall wring out a confession from
thee, Now I am accursed indeed. To lie in these flames that cannot be quenched,
to burn in this fire in which I cannot be consumed, is such a Curse, so
intolerable, that will make thee curse the day in which thou wast born, and
curse the time thou ever livedst in this world, because not better improved, to
escape that Curse thou lie under in that world. When thou shall cry out, and
roar, Woe is me, poor miserable wretch! I am tormented in this place, and cannot
have one drop of water to refresh and cool my parched tongue! Woe is me, poor
cursed Caitiff! I am in pain, in pain, in extremity of pain, and here is no
ease! alas! here is no ease! I toss and tumble in this bed of flames, and
cannot rest! If I wander from one side of Hell unto another, I cannot find one
corner where I might have a little rest! O cursed creature, that I loved not
Christ! If I had loved Christ as much above the world, as I loved the world
above Christ, I might have been among the blessed Saints, and not in the midst
of such a cursed Crew! Had I loved Christ so much more than Sin, as I loved Sin
more than Christ, I might have been a blessed one; but because I did not, O
cursed Caitiff, that I did not! I am now this cursed Caitiff! Who can be in
these Torments, and not acknowledge the Curses of the Lord have overtaken him?
Who can feel what is here to be endured; and yet who can endure to feel it,
which yet in feeling must be endured, and not reckon himself as cursed as
cursed can be? This I was told, for want of Love to Christ, would be my cursed
state; the Lord is come, and now for want of Love, it is my cursed state. I was
told, If I love not Christ, I should be Anathema when Maran-atha; I did not
love Christ, and now Maranatha, and I am Anathema.

6. To be Anathema when Maran-atha, will be to be cursed privatively; with the
loss of God, of Christ, of Heaven, of the society of Saints and Angels, and of
all the joys and happiness that God has prepared for them that love him; shall
then be openly cast out of God's Favor. You cast off Christ, and that is your
sin, and Christ will cast you off, and that will be your Curse. The love of
your heart is not toward Christ, and that is your Sin; and God's Face and
Favor shall not be toward you, and that will be your Curse. Can he be blessed
that loses God, that is our blessedness? Must not he be cursed that lies under
the punishment of cursed Devils? Now you love not Christ, and yet you will be
confident that you shall escape Hell, and obtain Heaven, and be blessed: But if
you continue without Love to Christ, you will be shut out of Heaven; and where
then? Do you know of any other place (whatever Papists dream) but Hell? and
when out of Heaven, and in Hell, what a poor Blessedness will your groundless
confidence bring you to.

7. To be Anathema when Maran-atha, will be to be finally accursed. While
Christ does tarry, if you are not in a good and blessed state one day, you
might be another: Tho last Lord's Day you were in a miserable condition, yet
this you may (and oh! that you might) be translated into a better: If not this,
if you live till the next, you may be then; tho you should desire to get out of
a cursed dangerous condition this day, before the next, for this day is yours,
the next might be none of yours. But when Christ shall come, that will be the
last day, and there shall not be a next: Therefore to be accursed that day,
will be to be sent away with a Curse upon your Souls, without any succession of
a Blessing.

When Christ was upon the earth, the last act he did relating to his Disciples,
was an act of Love, his Valedictory act was an act of Benediction, Luke 24.50.
And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lift up his hands and blessed
them. 51. And it came to pass, that while he blessed them, he was parted from
them, and carried up into Heaven. And when Christ shall come again, the last
act relating to them that love him not, shall be an Act of Justice, and
Vengeance, and Wrath; and his Valedictory act, an act of Malediction; and after
this, no act of Mercy, of Love, or Favor to them, therefore shall be finally
accursed.

8. To be Anathema when Maran-atha, will be to be accursed without an appeal to
any higher Court, or superior Judge, for such none is. If it were the last
thing that Christ would do to them, yet if they could remove their Cause, and
have an Hearing in another Court, and before another Judge, they might hope the
Curse may be repealed, the Sentence whereby they are declared accursed, might
be changed, and their sad condition altered for the better; but this cannot be,
for all Judgment is committed to the Son, John 5.22. And all men must stand or
fall, live or dye, be damned or saved, according to the Sentence that Christ
shall pass upon them. 2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every one might receive the things done in his
body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. And in the
description of the Process of the day of Judgment, we find, without appeal to
any other, the Execution shall certainly follow; and those whom Jesus shall
pronounce blessed, shall go into Eternal Life; and those whom he shall declare
accursed, shall go into Everlasting Punishment. Mat. 25.43: Come ye blessed of
my Father --. Verse. 41. Depart from me, ye cursed --. Verse. 46. And these shall
go away into overlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.

9. Therefore to be Anathema when Maran-atha, will be to be accursed with an
irrevocable Curse. Tho they should cry, call, beg for a Blessing, with greater
importunity than Esau did, who cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry, and
said unto his Father, Bless me, even me also, O my father, Genesis 27.34. Yet the
Lord Jesus at that day will be inexorable, not to be entreated; but as Isaac
said concerning Jacob, I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed; so Jesus
shall say concerning them that loved him, I have blessed them, and they shall
be blessed; and to them that hated him, I have cursed you, and ye shall be
cursed. So much we learn from Luke 13.25. When once the master of the house is
risen up, and has shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to
knock, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you,
I know you not whence ye are. 26. Then shall ye begin to say, We have eaten and
drank in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets. 27. But he shall
say, I tell you I know, not whence ye are, depart from me all ye workers of
iniquity. Mat. 7.22. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have not we
prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name
have done many wonderful works? 23. And then will I profess unto them, I never
knew you; Depart from me, ye that work iniquity. Christ in these Scriptures
speaks of many who shall find the door shut, themselves excluded, shall be
importunate for admission into a state of Everlasting Blessedness, by knocking,
calling, Lord, Lord, Open to us: But Christ does disown them, and denies their
request. They plead their prophesying, their hearing, their eating and drinking
in his presence, casting out of Devils, and doing many wonderful works in his
Name: But Christ replies; All this you did, but you did not love me, and ye
were not lovers of me, for ye were workers of iniquity; and a Lover of Christ,
and a Worker of Iniquity, (as this Phrase is used in Scripture) a man cannot be
at the same time: So that such as shall then be so cursed as to be shut out of
doors, are past recovery, past hopes of Mercy, past a possibility of being
blessed. And therefore

10. To be Anathema when Maran-atha, will be to be accursed with an Eternal
Curse: For be they must for ever; dye they cannot; shake off the Curse they
cannot; therefore cursed they must be for ever. For a man to be accursed all
his days, would be a sore judgment; but for a man to be accursed to all
Eternity, is beyond conception heavy and grievous. To live for ever, and to be
accursed for ever, is worse than never to have been, or to have their being
turned into nothing.

All the Curses that men, void of the Love of Christ, do lie under in this
world, they make light of. If they are cast out of God's Favor, it is a great
Curse; but now they are merry under it: If they have no Grace, it is a great
Curse; but they do account it no Curse; they have none, and they desire none:
But there are Curses waiting for them, and shall be poured out upon them at the
coming of Christ, which in the other world shall be heavy indeed, and
intolerable; and under them shall have a merry heart no more for ever. For to
be Anathema when Maran-atha, Is to be Cursed Dreadfully, because Totally,
Bitterly, Publicly, Positively, Privatively, Finally. Therefore
Uncontroulably. Therefore Irrevocably. Therefore Eternally.


CHAP. V. Eight Reasons why Love is so strictly required, that Christ must be
Loved, or the Sinner accursed.
THE Fourth general Head in the Method propounded, is, Why there is such a flat
necessity of our sincere Love to Christ, for the escaping of this described
Curse? Why God does so much insist upon our Love unto his Son, that whosoever
does not love him, shall be Anathema.

This is not to be understood exclusively, as if other Graces and Conditions
were not also necessary; for in other Texts we find, that for want of Faith,
this Curse will overtake many. Mar. 16.16. He that believes not, shall be
damned. John 3.36. He that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides on him. And for want of Repentance, Luke 13.3. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And for want of Conversion, Mat. 18.3.
Verily, I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children,
ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Joh. 3.3. Jesus answered, and
said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born again, he
cannot see the kingdom of God. And for want of Obedience, Heb. 3.18. And to
whom swear he, that they should not enter into his rest? (...), but to them
that were disobedient; translated, believed not. Sometimes the condition is
expressed by the term of a new creature. Gal. 6.15. For in Christ Jesus,
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature. Sometimes Faith and Love are put together, Gal. 5.6. For in Jesus
Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith
which works by love. And indeed all these are requisite, and are found
together in the same person; for he that has Faith, has also Love, and he
that has Love, does also Repent, and he that Repents does also obey; and he
that does Believe, Love, Repent, and Obey, is a New Creature.

Yet Love is thus insisted on for such Reasons as these.

1. Love commands the whole man; for it is in the Will, which is the commanding
Faculty. Love

1. Commands and sets on work all the other affections. If a man love Christ,
it sets Desires on work, if he be absent; it sets Joy on work, if he be
present, if Christ be absent, and the Soul does see a probability of obtaining
him, Love sets Hope on work: If there be any impediments that hinders a man in
his prosecution, it sets Anger on work for the removal of them.

2. Love commands the thoughts and mind: For love to Christ sets the mind on
thinking on Christ, and meditating upon him. The mind does muse upon what the
heart does love: Where love is fixed, the thoughts do dwell. Psalm. 119.97. O how
I love thy law! it is my meditation all the day.

3. Love commands all the outward members of the body. Love to Christ does set
the Tongue to speak of Christ, and for him; the Ear on hearing of his Word; the
Eyes in seeing the tokens of his Love and Goodness; the Hands in acting, and
the Feet in walking to those places and duties where Christ is to be found, and
enjoyment of him to be had.

2. If Christ has our love, he has our all: And Christ never has his own
from us, till he has our Love. Love withholdeth nothing from Christ, when it
is sincerely set upon him. Then he shall have our time, and he shall have our
service, and he shall have the use of all our Parts, and Gifts, and Graces;
yea, then he shall have our Estates, Liberty, and our very Lives, when he
calls for them.

As when God loves any of us, he will withhold nothing from us that is good
for us, no, not his own only begotten Son, Romans 8.32. And when Christ loves
us, he gives all unto us, his Merits to justify us, his Spirit to sanctify
us, his Grace to adorn us, his Glory to crown us; so when any of us love Christ
sincerely, we lay all down at his feet, and give up all to be at his command
and service, Rev. 12.11. And they loved not their lives unto the death.

3. Love gives the denomination to a man, according as the Object is which he
superlatively loves: For as is the Love, such is the man; and as is the Love,
such might you boldly call the man: If he be a lover of Honor, he is an
Ambitious man; a lover of Pleasure, a Voluptuous man; and if he chiefly love
the World, he is a Covetous man; if he love Holiness, he is a Religious man; if
the things above, an Heavenly-minded man; and if he love Christ with a
predominant love, he is a Sincere man, Cant. 1.4. The upright love thee.

4. Without Love all other things, tho never so many, great, and excellent in
themselves, are not acceptable unto God. He regards not your Prayers, if you
do not love him: He matters not your Hearing, if you do not love him; all your
Almsdeeds are poor things in his esteem, if you do not love him; yea, all your
Suffering for Religion, and for Christ, are nothing, if you do not love him. If
a man could Preach like an Angel, and yet not love him, he should not be
accepted by him, 1 Cor. 13.1. Tho I speak with the tongues of men and of
angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling
cymbal. 2. And tho I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries,
and all knowledge; and tho I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains,
and have no charity, I am nothing. 3. And tho I bestow all my goods to feed the
poor, and tho I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits
me nothing. Love therefore is above all these, for all these without love are
nothing.

5. Love makes us most like to God; for God is love, 1 John 4.8. And God loves
Christ above all the men on earth, and above all the Angels in Heaven;
therefore calls him his Beloved Son, Mat. 3.17.

God loves All men with a Common Love, John 3.16. Tit. 3.4. Holy men with a
Special Love. Angels with an Higher Love. Christ most of all, who is the Son of
his Love, Col. 1.13.
So our Love is gradual; we ought to love all men with some degrees of Love,
Holy men and Angels with an higher Love, and Christ with the highest Love. And
when we love as God loves, our Love makes us most like to God.

6. Love is the highest improvement of the faculties of our Souls.

1. We have Understandings to know God and Christ: And Love to God and Christ
is the highest improvement of all our knowledge; for if we know him and not love
him, the more we know of him, the more our knowledge does increase our sin, and
will aggravate our condemnation.

2. We have Wills to choose the Lord Jesus Christ, and when we choose him, Love
is the improvement of our Wills, in taking complacency in him who is the Object
of our choice.

3. We have Consciences that do dictate to us that Christ is best, and best for
us; and then we improve those dictates when we love him; else all those
dictates of Conscience are lost, and come to nothing.

4. We have Memories, wherein the Sayings of Christ to us, the Sufferings of
Christ for us, and the Benefits of Christ bestowed upon us, should be lodged
and laid up; and when we love him, we shall love to remember all these things
that we have by him and from him, and himself that is Purchaser and the Donor
of them.

But if our Love is predominantly placed upon any thing below Christ, all the
Powers of the Soul are debased; the Reason of man is degraded in contriving the
getting of such ignoble and fordid enjoyments as his highest end; the Will is
debased in choosing of them, and the Memory in being stuffed with the
remembrance of them, forgetting God and Christ, and better things; so that a
man is more a brute than a man, without sincere Love to Christ.

7. Love is the end of all other Graces, and in which they terminate their
Operations. Our knowledge of Christ ends in our loving of Christ, our
believing on him, hoping in him, trusting to him, like so many streams, at last
run into the Love of Christ.

8. Love is the Everlasting Grace that shall abide and be in use and exercise,
when the actings of other Graces shall cease. There are some Graces suitable
especially to our state of imperfection in this world. To live by Faith, to
Repent, and Mourn for sin, to live in hope of the glory that is to be revealed,
to wait till we be possessed of the Mansions that are above, to desire all the
good that is promised to us, but not yet conferred upon us.

But hereafter Faith shall be turned into Vision, Hope into Fruition, Desires
into Possession, waiting into Obtaining. And then we shall thus believe no
more, nor hope, nor desire, nor wait; but then we shall love still, yea, more
than ever, more abundantly, yea, perfectly, without diminution; continually,
without intermission, and eternally, without cessation; in which respect, among
the three Cardinal Graces, Love has the pre-eminence, 1 Cor. 13.13. Now
abides faith, hope, charity, these three, but the greatest of these is
charity; because it is the longest in duration. So that those that love Christ
sincerely here, shall love him perfectly hereafter, and be for ever blessed in
that love. But those that love him not on earth, cannot love him in the other
world; and for want of such Love, shall be accursed for ever.

CHAP. VI. The Application of the Doctrine.
THE last thing propounded in the method of this Subject, is the Use and
Application of it, to bring it down to our own hearts, to work this truth upon
our Minds, Consciences and Affections. And now, O that God would help me, and
Christ would help me, and the blessed Spirit of God and Christ would so help
me, and give me lively words, a lively Heart, lively and inflamed Love to
blessed Jesus, and your immortal precions Souls! that I might speak and apply
this great Truth, as becomes a man that death believe, every one of you before
God in this Congregation this day must be Anathema, when Maran-atha, if you
live and die void of love to Jesus Christ! as becomes a man that does believe
you must be blessed or cursed, damned or saved for ever, as you are prevailed
with, or not prevailed with, to give Christ your Hearts, and hearty love! as
becomes a man that does believe your Everlasting Stare is much concerned in
this one point that now is before us! Alas! Methinks I do foresee the great
multitudes that this Anathema will fall upon. Methinks I see the Lord a-coming,
methinks I hear the Trumpet sounding, and the Voice calling to the Dead, Arise,
and come to judgment; Come ye cursed Souls that have been in the Infernal Lake,
and appear before my Bar; come ye cursed Bodies, awake, arise, and stand before
my Judgment Seat; and let those cursed Souls be again united to those cursed
Bodies, and now be both cursed together, and cursed for ever, and let both be
inseparably linked together to endure this Curse to all eternity. Methinks I
see them coming, but unwillingly; they come, but with fear, and trembling; with
horror, and amazement.

Now, what is to do now? now, Maran-atha, and now every one of us that loved
not that Lord that now is come, must be Anathema. O woeful Souls! O miserable
Sinners! O cursed Caitifs! What shall we now do? and whither shall we now go?
do? that we should have asked before this day, that the Lord is come. Do? We
should have done that which we did not do; and now must go thither, whither we
would not go. O that we might rather cease to be, than to be what we must for
ever be; and go, from whence we never must return; and feel what will make us
cry and roar, toss and throw, and be for ever restless, and the more restless,
because hopeless and remediless. O, Sirs, my Heart is pained, my Bowels roll
within me, my Joints do shake with trembling, for fear lest any of you, that
pray in this place, and hear in this place, should fall under this Curse, when
the Lord shall come.

The Uses of this Doctrine shall be 1. By way of Inference or Instruction, what
things from hence may be deduced and learned. 2. For Reprehension or Reproof;
aggravating the Charge against such as love not the Lord Jesus Christ. 3. For
Examination or Trial; distinguishing the Non-Lovers of Christ from such as do
sincerely love him. 4. By way of Entreaty or Exhortation; That as you would
escape this Curse, be careful that you get this Love to Christ. 5. For the
Comfort, Encouragement, and Joy of such as love the Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity above all.


CHAP. VII. Under the first Use we might learn these Lessons, or deduce these
Ten Corollaries.
I. GOD only has power to curse any of his Creatures; He that made us can only
really and effectually make us a Blessing, or a Curse. Sin might meritoriously
subject us to the Curse, but God only can inflict all the Curse that Sin does
deserve. Wicked men might wish others accursed, and do; but their wishing them
to be so, does not make them so: By cursing others, they might sooner bring a
Curse upon themselves, than upon those whom they do curse; let them beware of
this, that cannot speak of some persons, but with a Curse in their mouths;
Psalm. 109.17. As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted not
in blessing, so let it be far from him. 18. As he clothed himself with cursing,
like as with a garment; so let it come into his bowels like water, and like oil
into his bones. That Cursings as well as Blessings belong to God, Balaam
himself did teach. Numb. 23.7. And he took up his parable, and said, Balaak the
King of Moab has brought me from Aram, out of the mountains of the East,
saying, Come, curse me Jacob, and come defy Israel. 8. How shall I curse, whom
God has not cursed? or how shall I defy whom the Lord has not defied?

Therefore when we find holy men of God in Scripture using Imprecations and
Curses, we must not draw them into Example, to fill our Mouths with Curses
against any; for there is not the same reason betwixt us and them.

1. When they cursed, they had the gift of discerning of Spirits, whereby they
perceived, such were designed by God unto destruction, as a Reward of their
cursed Sinnings, against whom they used such fearful Imprecations of Eternal
Damnation: Acts 8.20. Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee, because
thou have thought that the gift of God may be purchased with money. 21. Thou
have neither part, nor lot in this matter; for thine heart is not right in the
sight of God. 23. For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and
in the bond of iniquity. The like is to be said of David's cursing of his
slanderous Enemies, under the person of Doeg, Achitophel, or Judas, praying
against his Person, Family, Name, Honor, Estate, and Eternal Salvation. Psalm.
109.6. Set thou a wicked man over him; and let Satan stand at his right hand:
7. When he shall be judged, let him be condemned; and let his prayer become
sin. 8. Let his days be few, and let another take his office. 9. Let his
children be fatherless, and his wife a widow. 10. Let his children be
vagabonds, and beg; let them seek their bread in desolate places. 11. Let the
extortioner catch all that he has; and let the stranger spoil his labor. 12.
Let there be none to extend mercy unto him; neither let there be any to favor
his fatherless children. 13. Let his posterity be cut off, and in the
generation following, let their name be blotted out, etc.

2. The Imprecations of such men in Scripture might be taken rather as
Predictions, than as Curses; or at least imprecating Predictions. They speaking
by the Spirit of God, foretold what Curses would be inflicted by God upon them,
for their Sin, and in a way of sin overtake them.

3. There is a Ministerial, and a Magisterial cursing. The one is to make any
thing or person accursed, as the desert of Sin; the other is to pronounce,
wish, or declare any thing or person accursed; and this is all that men can do.
Therefore though men pronounce Anathema against some, without cause, as the
Pope and his Councils against Protestant^, we need not be terrified therewith,
else the most happy men might be the most accursed. 2 Samuel 16.12. It may be the
Lord will look on mine affliction, and that the Lord will require me good for
his cursing this day.

II. This does teach us the evil nature of Sin, and what a cursed thing it is,
as being the meritorious cause of all the Curses that befall any of the
Creatures of God. If Sin had been kept out of the World, curses had never come
into it: But Sin made way for the Curse, and brought it in; the commission of
sin was the introduction of the Curse. Genesis 3.14. And the Lord said unto the
serpent, Because thou have done this, thou art cursed above all cattle, and
above every beast of the field. 17. Cursed is the ground for thy sake, in
sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Sin and the Curse are so
linked together, that Christ only that can take away the Sin, can remove the
Curse. Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made
a curse for us. If Curses be heavy, Sin cannot be light; and if the Curses be
great that are due to Sin, Sin that procures them cannot be so small a matter
as the most make of it.

Would you flee from the Curse, and yet run into Sin? would you escape the
Curse, and yet live in Sin? what is this, but as if you would drink poison, and
hope you shall live? run into the fire, and imagine you shall not be burnt? Do
you cry out under the Curse as a grievous pain, and yet look upon Sin as the
greatest pleasure? Is the Curse dreadful, and do you look upon Sin as
delightful? Is the Curse intolerable, and can Sin be profitable? Oh learn to
look upon Sin through the Curse, and then Sin will appear to be a cursed thing
indeed.

III. Sin does cross and thwart the natural Principles which are graven by the
finger of God upon the hearts of all men. If you ask whether Sin be now in
man's lapsed state according to the nature of man? I answer, with this
distinction, there is the corruption of Nature, and so Sin is according to our
Nature; as natural for man to sin, as it is for light things to ascend, and
heavy to descend; and there are the Principles left in corrupt Nature, and so
Sin is still against Nature. In corrupted Nature there are yet remaining
Principles that beget an aversation from Misery, and an inclination for the
obtaining of Happiness; desires to avoid the Curse, and to procure Blessedness;
but Sin is a thwarting of both these; that you cannot sin, but you go against
the very Principles left in corrupted Nature, as preservatives to keep down the
Corruption of Nature.

Who is there among you all, but has innate Desires to escape the Curse of the
Great God? or can you desire to be accursed by him? Who is among you that has
not innate desires to be happy and blessed for ever? or can you fling away, or
shake off all desires of being blessed? you might as soon cast off the Nature
of men. A Profane Esau cried out for a Blessing, Genesis 27.34. And when Esau
heard the words of his father, he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry,
and said unto his father, Bless me, even me also, O my father. 36. -- And he
said, have thou not reserved a blessing for me?

Oh then say, Be gone, O cursed Sin! be gone; I will banish thee out of my
heart: for thou art not only contrary to the Nature of the blessed God, nor
only contrary to Innocent Nature, but even also to my Humane Nature, though
corrupted. Thou art not only opposite to a Principle of Grace implanted in the
New Creature, but to the Principles which God in mercy has left in my Corrupt
Nature, that cursed Sin might be opposed, striven against, and for ever
abandoned by me. I would be blessed, but thou will make me cursed; I would
avoid the Curse, but thou will bring it upon me. If I cannot be a wilful
Sinner, but I must be a cursed Creature, I would rather cease to be such a
Sinner, than to remain for ever such a cursed Creature. If I cannot have the
blessing of God, and my Sins too, I had better be without my own Sins, than be
without God's Blessing.

IV. Men will be the most miserable, or the most happy of all the visible works
of God. For amongst these, Man only is capable of proper Blessings, or proper
Curses; for those only are capable of penal Evils, that are capable of moral
Evils. Therefore when you read of other things being cursed, the Curse is not
on them properly, terminatively and ultimately, that is on the Creature, in it
self, for it self, or from it self; but only improperly, and relatively, in
respect to man, and so other things have been cursed in reference to man.

1. To show what man has done. So Genesis 3.17. And unto Adam he said, Because
thou have hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of the tree of
which I commanded thee, saying, thou shall not eat of it: Cursed is the ground
for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life. 18.
Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee. The barrenness with
which the Earth is cursed, in not bringing forth good Fruit, and its abounding
with Briars and Thorns, are both as Rods for the scourging of sinful man. So
also is that Catalogue of Curses in Deuteronomy. 28.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, etc.

2. To show what man should do. So Mar. 11.14, 21, 22. Christ cursed the barren
Fig Tree, to teach man the duty of fruitfulness to the glory of God, or the
duty of having faith in the power of God; for upon the Disciples observation
how the Figtree was withered away, Christ said to them, Have faith in God.

The unreasonable Creatures have not the knowledge of God, and the senseless
Creatures cannot feel the power of God; therefore these as they cannot be
properly blessed, so nor accursed. But Man has understanding to know God, and
has sense to feel the power of his Anger; therefore since among all God's
visible Works, man is only the subject of proper blessings, and proper Curses;
he will of all these be the most happy, or the most miserable: If he obtains
the Blessings of God, the most happy; if he lie under the Curses of God, the
most miserable. Those that get the Blessing, shall dwell, and live, and reign
with the blessed God, with blessed Jesus, and with his blessed Angels; but
those that lie under the Curse, must be tormented with cursed Spirits, cursed
men, with cursed Devils for ever. So then, except you love Christ, better you
had never been rational Creatures; a Toad, a Dog, a Serpent, will not be in so
bad a case as you will be: In a natural sense it is better be a Man than a
Beast; but in a Theological sense, it is better to be a Beast than a Man that
will never love the Lord Jesus Christ.

V. Sins of Omission expose men to the Wrath and Curse of God, and to Eternal
Damnation, as well as Sins of Commission: For it is, for not loving of Christ
that a man is declared to be Anathema. And when the Curse shall be openly and
publicly pronounced, and by Christ be thundered out against men at the last
day, the Reason given is Sins of Omission; Matthew. 25.41. Then shall the king
say unto them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels. 42. For I was an hungry, and ye gave me
no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no arink: 43. I was a stranger, and ye
took me not in; naked, and ye clothed me not: sick and in prison, and ye
visited me not.

These are charged, not with taking away their Meat, but with not giving; not
with casting them out, and banishing Christ in his Members, but with not taking
them in; not with putting them in Prison, but with not visiting them when they
were there, and for this they are declared to be accursed, and sentenced to go
to cursed Devils.

What a sandy Foundation then is the hope of multitudes built upon; That
because they are not openly profane, they bless themselves, and make no
question but God will bless them too. Like the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. God, I
thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers,
or even as this publican. Thou proud Pharisee! What if thou art no Swearer by
the Blood and Wounds of Christ, yet thou art no Lover of Christ, and for that
thou shall be accursed. Thou blind Pbarisee! What if thou art no Reproacher, or
Persecutor of Christ, yet thou art no Lover of Christ, for this thou shall be
accursed. Thou Self-doluding Pharisee! What if thou art no Blasphemer of his
Sacred Name, no Opposer of his holy Ways; no Drunkard, no Adulterer, no Thief
nor Robber, yet thou art not a Christ lover, and for this thou shall be
Anathema. What if thou art not as other men be, while thou art not what thou
ought to be? What if thou art not as this Publican, while thou art not as
this man that loves Christ? the Blessing of God belongs not to thee, but the
Curse of God, and his Wrath shall overtake thee. Oh look about you, and search
and see what Sins of Omission you are guilty of, repent and mourn for them, or
else you will be cursed and damned for them.

VI. It is an easy thing for a man to fall under the Curse of God. It is but
forbearing to love Christ, and how easy a thing is that? it is but denying
Christ your Heart, your hearty love, and the Curse is your own, and how easy a
thing is that? to obtain the Blessing is hard, is exceeding difficult; for
there must be weaning of our love from the World, and getting that under our
feet, which was predominant in our hearts, and how hard a task is this? there
must be calling off the love of the heart from Sin; which was as our right Eye,
or right Hand unto us, and how difficult a work is this? there must be a loving
above all, what we hated more than all; and an hating above all, what we loved
most of all; and thus to turn the stream of a man's Affections is exceeding
difficult.

There must be striving to an Agony, Luke 13.24, 25. there must be wrestling
with Devils, Ephesians. 6.12. with God himself, so as not to let him go, except he
bless us; Gen 32.24, 26. there must be fighting, and watching, and maintaining
our spiritual Warfare, 2 Timothy 4.7. there must be running, as for life, 1 Cor.
9.24. all this to get the Blessing, when the Lord shall come; all hard and
laborious.

But it is the easiest thing in the world to come under the Curse and Wrath of
God: Nay, it is hard not to have it come upon us. What mean then the most of
men to take so much pains to bring the Curse of God upon them? what need you be
at so much labor to undo your selves? what needs such swearing, sweating, in a
way of Sin, as if you were striving to get to Hell; as if you thought you could
not go thither fast enough, nor get thither soon enough? what need you rail at
the People of Christ? and revile the ways of Christ? and rent and tear his holy
Name, in your profane, polluted Mouths? Hell might be had with lesser pains:
and if cursed you WILL be, cursed you MAY be, without wearying of your selves
in committing of Iniquity: Sit still, and you will run to Hell; do nothing, and
you will soon be there. It is but letting Faith, and Repentance, and Christ
alone; it is but forbearing what you ought to do, and the Curse will fall upon
your Soul, and stick fast to you for ever.

It is easy to do what you should not, to love the World more than Christ. It
is easier not to do what you should, not to love Christ, and for the easier of
these you may be as sure of Hell, as if you were there already: therefore hold
your Hands, and Tongue, and Feet, from sinning so fast, from making such speed
and haste, from committing sin manibus pedibusque, with all our might and
power; for if not loving of Christ, not believing on him, not repenting for
sin, will, and does expose you to the Wrath and Curse of God: Good Lord! how
easy a thing is it to be overtaken with it.

VII. Must such as want love to Christ be thus accursed? Then what great care
and Conscience should Ministers have to preach the Lord Jesus Christ unto the
People with that plainness and power, that Christ might have their love, and
they might have the blessings of Christ? Cursed must the People be that do not
love Jesus Christ, then cursed must the Preacher be that preaches himself, and
not Christ, and studieth to set out his own Gifts and Parts, that men might
admire him for an Eloquent Orator, for his lofty Style, for his fruitful
pregnant Fancy, and as the Phrase now prevails, for his fine English, or for a
profound Philosopher, or a great polemical Divine; while by his starched
Sentences, seraphical Notions, and needless Pulpit Disputations, and manner of
Expressions, he soars aloft above the Peoples Capacities, and casts a vail upon
their Eyes, as if he studied in preaching of Christ, to hide Christ from their
Understandings; while he preaches to instruct them in the knowledge of Christ,
he clouds the Doctrine of Christ, and makes the plain necessary Truths to be
obscure, that after his polite Discourse, poor ignorant Souls remain as
ignorant as before, as if he stood amongst a thousand People that must be
damned, and cursed with everlasting Curses, if they love not Christ, to
flourish his Parts, to get the name of a great Scholar, in making easy things
hard, and hard more hard; when the true use of Learning (and great Learning it)
is to make hard things easy, and to bring things sublime and lofty, down to
the capacity of the meanest in the Congregation, that has a Soul that must be
damned or saved: Alas! it would make a serious man to tremble, when he thinks
all these People stand upon the brink of Eternity, and if Death jog them, they
fall and enter into it; and when he hears the Preacher speak with lofty
Rhetorical Strains, great swelling Words, as if he were making an Oration in
the Schools, not considering the Ignorance, the weak Capacity, of hundreds of
his Auditors. Can he think that Servants that have precious Souls, and many
ignorant and unlearned Tradesmen, that are taken up with the matters of the
World all the Week, can be profited on the Lord's Day with such a Style, or
manner of expressing the great things of God; that though it be their
Mother Tongue, transcends their Apprehension, almost as much as if he spoke in
an unknown Language, and so indeed is no better than an English Barbarian to
the People.

What cursed Pride is this, to seek Applause from men, when he should be
gaining Sinners to Christ? to seek to have their perishing breath, when he
should seek to save their Immortal Souls? What cursed doing is this to stand in
Christ's stead, and commend himself, instead of commending Christ? What though
Christ be the Subject of his Discourse, when his Discourse upon that Subject is
so managed, that it glides from Christ, unto himself, both as the Subject, and
the End? In hatred to such doings, I was about to say, What cursed Preaching is
this, wherein dying Self is sought to be advanced in the esteem of dying
People; when Blessed Jesus should be so set forth, that he might be magnified
in the hearts of all; be loved by all, be received by all; and immortal Souls
so loving, and receiving of him, might be for ever saved and blessed by him?
And what is the end of all? that he might be reverenced for his Parts, extolled
for his profound adorned Language, and have the common Vogue of a man of more
than ordinary Wisdom: A Wise man! and through his wisdom ignorant Souls do
perish: a Wise man! and by his preaching with the enticing words of man's
Wisdom, even by the preaching of the only Savior, in the words which man's
Wisdom teaches, and not the Holy Ghost, the Devil goes away with, and makes a
prey of the Hearers Souls, who in hearing do not hear, neither do they
understand; not because the Hearers are such Fools, but because the Preacher is
so wise. Let him pass for a Wiseman in his own Conceit; let him be esteemed a
Wiseman by them that do admire him, because they do not understand him, nor the
worth of Souls, nor the weighty work and end of Preaching, but with me he shall
never pass for a wise Preacher, who had rather be a Fool for Christ, than wise
for my self; for in such a place and work in being wise (in the reproved sense)
for my self, I should be found an egregious Fool. He that preaches so that no
man can rationally contemn him, and yet every man understand him, and thereby
wins Souls to set their love on Christ, is a Wiseman, and a Learned Preacher;
when he that preaches so, that few or none of the meaner Capacities, which are
the greater number, can understand him, any further than to understand they do
not understand him; and so the People perish for want of knowledge, under the
sound of profoundest knowledge, shall have little thanks from such People at
the Judgment-day; and what Reward he shall have from Christ, when he comes to
take an account of Ministers for preaching, and People for hearing, let him
take into his serious thoughts, and learn of Learned Paul, who has left a
pattern of the wisest Preaching, 2 Cor. 4.5. For we preach not our selves, but
Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake, lest not
preaching Jesus the Lord, but himself, as if he were more than a Servant, and
Jesus not Lord, he find, when Preaching and Hearing are ended and cease,
Maran-atha, and Anathema, be joined together.

VIII. Must they be cursed that love not Christ? then know, that outward
Prosperity and this Curse are consistent. A man might be a prospering man in
this World, and cursed in this World, and in the World to come.

Do you see many, whose Lives declare they have no sincere love to Christ in
their Hearts, thrive and abound in outward Enjoyments? not love Christ, and yet
are strong: not love Christ, and yet are rich: not love Christ, and yet be in
honor: What then? Might not a man in health be a cursed man? nay, the more
strength he has, the more able he is to do the Devil Service, and so his
strength is a curse unto him. The more he enjoys of the World, the more he
has to love, and the more he loves it; and so his Enjoyments are a curse unto
him, when they keep him from placing his love upon Jesus Christ. Have you not
read, that men's Blessings are cursed; Mal. 2.2. If ye will not hear, and if ye
will not lay it to heart, to give glory to my name, says the Lord of hosts; I
will even send a curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings: yea, I have
cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart. God threatens to curse
wicked men's Blessings; I will curse your blessings. I will! that is not to do
now, I have cursed them already.

Many are apt to call the proud happy; Mal. 3.15. The Rich, though bad, are
thought by many to be blessed: a great mistake! all men might see their outward
Blessings, but all have not eyes to behold the inward Curses that lie under
those outward Blessings. Is it not a Curse to have Riches without Grace? to
have our Portion and Blessings, and all in this Life? to prosper in the World,
and to be every moment in danger of Hell? do you look upon it to be such
happiness to have all for the Body, and nothing for the Soul? to have Earth,
and nothing of Heaven, and nothing to show for them? You read of some that have
their Portion in this life on Earth, Psalm. 17.14. and you might read that their
Portion on Earth is a cursed Portion, Job 24.18. and was it not so with the
Rich man spoken of in the Gospel? that on Earth had his purple robes, and fine
linen, and sumptuous costly dishes every day. O happy man! but stay till you
hear the end: He died, and whither then? to Hell. Where is now your happy man?
and what is his condition there? what, there he finds more pain, than on Earth
pleasure: there he feels more torment and terror, than all his days on Earth
had pleasure and delight; Luke 16.25. But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou
in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things:
but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. Remember! that vexes, not
eases: in thy lifetime; but that was but for the time of life, which then was
short and sweet; but this Life where now I am, more properly called Death than
Life, is long and bitter: receivest thy good things; but amongst them all had
not a good God, a good Conscience, nor one good Fruit of the Spirit; no, not so
much as love to Christ; but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented; he is
blessed, and thou art cursed: he is happy, and thou art miserable. Behold the
change! the world's blessed man, is now the cursed man: and he that was the
miserable man in the esteem of the World, is now the blessed man.

Then do not judge of Blessedness or Misery by the prosperity or poverty of
this World, but by the graces of the Spirit, or want of them in your hearts;
particularly by your love, or want of love to Jesus Christ. For it is not said,
Let him that is not rich, but let him that loves not Christ, be Anathema,
Maran-atha.

IX. Must all that love not Christ be cursed, then tremble at the thoughts of
the great number that shall be cursed. There are but few comparatively that
have sincere Love to Christ, therefore but few comparatively that shall be
blessed by entering into Eternal blessed life. Mat. 7.13. Enter in at the strait
gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction,
and many there be which go in thereat. 14. Be cause strait is the gate, and
narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it.

Many for want of Love to Christ will not bear his Cross; but all that want
this love Finally, shall bear his Curse. The number of the Curse-bearers, and
Non-lovers of Christ, shall be an equal number; so many, and no more.

Consider then what multitudes there are, that love other things more than
Christ, and see what vast numbers of men shall be accursed.

1. How many are (...), Lovers of pleasures more than lovers of Christ? 2 Timothy
3.4.

2. How many are (...), Lovers of money more than lovers of Christ? They prize
their Silver above the Savior, and part with him to keep that, Luke 16.14. 2 Timothy 3.2.

3. How many are (...). Lovers of honors more than lovers of Christ? John
5.42, 44, and and 12, 43.

4. How many are (...); Lovers of themselves more than lovers of Christ? 2 Timothy
3.2. And indeed sinful self-love is the very heart and core of the carnal man,
and the great Idol of all unconverted sinners. Principles of selfishness are
the rise of all their actions, and self is the end and scope at which they aim
in all they do; and so set up self in the room of God and Christ; and love
carnal self, when they should love Christ, and so shall lie under the Curse,
when they would have a Blessing. Few love Christ, and few blessed by Christ.
Most are void of love unto him, and most shall be accursed at his coming. Is it
an hard saying? If hard, yet true. Is it a hard saying? But it will be harder
feeling, when the Curse shall fully be inflicted.

XI. Shall every one that loves not Christ be Anathema, when Maran-atha,
accursed when the Lord shall come? then the day of Christ's coming will be a
doleful day to the Non-Lovers of Christ. Then all the World shall be divided
into cursed ones, and blessed ones. You love not Christ, and yet bless your
self; but I pray you consider Maran-atha, the Lord comes. You glory in your
Estate, though Christ has not your Heart; but I beg of you, that you would
remember Maran-atha. You put the Curse, and the Evil day far from you; but I
beseech you let Maran-atha sound in your ears. Then! Oh then, you shall curse
the day that ever you were born! you shall curse the time that you lived under
the Gospel, and heard of Christ, but did not love him. You shall curse your
self for your wickedness, madness and folly, that so lovely a Christ was set
before you, and you had not an heart to set your love upon him; and say,

Oh cursed heart, that would love the World, and not love yonder glorious
Christ! Oh cursed Will, that did choose the Vanities of the World before the
Son of God! Oh cursed was that love which I gave unto the Creature, and did
deny to Christ! How can I hold up my head now to behold that Christ, whom I
never had an heart to love? How can I hear that Voice, and yet it is so great,
so thundering, and so loud, that I cannot but hear it, commanding me to depart
like a cursed Wretch, when I never did, and never would hearken to his Voice,
calling to me to love him, and to give my Heart and Affections to him? Woe is
me! now Maran-atha, and now I am Anathema. Woe is me! the Lord is come, and with
him wrath is come; and banishment from Heaven is come. Woe, woe, woe is me! the
Lord is come, and I feel fear and trembling is come: ten thousand woes to me,
for the Lord is come, and now complete damnation comes: the Lord is come, and I
must go. I poor Wretch must go: go? Whither must I go? to a cursed place: to
whom! Alas! to cursed Company: But how! woe is me! like a cursed Wretch. Cursed
most bitterly; cursed finally, totally, Body and Soul, and all eternally; for I
had no Love for Christ, and now Christ has no Blessing for me.

When it is said throughout the World, Maranatha; then the World will ring with
this Cry, every one that loves not Christ, is now Anathema.

CHAP. VIII. Twenty Aggravations of want of Love to Christ.
THE Second Use does bring a Charge and an Accusation against you, for not
loving the Lord Jesus Christ. Some openly declare by their actions and manner
of conversation, That they do not love him. Some openly pretend Love to Christ,
but really have no love unto him, Ezekiel. 33.31. And they come unto thee as the
people comes, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words,
but they will not do them: for with their mouth they show much love, but their
heart goes after their covetousness. Love to Christ is in their mouth, but
love to the world is in their heart. Some say they love him, but God knows they
do not. John 5.42. But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you. No!
Do you know how great a sin this is? Why then do you make so light of it? Why
then are you no more ashamed, that you want this love? Would you not be ashamed
if this report went of you, That you did not love your Wife, your Children, or
your Neighbor? And is it not an incomparably greater sin and shame, that you
do not love the Lord Jesus? The only Son of God, the only Savior of lost
sinners. How is it that you do so seldom or never bewail the want of love to
Christ, in your Prayers; or scarce put it in amongst the Confession of your
Sins? What? do you love your Gold, and not your God? Or do you make your Gold
your God, and then love your Gold, instead of loving the true God? Can you love
your Silver, and not the precious Savior? Are you bound to love your very
Enemies, and yet have no love to him that would be your surest, greatest, and
most faithful friend? What shall I say? Good Lord, I am ashamed, and blush to
say, which yet is true of too many of the sons of men, that they both can and
do love their very beasts, their dog, their horse, and all their cattle, and
yet will not be prevailed with to love thy Son, thy only Son, and by thee,
beloved Son! Nay, what shall I say? That you do love your very lusts, and
filthy sins, that will destroy and damn you for ever, and yet not love that
only Lord and Jesus that would save you from your sins, and from Hell for ever.
What can I say? but that you love not Christ, because you love your sin so much.

Oh horrid shame! Love Deformity and not Beauty? Where are your eyes? Surely
your love to sin is blind. O monstrous Lover! Love that which is worst of all,
and not him that is best of all! Where is your reason? Have you lost the
understanding of a man? Has sin bereaved you of your wits? Then oh Madness and
Folly! Are you so fond of sin, as to be damned for it? Are you so foolishly
fond of this world, as for the love of it to be hated of God, and banished out
of his Glorious Presence for ever? Is your Soul so clogged with flesh, and sunk
so deep into it, that it can rise no higher in its love, than sensual, earthly,
and fleshly delights and pleasures? Will this love be so sweet in the review,
as you think it is in the present taste thereof? Is this so vile a thing, so
base and sordid love, that sets you below the rank of men, not to be reproved?
For this are you not justly blamed?

Blamed! yea, and justly reckoned an Anathema, that has such an incomparable
Object as Christ propounded to him, and yet will nor love him? Whose
Excellencies are set forth, and yet he sees no Beauty in him? That when there
is nothing in the world so suitable to a sinner, as Christ, and yet will you be
so perverse as to imagine, and your heart maintain, that Riches are more
suitable, and Pleasures are more suitable, and Christ and the things of Christ,
the only inconvenient things for you? If you do not think so, why do you do so
as you do, in denying him your love? Are you not to be blamed, that when yet
you might have Christ; are not past a capacity, a possibility of having Christ,
and all his benefits and good by him, that you do not turn your love unto him?
Are you not to be blamed, when you thus do vilify that Blessed Lord that none
can overvalue? Will not you pass for a sinful wretch, among all wise and
serious men, nay, with God and Angels, that you have a will for the world, and
for the empty vanities of this life, but no will for Christ, for a full, and
All-sufficient Christ? When you do prefer fading enjoyments of a transitory
life, before a durable good in eternal life? Tell me, I beseech you, is not he
deservedly a wretch, whom neither the Excellencies of Christ himself, nor all
the benefits he might have by him, will move him to set his heart upon him?
What do you think? What do you say? Have you done well or ill in not loving
Christ? Well, you dare not say; Ill, you are loath to say; because by so saying
you will condemn your self. What then? Condemn your self, because you have not
loved him; and love him now, that you might not be condemned by God, and cursed
by Christ, for not loving him at all.

But because the want of love to Christ is such an horrid, loathsome sin, and
yet lamented but by a few, as if it were in our days almost accounted for no
sin at all, I shall endeavor to aggravate the hainousness thereof in Twenty
particulars, propounded to you by way of questions, and let me entreat you to
weigh them with a serious mind, and when Right Reason shall dictate a true
answer, seek out some secret place, where you might weep bitterly for this
odious sin, want of love to the Lord Jesus Christ.

I. Not love Christ! What is this, but a crossing of the end of God in making
thee a man? In setting thee above the beasts of the field? In giving thee a
more noble and more excellent soul, than he has given to the unreasonable
creatures? Has not God given thee a soul capable of knowing Jesus Christ? And
what should thou know him for, if not to love him? Has not God given thee a
will to go forth in its actings upon the most sweet and suitable Objects? And
what is that but Christ? Has he not put such an affection as Love into thy
heart? And do thou think in thy Conscience, it was that thou might love
the world, and not his Son? Thy self, and not his Son; but thy self in
opposition to his Son? Thy sin, and not his Son? Can thou imagine that God
made thee a man, and not a beast, that thou might love him no more than
beasts can love him? Then it had been enough if God had made thee a beast, and
not a man. Or do thou repent that God has given thee the Nature, the Reason,
and the Love of a man, that thou will not place it upon himself, for which end
he made thee a man? If thou do repent that thou art a man, and not a beast,
then choose the Love and Pleasures of a beast, and refuse the Love and Pleasures
of a man, and that as a man thou art capable of. If not, why do thou not
answer the end of thy creation?

Do thou not see that all the Visible Works of God do that for which they
were made? Did not God make the Sun to give light unto this World? And do
thou not see what haste it makes to set, and in the morning thou perceivest,
when out of view, it kept its course, and hasted to rise to give its light to
this our Hemisphere again? Did not God make this Earth to bring forth Fruit for
the comfort of man? And do thou not daily eat thereof? Did not God make other
Creatures for the use and service of man? And do they not do so? And has not
God made thee, and made it thy duty to love him? Why then do thou not do it.

Oh monstrous perverting of the Creation of God! And that in the best of his
visible works. If the like were done by other creatures, how soon would thou
be weary of thy life? If the Sun should withhold its light, what a dungeon
would this world be? If the Earth should bring forth nothing but Briars and
Thorns, it would yield thee nothing but vexation and sorrow. If the creatures
should use their power and strength against thee, as they do in serving of
thee, thou would judge it better to want them, than to have them. And shall
all that was made for man answer their end, and not man, that was made more
immediately for God himself? But a man that wants Love to Christ, is become
worse than the beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.20. Better thou had never had the
heart of a man, if Christ has not thy heart.

II. Not love Christ! What is this, but a thwarting the end of all Christ's
undertaking for thee, as thy Redeemer? When man had sinned away the Holy Image
of God, and turned his heart and affections from God to the Creature, man might
have feared him, but never have loved him, Genesis 3.10. I heard thy voice in the
garden, and I was afraid. -- Sin had brought such an aversation in the heart of
man from God and all good, that without Christ's undertakings for man, man
could have loved him no more than Devils.

Why did the Son of God become the Son of Man? Why did he shed his Blood, lay
down his Life? Why did he suffer, sweat, bleed, and dye? Why did he bear our
Punishment, satisfy Divine Justice, endure the Wrath of God, the Rage of Men
and Devils, but to bring man back again to God, from whom he had departed? And
that the stream of man's affections might be turned again into its right
Channel?

Could thou not have loved the World, and Self, if Christ had never dyed?
Could thou not have loved thy Pleasures and thy Sins, if Christ had never
died? And having died, will thou love no better? Has he come from Heaven to
gain thy Love, and shall he not have it? Has he given himself a Ransom to
deliver thee from thy Captivity, and paid thy Debt, for which thou should
have gone to the Prison of Hell, to gain thy Love, and shall he not have it?
Has he given his Life for thine, his Soul for thine, in dying when thou
should have dyed, and all this to gain thy Love, and shall he not have it?

What think thou? Was Christ weary of the Bosom of his Father? Was it more
honorable for him to dwell in flesh on earth, than with the Father of Spirits
in Heaven? Was it not infinite Condescension, for his Deity to be veiled with
the rags of our Humanity? Or was Christ prodigal of his Blood, or weary of his
Life; or did he love and choose such cruel Scourgings, such Contempt and Scorn,
such a cursed, shameful, painful Death for themselves? Surely all this was for
some great and noble end; which end thou do, as much as in thee lies, by thy
not loving him, frustrate, and render unattainable; for if all men should deny
him their Love, as thou do, where would be the Reconciliation betwixt God and
man, Remission of Sins, or Salvation of Souls, which Christ died to procure?
Will God be reconciled to that man that does not love him? Or can that man that
loves not him be reconciled unto God? Or does not Reconciliation without
Renewals of Love, sound like a contradiction? Or shall Remission and Salvation
be vouchsafed to them that never love him? Behold then the greatness of this
sin, in its thwarting the wonderful Undertakings of Christ for man's Redemption.

III. Not love Christ! What is this but an opposing and withstanding all the
Operations of the Spirit? For do not all tend to this, That you should Love the
Lord Jesus? What do all Convictions tend to, in showing thee thy lost estate,
the vanity of the world, the emptiness of the creature, the impossibility of
Salvation by any other, but that thou might look after him, and make him the
Object of thy Love? What means the Illumination of the Spirit, in enlightening
of thy mind in the knowledge of Christ, to see and discern the Fullness and
Sufficiency of Christ; the Fitness and Suitableness of Christ; the Freeness and
the Willingness of Christ, but that thou should fix thy Love upon him? What
do all the Persuasions, Strivings, and Wooings of the Spirit-tend to, but Love
to Christ? Was ever any more solicitous for the love of another, than the
Spirit has been, that Christ might have thine? And shall all, and thine only
Answer be, I cannot love him, I will not love him? No? Why not? Can thou
better place thy Love? Can thou find in Heaven or Earth, a more suitable
Object? Yet art thou resolved to give no other answer, but that in Jer. 2.25. I
have loved strangers, and after them will I go. I have loved the world, and I
will love it; I have loved my pleasures, and I will love them; I have loved my
sin, and so I will still. Why so resolved, poor sinner! Why so resolute? Should
not the world be a stranger to thee, and thou to the world? Should not sin be a
stranger to thee, and thou to sin? What though? I have loved these strangers,
and after them my heart and love shall go. Indeed! then let all men judge, God
and Angels judge what an opposer thou art to all the Workings of the Spirit to
the contrary.

IV. Not love Jesus! What is this but fearful sinning against the most gracious
Attributes of God?

1. Was it not love in God to give his Son to be a Savior? And will thou sin
against this Love, in not loving him that by Love was given for thee? Was it
not so infinite, so great, so wonderful, that no mortal man can comprehend it?
John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son. -- Is it
not such manifest love, that all the Devils in Hell cannot deny it to be love?
1 John 4.9. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Was
it not preventing Love in God to give his Son for thee, before thou gave, or
could give thy love to him? 1 John 4.10. Herein is love, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our sins.
And is it not a great sin against such great love, and a manifest sin against
such manifest love, not to love him with a following love, that so far loved
thee with a preventing love?

2. Was it not Infinite Wisdom in God to find out such a way, that Justice
might be fully satisfied, and free Mercy might be richly manifested? That sin
might be punished to the uttermost, and yet the sinner saved to the uttermost?
Sin punished, and the sinner pardoned? If all the Angels in Heaven that excel
in Wisdom and Knowledge, had been called to Council, they could never have
thought of this way for fallen man's recovery, which is the product of the
Infinite Wisdom of God, and by the Church made known to Angels. Ephesians. 3.10. To
the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places,
might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God. What greater folly
then can there be, than to sin against such Wisdom?

3. Was it not Goodness in God to accept of Christ's Sufferings for thy
Sinnings? Of Christ's Death, instead of thy Damnation, if thou would believe
on him and love him? And will thou slight this Goodness, by withholding thy
love from him?

4. Was it not patience in God to wait so long for thy Love? Might he not have
damned thee for thy first refusal? And have taken thy first denial for thy
final answer? And have scorned thy love, after thou had so long given it to
the world and sin, and denied it unto his Son? And when in thy wicked heart
thou had once said, Thou will not love him; God in his righteous judgment
might have said, I have thine answer; and for this, Thou shall not love him. If
God had been thus quick and short with thee, who have been so slow to love his
Son, what a deplorable condition would thy Soul have been in this day, and to
all Eternity? But if God has waited so many years, and does still wait, if
perhaps thou will change thy mind, return unto thy wits, and give a wiser
answer? Will thou still abuse his Patience, by persisting in the denial of thy
love to Christ? Take heed lest his Patience toward thee should end, before thy
Love to Christ begin; for then when thy Punishment for not loving of him does
once begin, it shall never end. The longest Patience turned into Wrath, thou
shall find the longest and the hottest Wrath, and most fiery Indignation.

V. Not love Jesus! What is this but an utter subverting of the whole design of
the Gospel, and refusing life and salvation by the Covenant of Grace? God gave
to innocent man a Law and Covenant of Works, but he quickly transgressed that
Law, and thereby by that Covenant Happiness became impossible to man. After
that, God gave a Law and Covenant of Grace to fallen man, and established the
same in the Blood of his Son; and will you also refuse Life and Happiness by
going on in your sin of not loving Christ? For hereby 1. The Conditions of the
Gospel are Neglected. 2. The Threatenings of the Gospel are Slighted. 3. The
Commands of the Gospel are Disobeyed. 4. The Promises of the Gospel are
Undervalued.


1. The Conditions of the Gospel, and Covenant of Grace are neglected. The
great Article, the Sum and Summary whereof is, I will be your God, and ye shall
be my people, Heb. 8.10. I will love you, and you shall love me; my heart shall
be toward you, and your heart shall be toward me: I will love none like you,
and you shall love none like me. How is this done? Can you love him while you
do not love him? Has God and Christ your hearts, while the world and sin have
your hearts? 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons
and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. That is, I will pity you as a father,
and love you as a father does his children, and much more; and ye shall love me
as sons and daughters love their father, and much more. A son, and not love! a
daughter, and not love! such sons and daughters are bitterness to their
Parents; and so are ye to Christ.

2. In not loving Christ, the Threatenings of the Gospel are slighted, and set
at naught by thee. It is dreadful to lie under the Curses of the Law; but it is
more terrible to fall under the Curses of the Gospel. It might make thy heart
to shake within thee, to have the Curse and not the Blessing of thy Maker; but
it might make thy heart to sink within thee, to have the, Curse and not the
Blessing of the Redeemer. What else does he do in the words of the Text? What
else is it but a Curse, to be judged, accounted, declared to be unworthy of
Christ? Unworthy to be pardoned by him, and saved by him; that is, not fit to
be saved by Christ, nor sit to be delivered from hell, or taken up to heaven.
Mat. 10.37. He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me;
and he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. Or will thou bless thy self tho thou hear this Curse? Like the man, Deuteronomy. 29.19. And
it come to pass when he hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself
in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, tho I walk in the imagination of my
heart, to add drunkenness to thirst. So thou; Tho I do love the world, and sin,
and self, more than Christ, I shall have Peace, and Pardon, and Eternal Life.
Shall thou so? How will thou come by it? From whom will thou have it? Will God
spare such a man? Shall not his Anger smoke against him? And the Fire of his
Indignation burn him up till he be consumed? Or burn him, tho by burning he
shall never be consumed. If it were a man, thou might say, Let him curse,
Psalm. 109.28. But will thou say of God, of Christ, Let him curse, who cares?
Let him curse, who fears his Curse? Thou careless sinner! God will make thee
care, and if thou do not fear, God will make thee feel the weight of his
Anger; and when thou shall feel what now thou do not fear, thou shall not
make so light a matter of it.

3. The great Command of God, by not loving of him, is disobeyed; Matthew. 22.37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind. 38. This is the first and great commandment. The Lord Jesus
is a great King, a great Savior. The Command to love him is a great Command,
which if thou do not do, upon this account thou art a great Sinner. If a
great Swearer, then ye say, such a one is a great Sinner, a great Drunkard, and
therefore a great Sinner; and so he is. But tho thou art no Drunkard, no
Swearer, yet not a Lover of Christ, for this, I say, thou art a great Sinner;
for thou live in daily disobedience to the great Command.

4. By not loving of Christ, the Promises of the Gospel are undervalued; if
thou would love him, he promises thee a Crown of life, Jam. 1.12. he
promises thee all the good that thou do want, or can desire; the pardon of
Sin; the Favor of God; deliverance from Hell, the Happiness of Heaven. Oh what
Inducements of Love are these! What Motives! what Incentives! what madness to
lose all these for the love of the World, for the love of a nasty, filthy Lust!
Will thou still say, all these shall never gain my love to Christ? nor move me
to set my heart upon him? Thou say, thou say not so, but I say, and God
knows thou do so: and is it not as bad to do so, and not say so; as not say
so, and yet do so, when thy doing so, is as if thou said so: So! how? why as
if thou said, Rather than I will love Christ, I will never be pardoned;
rather than I will love Christ, I will go without the Favor of God, without
the Joys of Heaven; I will be damned, and go to Hell, rather than I will love
Christ; say thou so? or will thou do so? is the Love of Christ so grievous to
thee? take thy choice; and when thou art in Hell, and damned there, thou shall
never love him.

VI. Not love Christ! what is this but odious Ingratitude for the greatest
Kindness to the Children of men? Suppose thou wast in debt, and unable to pay,
therefore must be cast into Prison; one discharges thy Debt, would thou not
love him? if not, would not all say, thou art unthankful? Suppose thy self to
be in Turkish Slavery, and one redeem thee, would thou not love him? Suppose
thou art condemned to dye, and one procures thy Pardon, would thou not love
him? or bear the brand of an ungrateful Person? Thou wast in debt to God, and
had nothing to pay; thou wast in slavery to Sin and Satan; thou wast at
enmity with God: condemned to dye, in danger of Hell, unfit for Heaven: the
Justice of God did flame against thee: the Wrath of God did lie upon thee; Hell
and Devils waited for thee. None could help thee, but Christ; satisfy for thee,
but Christ; purchase thy Pardon, but Christ; save thee from Hell, and bring
thee to Heaven, but Christ: nor He neither without suffering, bleeding,
sweating, dying: without bearing the punishment of thy sins; giving his Soul
for thine, his Life for thine; and after all this, art not thou to a wonder
unthankful, if thou will not so much as love him? wilt not? let the Heavens be
ashonished! and the Earth amazed, and all the Creation of God blush, and be
ashamed at the unthankfulness of sinful men! that hear, that for their sakes
Christ was scourged, buffeted, crowned with Thorns; his Side pierced with a
Spear, Nails driven through his Hands and feet, was arraigned, condemned,
accused, condemned and crucified, and yet will not love a Christ scourged for
them; a Christ groaning under the burden of their Sin; a Christ sweating under
the heavy load of the Wrath of God, will not love a weeping, bleeding,
crucified Christ, when all this was endured in their room and stead.

VII. Not love Christ! is not this damnable contemning and despising of him? Is
it not a setting him at naught? it is spoken of Christ, Psalm. 22 6. A reproach
of men, and despised of the people. And Isa. 53.3. He is despised and rejected
of men. -- He was despised, and we esteemed him not. The Septuagint translate
the word by (...), which is used of Christ in the New Testament, Luke 23.11.
And Herod with his men of war set him at naught, and mocked him --. Act. 4.11.
This was the stone which was set at naught by you builders --. What we greatly
love, we highly value: what we love not at all, we value not at all, and that
we do despise. And is it not sin enough to despise the People of God, but will thou also despise the Son of God? not enough to despise the Word and Ways of
God, but will thou add this to it, to despise the only begotten Son of God? Not
to love, and to despise, is all one; Matthew. 6.24. No man can serve two masters;
for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or he will hold to the
one, and despise the other. Is this no evil in thine eyes? Is Christ that is
honored by the Father, contemned by thee? Is he the joy of Angels, the delight
of Saints, and is he thus set at naught by thee? Is he the Pearl of great
price, and do thou look upon him to be nullius pretii, of no worth? Is he the
chiefest of ten thousands, and do thou thus disdain and vilify him, as if he
were the meanest of ten thousands? Can thou value thy Riches, and love them,
and not Christ? Can thou value thy Relations, and love them, and not Christ?
Behold, in comparison of Riches, Children, Life, thou despisest Christ, when
thou should depise these in comparison of Christ. He that despises the word,
shall be destroyed, Prove. 13.13. He that despises his neighbor, s^^neth;
Prove. 14.21. He that despises his father's instruction, is a fool, Prove. 15.15
He that despises his mother, the ravens shall pick out his eyes, Prove. 30.17.
What then is he, and what shall be done to him that despises Christ?

VIII. Not a lover of Christ! what art thou then but an hater of him? there is
no medium between these two. Love him thou must, or hate him thou do. Matthew.
6.24. He will hate the one, and love the other. Matthew. 12.30. He that is not
with me, is against me. He that does not so love him, as to have him rule him,
does hate him. Luke 19.14. But his citizens hated him, and sent a messenger
after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us.

Should thou hate thy Lusts, and love the Lord; and do thou love thy Lusts,
and hate the Lord? I entreat thee, tell me, What has he done unto thee, that
thou should hate him? as Christ reasoned with them that so hated him, that
they stoned him; John 10.32. Jesus answered them, saying, Many good works have
I showed you from my father, for which of those works do ye stone me? So let me
reason with thee; Many a good Work has Christ done for thee, for which of
these do thou hate him? Has he not come from Heaven for thee? was he not
wounded, beaten, scourged, and suffered death for thee? for which of all these
do thou hate him? has he not made Salvation possible for thee? do thou
hate him for that? has not he purchased a Conditional Pardon for thee, do
thou hate him for that? has not he entreated thee to consider thy own Soul,
and to prevent thine own Damnation; do thou hate him for that? has he given
thee any other cause? thou have many reasons to love him, but no cause to hate
him, as Christ himself asserteth. Joh. 15.25. They hated me without a cause,
but for that hatred they shall not be punished without cause.

IX. Not love Christ! art thou not herein a confederate with the Devil, against
God and Christ? And joinest in with the Devil against Christ? And do thou not
in this rather obey the Destroyer than the Savior of thy Soul? Christ calls,
Give me thy love, but thou do not. Satan persuades thee to withhold thy love
from Christ, and so thou do. Christ says, Give me thy heart, Prove. 23.26.
but thou do not. Satan says, Let the World have thy heart, and so it has.
Can thou displease Christ more than to deny him thy Love? Or can thou
please the Devil better? What means this perverseness of thy heart? What mean
these cross and crooked dealings, as if Christ were thine enemy, and the Devil
thy friend? As if thy loving Christ would be thy ruin, and listening to the
Devil were the way to happiness.

Poor Sinner! Will the Devil save thee? Christ would. Will he help thee into
the favor of God, or up to Heaven? Tell me, what do thou in thy Conscience
think, does Christ or the Devil most desire thy real good? Did the Devil suffer
for thee? Christ did. Did the Devil dye for thee? Christ has. Has the Devil
any love unto thee? Christ had so much as to shed his Blood, that if thou will
hearken to him, thou might be saved by him. Why then, when Christ, the World
and Satan, are striving for thy heart and love, do thou open to the World and
Satan, and shut it against the Lord Jesus Christ?

X. Not love Christ! Do thou not herein bear the Image of the Devil, and look
more like a Devil than a man. Has the Devil no love to Christ? Nor have thou.
Oh what a thing is this, that a man on earth should love Christ no more than
the Devils in Hell? And is the likeness of the Devil thy Glory? Is his Image
thy Beauty? And Conformity to Satan thy Dignity? Or can thou be saved more
than the Devil himself, if thou love Christ no more than he? Oh when the
Accusation at the last day shall be brought against thee, This man hated Christ
like a Devil: Did he so? Away with him now unto the Devils. And that man's heart
was no more toward Christ than the Devils. No? Then let that Man and Devils go
together, and be Damned together.

XI. Not love Christ! Do thou not carry thy self worse toward Christ than
the Devils do? And is not thy not loving of Christ worse in thee than it is in
Devils? because the greater love and kindness that Christ has shown to thee
than ever he did to Devils, and the more he has done for thee than he has for
them, the worse is want of love to Christ in thee than in them. Did Christ dye
for Devils as he has for thee? Did he bear the punishment of their Sin, as he
has for thine? Did he ever make Salvation possible to them, as he has to
thee? Did he ever offer pardon to them, as he has to thee? Or did he ever
sollicir them for their love, as he has done with thee for thine? Might not
Devils say, we have not that cause nor reasons to love Christ as Men have? And
might not we suppose, if the Devils in Hell were set in the same circumstances
as Men on Earth, that some of the Devils might love him, when some men will
not? However, when we consider the Texts that speak of fallen Angels, and how
they are irrecoverably cast into blackness and darkness, and of fallen men who
are saveable, it is sufficient foundation for this conclusion, That want of
love to Christ is worse in men than it is in Devils. Concerning Gods just
dealing with Sinning Angels, we read, 2 Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels
that sinned, but cast them down to Hell, and delivered them into chains of
darkness to be reserved unto judgment. And Epistle of Jude, ver. 6. The Angels
which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he has
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great
day. Not a word of a Savior for them, but of Mankind the Scripture speaks of
abundance of love and mercy: Joh. 3.16. God so loved the World, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but
have everlasting life. Tit. 3.4. But after that the kindness and love of God
our Savior toward man appeared; and denies that concerning Angels, which it
does affirm concerning Man. Heb. 2.16. For verily he took not upon him the
nature of Angels, but he took upon him the seed of Abraham. Has he done that
for you, which he has not done for Devils, and is not then want of love in you
to him, a greater evil, than it is in Devils? Let this shame you that ye are
not lovers of Christ.

XII. Not love Christ! What do ye make of this but the beginning of Hell? By
the same reason as love to Christ is the beginning of Heaven. Love to Christ is
the employment of the Saints in Glory, and to be without love to Christ is the
frame of the Damned in misery. So much of hatred to Christ is in you, so much
of Hell is in you, before you be in Hell.

XIII. Want of love to Christ! Is not this the Daughter, and the Offspring, of
many foul abominations that are reigning in thy heart? Does it not suppose the
predominancy of many other sins? As,

1. Does it not suppose Ignorance of thy misery, Sins deformity, and of Christ's
beauty, excellency and necessity?

2. Does it not suppose preceding Infidelity? That thou do not believe what
God says concerning Christ, nor what shall be thy portion, and thy everlasting
miserable condition without Christ?

3. Does it not suppose a conceit of thy own Righteousness, which if thou
saw to be insufficient, would Christ be thus slighted and disregarded by
thee?

4. Does it not suppose Self-willedness? Thou will love what thou will love,
and not him thou should love, come on it what will. Is it not plain
wilfulness when thou can give no reason why thou will not love Christ, But
because thou will not?

5. Does it not suppose predominancy of sinful Self love? Carual Self thou will
love, and because this in dominion is inconsistent with the love of Christ,
thou do omit the loving of him.

6. Does it not suppose fearlesness of God, and of his Indignation? If this did
awe thee, could Christ be thus neglected by thee?

7. Does it not suppose forgetfulness of Death and Judgment? Of Heaven and
Hell? Could thou without horror, think of dying without love to Christ; When
to dye so once, would be to dye for ever? Without trembling could thou think
of Judgment, when for want of love to Christ thou shall certainly be damned,
whenever thou appearest at his Judgment-bar? Or of Heaven, when thou must never
enter into it? Or of Hell, when thou must certainly be cast into it for want of
love to Christ?

8. Does it not suppose great carelessness of thine own Soul? For can thou
love thy Soul, and not love Christ the Savior of the Soul? Can thou take
care of the Salvation of thy Soul, and take no care to love him that is the
purchaser, and the donor of eternal Salvation? Is such a litter of sins in the
heart void of the love of Christ? And will thou after this, make so light a
matter of it?

XIV. Want of love to Christ! Is it not the Mother of many horrid
transgressions, and the Nurse, Maintainer, and Fomenter of them? Love to Christ
shuts the door of the heart against the temptations of Satan, the inticements
of Sinners, and the allurements of the World; but the want of it sets it open
unto all. Love to Christ would be a Dam to the stream of Sin, but the want of
it is the plucking up the Floodgates thereof, that Sin might run out of the
heart into the life with a swift current. Is not the absence of love to Christ
the cause of many commissions of Evil? Would it not bridle thy Tongue, restrain
thine Hands, shut thy Eyes, stop thy Ears, and keep all these from being
defiled with finful actings upon sinful objects? Is it not the cause of the
omission of good? Of praying, hearing, meditation, holy discourse? What goes
before, and what follows after the want of love to Christ, as flowing and
proceeding from it, makes it a sin exceeding sinful.

XV. Love not Christ! Have not then all the Ordinances of God been ineffectual
as to thee? Have not Ministers preached in vain, and spent their labor for
naught? And have not thou heard in vain? And followed the means of Grace in
vain? when by all the means thou have not got this Grace of Love? What though
thou have obtained knowledge, is not that knowledge, without love to Christ,
vain knowledge? What though thou art able to discourse of God and Christ, and
Heaven, and the workings of the Spirit, without love to Christ, is it not
(though concerning such great and weighty matters, yet) vain discourse? Have
not all the calls of Mercy, the workings of Conscience, the wooings of Grace,
the pleadings of Ministers, the entreaties of Love, the knockings of Christ,
the strivings of the Spirit, the waitings of Patience, been all slighted and
disregarded by thee? Are not all thy Prayers lost, and will not all thy
Profession come to nothing, and thy hopes of Heaven perish, when for want of
love to Christ thy Soul shall never enter into Heaven, but perish everlastingly?

XVI. Want of love to Christ! Is it not a mark and brand of a graceless Man? Is
not the absence of love to Christ, inconsistent with the presence of any other
saving Grace? Psalm. 31.23. O love the Lord, all ye his Saints. No love, no
Saint: No Saint, no Grace in thee. If Loveless, altogether Graceless; for then,

1. Thou art faithless, for did thou believe on him, thou would have
sincere love unto him, for where there is Faith, it works by love, Gal. 5.6.

2. Thou art fearless of God. Love and fear of God do sweetly concur: Love is
afraid to offend.

3. Thou art sorrowless; that is, as to any holy, godly sorrow: For love to
Christ would make thee sorrow for thy sin, for the absence of Christ, and love
would cause thee to sorrow that thou love no more.

4. Thou art also hopeless; for there can be no solid ground of hope in him,
when there is no love unto him. He that hopes for Heaven by the merits of
Christ, without love to the person of Christ, his hope is a Fabric without a
foundation, the Fools Paradise: It is hope without a warrant, and in the end,
when he misseth of the end of his expectation, will be found to be no better
than rash confidence, bold and damnable presumption. For the greatest
Professor, without love to Christ, is a Self-deluding Hypocrite, whose hope
shall be cut off, and prove as weak, though spun as fine as a Spiders web, Job
8.13. And shall be as the giving up of the ghost, Job 11.20. And is the want of
all Grace no evil in thine Eyes, when it brings punishment that shall be
endless, easeless, and remediless, upon all that were totally and finally
Graceless.

XVII. Not love Christ, Gods own Son! How then is God thy Father? Joh. 8.42.
Jesus said unto them, if God were your father, ye would love me -- If ye be his
creatures, and not love him, it is an aggravation of your sin, not to have love
to him that gave Being to you; but though ye are his Creatures without love,
yet ye are not his Children; but better never had been his Creatures if not his
Children, for though ye should every day, with great confidence, say Our
Father, without love to Christ, God will never own you as Children, nor give
you Childrens Portions.

XVIII. Not love Christ! How can thou then excuse all the love thou have to
other things from being sinful Love? So that the more thou lovedst, the more
thou sinnest, because thy love to others is not subordinate to the love of
Christ, but separate from it. To love other things and persons in Subordination
to the love of Christ, is not a Sin, but Duty; to love other things and
persons, and not Christ, or more than Christ, is not a Duty, but a Sin; and
thus the love of your Estates is sinful Love. And the love of Husband, Wife,
Children, and of your Selves, is therefore sinful Love, because it is above the
love of Christ, for these should be loved in Christ, and for Christ, but you
love them without Christ, and more than Christ, therefore all your love,
without love to Christ, (though materially good) is sinful love, Mat. 10.37.

XIX. Not love Christ! Art thou not all this while treasuring up terrible
Accusations in Conscience against the hour of Death, and day of Judgment? The
time will come, and is at hand, when thou, and all thou lovedst, besides
Christ, must be separated. Thou have loved the World, and thou must leave it;
thou have loved thy Pleasures, and thou must bid adieu unto them; thou have
loved thy Relations, and thou must take thy sarewel of them; and then, oh then,
if conscience be awakened, if thou do not go blindfold, and hood winked, by
the Devil, out of this World, wilt, in the bitterness of thy Soul, lament thy
woeful case, and say, Oh! What have I done? What is this that I have done, to
love what I must leave? I loved my Riches and now Death will take me from them.
I have set my heart more upon my earthly Relations than upon Christ, and now
Death is come to tear and carry me away from them. I have loved my life more
than Christ, and now Death will put an end unto my life. And all these things
that I have loved, now must lose. Oh! Had I loved Christ as I have loved them,
Christ would not have left me; Death could not have separated him from me, but
should have removed me nearer unto him. But this I did not; woe is me that this
I never did, for now all my love proves vexatious love, to think and find that
what I have loved, in one moment I have for ever lost.

XX. Want of love to Christ! Does not this make Damnation unavoidable? and the
escaping of Hell to be impossible? For when thou dyest, whither would thou
have thy Soul to go? To one whom thou never lovedst? While thou did live,
thou did not, would not love him, and after Death can not. Can not love
him? Is Heaven a place for them that cannot love Christ? Heaven is a place of
Love; the Employment of Heaven is to love, and praise him whom they do love.
Without love to Christ, thou would not find employment there, and the life of
Heaven will be no idle life, where all shall live and love, and love as long as
they shall live; therefore such as do not now, and hereafter cannot love, shall
never enter to live in that place of Love.

Now, Sirs, What do ye think? Is the want of love to Christ so small a sin as
ye have hitherto supposed it to be, when you have spent and past the greatest
part of your lives without love to Christ, and without sorrow, for want of that
love? What do ye mean! To cease to live, before ye do begin to love? What shift
have ye made to live in mirth and joy, when the love of Christ has not lived
nor reigned in your hearts? Let Conscience be Judge between God and you, but if
Conscience be dead, and will not give its judgment, let God himself be Judge;
have ye done well to love that which ye should have hated, and hated him whom
ye should have loved? Done well! God knows it is not well done, and Devils
themselves know you have not well done; and ye your selves, sooner or later,
(God grant before it be too late) shall know in this ye have not done well.
Done well! No, ye have done foolishly, ye have done wickedly; nay, in this ye
have done Devilishly in what ye have done; call to mind the things that have
been said, ponder them in your hearts, weigh them in the balance of right
reason, and it will tell you ye have done abominably in what ye have done.

But I suspect this thought is rising in your hearts, If we had not loved
Christ, we should yield we had done so great an evil as this is aggravated in
it self, and by its circumstances to be: But God forbid that we should live
without love to Christ, we think it is pity that Man should live that does not
love Christ. This supposed love, I fear will keep you off from repenting for
want of real love to Christ, and make you set light by all these aggravations
of this Sin, because ye think, and hope ye do love Christ; and some are so
ignorant of their sinful state by Nature, and so vainly confident of the
goodness of their hearts, that they bless God they have loved Christ ever since
they were born, and will be ready to spit in that man's face that shall question
their love to Christ. Come then, ye that are so confident that ye love him,
come unto the Trial, bring it to the Touchstone of the Word of God, and try of
what Metal is your Love: What if it should prove but counterfeit instead of
real? Or suppose in some sense it should be real, and not counterfeit, yet
should not be sincere, and saving love, for the discovery whereof, I shall ne^^
proceed to the third Use.

CHAP. IX. Ten Questions by way of Conviction, that many, very many, have no
sincere Love to Christ; from whence also Characters of sincere love to him, by
the right resolving of these Questions, might be gathered, and our Love tried,
whether sincere or counterfeit.
MUST a man that loves not Christ sincerely, be Anathema when Maranatha? Must
he love, or be cursed if he do not? Then, as Christ did put the Question unto
Peter, Joh. 21.15. Simon Son of Jonas, love thou me? And 16. the second time,
and 17. the third time. Simon Son of Jonas, love thou me? So do thou put this
Question to thy self, O my Soul! love thou the Lord Jesus? And when thy heart
may forwardly return an answer, ask it the second time, O my Soul! art thou not
mistaken? Do thou indeed love the Lord Jesus? And because the matter is of
everlasting moment, put the Question a third time, and so often, till to this
Question, O my Soul! Do thou sincerely love the Lord Jesus? Thou have such
proof out of the Scripture, as will hold trial, when this shall be in question
at the great day of Judgment. But alas! What great grounds of jealousy are
there, that the love of many is but supposed love to Christ, that think they
do, that hope they do, but indeed do not? For whose conviction I shall desire
them to give in a serious answer to the following Queslions, as trials of the
sincerity of their love.

I. Do thou love Christ sincerely, and live in wilful disobedience to the
known commands of Christ? Do thou know his will, and willingly every day act
contrary to it, and yet pretend to love him? Do thou slight his commands, and
love his person? Does Christ command thee to be the death of thy sins, and thou
suffer them to live and rule, and yet love him? Does Christ command thee to
pray continually, and thou do neglect it continually, and yet have the face
to say thou love Christ? Does Christ command thee not to swear profanely at
all, nor to take Gods name in vain, and do thou do this often in a day, and
yet defy that man that calls in question thy love to Christ?

But whatever be thy confidence, I do declare to thy face, it is a great and
Soul-damning mistake; for as Love and Obedience are conjoined in the Scripture,
so they are never parted in the true and sincere Lover.

Weigh these Scriptures, and thou will find thy Love pretended to without
obedience, to be so light, that it will be driven away by the evidence of the
Word, like chaff before the wind. Exodus 20.6. And showing mercy unto thousands
of them that love me, and keep my commandments. The same words repeated, Deuteronomy.
5.10. and Deuteronomy. 7.9. Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the
faithful God, which keeps covenant and mercy with them that love him, and
keep his commandments, to a thousand generations. And 11.13. And it shall come
to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently unto my commandments, which I command
you this day, to love the Lord your God, and to serve him with all your heart,
and with all your soul -- Neh. 1.5. I beseech thee, O Lord God of heaven, the
great and terrible God, that keeps covenant and mercy for them that love him,
and observe his commandments. Joh. 14.15. If ye love me, keep my commandments.
21. He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is, (yes, that is the
man) that loves me -- 23. Jesus answered and said unto him, if a man love me,
he will keep my words -- 24. He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings. --
Do ye see how in all these Texts Obedience is joined with Love? If Love go
before, Obedience follows after, and the latter is a proof of the former.

Then the man amongst you, that is not openly profane, but of a moral
conversation, and moreover a Professor, will say as Saul did to Samuel, Blessed
be thou of the Lord. I have performed the commandment of the Lord, 1 Samuel
15.13. But Samuel replied, ver. 16. What means then this bleating of the
sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the Oxen which I hear? So ye say, we love
the Lord; how do ye prove it? Why we have performed the Commandments of the
Lord. Have ye so? What means then the neglect of Prayer in your Families that
I hear of? What means then your Idling away the Lords day, or polluting it by
worldly Discourse? What means, I pray you, the allowed dead Praying, and dull
performances, not striven against, nor lamented for? But if you would not
deceive your sell, mind that, that Obedience which proves sincerity of love to
Christ must be,

1. Universal, and that in regard of the object; all the Commandments of God,
those that are more hard, as those that be more easy; those that cross and
condemn your best beloved sin, as well as those you could more easily and
readily part with; those commands that respect the inward as well as the
outward Man, and do enjoin the manner as well as the matter of your Duties.
Psalm. 119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy
commandments; and Universal, in regard of the subject, that your obedience be
done with the whole heart. Deuteronomy. 10.12. And now, Israel, what does the Lord thy
God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and
to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul.

2. Obedience that is a proof of Love must be cheerful, for Love obeys with
delight. It is not a burden to Pray, but a pleasure; hard Duties become easy
to Love, and the time seems not long, nor tedious. As Jacoh, for the Love of
Rachel, Genesis 29.20. And Jacob served seven years for Rachel, and they seemed
unto him but (...) as ones days, translated as few days, for the love he had
unto her. Seven years to love seem but as one day. One day in an holy Duty to
one that wants love, seems as seven days, if not as seven years, which seem
to pass away sooner, and with more delight, than one day spent in Flesh
displeasing Duties, where there is no love to take off the rediousness of it to
the Flesh.

3. Such Obedience must be the choicest: Sincere Lovers of Christ will serve
him with the best they have, and in the best manner they can. Love thinks
nothing too good for God and Christ, else it is but deceitful and pretended
love. Mal. 1.13. Ye said also behold what a weariness is it, and ye have
snuffed at it, says the Lord of hosts; and ye brought that which was torn, and
the lame and the sick; thus ye brought an offering: should I accept this of
your hands? says the Lord? You bring Prayers, but they are sleepy Prayers;
thus ye Pray. Ye Pray, but with your minds roving because of the prevailing
habitual love ye have unto the World; THUS ye Pray. Could sincere Love find no
better Service? Give no better Duties than such for which a man is a Deceiver,
and Accursed? v. 14. But cursed be the deceiver, which has in his slock a
maele, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a
great King, says the Lord of hosts, and my name is dreadful among the heathen.
That is strange then, that it should be no more dreadful among his people that
pretend to love him, that they are not afraid to bring and offer such Duties to
him as do so much provoke him, and are so greatly displeasing to him; that give
him only words when they have (a Male in their Flock) an heart in their breast
to give him.

4. Such Obedience as is a proof of Love, must be persevering to the end,
expressed not by stepping into Gods ways, but by walking in them. One that
loves not Christ might step into a good way, but he that loves does walk
therein. Deuteronomy. 11.1. Therefore thou shall love the Lord thy God, and keep his
charge, and his statutes, and his judgments, and his commandments always. And
19.9. If thou shall keep all these commandments to do them, which I command
thee this day, to love the Lord thy God, and to walk ever in his ways. -- Such
then as have made great shows of love to Christ, and now are revolted, and have
forsaken his holy Commandments, by this might judge what kind of love it was to
Christ, that they once made profession of; and more by their partial, irksom,
and refuse Obedience, might be convinced, that their love to Christ is unfound,
and only supposed Love.

II. Do you love Christ, while you maintain the Love of Sin in your Heart? Can
the love of Sin, and the love of Christ, dwell together in highest degrees? Can
the affection of love in that manner be carried out to two contrary objects at
the same time? And is there any thing in the World more contrary than Christ
and Sin? Is there more opposition between Light and Darkness, extremely Sweet,
and extremely Sour? Can you love your Health and Poison too to be in your
Stomach? Can you love Christ, and yet love what he does hate? Can you love
Christ and delight in Sin, which took away the Life of your Lord? Could you
carry that Knife continually in your Bosom with delight, that was the
Instrument of Death unto your dearest Friend? You might as soon look down upon
the Earth, and up unto the Heavens at the same instant, as thus love Sin and
Christ together. Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the Lord, hate evil; and the hatred
to Sin, that proves sincere Love to Christ, must be

1. Universal, to the Darling Sin as well as others, to the Sin that has been
to you as your Right Hand, or Right Eye. Hatred is to the kind; he that hates a
Toad: It is not this one, or that in particular, but all. He that Loves Christ
sincerely, hates Sin as a man hates a Toad, not only as to the degree, but also
as to the extent, all and every one. Psalm. 119.104 I hate every false way.

2. Implacable: Anger might be pacified, but Hatred planted in the Nature is
irreconcilable. Antipathy cannot be rooted out, nor turned into Love. A man
might be angry at Sin that loves not Christ, but be friends again; might turn
from it, and afterward return unto it; but the hatred to Sin implanted in the
new Creature is implacably bent against Sin, that the words might have some
place here by way of allusion, relating the Love and Hatred of Amnon to Tamar.
2 Samuel 13.15. Then Amnon hated her exceedingly, (Hebrew is, with great hatred
greatly) so that the hatred wherewith he hated her, was greater than the love
wherewith he had loved her; and Amnon said unto her, Arise, be gone. With like
detestation will the Lover of Christ pack away his Sin; Arise, be gone, with
greater hatred than before he loved it.

3. Therefore it is mortal and destructive to Sin that is the object of it.
Esau hated Jacob because of the Blessing wherewith his Father blessed him; and
Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand, then
will I slay my brother Jacob, Genesis 27.41. So the Lover of Christ, that hates
Sin, is resolved to be the destruction of it. Shall not I be the death of that
cursed Sin that was the death of my blessed Lord? Shall I suffer that to live
in my heart, which would not suffer Christ to live in the World? Did Sin shed
my Saviors Blood, and shall not I be avenged on my (...) Did Sin make my
Savior Groan, and Sweat in a bloody Agony, and shall I take delight therein?
Was my Sin the Nails that did fasten him to the Cross? The Spear that did
pierce his blessed Side? And the Thorns that Crowned his Sacred Head? And shall
I lodge it in my Bosom? Did Christ in love unto my Soul dye for my Sin, and
shall not I, in love unto my Lord, cause Sin to dye in me?

III. Do you love Christ sincerely, when the things of this World have the
predominant degrees of your affections? As Sin is not to be loved at all by
them that love Christ, so things that are good, must not be loved above Christ,
nor are by them that love him. Mat. 10.37. If any man love father or mother
more than me, he is not worthy of me. Does that Woman love her Husband with a
sincere Conjugal Love, that though she love him truly, yet loves another more
than him?

Do you love Riches, Pleasures, Honors, Relations, Self, Life, more than
Christ, and yet sincerely love Christ? As he is better than all, greater than
all, more suitable, more durable, more sweet, more satisfying, than all other
good things, so he must be loved above, and more than all. 1 John 2.15. Love
not the world, neither the things that are in the world; if any man love the
world, the love of the father is not in him. Jam. 4.4. Ye Adulterers and
Adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God?
Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.

Though one that is sincere in his love to Christ might not love Christ more
than some other persons love him, yet he loves Christ more than he loves other
persons or things. But do you love Christ more than you love other things, and
yet,

1. Your thoughts are habitually set, and actually run out upon other things
more than upon Christ? Can you think on the World with delight, but not on
Christ? And love to have a thousand thoughts on other things for one you have
of Christ? It is a pleasure to you to think on your Pleasures, your Profits,
your Children, but a burden to you to think of Christ, and keep your thoughts
upon him. Are not the thoughts much upon the object of love; Psalm. 139.17. When
I awake, I am still with thee. But if you cannot sleep in the Night, your Head
is full of the thoughts of the World, because your Heart is full of the love of
the World. Is it not a sign the World, and not Christ, is loved as your
Treasure? for where the treasure is, there the heart will be also, Mat. 6.20,
21.

2. Do you love Christ more than other things, when your labor is more for
other things than for Christ? Did you ever take that pains, that care, to get
an Interest in Christ, as you have done for the Riches of this Life? If you
had, might you not have had him, whereas now you are without him? You Sweat for
the World; you are Cold in your Praying for Christ; you lay out your strength
in working for the World; you are sloathful in endeavoring after Christ; you
are lively upon the Exchange; quick in your Counting House; with might and main
you act in your Shop, but dull in your Closet upon your Knees, if you at any
time are there so employed. Is this your love to Christ more than to other
things? Or,

3. When your care is more to keep other things than that Christ, you conceit
you love? Let Christ go to keep your outward Possessions, and yet say you love
Christ more; who do you think will believe what you say? Will not a man that
loves his Child more than his Gold, and all his Goods, if his House were on
Fire, lose all to save his Child? So would you for Christ, if you loved him
more than all.

IV. Do you love Christ and never grieve, nor groan, nor repent for the Sin
whereby you have dishonored him? Can there be love to any person without
grieving for the unkindness that you have done unto him? Does a Child love as a
Child, that is not grieved because he did offend his Father? If your Heart did
burn in Love, would not your Eyes flow with Tears? If the fire of Love were
kindled in your Breast, would not the waters of Sorrow run down your Cheeks,
and make thee say, Oh! What have I done, that I so long have slighted this
loving Lord? Oh! What did I mean to stop mine Ears against his Calls of Love
and Mercy? That I let him stand without Door, when the World and Satan were
admitted in? Did my Lord suffer for my Sins, should I then have sinned thus
against my suffering Lord? Was he Nailed to the Tree for my sake, and must I
yet wound him more? Oh! That I could not behold my bleeding Lord without a
weeping Eye! I am grieved, dear Savior, I am grieved, to remember how I
slighted thee, and trampled thy Royal Commands under my feet. O Lord, I blush
and am ashamed, that I did spurn against such tender Bowels, that I did
undervalue such invaluable Love! and did prefer the Dung of this World before
such an incomaprable Savior!

But you can daily sin, and your Soul not sigh, nor sob, nor grieve, nor groan.
You can sin and rejoice at the thoughts of it. Jer. 11.15. When thou do evil,
then thou rejoycest. Thou can sin and make a sport at it, like a fool. Prove.
14.9. Fools make a mock at sin. Oh thou Loveless Sinner! Did Christ bleed for
Sin, and do thou laugh at it? Was Christ serious, and his Soul sorrowful even
to the Death for sin, and do thou make a sport of it? Have thou a Sea of Sin,
and not a drop of Sorrow for it? Surely thou art the man that have not one Dram
of sincere love to Jesus Christ.

V. Do thou love Christ, and live without communion with him? And when he is
absent from thy Soul, art never troubled at it? Does not Love desire sweet
converse, and familiar intercourse, with the person that is the object of thy
Love? Can Lovers be long asunder, and not desire a meeting? Can thou account
the presence of the beloved object a burden to thee? Or is not his absence
really so? Do thou think that he does love thee, that is weary of thy
company, or never desirous of it? Or shuns the place where thou do wont to
be? If indeed thou love Christ, thou could be content to be without any
thing than without him: Thou could better be without thy health than without
Christ, without thy dearest friend next to Christ, than without Christ; that is
to thee the dearest of all, if thou do love him. Without thy Meat and Drink,
even thy necessary Food, than without Christ. How is it then that thou can
take up contentedly without Praying, and without Hearing, or with these without
Christ in them? Is it not for want of Love? Lovers have their fainting Fits,
ready to faint and dye away when the object cannot be enjoyed. Cant. 2.5. Stay
me with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. Cant. 3.1. By
night on any bed I sought him whom my Soul loves; I sought him but I found him
not. 2. I will rise now, and go about the City in the streets, and in the broad
ways I will seek him whom my soul loves; I sought him but I found him not. 3.
The watchmen that go about the city found me: To whom I said, Saw ye him whom
my soul loves? 4. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him
whom my soul loves: I held him, and would not let him go -- The Soul in love
with Christ is restless in his absence, and never leaves seeking till it find
him, and having found him, holds him fast by Faith and Love, and will not let
him go. The Soul that loves does long, does thirst, does breathe and pant,
after the beloved object; for what is desire but love in motion, as love is
desire at rest? And though a gracious heart finds complacency and rest in love
to Christ, yet if Christ be not enjoyed, Love cannot rest, but moves, in
desiring of him, like David, Psalm. 42.1. As the heart pants after the water
brooks, so pants my soul after God. 2. My soul thirsts for God, for the
living God; when shall I come and appear before God? And is early and earnest
in seeking after him, and every full condition to him is empty, and every
fruitful state to him is barreh, and he sees weakness and disgrace in all
worldly Strength and Honor, till he is filled and made fruitful by the
enjoyment of Christ, and does see his Power and his Glory in his Ordinances.
Psalm. 63.1. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts
for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty land, where no water
is. 2. To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary.

VI. Do you love Christ, and yet hate what he does love? Does not true love
make you love such as are beloved by him whom you do love? Do you love Christ
and hate his Word? Did not David that loved God, esteem his Word, for the
sweetness of it, more than Honey? Psalm. 119.103: And for the worth of it, more
than Gold? Psalm. 119.72. Do you love Christ the Lord, and take no delight in
the Lord's Day, that is set apart for the commemoration of the wonderful work of
man's Redemption, and filling us with joy at the remembrance of his
Resurrection? Can you idle away this day? Can you spend it in Pleasures, and
profane it with your vain Discourse and worldly Talk, when you should be
delighting your self with the thoughts and speech of the great things that
Christ did suffer, and by suffering procure for his People? Do not they that
love and honor an earthly King, delight themselves, and show their joy, on his
day of Coronation? I cannot be induced to believe that any man loves Christ,
that takes no care, and makes no conscience of the holy observation of the
Lord's Day.

Do you love the Lord Jesus, and yet hate his people? Cannot you endure a real,
holy, humble, sin-fearing Christian, and yet impudently say, You are a Lover of
Christ? Can you revile them, and magnify Christ? Do you love him, and hate
such as are like him? Does a Woman love her Husband, that with indignation
tears his Picture? In this God himself does declare thee to be a Liar, when
thou do this, and says thou art a Christ-lover. 1 John 4.20. If any man
say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar: for he that loves not
his brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen? 21.
And this commandment have we from him, that he who loves God, love his brother
also. 1 John 5.1. -- And every one that loves him that begat, loves him also
that is begotten of him. Did not Christ show his love unto his people, by
laying down his life for them? And do you show your love to Christ, in taking
their lives away from them that love him, because out of love unto him they
will not, dare not sin against him as you do, and dare; when true love to
Christ and them, in due circumstances, will cause a man, that is a sincere
Lover, to lay down his life for them? 1 John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love
of God, because he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our
lives for the brethren. Did you love God and Christ, you would have a free
heart, and open hand, to receive his people in their Need and Necessities. And
do you love God and Christ, when you can find both heart and hand to spoil them
of their Goods, and thereby bring them into Poverty and Want? Is it a certain
sign of want of love to Christ, when you do not according to your power supply
their wants? And is it not then a certain sign of hatred unto Christ, when you
take away their Supplies, and bring them, drive them into want? 1 John 3.17.
But whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his brother has need, and shuts
up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? How
indeed? Who can tell or conceive how it should?

VII. Do you love Christ, when you had rather sin against him than suffer for
him? Is that your Love, when you had rather forsake him, than in danger follow
him? When you had rather deny him, than dye for him? And though you do as Peter
did, you do not repent, and weep bitterly as Peter did. Did not Love move
Christ to suffer and dye for us? Was not Love the chain that did fasten him to
the Cross? And if you loved Christ, would the Waters of Affliction and
Persecution quench your Love? You love him, but cannot suffer for him. Worthy
Love! but such as with which Christ does not count you worthy of him, or to
have any saving benefit by him, Mat. 10.37, 38. The Martyrs loved Christ, when
they did go to Prisons for him, and went to the Stake, and were burned into
Ashes for him. You would think it a hard saying, to assert, None but Martyrs
love Christ. But with a distinction, I think it is a true saying, A Martyr is
either actually so, or intentionally. It is the purpose and resolution of the
Heart, to dye for Christ's sake, if called to it; he is one that does dye for
Christ, or is ready, willing, and b^ the help of Grace is resolved to lose his
Life, than leave Christ. And then it is safe to say, That he that loves his
Life more than Christ, and will part with Christ, rather than his Life, has no
sincere love to Christ; for Christ does say it, Mat. 10.37, 38. And this was
the resolution, and disposition of Paul's heart, before he was actually put to
death. Act. 21.13. Paul said, What mean ye to weep, and to break mine heart?
for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name
of the Lord Jesus.

VIII. Do you love Christ, that never were convinced of your need of Christ? Of
your undone and lost estate? Of your deplorable cendition without Christ? Are
you ignorant of your Malady, and can you then value the Remedy? Does not the
Soul, first feeling its wounds by Sin, enquire what to do to be saved? And then
upon the sight of the power of Christ, that he is able to save, and of the
freeness of Christ, that he is willing to help, the Soul is drawn to love him,
and to set his heart upon him. Blessed Lord! will thou help me out of my
misery? When none can deliver, will thou? I am undone! Will thou succor me? I
am lost! Will thou save me? Why, poor Sinner, says Christ, I do pity thee: my
bowels yearn over thee: I will keep thee: I will save thee both from Sin and
Hell. Will thou so, dear Lord? Thou shall have my heart; my love shall be to
thee.

IX. Do you love Christ, and yet will not submit unto him in all his Offices?
When you say you love Christ, whom do you mean? Or in what respect do you
consider him? As a Priest only, that died for your Sins? As a Jesus, to deliver
you from Hell, to free you from the torments that your very Nature is against?
Did you ever know a Drunkard, a Swearer, or the vilest-debauchedst Wretch, that
has heard of Hell and Christ, but was willing and desirous, on his own terms,
but not on Christ's, to be saved from the torments? And upon that account will
you say, That this man continuing in his open Sins does love Christ? But Christ
in this one respect considered only, is not that Christ that is Preached, and
offered to you in the Gospel, but also Christ as Prophet and King. Is this then
your love to him, to divide him? Is this your love, to dethrone him from his
Kingly Office? No, it is plain hatred to him. Luke 19.14. But his citizens
hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this man to
reign over us. But those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over
them, bring them hither, and slay them before me.

X. Do you love Christ, and never care if he never come again? Nay, you could
be glad you might never leave this World, if you might have your pleasures and
enjoyments in it; but that Christ should come to you by Death, or at Judgment,
you have no desire, but sorrow at the thoughts thereof. Does that Woman love
her Husband that is gone a Journey, and the tidings of his coming back is
sorrowful News unto her? The loving of the coming of Christ, is a character of
such as shall be crowned when he comes. 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give
me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing. And the Spouse that was inflamed with Love, concludes that Song of
Love with this Request, Cant. 8.14. Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to
a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the mountains of spices. And when in the last
words (save one verse) of all the Book of God, Christ promises his last and
speedy coming; the Church that loves Christ, catches the promise out of his
mouth, and turns it into a Prayer. Rev. 22.20. He which testifies these
things, says, Surely I come quickly, Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus. But your
heart says rather, Oh not so, Lord Jesus; great love in the mean time in your
heart. Yet one that truly loves Christ might be sometimes filled with fear at
the thoughts of Christ's coming, not because he does not love and desire it, but
because he thinks he is not prepared for his coming, lest Christ should find
him unfitted and unready at his coming, to enter with him into his glory; but
while he does defer his coming, the loving Soul is hasting in his preparations
for it: As a Woman that is told her Suitor is coming, is greatly troubled, not
because he is coming, but because she fears he might come before she he adorned
as she does desire.

What say ye now, Sirs? Do ye love Christ, or do ye not? Upon the laying these
things to your heart, by examination of your heart by them, can ye upon mature
deliberation, say that ye find the love of Christ is there? Then I shall show
in the close of this subject, what cause of joy in God ye have, what comfort
for the present, and what ground of expectation of better, greater things for
the future, and for ever this love to Christ might be unto you.

But is this the case of all you in this Congregation? I would to God it were!
Is love to Christ in every heart among you? I wish it were, but I fear it is
not. I hope some of you do love Christ, but can I hope so of you all? If I
would never so fain I cannot, while some are ignorant, and some are profane,
and too many are excluded by the former characters of Love, from having, for
the present, the Grace of Love. Oh that I my self had more love to Christ, that
I might grieve more, that blessed Jesus is not loved by more among you! Oh that
for Jesus sake I had more love to your Souls, that I could weep abundantly over
you, that neither for Jesus sake, nor your own, have hitherto loved the Lord
Jesus! What then? Have ye not? Good God pardon it. Will ye not? Good God forbid
it! What shall I do? Take it for granted that many of you do not love the Lord
Jesus? Yea, I have proved that ye do not. And oh! how bitter are these thoughts
to me, that so many of you do not love the sweetest Jesus! Shall I take it for
granted that ye will not? This were enough, if my heart were not a stone, to
break it to pieces. Shall I let you alone without this Love? I dare not. Shall
I try to gain your Love, not to me, but to my Lord? I am afraid ye will deny
me. Deny me! In this that is of everlasting concernment to your Souls, shall I
take a denial and be gone? At your first denial I will not be gone, I know ye
must have love unto him, or be cursed by him; how then can I acquiesce in a
denial from you?

I know the Sinner does not know what he says, when he does deny to give
Christ his love, and therefore in hopes he might come to a better understanding
of himself, and what makes for his own eternal good, I will proceed to the
fourth Use, by which I hope God will change some of your hearts and minds, and
win the love of some of you for Christ, that all you that yet do not love him,
will not give this as your final answer, That ye will not love him.

CHAP. X. Where the fourth Use is an attempt of gaining Sinners consent to love
Christ; a serious wish for good success.
OH then be persuaded as ye love your Souls, as ye would escape the Damnation
of Hell, as ye would obtain the Happiness of Heaven, as ye would avoid the
punishment of Devils, as ye would dye in a good condition, and after Death give
a good account of the Wooings of Grace this day, and not be Anathema when
Maranatha; be persuaded to set your hearts and love upon Jesus Christ, for he
must be loved by you, or ye must be cursed by him. Abraham, Genesis 24. sent his
Servant, bound with an Oath, to seek a Wife for his Son Isaac, with this
provi^o, If the Wom^n would nor be willing, he should be clear from his Oath,
ver. 1. to 10th. The Servant prepares to go on this Message, and Prays, O Lord
God of my master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this day, and show
kindness to my master Abraham, ver. 10.11, 12. He meets with Rebekah by the
Well of Water, enquireth whose Daughter she was, and whether there were room in
her Fathers House for him to Lodge in; he is invited by her Brother Laban,
saying, Come in thou blessed of the Lord, wherefore stand thou without? for
I have prepared the house, and room for the camels, to ver. 32. There was Meat
set before him to eat, but he said, I will not eat till I have told my errand.
And he was desired to speak on, and he said, I am Abraham's servant, and the
Lord has blessed my master greatly, and he is become great -- and he has a
Son, and he has given him all that he has, and my master made me swear,
saying, Thou shall go unto my fathers house, and to my kindred, and take a wife
unto my son; and now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me,
and if not, tell me, that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left. Then
Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceeds from the Lord; we
cannot speak unto thee bad or good: behold Rebekah is before thee, take her,
and go, and let her be thy masters sons wife, as the Lord has spoken. And the
servant brought forth Jewels of silver, and Jewels of gold, and raiment, and
gave them to Rebekah, and they said to Rebekah, Will thou go with this man? and
she said, I will go.

O that I might have such success with Souls this Day! for the Lord my Master,
has sent me bound with the obligation of a Woe, to seek the love and consent
of lost Souls, to become the Spouse of his Son Jesus, with this relief, That if
Sinners be not willing, nor will accept the motion, I shall be released from
the Woe. I have made preparation, (though less and weaker than such a weighty
matter does require) and have Prayed that the Lord God would send me good speed
this day. And now I am standing by the Well of the Water of Life, and some of
the City are come to draw Water out of the Well of Salvation; and upon enquiry
made, I find they are the Children of the Kindred of Jesus, who forasmuch as
the Children were partakers of flesh and blood, himself also took part of the
same, to whom my message is so important, that I can willingly forbear to eat
till I have told my errand; and therefore in your Audience desire to speak on,
saying, I am the Lords Servant, who is not made great, or blessed by any other,
for he is great and blessed above all, and over all for ever: the earth, and
all that therein is, is his; the Sea, and all therein is his; the Heavens, and
all therein, is also his: And he has a Son, one only Son Jesus, and he has
given him all that he has, even all power in Heaven, and in Earth, and has
set him at his own right hand, far above all Principalities and Powers, and
Might, and Dominion, and every Name that is named, not only in this World, but
that which is to come, and has put all things under his feet, and gave him to
be Head over all things; the Judge of all the World. And this great Lord has
sent me to ask and beg your Hearts and Love, in order to an indissoluble
Marriage to his own only Son; and now if ye will deal truly with my Master,
tell me, if not, tell me. Oh now who says the thing is of the Lord, and
proceeds from his grace and mercy, we cannot gainsay, we will not refuse this
Message. And when you are asked who will have this Jesus? Who will love this
Jesus? methinks one should say, I will; another should say, and I will. One and
Another! What! no more? Methinks every one should say I will; that there should
not be another, that should say, but I will not. Let who will, but I will not.
No? Why? Because no better a Servant is sent to gain thy consent? Or does
manage this great affair with no more zeal and skill? Do thou pray for the
pardon of my weakness and folly, and I will pray that thou might have more
wisdom to discern when a good proposal is made unto thee; but whether thou
regardest me, or not regardest me, I regard not, so thou would but have
regard to Jesus Christ, and to thine own immortal Soul. If thou do despise
me, do not despise my Master, nor his Son, for though I am not so good as
Abraham's Servant, yet my Lord and Master is better, infinitely better, and
greater, than Abraham, to whom he was Servant; and my Masters Son, Jesus, is
better, incomparably better, than Isaac, Abraham's Son, and would certainly
prove a richer match to thy Soul, than Isaac was to Rebekah.

Consider therefore again, before thou do again deny him thy love, for have
thou not denied him thy heart long enough already, but will thou do so still?
Has not thy love run waste upon the Creature to this day? And shall it do so
still?

Art thou not weary yet in loving of the World? Art thou not yet tired in
setting thy heart upon Vanity? Has it answered thine expectation? Have thou
found that sweetness in the Creature which thou lookedst for, when thou did
first set thy heart and love upon it?

Thou have tried what is the love of the Creature, oh now try what is the love
of Christ, and if thou do not find it better, if thou do not find it
sweeter, than all thy former love, (provided thou love him sincerely) return
to it again.

Behold, whose cause do I plead this day? Christ's or mine own? For whom do I
ask your Love? for my self, or for Christ? Slight me as you will, but do not
slight Christ: Vilify me, but do not undervalue Christ: Count me unworthy of
your love or look, but do not so by the blessed Son of the most glorious God:
Say, I am not fit to be regarded; I bless God, I have learnt to bear it; but I
beseech you, say not so of Christ. Revile and hate me if you will, if you will
but love that Jesus, that out of Love did dye for you: If you would but love
him, that then would certainly save you, and bring you to eternal Glory and
Happiness for ever.

If you love the World never so much, can the World do so much for you? If you
love your Honors, your Pleasures, your Relations, never so much, can they
bless you as Christ will bless you? Nay, the more you love them, the more
miserable the love of them will make you. Should I call you to love the World,
you would do it; or your Pleasures, Self, or Sin, you would do it. Nay, when I
(or any more skilful than I am) have called to you, to wean your Love from
these, yet still in love you cleave unto them.

What! Is Christ the only unlovely object in your Eyes? Can you find Love for
any thing but Christ? What is it in Christ that does displease you? What do you
see in him that is offensive to you? Either love him, or give a reason why you
will not.

Do you blame me for my Importunity? I thought since I began this Use, you did
refuse, because I was not urgent enough with you. You will not love, except you
be entreated; if that were it, that you love to be entreated to Love, and would
love Christ, after much entreating, I would study Night and Day to think how I
might entreat you, and what Arguments to use, to prevail, and obtain your love
for Christ.

But why should you look for such long entreaties? Do you know who it is that
does entreat you? Is it I, or God himself by me? I pray you view one Text, and
then let him that does entreat you, wait no longer for your answer, and for
shame put him not to entreat you longer. What place is that? It is 2 Cor. 5.20.
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we
pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. What say you now? I from
God, and God by me beseech you. A Minister of God stands among you in Christ's
stead, to beg, entreat, beseech that from you, which if Christ stood in this
place this day, he would Preach unto you, and desire, and command from you,
that ye would be reconciled unto God; after the enmity to him, you would love
him. God, Christ, by his Servant, does beseech, entreat, pray you to love him.

Oh the astonishing condescension of the holy God! That he will i^treat! Oh the
amazing stupidity and folly of the sinful Sinner, that he will not be
entreated! Surely the infinite distance that there is betwixt God and Man,
might fill us with wonder that God should become a Suitor to man for his love,
when there is not so much distance between Man and Nothing, as there is between
God and Man; and yet he is pleased to stoop so low, to urge us to consent to
him, that we might be advanced as high as Heaven, who else must be plunged into
the depths of Hell.

On what is this? that the Creator should seek to be loved by the Creature! The
Lord to be loved by the Servant! The King of Saints to the Subjects of Sin,
that he might have our Heart and Love! Whereas if we did consider, that our
stri^test Service to him, would be our largest Liberty, our having of him our
only Happiness, our missing of him our greatest Misery, we should know it were
our Interest to prostrate our selves at his Feet, to lie at his Door, with
Prayers and Tears, with Cries and Calls, with Grief and Groans; to make it our
daily Suit to him, that he would love us, and give us an Heart to love him.

Man was first in departing from God, and in removing of that love that at
first there was betwixt God and Man; yet God is first in seeking the renewing
of Love, else Man would always hate, and never love him. And that God should
seek to Man for his Love, and be denied, might be astonishment to the Angels in
Heaven, and make matter of joy (if they be capable of any joy) to the Devils in
Hell, that Men that may love Christ, and will not, might be as miserable as
themselves, to whom he is not propounded as an object of Faith, Love, or Hope.

But whether you will love, or not love him, God has commanded me, and others
of his Ministers, to lie hard at you for your Love; he has given us a
Commission to make a motion of love betwixt Christ and you, in order to your
matching with him, Mat. 22.2, 3, 4, etc. and has committed to us the Word of
Reconciliation, and made it our Work to Woo you for your love unto his Son,
and to try to gain your consent, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. And if you will love him,
to espouse you to him, 2 Cor. 11.2. This is my Message, and for this end am I
come this day, If I do not ask you, I hazard my Soul; if you deny, you lose
yours. God therefore grant, that I might so ask, that you may not deny, that
both your Souls and mine might Love, and so be Saved. For the gaining of your
Love for Christ, I shall use these Arguments, propounded by way of Question,
and when you have given a right Answer to them, I hope Christ will have a good
Answer from you.

CHAP. XI. Twenty Motives, or Pleas, that Christ might have the Love of your
Hearts.
I. CAN you find a more excellent object for your Love than Christ? If you
search through the whole Creation of God, is there any like to Christ?
Whatsoever you think, who dare say there is? Are Riches, Honors, Pleasures,
Relations, which you have loved, comparable to Christ, whom you ought to love?
If Good be only the object of Love, is not the best Good the best object? Can
you love the lesser Good, and not the greater? Yea, the greatest of all? Is not
all the Goodness in the Creature but as a drop to the Sea, as a Candle to the
Sun, as a Sand to a Mountain, if compared to the Goodness there is in Christ?
If David were worth ten thousand of others, 2 Samuel 18.3. is not Christ, David's
Lord, better than all the World? Read Cant. 2.3, and 5, 16. Prove. 3.14, 15.
Phil. 3.8. Do thou waver in thy thoughts, or hesitate about this? Tell me,

First, Is not Christ a Good most suitable for thee? Is Liberty so suitable to
a Captive Man, or Bread to an Hungry Man, or Health to a Sick Man, or Ease to a
Pained Man, as Christ is to a Sinsul Man? For,

1. Art thou not lost, undone, in danger to be Damned? Christ will be thy
Savior, thy Keeper, and Recoverer. Luke 19.10. The son of man came to seek and
to save that which was lost. Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able to save to the
uttermost all that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. Isa. 63.1. -- Mighty to save.

2. Art not thou ignorant, dark and blind, know not the way to Heaven and
eternal Happiness, and might^st weary thy self to find the Gate of Life, and
yet miss of it when thou have done all? He will be thy Teacher and thy Guide,
and direct thee Infallibly to it. He will Anoint thine Eyes, and cause thee to
see such things as never yet thou saw, ver. 3.18* If he Anoint thine Eyes
with his Eye Salve, though thou wast born blind, thou shall have thy sight.

3. Art thou not Sick, and full of Spiritual Diseases? Abounding with Soul
Distempers? Even sick to Death? Nigh unto eternal Death? He will be thy
Physician, who is so able and so skilful, that never any yet, that he undertook
to Cure, Died under his Hands; for rather than thou should dye of thy
Disease, he will make thee a Potion of his own Blood, which if thou Drinkest,
thou shall certainly recover. Therefore he came to be a Soul. Physician, and
gave this as a reason why he did converse with Publicans and Sinners, That he
might cure them, Mat. 9.12.

4. Art thou not indebted? Owe thou not Millions to God? Have thou a Mite to
pay? If God demand satisfaction from thee, will it not prove thy Damnation? If
Justice pursue thee, Death Arrest thee, will not Devils seize thy Soul, and
hale it to the Prison of Hell, from whence thou shall not be delivered, till
thou have paid the uttermost farthing, which will never be? This Christ, if
thou will but love him, will be thy Bail, become thy Surety, and make payment
of thy Debt, and give thee a Discharge.

5. Art thou not polluted and unclean? Has not the Leprosy of Sin overspread
thy Understanding, Will, Conscience, Memory, and all thine Affections? So that
thou art defiled all over, lie wallowing in thy Blood, art cast out to the
loathing of thy person; and can thou, in this filthy case, enter into the
holy Kingdom of God? If thou will give him thy Love, he will take away thy
silthy Rags, and give thee change of Raiment, Zac. 3.1, 2, 3. If thou will come
to him with Faith and Love, and say, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me
clean, he in Love to thee will say, I will, be thou clean, Mat. 8.2, 3. He will
make for thee a Bath of his own Blood, and his Blood shall cleanse thee from
all thy Sins, 1 John 1.7. Yea, though they be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool, Isa.
1.18.

6. Art thou not a Captive to Satan and to Sin? Drudging Elbow deep in the
loathsome Service of Sin? Is not thy Bondage more hard than that of the
Israelites in Egypt? And is not Satan and Sin as Cruel and Tyrannical as
Pharaoh and his Taskmasters? Do thou love thy Chains? Art thou at ease in thy
Fetters? Would thou be released? Christ will be thy Redeemer, by Price and by
Power, and make thee free; and then thou shall be free indeed.

7. Art thou not an Enemy to God? Born so, and Lived so? Take heed thou do
not dye so, for then there shall be no Peace, no making up the breach betwixt
God and thy Soul. But now Christ is the blessed Peacemaker, and by the Blood
of his Cross he will reconcile thee unto God, Col. 1.20, 21. God will never be
reconciled to thee, but in, and through Christ, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.

8. Art thou not spiritually Dead? Have thou not lost the holy Image of God,
which was thy Beauty? Though thou art Dead, he can quicken thee, and give thee
the Life of Grace and Glory, 1 John 5.12.

Now if this be thy condition, and Christ can, and is ready, able, and willing,
to help thee in every respect, how suitable is Christ to thee? And suitableness
being a ground of Love, and a motive thereunto, what an Argument is here to win
thy Love? Oh say then, I am Lost, but Christ will save me; I am Ignorant, but
Christ will teach me; I am Sick, and he will recover me; I am Indebted, and he
will be a surety for me; I am Polluted, and he will cleanse me; I am a Captive,
and he will redeem me; I am an Enemy to God, and he will reconcile me; I am
Dead, and he will quicken me. Oh, I never found one so suitable for me; now,
even now, he shall be loved by me. Oh this is the most excellent Object for my
Love, and I will no longer hold it from him.

Secondly, Is not Christ the most satisfying Good? Thou art Indigent, he will
supply thee; thou art empty, he will fill thee; thou art poor, he will enrich
thee. Oh for Love, for such a Savior!

Thirdly, Is not Christ the most durable Good? When thy Riches shall fail thee,
thy Pleasures and Honors, and Friends, shall fail, Christ will never fail,
Psalm. 73.26.

Fourthly, Is not Christ a peculiar Good? Given by peculiar Love, only to a
peculiar People, bringing with him peculiar Privileges? When all other things
thou love, are common to the bad, as well as to the good? Though a Worldly
man, whose Heart and Hands, and House, are full of the World, might say Riches
are mine, yet he cannot truly say, Christ is mine. Let him have from thee
peculiar Love, and he will be to thee a peculiar Good.

Fifthly, Is not Christ the most necessary Good? Do thou need Food so much
when thou art Hungry, or Liberty so much when thou art in Prison, or Salve when
thou art Wounded, as Christ when thou have sinned? Without other things thou
may be happy, pardoned, reconciled, and for ever saved, but can any of these
be thine without Christ? Christ is needful, while thou live, for if thou
be in health, without him thy Soul is sick. If thou should be sick, he
will give the choicest, and the richest Cordial; when thou die, he will
secure thy departing Soul; and after Death, he will be thy Friend; when all
shall leave thee at thy Grave, he will be thine for ever.

Sixthly, Is not Christ the most profitable Good? For when thou have him, thou
have all. Then God is thine, and the Spirit is thine, and the Promises are
thine, and the Privileges of the Covenant are thine; and Heaven it self shall
be for ever thine.

Seventhly, Is not Christ the most delightful Good? Some delight in what they
see, some in what they hear, some in what they taste, some in recreation, and
some in notions, but the delight of Christ does surpass them all.

Eighthly, Is not Christ a sure Good? Other things God may give, and call for
them back again, Hos. 2.9. I will return, and take away my corn in the time
thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and my
flax -- But God never says, I gave such a man my Christ, but I will take away
my Christ again. He may take Riches out of thy Hand, but (if thou gettest him)
he will never take Christ out of thy Heart.

Ninthly, What shall I say to advance Christ in thy esteem, that thou might
love him? Is he not a comprehensive Good? Eminently all? There is no goodness
in the Creature, but it is formally, or virtually, in Christ. Is there wisdom
in the Creature? There is more in Christ. Is there beauty, power, in the
Creature? There is much more in Christ, Col. 1.19. For it pleased the father,
that in him should all fullness dwell. Joh. 1.14. -- full of grace and truth.

This is the person for whom I beg your Love. This is HE that is altogether
lovely and desirable. Consider now, I beseech you; can you be better offered?
Can you find a better match for your Soul? Can you say all this, the one half
of this, any one of all these things, concerning the objects you have hitherto
loved?

Oh then say, I never understood the loveliness of Christ before: How has Sin
befooled me! How has the World bewitched me! And how has my foolish wicked
heart deceived me, that I have lavished my love upon the Creature, and Sin,
when there was a Christ to love! Such a Christ to love! Such a Good as is not
to be found in all the World! Now shall he have my Love, my Heart, my All.

II. Tell me, Has not Christ deserved your Love, by what he has suffered,
done, given, purchased, promised, and prepared for his Lovers? Behold his
Wounds which he has endured for thee: Behold a Crown of Thorns on his Head,
that there may be a Crown of Glory upon thine. Behold him Dying, that thou
may Live: Him Suffering, that thou may be Saved: Him Poor, that thou may
be made Rich, with the best, s^rest, and most durable Riches. Behold him
Condemned, that thou may be Absolved: Him in an Agony, that thou upon the
conditions of the Gospel might have Rest and Ease in Glory. Behold him
bearing the Cross, and the Cross bearing him, that thou might not bear the
Curse: Him bearing the Fathers wrath, that thou might be made the Subject of
his Grace, and the Object of his Love. And now tell me, Does not this Christ
deserve thy Love? Should thou love any like him, when none has done for thee
like him? Does the small kindness of a Creature draw thy Love, and shall not
all this in thy Savior, toward thee, kindle a Fire of Love in thee toward
him? How can thou forbear to love him?

III. Will not Love to Christ be the best Love thou can attain unto? As he is
the best Object of Love, so Love going out to Christ is the best Acting of
Love; and pity it is, that any other Object should go away with thy prevailing
Love. For,

1. Love to Christ will be the sweetest Love. He that loves other things, and
not Christ, loves nothing but Vanity, and to love Vanity will prove vexation.
He that loves Riches has vexing sorrow with his love, fretting fears, and
perplexing, cutting cares. When thou love thy Relations, if they be bad, the
more thou love, the more thou art Wounded: If they be good, the more evil
befalls them, the more thou art grieved. There cannot be love to other things,
without love to Christ, but it will be bitter Love; for thou will repent of
that love, or thou will not. If thou do, then thou will find more forrow for
it, more bitterness in it, than ever thou did find delight, and say, Oh now
it does repent me, that ever I loved the World as I have done; my Pleasures, my
Sin, as I have done: But thou will never have cause to say, I repent that ever
I loved Christ. Never was such a Word heard from the mouth of a sincere Lover
of Christ; if thou do never repent of thy Love to the World and Sin, that
Love will certainly end in sorrow, and with bitterness of Soul be fruitlesly
lamented in Hell.

But what content, satisfaction, delight, comfort, joy, there is in loving of
Christ, none can tell so well as he that loves him.

2. Love to Christ is the safest Love: No fear of Sinning in this Love, except
it be in the smalness of the measure of it; but that is not to Sin in loving,
but not loving more. You might fear and tremble in loving other things, and
say, Do not I sin in this? Is there not sinning in my loving?

3. Love to Christ is the surest: Love to other things is often turned into
hatred: Love to day, and hate to morrow; but this remains firm. The Object is
the surest Object, neither Men, nor Death, nor Devils, can take away the Object
of this Love. It is surest in the Habit and Principle, the Power of God, the
Prayer of Christ; the promise of both secure the preservation of it. It is
surest in the Act, for if we be careful our selves, no Men, nor Devils, can
hinder our acting of this Love; they might keep us from hearing of his Word,
but not from loving of his Person.

4. Love to Christ is the Noblest Love. Love to Pleasures, to the World, to
Sin, is base polluted Love, this most sublime and raised; it has the noblest,
and the highest Object, it carries the Soul in his Thoughts and Meditations
after him into the highest Heavens, and has complacency in the highest Degree,
and shall have for ever the highest Reward.

5. Love to Christ is the longest: Love that shall never end. Sirs, ere long,
you will have done loving this World, even ye that love it most, and have your
hearts most set upon it. Ye that now have your hearts full of Earth, when ye
shall have your mouths full too, and your Corpse lie rotting in the Earth, you
shall have done loving of it: Death, that ends your life in the World; shall
end your love to the World, which Grace never did. Ye shall also have done, ere
long, loving your Relations; ye shall have done loving Father and Mother,
Brother and Sister, and Husband, and Wife and Children, as now in that
relation, but the gracious Soul, the Lover of Christ, shall never have done
loving of Christ: It is sweet to have it, but this does make it more sweet, to
think he shall always have it. Have it in Life, have it at Death, and have it
after Death. O blessed Love, that shall never be lost, but ever last.

While I was Musing upon this, it came into my mind to consider, what those
that never love Christ in this World, can love in the next; and I could not
imagine any thing, that Damned Souls in Hell, can Love. (If it be that I
understand not, nor am acquainted with the acting of their Souls, nor State,
God grant I never may, as they do.) I thought, can they love God, Christ, the
holy Spirit, Angels, Saints? Their hatred to all these, is, and shall be, more
deeply radicated; that is, Rooted in them, than ever upon Earth. Can they love
the place of Hell? They wish they never had come thither. Can they love the
pains of Hell? They grieve and groan under them, and are weary to bear them.
Can they love the Devils in Hell? They curse them for tempting them to Sin,
that brought them to that place. Can they love their Companions in Hell? They
are an aggravation of one another misery. Can they love their Sin in Hell?
Alas! all that was pleasurable in it is gone, and the pain and sting only does
remain. Can they love their Beings in Hell? They had rather dye than live, and
cease to be at all, than to continue to be there. I know not what it is that
they can love. O loathsome place, where there is, and can be, no love! O lovely
Heaven! where Love does Reign, where Love does Live! and the Life of them
therein shall be for ever a Life of Love! And in this World, where Love is
wanting, so far it looks like Hell. Where Love, and that which is the best,
which is that which is to Christ, does prevail, so far it looks like Heaven.
Dear Lord! save me from Hell, because there, there is no love to thee, nor to
any thing that is good. Sweet Savior! lead me in thy way to Heaven, and bring
me thither, where Love to thee shall live, and last for ever.

IV. Is it not great folly to love other things and not Christ? For love ye
will. There is such an affection as Love in all your Hearts, and something it
will be set upon in this World, what e're it be with Damned Souls in the next.
Now if Christ have it not, the World will: If Christ has it not, Sin will. And
do ye act as Rational Creatures, as Men endued with Reason, to deny your Love
to Christ, and give it to the World, and Sin? Set one over against the other,
and then tell me,

1. Is it not great folly to love that which is worse than your selves, and not
that which is infinitely better? Do ye think your Silver and your Gold is
better than your selves, as much as ye love it? That your Houses, and your
Lands, as bad as ye are, are better than your selves? But ye are not yet so
good, nor yet so bad, but I hope ye will say, and ackdowledge, that Christ is
better.

2. Is it not great folly to love that which cannot love you again, and not him
that would? Ye love your Gold, but that cannot love you again: The Clothes upon
your back, the Furniture in your Houses ye love, but these can make no returns
of Love. Ye give your love to them, but ye receive no love from them. Are ye
not vexed, when ye love a Man that does not love you again, nor return love for
love? And why are ye so well pleased, and are so well contented, in placing the
very strength of your love on Worldly things, where the return of love is not
only not actual, but impossible? But would ye love Christ, ye should have more
love from him than ye give unto him, if ye strive with all your might to love
him with the utmost love ye can, Joh. 14.21, 23. Prove. 8.17.

3. Is it not great folly to love that which can never satisfy you, and not
him that would satisfy your Souls for ever? Did these things ye love, ever
fill your desires? Did they ever give you full content? How should they? When
God has made your Souls capable of the enjoyment of an infinite good, how can
that which is finite fill them? It is only an infinite good, and not finite,
that can satisfy your Souls, though they be finite; all the Creatures cannot
fill one. For the Will of Man, though it be subjectively finite, yet it is
objectively infinite; that is, (for to be easy and plain in such a place as
this, and in such matters as these, before you, is best, because for you most
profitable and edifying) though the Will in it self, and in its own Nature,
because a Creature, is finite, and limited, yet it is capable of making choice
of God, for its chiefest Good, that is infinite and unlimited. And God has put
into the hearts of Men, desires after good that is eternal, for they desire to
be eternally happy; but God has not put this eternal goodness in any, in all
the things of this World, for they are all transitory. Therefore when ye look
for satisfaction in the Creatures that ye love, or in the loving of them, ye
look for that which God never put into them, and nothing can give more than it
has, and nothing has more than God has given it, therefore to look for more
from it, than God by making it, has put into it, may yield you vexation
enough, but no satisfaction at all. Eccles. 5.10. He that loves silver, shall
not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loves abundance with increase. This
is also vanity.

4. Is it not great folly to love that which ye must shortly part with, and not
him that ye might enjoy for ever? Though ye have your heart full of Love to
other Earthly things, you shall not earry an handful of them into the other
World. Eccl. 5.15. As he came forth of his mothers womb, naked shall he return
to go as he came, and shall take nothing of his labor, which he may carry away
in his hand. 1 Timothy 6.7. We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain
we can carry nothing out; but Death, that carries the Lovers of the World
quite away from the things they love, shall set the Soul of a Lover of Christ
nearer to him. Phil. 1.23. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to
depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better. The Soul that loves
Christ, when (by Death) it is absent from the Body, it shall be present with
the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8.

5. Is it not great folly to love that which might leave you while ye live, and
not that Christ that would never leave you, nor forsake you? As ye are fure
these things, which ye love, will be none of yours after Death, so ye are not
sure they shall be yours while ye live. May ye not be rich to day, and poor to
morrow? Well to day, and sick to morrow? In honor to day, and in disgrace to
morrow? Was it not so with Haman? Esth. 6.10, 11, and 7.9, 10. When ye have
Riches, and love them, ye are not sure to hold them. Prove. 23.5. Will thou set
thine eyes (thine Heart and Love) upon that which is not? for riches certainly
make themselves wings and fly away as an Eagle toward heaven. The Hebrew Text
is, Will thou cause thy eyes to fly upon that which is not? Riches fly away,
and the Worldly man's Heart, and Love, fly after them; and though his Heart and
Love, be swift in their motion after Riches, yet sometimes Riches fly so
swiftly, that their Lover cannot overtake them. The pleasures of Sin, and so
the profits of the World, are but for a Season, Heb. 11.25. and when the Season
is over they are gone; but Christ would never leave you, nor forsake you, Heb.
13.5.

6. Is it not great folly to love that which may prove an hinderance to your
everlasting happiness, and not him that is the purchaser, and the promoter of
it? To love that which is often hurtful to the owners, and always hurtful to
the over-lovers of it, and not him that never did his Lover harm, but good?
Eccl. 5.13. There is a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun, namely,
Richer kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. This Solomon had seen, and
many have seen; but that Christ should hurt any Man, that has him for his own,
was never seen. Riches are thick Clay, and Clogs, to the Minds of Men, and keep
them down to Earth, that they cannot rise to Heaven, nor get so high while they
live, nor their Souls when their Bodies dye, that they make Salvation exceeding
difficult, Mat. 19.23. Then said Jesus to his Disciples, Verily I say unto you,
that a rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of heaven. 24. And again I
say unto you, it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a Needle, than
for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God; but to love Riches, and not
Christ, while a Man does so, does not make Salvation only hard, but impossible;
but the love of Christ, makes Salvation not only possible, but certain and
easy.

7. Is it not great folly to love that which cannot comfort you at Death, and
not Christ, that both can and would? Love what ye will, besides Christ, and not
Christ, it cannot be a stay to your departing Souls; what will ye look to at
Death for comfort, your Riches? Why ye are going from them, with an heart full
of love to them; to love them, and yet must leave them, to leave them in loving
of them, will torment and vex you, not support and comfort you. To Pleasures
that ye loved? When ye lie a dying, they are fled, and past, and gone. To your
Friends? When ye are dying, ye are taking your last leave of them. To Christ?
Alas, him ye never loved, and the thoughts of that, will be a sting more
painful than the sting of Death.

V. Can ye do any thing less than love Christ, or can ye do any thing more? Is
it not a small thing that Christ should have your Love, for all those great
things ye have, and hope to have by Christ? And yet Christ stands upon your
love as greatest of all, and all without love is nothing. If Christ had asked
you to lay down your Life for him, had he required more from you than he
himself has done for you? Had he called you to give your Bodies to be burned
for him, should ye not have done it? How much more when he faith, Let your
Hearts but burn in Love unto me, when that burning will not be painful, but
delightful? When Naaman came to the Prophet to be cleansed of his Leprosy,
being directed to go and Wash in Jordan, and he should be clean, in Wrath he
went away, but his Servant came to him and said, My Father, if the Prophet had
bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it? How much rather
then, when he says to thee, wash and be clean? 2 King. 5.13. If Christ had
required some great thing, that thou might escape great torments, and be
partaker of great Salvation, would thou not have done it? How much rather
then, when he says, Love me, and be Saved? When you have received great
kindness from a Friend, whom you cannot requite, yet you say, I cannot do less
than love him; yet this small thing is more in Christ's account than all without
this. You Pray to him, but to Love him is more; an Heart full of Love, is more
to Christ than a thousand Prayers, full of the most eloquent Expressions,
without Love. You hear his Word, but to love him is more. You might suffer for
him, but to have love to him is more. Should (...) give all your Goods to the
Poor, and your (...) to the Fire for him, to give your Heart and (...) him is
still more. And indeed, except (...) the former proceed from Love, and are
accompanied with it, they are not pleasing to Christ, nor profitable to your
Salvation, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.

VI. Will you love that which you might easily love too much, and not Christ,
whom you can never over-love? You might love your Riches, your Relations, your
Pleasures, your Self, your Liberty, your Life, too much. In these your love
might soon exceed, and transgress the bounds; and it is hard not to exceed, but
to keep within bounds. And indeed, so much love as you give to these, more than
to Christ, is too much; but could you love Christ with as much love as all the
Saints in Heaven love him, it would not be too much for him, if you were able
to bear it. Many have complained they loved Christ too little, but never any
that he had too much of their love. God does blame you, and Conscience does
accuse you, for your great love to things below, but neither God nor
Conscience, for the highest degrees of love to Christ, and things that are
above.

VII. Can you love your selves truly, and not love the Lord Jesus sincerely?
There is a Self-love, which is inconsistent with the love of Christ, and there
is a Self-love which is the best, that no man has but he that loves Christ.
Does that man love himself indeed, that regards not the Salvation of his
Soul? That does ruin himself, and damn himself, and shut himself out of Heaven?
Does that man love himself indeed, that does expose himself to the wrath of
God, to the damnation of Hell, and to banishment from the glorious presence of
the blessed God? All which, a man brings upon himself for want of love to Jesus
Christ; if then you will love your self truly, you must love Christ sincerely.

VIII. Are not all the Duties of Religion tedious to you for want of love to
Christ? Do you find it a burden to Pray? A burden to hear or read the Word of
God? Is it a burden to you to medirate upon God and Christ, and things above?
It is all for want of love to Christ; for Love makes hard Things easy, and
heavy Labor to be light.

IX. Does any thing make you more like to God than to love Christ? Do you not
in this most resemble God? Do you believe in Christ? So does not God. Do you
trust in Christ for Life and Salvation? So does not God. Do you obey the
commands of Christ? God has no superior to command him. But do you love
Christ? So does God. Joh. 3.35. The father loves the son, and has given all
things into his hands. Joh. 5.20.

X. Might you return to God and Christ, like for like, in any thing but in
Love? Or in any thing carry it toward God, as God does toward you? If God be
angry with you, might you be angry with God? If God withdraw comfort from you,
might you withold Duty from God? If he rebuke you, might you rebuke him? If
he be displeased with you, might you be displeased with him? Would not all this
be your sin, and perverseness of heart, toward him? But if he love you, you
may, and ought to love him. If he has set his heart upon you, your Duty is to
set your heart on him.

XI. Can you hope for Salvation by him, without sincere affection to him? Or
who bids you hope for any such thing? Can you have the face to expect such
great things by, through, and from Christ, as Pardon of all your Sins,
deliverance from Hell, the happiness of Heaven, and yet not love him? Do you
hope for eternal Life by Christ? I know you do; might not Christ then expect
love from you, when you expect Life by Christ? As you would have Life by
Christ, let Christ have Love from you, or else your expectation of Life will be
disappointed, and end in Death without end.

XII. Dare you dye without love to Christ? Dare you, can you, leave this World
with a quiet mind, if you love not Christ? No, surely, except you dye as Blind
as you were Born. What think you when you come to be Sick, and when you come to
Dye, will it not be a cut to thy Heart, to think I have lived twenty, forty,
years, but I never loved Christ? Now must I go to appear before him whom I
never loved. Why not love him while you live in health, as well as wish you had
loved him when health is gone, and sickness come? When Life is going as fast as
Death is coming?

XIII. Is not your Love Christ's due? Do you not owe it to him? Is it not due to
him by virtue of Creation? Did not he give your Being to you? By virtue of
Redemption, when you were worse than nothing, did not he lay down his Soul, his
Life, his Blood, as a Price for your Ransom? By virtue of Preservation, has
not Christ kept you out of the Grave, and Hell, unto this day? Justice would
have hewn thee down, and Wrath would have damned thee long ago, and who has
procured a Reprieval for thee but Christ? That thou art on this side the
Torments of the Damned, not past Praying, and Hearing, and Hoping, is all
through Christ's procuring for thee longer time. By virtue of Provision, which
Christ makes for thee, thou would not have had a Rag to thy Back, nor a
Morsel for thy Mouth, nor Sleep in thy Eyes, if Christ had not bought, and by
Purchase procured for thee what thou have. Thy love is due to Christ by virtue
of Command, whereby thou art obliged and bound to give it to him, and shall be
accounted a Transgressor, and a great one too, if thou do withold it from
him.

If it be due so many ways, what Injustice will it be in thee to deny to Christ
that which is his due? Art thou not careful to give to every one their own? And
is it not an ease to thy mind, that though thou art not Rich, yet thou have to
give every one his due? Do thou not Trade, Work, Cark and Care, to give all
their own, and shall Christ be the only Person to whom thou will be Unjust? If
thou have not enough to satisfy all thy Creditors, yet of one, whom thou
love, and bear more respect unto, thou say, If it please God, such a
one shall lose nothing by me. Poor Sinner! will thou say, Though I cannot do
what I should, yet Christ shall not be so far a Loser by me, as not to have my
Heart and Love. Look to it, that he do not; for if he do, thou will lose thy
Soul; and then who will be the greatest loser?

XIV. Is it not great condescension in Christ, that he will so kindly accept of
thy Love? One so great accept the Love of one so mean! One so holy accept the
love of one that is so sinful! One so glorious, of one so vile! Do great Men
value the love of Beggars? or Princes, the love of Peasants? Would a Man of
great Birth and Estate give leave to one clothed in Rags to love him in order
to Marriage? Or would he not scorn and reject both the person and her love?
Methinks, considering what Christ is, and what thou art, thou should say, If
Christ will give me leave, I will love him. Give thee leave! Not only so, but
gives the command, and that upon pain and peril of everlasting Damnation, if
thou do not. He does give thee leave and charge to love him, but no leave to
live without love to him, though for thy long refusal he might justly leave
thee to live without love to him.

XV. Should you ever have any cause or reason to be ashamed of your love to
Christ? Is not the time coming, and the day hastening, when covetous men shall
be ashamed of their loving of the World, and voluptuous men ashamed of loving
their Pleasures, and the ambitious of their Honors; but the time will never
come, the day will never be, that a gracious Soul shall be ashamed of his
sincere love to Jesus Christ. For what is said of Hope, is true of Love, Romans
5.5. it makes not ashamed; but as all Sin is matter of shame, Romans 6.21. What
fruit have ye of those things of which ye are now ashamed? so especially the
Lovers of Sin, shall be ashamed that they loved not Christ. For is it not an
horrid shame, that a rational Creature should be such a Sot as to love Sin that
is most loathsome, and not love Christ that is most lovely? To love deformity,
and not beauty? A real evil under the notion, and appearance, and paint, of a
seeming good, and not a Christ that is a real good, without appearance of the
least evil! O shame! shame! I am ashamed that Sin should have such esteem, and
Christ so great contempt put upon him; but shame shall ere long confound these
now shameless Wretches, when they shall cry out, We are ashamed that we loved
Profits, and not Christ; House, Lands, Lusts, and not Christ. This is the
confusion of our Faces, and shame does cover us, that we should be so foolish,
and so blind, that we had not Wit, nor Reason, to distinguish betwixt the
greatest and most lovely good, and the greatest and most odious evil.

XVI. Is there any love so profitable as the love of Christ? Gain draws Love;
by the love of other things more than Christ, you will lose more than you gain.
By such love, God, Christ, Heaven, and your own Soul, will be for ever lost;
and should your gains of the World be proportionable to your love of the World,
yea, and exceed it, to the gaining of the whole World to your self, which never
man yet did, your gain would prove your loss; and when you come to cast up your
Account at Death, or Judgment, you will find your self cast much behind hand,
because from Gods face and favor. Mat. 16.26. What is a man profited, if he
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul? But by the loving of Christ you shall have gain, that no
man can value, no Wit can estimate, no Arithmetician, by all his Numbers and
Figures, can compute; even pardon of innumerable Sins, the favor of an
infinite God, deliverance from unconceiveable Torments, possession of endless
Life, and more than I, or any man, can describe or comprehend.

XVII. Is there any love so universally necessary, as the love of Christ? One
man loves one thing, and a second another, and a third another, but there is no
necessity that all men should love any one thing but Christ, and things
appertaining to our having and enjoying of him; and love to Christ is necessary
for poor and rich, for great and small, for noble and ignoble, for learned and
unlearned, for bond and free. Oh then, what doings are these, that that love
which is necessary, not only for the most, but for all, should be neglected not
only by the most, but almost (comparatively) by all?

XVIII. Do not you want one great help against the temptations of Satan, while
you are void of love to Christ? Is not Satan your Enemy? Is not your heart
forward to yield to him? Does it not concern you to resist him, when if you
yield, you deserve to dye? But this love would Garrison your Hearts, Fortify
your Souls, make you Courageous and Resolute against all the batteries of
Satan, assaults of Sin, and watchful against the Assurements and Ambushments of
the World, and that you would say, Shall I offend my dearest Lord? Shall I
displease him that has had such good pleasure to do me such good, such
everlasting good? Oh! how can I do this, or that great evil, and sin against
him whom I do love! For do you not find that Love forbids, and exceedingly
restrains, from grieving, offending, or wronging him, whom you do entirely love?

XIX. Will you ever be able to hold your profession of Christ without sincere
love unto him? When trials come, will not such as have no saving love to
Christ, turn their backs upon him? Will they that love Riches, Ease, Liberty,
Honors, Life, or any thing more than Christ, lease, lose, lay down, these for
Christ? What you love most, will you not endeavor to keep longest? These must
be harbored, but Christ then shall be abandoned, Mat. 19.21, 22. but if you
have not that love that will keep you steadfast and constant, in suffering for
Christ on Earth, for want of that love you shall suffer eternally in Hell.

XX. Is it not possible for you to set your love upon Christ? Is it not
attainable? Devils cannot love him, but you can. Damned Souls cannot love him,
but you can if you would; for have you not the means to help you to love him?
Is not he Preached to you? Is not the Spirit striving with you? Will you say
you cannot love him though you would? That I utterly deny, for if you were
really willing to love him, you could love him; nay, if you do unfeignedly Will
to love him, you do love him, for what is Willing but Loving? And what hinders
you from Loving, but your not willing to love him? Will you say, you want
power? What power do you mean? The Natural faculty or power of the Will? That
you have; how else do you Will any thing you do? Will you say you want a power
of Willing to love Christ? What is that, but that you are unwilling to love
him? And if you cannot, because you will not, the more you plead your Cannot,
the more you aggravate your Will not. A Natural Power God has given you, that
is a Will, if you lie under a Moral Impotency, that is your Sin; and what is
this Moral Cannot, or Impotency, but the averseness of the Will from Christ?
Therefore, though without the powerful workings of the Grace and Spirit of God,
you cannot love Christ sincerely, yet this Cannot is your Will not; for if by
the Grace of God you were enabled to Will, you could, and if you were as
willing to love Christ, as some now are, that once were as unwilling as now you
be, you could love him as well as they. Why should you stand off, and say, If
it were possible for me to love Christ, I would? How! Possible! What! Is there
no difference betwixt you and a Devil? Betwixt you and the Damned in Hell? You
can love the World; can you do that? You can love your Self; can you do that?
Yes. And I suppose you can love Sin too, can you not? To our Grief, and your
Shame, we find it: But why can you love World, and Self, and Sin? Is it not
because you will? Do you do it against your Will? I wish you did, then there
might be more hopes you would be persuaded to love Christ. You can, and do love
Sin, because you are willing; have but as great willingness to love Christ, as
the World and Sin, and then it may be said, Not only that you can, but do love
Christ. However, though I am no Asserter of the Liberty and Power of the Will
in things Supernatural, nor an opposer of the necessity of the workings of the
Spirit, to enable a Sinner to love Christ, yet it is most manifest that your
unwillingness is the hinderance of such Love, and this unwillingness is your
weakness; since then your unwillingness (certainly by Grace) might be removed,
your Love is possible, therefore cease not till it be actual.

Are ye at length convinced of the Necessity of love to Christ? And are ye at
length persuaded to seek it, and willing to get love to him? I shall then next
proceed to the Directions, whereby ye might, through Grace, fall in love with
Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XII. Ten Directions to get sincere Love to Christ, showing the way of
Love to him.
I. CLearly understand, and be thoroughly convinced of thy lost Estate, and
miserable Condition, for Conviction, sight, and sense of Sin, and of our lost
Estate thereby, usually goes before the setting of the Heart and Love upon
Jesus Christ; though God does not deal with all Sinners, in all circumstances,
alike, in working and begetting in them consent and love unto his Son, in
diverse persons the measure of Conviction is different, as in the Natural Birth,
some are born after more pangs and throws than others are, so in the Spiritual
Birth (in which the Love is turned unto, and set upon Christ, the day of this
Birth being the day of Espousals) some God deals with more gently, with some
more roughly. Some he melts like Wax, and some he hews like knotty Wood; some
he carries by the Gates of Hell, to the Door of Heaven; and some he brings to
Christ, and leads to Heaven with lesser Terrors.

To gain your love to Christ, he expressly threatens Damnation that is so great,
it cannot be fully expressed, and lets the Sinner know, that Consent and Love
he must, or be Damned he must. He does let in such light into the Mind, that
the Soul does see there is is no way to escape the darkness of Hell, than by
consenting to Christ that came from Heaven; and Christ presses hard upon the
Conscience of the Sinner, whom he Wooeth for his Love, saying, Poor Sinner!
What do thou mean? To be Damned rather than to have me for thy Savior? To go
to Hell with thy Lusts, than to Heaven with me the Lord? What will thou do?
Shall I have thy Love or No? Will thou at last consent, or will thou still
refuse? I tell thee plainly, if I and thou part, Hell and thou must meet. I
have been Wooing long, and Waiting long, but now it is come to a parting, or a
closing point, and it is time for thee to come to a resolution. This is the
Case, Deny my Suit, and God will Damn thy Soul: If thou hear not me, thou shall
howl in Hell: If I leave thee, God will leave thee, and Mercy will leave thee,
and all Misery will come upon thee. Poor Sinner! Consider the issue of thy
final refusal of me, and of denying thy love to me.

1. Will it not be thy being cast into pain of greatest extremity? And how will thou do to bear it? If God do but touch thee with his Finger, thou do sigh
and sob, thou do cry and roar, and can not rest. O how will thou rest, when
God shall lay on blows with his Almighty Arm? If pain in thy Head, or sickness
at thy Heart, or Gripings in thy Bowels, make thee cry out like a Distracted
Man, what will thou do to bear the wrath of God in a place prepared on purpose
to show his indignation against Christ-refusing Sinners? When the sorest
affliction in this Life, is but as the pricking of a Pin, to the piercing of a
Sword, if compared to the Torments of the Damned?

2. Will it not be Misery joined with endless Eternity? And had thou rather
bear pains extreme and eternal too, than Love me, that would deliver thee from
them? Does not a small affliction make one Day or Night seem long, much more if
it be heavy? Then in the Night thou ask, Is it not Day? Thou countest the
Clock, thou numberest the Hours, and think that Time does pass but slowly
on. Would it were but break-a-day that I might rise! But all the time between
the Creation and the Dissolution of the World, is but a moment to Eternity:
Where there is no striking of Clocks, no telling of Hours, no returns of Night
and Day, but always Night, and never Day; never shall be break-a-day. A
thousand years shall pass, and never the less to come. Nay, nothing past, and
nothing to come, and yet more to come than is already past; an everlasting
Instant. Now there is hope, and yet thou will not give me thy Love and Heart,
then there will be no hope, and that might even break thy Heart. Besides,

3. Will it not be universal pain? All over, no part free. Here if thou art
pained in thy Head, thy Heart may not be sick; if pained in more, yet not in
all, but then thou will be all over Tormented. Thy Understanding will torment
thee, when thou shall know the God, the Heaven, the Happiness thou have lost,
and all for want of Love to me; and the misery thou have found. Thy Memory will
increase the vexation of thy Heart, in calling to mind thine opportunities upon
Earth, how Mercy did entreat thee, how Grace did Woo thee, how I called, my
Spirit strived, and Patience long waited for thy Love, and yet I could not
obtain it of thee. Thy Conscience will sting and gnaw thee, saying, Did not I
tell thee this would be the end of thy Refusals? Did not I forewarn thee? Did
not I say it would be thy wisest, only way, to hearken unto Christ, and to set
thy Love upon him? But thou would not, did not hearken to my voice, nor to
the voice of Christ entreating of thee for thy Love. And at the Resurrection,
thy Body will be sharer of punishment with thy Soul, and all thy Senses be
tormented with afflicting Obects: Thine Ears in hearing doleful Lamentations;
^hine Eyes in seeing a cursed Crew of Damn^d Creatures; thy Smell afflicted
with the stench of burning Brimstone; thy Taste in continual drinking of the
Cup of Wrath, full of Dregs, without mixture of Mercy; thy Touch in feeling the
Fire burning, but never consuming of thee. It was a Wonder unto Moses, that the
Bush did burn, and not consume on Earth; and these brambles shall burn in Hell,
and not consume, which will be a greater Wonder.

Now tell me, poor Sinner! says Christ, what is thine Answer? Had thou
rather endure all this than love me? Had thou rather love the World, and thy
present Pleasures, and hereafter lie in these extreme, eternal, and universal
pains, than love me, and be delivered from them? One of these must be; be wise
therefore in thy choice.

As Christ takes this course to gain thy Love, so do thou join in with Christ
by serious consideration for thine own Conviction, that thou may give thy
love to him. Urge thy self, and work it on thy Heart, that thou art under the
Curse, and Threatenings of God, which are true, terrible, intolerable, and
eternal; thou art the Man that art threatened by God with the forest
Punishments, Plagues, Judgments, in this Life, and in the Life to come; thou
art the Man that Law and Gospel will condemn, if thou finally deny thy love to
Christ. Think seriously with thy self, that thou art under the Wrath of God,
which is great Wrath, Jer. 21.5. Whole Treasures of it, Romans 2.5. Abiding
Wrath. Joh. 3.36. Tearing and destroying Wrath. Amos 1.11. Psalm. 50.22. Ezekiel.
43.8. Intolerable. Nah. 1.6. Most of it to come. Mat. 3.7. And Eternal, Rev.
14.10, 11.

Endeavor to get thine Heart affected, that while thou love not Christ, thou
have no Title to Heaven, no Actual Hope, no Promise, no Pledge nor Earnest, no
Plea, no Interest, no Warrant to expect Salvation; that Hell is thy due,
Torments thy desert; Hell is appointed for thy Lodging, Dwelling place. The
Place is prepared, the Fire is kindled, Devils are waiting, and all Hell is
moved to meet thee at thy coming. Oh think what manner of Hell it is, that thou
art every moment in danger of; it is hot, long, large, dark, deep, a restless,
and remediless Hell. When thou have got a sight and sense of thy Sin, and that
thou art lost in thy self, then

II. Consider, there is no help for thee in any mere Creature among all the
Creation of God; none such can prevent thy Damnation, set thee in Gods favor,
bring thee to his Kingdom. If thou look upwards, Angels cannot, or
downwards, Devils neither can, nor will. Look round about thee, all Creatures
say, There is no help in us, for Wrath must be pacified, and that cannot be
till Justice is satisfied, and how shall any mere finite Creature, satisfy
Infinite-offended-Justice? Tears, Prayers, Reformation, cannot satisfy God, so
that as all other Creatures cannot give relief unto thee, so thou thy self
can not help thy self. Then,

III. By serious thoughts dwell upon thy own Mortality, and on the
consideration of Judgment, Heaven and Hell. Ponder upon the certainty, and the
nearness of approaching Death; thou might dye this Year before the next;
this Week, this Day, this Hour, before the next; and say, Oh what will become
of me then? Where shall I be then? What shall I do? Nay, What shall I suffer
then? Am I under the Curse, and Death at my back? Is God angry with me, and
Death at my heels? Have I no Title to Heaven, no Reason to hope for it, and yet
do not know how soon Death might come? Am I in danger of Hell, and might drop
into it any day in the Week, any hour in the Day? Oh woeful case that I am in!
Wrath is over my head, and Hell is under my feet: Wrath is ready to fall upon
me, and I am in danger of falling into Hell! I never thought my Heart, for want
of love, had been so bad, my danger so great, my Soul so black, my Self so near
to Hell Torments! Woe is me, that all my Life I have loved loathsome Sin! A very
Monster! Even Sin which is a provocation to the Majesty of God, a contradiction
to the Will of God, an opposition to the Nature of God, a rejection of the Son
of God, a vexation to the Spirit of God, and Damnation to my own Soul; surely
this Love was blind. Oh! Will God bear such slightings of his Son? Such
abusings of his Grace? Such contemning of his Mercy? Woe is me! Can I live
without Life? And be saved without a Savior? Oh what shall I do? And where
must I have help? By whom may I be relieved, restored, saved? Oh in this
distress that I am in, if I could but hear of one that could, and would,
relieve and save me, of one that could take off the Curse, and make me Blessed,
that could turn away Gods wrath, and reconcile me unto him; that would save me
from Hell, and bring me to Heaven, then! What then distressed Soul? Oh then,
him would I love. Love! Yea, with all my Heart, with all my Soul, as surely I
should have cause to do. Love him! Did I know such a one, his very Name would
be precious unto my Soul, it should be Engraven on my Heart, and I should think
I could never love such a one enough. Say thou so, Sinner? I will tell thee
there is one, and but one, that can, and that is full, and fit, and free, to
help thee, and to save and succor thee, in this distress that thou art in. Oh
good Sir, what is his Name, that I might apply my self unto him, and place all
my Love upon him? His Name is the Lord Jesus Christ. Lord Jesus Christ! Oh
blessed Lord, Oh sweetest Jesus, Oh loving, lovely Christ! Lord Jesus Christ!
Methinks the sound of his Name is Melody to mine Ears, is Honey to my Taste, is
Light unto mine Eyes, a sweet Perfume of precious Ointment; it is Balm to my
wounded Conscience, it is a reviving Cordial to my sinking Spirit, to my
fainting Soul. Methinks, now you have told me, his Name runs in my Mind, I love
to have it (with love and reverence) in my Mouth, and upon my Tongue. The Lord
Jesus Christ will help me; the Lord Jesus Christ will save me, if I love him;
if I love him that is Lord, and Jesus, and Christ. Oh if the very hearing of
his Name has given this hopes, fain I would know more of him, for surely the
more I know of him, the more my Love will be set upon him. Oh that some would
tell me more what he is, and what I might do that I might love him! That Is next.

IV. Get the Knowledge of Christ, what he is, and what he will be to thee, and
dwell on those thoughts, till thou find thy heart to glow, to burn, to flame
in love to him. And to this purpose consider, 1. His Name, Lord, Jesus, and
Christ. 2. His Relation to God, yet given for Man. 3. His own Excellencies, and
undertaking for you. 4. His Affection, and what he will be to you. 5. His
Benefits that he will confer upon you.


1. The consideration of his Name has much in it to attract and draw thy Love;
for he is,

1. Lord. Even Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, the Blessed and only
Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15. He is Lord by virtue of Creation, he gave thee thy
Being, brought thee out of Nothing, made thee a Man; he gave thee
Understanding, Will, Affections. Now will thou love thy Father, and thy Mother,
and not thy Maker? He is Lord by right of Redemption, when thou wast in thy Sin
worse than Nothing, in Bondage to Satan and Sin, he bought thee out with his
own Blood, Act. 20.28. by giving his Soul for thine, Isa. 53.10. his Life for
thine, Mat. 20.28. himself for thee, 1 Timothy 2.6. Let the thoughts, how dear he
paid for thy good, draw thy Love. He is Lord by universal Jurisdiction, given
by the Father. Mat. 28.18. All power is given unto me in Heaven, and in Earth.
Joh. 5.22. The father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the
Son. 27. And has given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is
the Son of man. Joh. 17.2. As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he
should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. Romans 14.9. For this
end Christ both died, rose and revived, that he may be Lord both of the dead
and living. Behold, no Lord like this, that has power to judge and execute, to
damn and save; a means this is to beget both fear and love.

2. Jesus. A gracious Name, a Savior, Mat. 1.21. Thou shall call his name
Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sin. His very Name tells you,
what you might expect by him. Jesus! A glorious Name, Phil. 2.9. Wherefore God
has highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name. 10. That at the
name of Jesus every knee should bow: all be subject unto him. Jesus! A precious
Name! Gant. 1.3. This Name is a sweet Perfume, more than all precious
Ointments. Jesus! A miraculous Name. Acts 3.6. In this name the lame have been
made to walk, the blind to see, the deaf to hear, the guilty are justified, the
polluted are purged, the aliens reconciled, and sinners saved.

3. Christ. Anointed; Psalm. 45.7. God thy God has anointed thee with the oil
of gladness above thy fellows. Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon
me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings -- If he has been
anointed to be a Savior to lost Sinners, should not the thoughts of this be an
attractive of your love?

2. To gain your love to Christ, consider him in his relation to the Father,
who yet gave him foryou. All Beings have some relation to God, but none nearer
to him than Christ; who is God's own Son, and that in a sense beyond all Angels
that were the Sons of God by creation, Job 38.7. Believers, by Adoption, John
1.12. Gal. 3.26. but Christ by eternal Generation, Psalm. 2.7. Christ, God's
only begotten Son, such an one he had but one, and yet this only one was given
for you. O where is your love? Is not this enough to kindle it in your hearts?
Christ was God's dear Son, his very Darling, his daily delight, Prove. 8.30. The
Son of his love, Col. 1.13. And shall he not be the Object of yours? Behold the
Son of his love was given, and came for the Children of Wrath. And is not he to
be beloved upon that account, and for that very reason? Do men love the Sons of
Princes, and will not you love the Son of God? Do you love your own Children,
your own Sons and Daughters, and will you not love the Son of God? He did not
say, Father, since I am thy Son, why should I suffer and die for thine Enemies?
Father, I am thine only Son, and thou have not another in Heaven or Earth, as I
am; why then should I be crowned with Thorns, that Sinners might have a Crown
of Glory? But this only Son did die for Rebels; the Son of God's Bosom, lay in
the Bosom of the Earth. Dear Savior! Thou art worthy of every man's bosom-love.

3. To attract and draw your Love, consider how wonderful Christ is in himself,
and in his undertakings for you, and then love him with wonderful love; for if
you should not love, it would be wonderful. Isa. 9.6. His name shall be called
Wonderful.

1. Christ was wonderful in his Conception and Birth, Isa. 7.14. Behold, a
virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. Luke
1.35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
overshadow thee; therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee,
shall be called the Son of God. Behold, Mary a Mother, and yet a Virgin.
Wonderful! Mary that bore Jesus was a Sinner, and yet Jesus born of her was
without Sin or Spot. Wonderful!

2. In his Person. He was Man, and yet he was God; he was God, and yet he was
Man, 1 Timothy 3.16. Wonderful!

3. In his Works and Operations. He healed the sick without medicines, he
opened the Eyes of a man born blind with Clay and Spittle, John 9.1.6.7. cast
out Devils, with a word did calm the raging Sea, Matthew. 8.26, 27. All wonderful!

4. In his Death and Passion. Matthew. 27.50. Jesus when he had cried again with
a loud voice, yielded up the Ghost. 51. And behold the vail of the temple was
rent in twain, from the top to the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the
rocks rent. 52. And the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which
slept, arose. And before, ver. 45. From the sixth hour there was darkness over
all the land unto the ninth hour. All wonderful!

5. In his Resurrection, John 10.18. The Dead were raised by him, and he being
dead was raised by himself. Wonderful!

6. In his Ascension, Acts 1.9, 10, 11. The Disciples stood gazing and looking,
and wondering at his going up to Heaven.

Now was this wonderful Jesus, born in s^^ch a wonderful manner, lived doing
Wonders, dyed with Wonders, rose by a Wonder, and wonderfully ascended into
Glory, and all this for the sake and salvation of lost Sinners, if ye will not
love him, will it not be the Wonder of Angels, of Devils, and all the Creation
of God? Might not Angels wonder at you, and Devils wonder at you, and the
Saints of God at his coming wonder at you? Behold, so many of you as will not
love this wonderful Jesus, shall be the Wonder of the World at the last day.

7. Nay yet more, he was the Ancient of Days; from all Eternity, John 8.58. and
17.5. Prove. 8.22, 31. and yet he became a Babe for you.

8. He was clothed with Majesty, Heb. 1.3. and yet for your sakes did subject
himself to greatest Ignominy, Isa. 50.6.

9. He was eminent for Beauty above all men, Psalm. 45.3. And yet for you his
Countenance was marred more than any man's, Isa. 52.14.

10. He was mighty in Power, by his Word commanded Devils, stilled the Sea,
supporteth the World, yet for you dyed like a weak man.

11. He was perfect in Holiness, without spot or guile, and yet standing in
your room was greatly accused of Blasphemy.

12. He was full of Wisdom, Col. 2.3. yet derided and laughed to scorn for you.

13. He is judge of all the World, and yet for you condemned at the Bar of
Men, to take away your sins, and (if ye would love him) to prevent your being
condemned at the Bar of God. All this is wonderful: And yet that such a
wonderful Person did so wonderfully condescend, and after all this should not
be beloved by you, will be and is wonderful shame.

4. To draw your love to Christ, consider what he will be to you. For relation
breeds affection. The love of Christ to you, should beget love in you to
Christ. What will he be to thee, if thou will love him! He will be thy
Bridegroom and thy Husband, the richest Match that can be offered or motion'd
to thee. He will be thy Shepherd, and gather thy Soul unto his Fold, and save
thee from the destroying Wolf. He will be thy Redeemer, by price to buy thee
out of the hands of revenging Justice, and by Power to rescue thee out of the
Jaws of the roaring Lion. He will be thy Priest and Surety to pay thy Debt, and
reconcile thee unto God. He will be thine Advocate to plead thy Cause against
Satan thine Accuser, and will continually appear before the Father for thee, 1
John 2.2. He will be thy King and Captain, to conquer thine Enemies, and
trample them under thy feet. Is there nothing in all these things to gain thy
Love, to woo and win thy heart to this blessed Jesus? How can thou for shame
deny him? Can thou go out of this place this day, and not plight him thy
truth? not give him thy love? Oh say, this is he whom I will love?

5. Moreover, let this powerfully draw thy love to Christ, what benefits thou
may have by him, in respect of deliverance from evil, he would then deliver
thee from the guilt and power of sin, Matthew. 1.21. from the tyranny of Satan,
Luke 11.22. Heb. 2.14. from the Curse of the Law, Gal. 4.4. from the Wrath to
come, 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. Romans 5.10. and from the sting of Death and Damnation of
Hell, 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56. in respect of the collation of good; he will
reconcile thee unto God, and bring thee into the Adoption of Children; purge
thy Heart, justify thy Person, procure audience of thy Prayers, stand by thee
at Death, and save thee for ever.

Now poor Sinner! what do thou think of this Lord Jesus Christ, that makes a
motion for thy affection? Tell me, as before God, would not thy love be better
bestowed upon this Christ, than upon the World and Sin? Thou dare say no
otherwise with thy mouth, Oh say so also unfeignedly in thy heart, and give it
him as thou say, and I have my end of preaching this lovely Jesus to thee,
and Christ will have the end of his dying for thee, and thou will have that
good by hearing, which was not in thy heart to aim at when thou came within
these doors; that came a slighter of Christ, and go away a lover of
Christ; that came from thy house to this with an heart cleaving in love unto
the World and Sin, but returnest from this unto thy own, with the love of sin
turned out, and with the love of Christ entered into thy heart, will make thee
say, O blessed change! How much is this new love better than my old! O blessed
Word, that it ever sounded in my ears, and God brought it to my heart! O
blessed day! the day of days! the best day I ever had! This day shall be
recorded by me, for this day Christ and I did fall in love. Some come to a
Sermon, and by their wandering eyes and roving filthy hearts fall in love with a
Creature, but I came, I confess I know not why nor how, and God has been in
mercy pleased to change my heart and love, which is the best change I ever
made; for this is the sweetest love I ever found. But it may be this is not yet
the happy Case of some others, thereto to such I add,

V. When thou have got this knowledge of Christ, willingly entertain him, and
heartily receive him as offered in the Gospel, and resign thy self to him; and
when he has propriety in thee, and thou in him, love will arise in thy heart
to him. Faith is the Root, and Love is the Flower that grows upon it; and
Faith thus implanted will quickly work by love, Gal. 6.5. When by Faith he is
thy Christ, and thy Lord and Savior, he will certainly be the beloved of thy
Soul. The Foundation of Love is laid in the relation to the person that is the
object of love, and propriety and interest does beget it; you love that which
is your own, because it is your own. Your Children, your Wife, your Husband,
above all others. And you will love Christ, when once by Faith he is your own.
Cant. 2.16. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine. Then all other things,
which now are highly valued by you, will be accounted as dross. Phil. 3.8. Yea
doubtless, and I count all things but dross in comparison of the excellency of
the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.

VI. Pray much to God to work this Love in your hearts to Christ; it is the
Fruit of the Spirit, and wrought by him. It is your Duty, but it is God's Gift;
it is your Act, but it is God's Work. Ephesians. 6.23. Peace be to the brethren, and
love with faith from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ. Not only Peace
is from God, that is the God of Peace, and Faith from him the Worker of it, but
Love is from God that is the God of Love. Love to Christ must be had from God
and Christ, or you will never have it. For this the Apostle prayed for others,
2 Thessalonians. 3.5. And the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into
the patient waiting for Christ: And you may be the more encouraged to ask for
this, because such a Petition is pleasing to God, that you beg an heart to love
his Son, rather than for Riches, and Honors, and length of Life in this world,
as in that of Solomon's, in asking for Wisdom, 1 Kings 3.9, 10. And in your
praying be earnest for love to Christ, more than for your Life; for love to him
will be to you everlasting Life; and take that Promise and turn it into a
Prayer, and then most like to be effectual, Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Lord thy God
will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed to love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live.

VII. Improve the Principle of self-love to the promoting of love to Jesus
Christ; and say, Do not I love my self? Have I not so much love to my own Soul,
as to wish it well for ever? Would I have my self miserable and accursed for
ever? If I be sick, do not I love my self so far as to desire health? If in
pain, to desire ease? If in want, to seek supply? And is there any way for me
to procure good, everlasting good, but by Jesus Christ? I might love my self,
to please my self in sinful delights, to destroy my self and damn my self,
without loving of Christ: But such Self-love at last will prove Self-hatred;
and is that the best love, I have for my self? Surely if I love not Christ, I
hate my self.

VIII. Make use of the sense of natural and friendly Love to raise in thee Love
to Jesus Christ. Thou have some experience of the sweetness and delight there
is in loving of a Friend, Oh then what will be the delight of love to Christ!
Thou feel what it is to love thy Parents, to love thy Children, thy Wife,
thy Husband; if thou meetest with troubles, Love does make them light. Is there
so much sweetness in the love of a Creature, and will there not be much more in
the love of the Savior? If the Streams be sweet, is not the Fountain much
more? I have found comfort and pleasure in the love of Relations, I will now
try what is to be found in love to Christ the Lord.

IX. Improve the vanity and vexation of the Creature, and all thy
disappointments and afflictions, to raise and promote in thee the love of
Christ. Thou have let out thy love upon the world, how has it proved? and what
has it afforded thee? Have thou not found it to be a wearisom empty world? A
world of Care, and Grief, and Pain? Thou have looked for Ease, and behold
Trouble; for Content, and behold Vexation; for Satisfaction, and behold
Emptiness; and is this a World to be loved more than Christ? Is not it is
Sweetness, sour? It Is Mirth, Sorrow? It Is Riches, poor? Oh then I must love
Christ, or have nothing to love, out Vanity and Deceit.

When by the Word this Love is not wrought, God might effect it by the Rod.
When thou wast deaf to all Instructions, God can open thy Ear and Heart by some
Affliction, and shake thee over the grave, if thereby he might shake the love
of the World and Sin out of thy Heart; and by threatening thee by sickness, that
thou shall have no longer room in the World, make room for the love of Christ
in thy Heart; and by threatening to separate thy Soul and Body, he might part
thy Soul and the love of sin. By some sickness he brings thee to the brink of
the Grave, and bids thee look where thou must lodge; and then to the borders of
Hell, and bids thee look where thou must lie, if thou will not hearken to his
Son. He lays thee on thy weary Bed, and shows thee a sight of another World,
and thy nearness to it, and does threaten a Divorce of Soul and Body, that thou
might be willing thy sin might be divorced from thy Soul, that thy Soul
might love, and be married to his Son; of which some have had such good
experience, that they can say, This was healthful sickness, recovering
weakness. The view of Death, the means of Love and Life. If I had not been
sick, I had not been well; if God had not shown me Death, I had never seen
Life: If I had not been filled with these fears, I had past my days without
hope; if I had not been brought into these straits, I had never been set at
liberty: If I had not been poor, I had never been rich; if I had not been
empty, I had never been filled; if I had not been driven to feed on husks, I
had never been feasted in my Father's House; if I had not found bitterness in
the love of the Creature, I had never tasted the sweetness of the Love of
Christ.

X. Improve all the mercies thou receivest from God, and look upon them as
Love Tokens sent to gain thy love. Love Tokens often take our love; and such
silent Gifts are very Rhetorical. The Clothes upon thy back, thy Meat and
Drink, thy Bed, thy Health, thy ease from Pain, bespeak the Love of thy Heart
for Christ. By sin thou have deserved thou should have no Bread to put into
thy mouth, that Sleep should depart from thine Eyes; thy Bed should be filled
with Thorns, thy Body with Diseases, thy Conscience with Horror, thy Heart
with Fears, thy Soul with Sorrows, thy Life with Bitterness, but Christ has
bought good things for thee by his Blood, and has given them to thee from his
Bounty; and by all these he pleads with thee, that thou would not deny thy
love to him, that is so kind to thee.

Nay, thy very being on God's Earth, thy breathing in his Air, that thy Body is
above ground, and thy Soul on this side Hell; that thou art not silent among
the dead, nor crying out among the damned, is a great Love-token indeed. For
Justice would have cut thee down long since, Sin these 20, 40, 60 years has
cried to Heaven that thou may be packed to Hell; Devils have long desired
the day of thy death, hoping it will prove the day of thy damnation; but this
has been Christ's love to thee, to beg for thee longer time, even time unto
this day; but for how much longer he might ask on thy behalf, is more than is
known to thee or me, or any man.

And is not love in Christ the cause of all this good to thee? And should not
Love in thee to Christ be the fruit and return of all this good from Christ to
thee? As the goodness and long-suffering of God should lead us to repentance
for sin, so also to love unto his Son. Does not the kindness of a man shown to
another beget love from him that receives it, to him that does confer it? And
shall not the kindness, God for Christ's sake has shown to thee, far
surpassing the kindness of men, allure and draw thy love to him? Do thou ask,
What shall I return to Christ, that died to satisfy God's Justice, to make
Salvation possible to me? I answer, Love. And what, for the tenders of mercy,
and the offers of Grace made to me? I answer, Love. And what must I return for
his patient bearing with me, that I am not dead and damned? I answer, Love,
Love, Love. And what must I return to Christ for my hopes of Heaven, or eternal
happiness? Or if I have not well-grounded actual hope, that yet I am not past
hope, but live in hope, that by the use of means I may have a lively hope of an
incorruptible Crown? I answer still, Love. Unfeigned Love, sincere and hearty
Love. So love, and then hope; love strongly, and then thy hope will be lively.
Love him thus, and then in the next and last Use I will tell thee what comfort
and joy this love may bring into thy heart.

CHAP. XIII. Ten Springs of Spiritual Comfort flowing into the Hearts of the
Lovers of Christ.
Love thou the Lord Jesus! Blessed Soul! Love thou Christ? Happy Man!
Love thou him that is Lord, and Jesus, and Christ? Joy in thy Love. For great
is the difference between the Lovers of Pleasures and the Lovers of Christ;
betwixt the Lovers of the World, and the Lovers of Christ; betwixt the Lovers
of Sin, and the Lovers of Christ: For the Lovers of Pleasures shall be filled
with pain, when their Pleasures are gone; but so shall not the Lovers of
Christ, for their eternal Love to Christ, will be eternal Pleasure to them.

2. The Lovers of the World shall lose all they love; though they do not love
to lose, yet they shall certainly lose all they love; but so shall not the
Lovers of Christ; for they love and long to see him; and in seeing him for
ever, shall have and love him for ever.

3. The Lovers of Sin shall be condemned for their Love, must to their Lodgings
in Hell, where Love is a stranger; but so shall not the Lovers of Christ, but
shall be taken up to their Mansions in Heaven, and shall dwell in Light, and
Life, and Love for ever. Where Light shall be the Life of Love; and their Life
shall be the Love of Light, and Love shall shine and sparkle in Light and Life
for evermore. Now we believe, but do not see Christ, nor ever have, for we walk
by faith and not by sight; though we have not seen him, yet believing we love
him; believing and loving without seeing brings rejoicing, unspeakable and full
of Glory. Oh what will that Joy then be, when believing shall be turned into
seeing, when we shall not believe and love, but see and love! That Joy that now
proceeds from Believing and Loving is unspeakable, but that Joy that shall flow
from Seeing and Loving is unconceivable. 1 Pet. 1.18. Whom having not seen ye
love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of glory.

I promised to show you the Comfort, the Blessings, the Joy that Love to Christ
will bring unto you; but I confess plainly I am posed. It is above my shallow
understanding; here is a Depth, I cannot sound it; here is an Height, I cannot
reach it; here is a Length and Breadth, I cannot compass it. As in the love of
Christ unto the believing Soul, so in the love and joy that proceeds from the
love of the believing Soul to Christ; The one is without measure, the other is
above my measure. How shall I speak that which is unspeakable? and utter that
which is unutterable? Will ye excuse me then, if I do not what I did purpose to
do? And will ye loose me from my Promise, when what I did promise, I find upon
the attempt of performance, it is above my Power? Or will ye tie me to do,
because I promised, what I am not able? If so, will ye pardon my Weakness,
wherein I shall come short, if I tell you a way, whereby ye your selves shall
be able to supply my defect? That is, Do ye so believe and love, that ye might
feel what I cannot speak, and find that by Experience which cannot be uttered
by Expressions; and taste that in your selves, which I cannot declare with my
Tongue. The Tongue is the Instrument of Taste, as well as of Speech; and if ye
would know the sweetness of Honey, ye might do it better with the tasting of
your own Tongue, than by the telling of mine. But yet that ye may see my Will
to attempt, where I want Power, I will not be altogether silent concerning
these unspeakable things: For as we should labor to know the love of Christ to
us, which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19. so we may endeavor to declare things
that be unspeakable: To speak things that be unspeakable is impossible; but to
speak something of, or concerning things unspeakable, (wherein I must
acquiesce) is feasible: Though I do not undertake to bring you all things
speakable concerning these unspeakable things; but these few follow.

I. Love to Christ is an evidence of the sincerity of your Hearts, and of the
truth of your Conversion. He that loves the World, is a world^y man; and he
that loves his Pleasure most, is a voluptuous man; and he that loves Christ
with a predominant Love, is a gracious, upright man. Cant. 1.4. The upright
love thee. Such love to the second Adam is not sound in any man that is still
growing upon the old stock of the first Adam. This love to Christ was not born
with us, but wrought in us when we were born again. This new Love only is in
the new Creature: Love to Christ is an evidence of your Interest in Christ.
Such predominant Love to the Lord Jesus, so Spiritual, was never found in any
Heart, that is only carnal: The Proof therefore of this predominant Affection,
will be a demonstration of your Spiritual Renovation. Christ sifting Peter
concerning his sincerity after his Fall, when sifted by Satan, enquires after
his Love to him, John 21.15, 16, 17. Romans 8.28.

II. All the Promises of the Covenant of Grace shall be made good to all those
that sincerely love the Lord Jesus. These Promises are many, great, precious,
and all su^e to the Lovers of Christ. God in the Covenant has promised he will
be your God; and all that is contained in that Promise is unspeakable; for it
is more, than that he will be your Friend, your Father, or bountiful
Benefactor; or however, more is contained in these explicatory words than I am
able to explain, Heb. 8.10. God has promised the pardon of sins, Heb. 8.12.
That he will justify us, Ezekiel. 36.25. and take away the old Heart, and give a
new one, the hard and stony Heart, and give a soft and fleshy (which shall not
be a fleshly) Heart, ver. 26. to give his holy Spirit, to help, to quicken, to
guide, to comfort you, ver. 27. To give persevering Grace. Jer. 32.40. And I
will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from
them, to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall
not depart from me. If God neither turn away from his sincere People, nor they
from God, their Perseverance is sure, that neither shall be, is secured by the
Promise of God. Now these Promises concern the Lovers of God and Christ, and to
them shall be performed. Neh. 1.5. O Lord God of Heaven, the great and terrible
God, that keeps Covenant and Mercy for them that love him, and observe his
Commandments. The same words in Dan. 9.4. there are promises to them that love
God and Christ, and there are promises for the performance of those promises to
such. Deuteronomy. 7.9. Know therefore that the Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful
God, which keeps covenant and mercy with them that love him, and keep his
commandments. He did, he does, but how long will he do so? To a thousand
Generations. But what will he do to them that do hate him? What? Read and
Tremble, ye that are haters of God and Christ. Ver. 10. And repayeth them that
hate him, to their face, to d^stroy them. He will not be slack, to him that
hates him, he will repay him to his face.

III. Predominant sincere love to Christ, is an evidence of Gods special and
peculiar Love to you. How fain would thou know that God does love thee, and
Christ does love thee? Then thou say thou should not care, though all the
wicked in the World should hate thee, and, if I knew that God did love me, it
would resolve my Doubts, expel my Fears, lighten my Burdens, sweeten my
Mercies; make me cheerful under the Cross, be a Cordial to me in Sickness, and
be Life to me in the Gates of Death. Can thou prove thou love Christ? Then
I can prove that both God and Christ do love thee; for thy love to God and
Christ is the fruit and effect of Gods and Christ's love to thee. God loves
first, or thou had never loved at all. God loves us with a preventing Love;
never any prevented God and Christ in Love. We love with a following Love.
Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me. Joh. 14.21. He that has my Commandments,
and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me, shall be
loved of my Father, and I will love him. 23. Jesus answered and said unto him,
If a man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him -- 1 John
4.19. We love him, because he first loved us.

And now what Spiritual Comfort! What Heavenly Joy! What Ravishing Delights!
might a Lover of Christ take in this, That God and Christ is a Lover of him,
because his Love is such that is above all Expression, beyond all Conception,
above all Comparison? Ephesians. 3.18. May be able to comprehend with all Saints,
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height. 19. And to know the
love of Christ, which passes knowledge. The properties of this Love, will make
your Joy to be abundant.

1. Christ loves his Lovers with a free Love; ye had motives to love Christ,
his Beauty, his Wisdom, his Fullness: The Necessity ye had of him, the Good ye
expected by him, were attractives of your Love to him; but what was in you to
move Christ to Love you, when ye were Deformed, Polluted, Guilty, Condemned,
Poor, full of running Sores, and wallowing in your Blood? Ezekiel. 16.6. And when
I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own blood, I said unto thee,
when thou wast in thy blood, Live: yea, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy
blood, Live. 8. Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy
time (which might have been the time of loathing) was the time of love -- As he
has Mercy because he will have Mercy, so he Loves because he will Love. Deuteronomy.
7.7. The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were
more in number than any people -- 8. But because the Lord loved you --

2. Christ loves his Lovers with a pure Love. The Love of most is
Selfish-love, loving others for their own ends; and indeed, there was something
of Self in your loving of Christ, that ye might be Pardoned by him, and
Justified, and Saved by him. But what can Christ gain by loving of you? What
advantage redounds to him? Or what profit has he thereby?

3. Christ loves his Lovers with an unparalled, matchless Love. Great was
the Love of Jonathan and David; great is the Love of tender Parents to their
Children, but Christ's is greater than all. Joh. 15.13. Greater love has no man
than this, That a man lay down his life for his friends.

4. Christ loves his Lovers, with a constant, abiding Love, for it is eternal
and unchangeable. The Love of Creatures is sickle, and waveringlove, sometimes
sades and fails, while they live, or dies with them when they dye; or when we
dye, their Love to us does also dye: At least, they love us not as in that
relation, for Death has nulled that relation. But the Love of Christ is
without end; he does Live for ever, and he will Love for ever, and neither our
Love to him, nor his to us, does dye when we do dye, but after Death we love
him more than ever, and he does manifest his Love to us more than ever. Jer.
31.3. I have loved thee with an everlasting love --

IV. Christ makes the hearts of his Lovers the seat and place of his special
Residence. Lovers love to dwell together, and Christ has prepared Mansions for
us that we might dwell with him hereafter; but Christ, through the greatness of
his Love, being impatient of so long absence, till we come to be present with
him in Heaven, makes our Hearts a Mansion for himself, that he might dwell with
us on Earth, till we are lodged with him in Glory. Joh. 14.23. Jesus answered
and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words, and my father will
love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. Oh blessed
Change!

When thou lovedst not Christ, Satan, the World, and reigning Sin, had their
abode in thee. These were the Lodgers in thy Heart, that had the best Room, and
chiefest Seat in thine Affections: While thou wast in the World, and not in
Christ, the World was in thee, and no^ Christ. While thou wast in thy Sin, thy
Sin was in thee, as Lord and Ruler; but now thou have changed thy Love, thou
have changed not only the Lodgers, but the Governors and Rulers of thine
Heart, for now the Father is come, and the Son is come, and the Holy Ghost is
come, and have taken up their abode in thee. Will God dwell in Hearts of Clay?
Yes, if Love to him dwell there.

V. Christ will manifest himself unto his Lovers: He will discover his Love,
and that in the worst condition ye can be in. While ye are in Prosperity, many
may manifest much Love unto you, but when ye are afflicted, distressed, and
stand most in need of their Help and Love, will withold it from you. Job
19.13. He has put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are verily
estranged from me. 14. My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have
forgotten me. 15. They that dwell in my house, and my maids, count^ me for a
stranger; I am an alien in their sight. 16. I called my servant, but he gave me
no answer; I entreated him with my mouth. 17. My breath is strange to my wife,
though I entreated for the childrens sake of mine own body. 19. All my inward
friends abhorred me, and they whom I loved are turned against me: But Christ
that dwells in the Hearts of his Lovers, is to them a Bosom friend, that he
makes the time of their greatest Troubles and Distresses, to be the time of the
discoveries and manifestations of his love. Isa. 63.9. In all their afflictions
he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them: in his love, and in
his pity, he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all the days of
old. And if he withdraw, and for a time conceal his love, it is to make them
more earnest in seeking after him, and for fuller discoveries of his love to
them afterward, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3.

VI. All things shall work together, for the good of them that love God and
Jesus Christ: Nothing shall befall them, but first or last shall further them
in their way to Heaven, and tend to their advantage. Many things seem to be
against you, but all shall work for you. If you be in Prison, your Heart shall
be the more enlarged. If you lose the things of the World, your Heart shall be
the more set on the things of Heaven. If you be sick and weakly, it shall
quicken you, and stir you up to make more haste to get ripe for Heaven. If you
be Poor in the World, it shall further your Riches in Grace. Whatever be the
Cross, it shall increase the weight of your Crown. Romans 8.28. And we know that
all things work together for good, to them that love God, to them who are the
called according to his purpose.

VII. Sincere love to Christ, is a mighty help against Apostasy. If a man be a
Professor, and a Lover of the World, a Professor, and a Lover of Pleasure, of
his own Ease, and Life, more than of Christ, when these come in danger, to keep
them, he parts with Christ; but he that loves Christ above all, will part with
all, to cleave to Christ. Love to Christ, has carried his people through great
difficulties and dangers; out of love to Christ, they have contemned the
Allurements, and laughed at the Affrightments of this World, have gone through
Shame and Reproach, endured Stripes and Imprisonments, Bonds and Bondage, and
Death it self. Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
(Whether it be understood Actively or Passively, of the love wherewith we love
Christ, or the love whereby we are beloved by Christ, is not material, for
concerning both we might ask) Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution,
or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? 37. Nay, in all these things
((...), we over-overcome) we are more than conquerors, through him that loved
us. 38. For I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come. 39. Nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. If any leave Christ, it is
for want of love; for so far as love prevails, we shall, in greatest Troubles
and Sufferings for him, cleave unto him.

VIII. The Lovers of Christ shall be always under his Eye for good: He will be
looking upon them, in order to the showing of Mercy unto them. He looks upon
the Lovers of the World, and Sin, with an Eye of Observation and Indignation;
he looks, and takes notice of their sinful love; he looks, and is angry with
them for such love; but he looks upon his Lovers with an Eye of Compassion, to
pity, and to tender them. Psalm. 119.132. Look thou upon me, and be merciful
unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy name.

God uses to do so, it is his way, his manner and custom of dealing so, with
such as love him; it is not a strange thing to God, nor a thing that he does
but now and then, but it is his daily custom to look upon his Lovers, and show
them Mercy. Psalm. 145.20. The Lord preserves all them that love him, but the
wicked (that do not love him) will he destroy.

IX. The Lovers of Christ have great preparations made by God himself, for
their entertainment in the other World: For all the Lovers of the World, and
Sin and Vanity, is Wrath and Hell prepared, but for the Lovers of Christ, such
things as do transcend the most refined Wit to conceive, the most eloquent
Tongue to express, or the ablest Pen to describe. 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him.

1. The Eye of Man has seen admirable things, Coasts of Pearl, Golden Mines,
stately Monuments, Kingly Palaces, costly Raiments, but never Eye has seen
such things as God has prepared for them that love him.

2. The Ear has heard of more than the Eye has seen, and many hear of the
joys of Heaven whose Eyes shall never see them.

3. The Heart of Man can conceive more than the Eye has seen, or the Ear has
heard; it can imagine all Pebles to be Pearls, all the Earth to be a silver
Heap, the Sea to be liquid Gold, the Air transparent Crystal, every Star to be
a Sun: And if all these were so, they would be but as a Sand to a Mountain, a
Beam to the Sun, a Drop to the Ocean, a Grain to a Golden Mine, compared with
the things that are prepared for such as love God and Christ, for those things
are so great, they cannot be measured, so many, they cannot be numbered, so
precious, they cannot be valued, so long and lasting, they will never be ended;
they exceed our Faith, they are beyond our Hope, above our Desires, they might
be possessed hereafter, but they cannot be comprehended here, because,

For Sublimity, they are Incomprehensible, for Transcendency Inexplicable, for
Glory Unutterable, for Sweetness Vnconceiveable, for Sureness Unquestionable,
for Fullness Unmeasurable, for Firmness Immovable, for Lastingness Unchangeable.

1. For God has prepared and promised such as love him, a Kingdom. Jam. 2.5.
Hearken my beloved brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich
in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love
him? A Kingdom is the top of Worldly Honor, and when those that love Christ
shall be in Heaven, they shall be in their Kingdom, far surpassing all other
Kingdoms, for it is the Kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. others are
but the Kingdoms of Men: Theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, others, the best, but
the Kingdoms of this World, 2 Timothy 4.18. Theirs is an everlasting Kingdom, 2
Pet. 1.11. others, in their greatest flourishing, are near to withering, and
that which lasts longest will have an end.

2. God has prepared for his Lovers a Crown of Life. Jam. 1.12. Blessed is the
man that endures temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown
of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him. A crown of glory,
1 Pet. 5.4. A crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is laid up
for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give
me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his
appearing.

3. Such as have sincere Love, have lively hope of an Inheritance; all
Christ-lovers are Heirs, and their Inheritance is Incorruptible, no end of it,
and they live to enjoy it for ever. It is Undefiled, no spot nor stain in it;
no Sin nor Sorrow, no Grief nor Groans, no Troubles nor Terrors, to mosest and
disquiet them. It fades not, it is always in the Flower; it does always
blossom, there is Summer without Winter, Spring without Autumn. It is safe in
it self, it is reserved in a sure Hand, in Gods own keeping. It is sure to us,
we are kept by the power of God, the Inheritance is reserved for us; we are
preserved by God, that no sorce, nor fraud, shall make his sincere Lovers come
short of it. It is in Heaven: The place where an Inheritance does lie, adds
to the valuation of it; no place like Heaven, no Inheritance like that which
lies in Heaven.

4. God has prepared Glory for the Lovers of his Son; Glory that now is a
Mystery, and is to be revealed, Romans 8.18. Eternal glory, 1 Pet. 5.10. Eternal
weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

X. The Grace of God shall be with the sincere Lovers of Christ. Grace
signifies sometimes the favor of God, and sometimes the good things that do
proceed from his Grace and Favor; so that both the good will and kindness of
God, and all manner of good that is the Fruit of Gods special favor, necessary
to the life of Grace, and Glory, shall be to the Lovers of Christ. Ephesians. 6.24.
Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen.

CHAP. XIV. The CONCLUSION.
AND now (beloved Hearers) what is the issue of all that I have said, and ye
have heard, upon this Subject? Have I gained any of your love to Christ? Or are
ye still in love with the World, and Pleasures, and Profits, and Honors,
thereof? Are ye in love with Sin and Self, more than with Christ, after all the
Arguments and Pleadings of Grace and Mercy for your Hearts, and hearty Love, to
be placed on the blessed Son of the most blessed God? Did ye love Sin, and will
ye love it still? Did ye love the World, and will ye do so still? Did ye not
love Christ, and do ye not yet, and will ye not? is this the answer I must
return to him that sent me? Lord, I cannot gain their love unto thy Son; fain I
would, but I cannot. I have asked them in thy Name, but they will not. I have
studied for this purpose, and Prayed and Preached for this purpose, but I have
studied in vain, and my Labor with so many is lost Labor. I have delivered my
Message, but they will not hearken. I have entreated for their Love, not for my
Self, but for thy Son, but many will not consent. Why, Sirs! Did I find you
full of Love to Self, and Sin, and World, and after all, must I leave you so? I
found you void of the Love of Christ, and must I leave you so? Why then did I
Preach, and why did ye Hear? Did ye come day after day resolved, Say what I
could, ye would do what ye list? Shall that blessed Jesus, that has been set
forth before you, be still thus despised, and set at naught by you? Did I find
the Anathema upon you, and must I leave it upon you, till Maranatha? What if
God should say, he that after all these Entreaties, Calls, Invitations, to love
Christ, yet loves the World, Let him love the World; and he that loves Sin,
Let him love his Sin, Let him love his Pleasures, Let him love what he will,
since he will not be persuaded to love whom he oshuld? Oh dreadful Curse! Oh
heavy Wrath! Oh sad presage of the Curse, that shall fall upon such Souls when
Christ shall come, and after that, lie and abide upon them for ever!

Speak therefore in thy Heart, Sinner, and return thine Answer, for it may be
this might be to thee the last time of Asking; Will thou give Christ thy Love,
or will thou not? Thy sincere, not thy pretended Love? Will thou consent and
promise, before thou stirrest out of this place, to love Christ more than all,
beyond all, and above all? Or will thou deny him such love, and keep it for,
and place it still upon thy old beloved sinful Objects? Say thou so? What,
must I, to my Sorrow, and thy Woe, as to thee, end as I did begin? I had hoped
I might have bid thee joy of thy new Love, and matchless Match, in thy
consenting to Love, and accept of this Blessed Jesus for thy Lord and Husband;
but if thou will not, I must say what I would not. Lord, I am loath to say it,
but it is what thou do say, and I cannot alter it; yet, if I must say it, let
it be with a pained, and a sorrowful Heart, and as my Mouth shall drop the
Word, let mine Eyes drop so many Tears, whilst at thy command I must pronounce,
If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha.

But must this be the Sentence I must leave upon you all, that at the beginning
of this Text had no love to Jesus Christ? What, is there not one amongst you
all that can say, Before I did love my Pleasures, but now I love Christ? I did
love my Sin, but now I love my Lord and Savior? My love is turned into another
Channel? I have found another object for my love? I would not for a thousand
Worlds have died before I had sincere love to Christ? Not only one, but many of
you, can say so, or else ye have basely dissembled, both with God, and this
Congregation. Many of you that did not love the Lord Jesus Christ, now do, or
ye have been wretched Hypocrites, while ye have been Hearers of these Sermons;
for what did ye mean by all those Bills that ye did give in, day after day, ten
or twenty in a day, acknowledging your former Sin, till now, in loving other
things, and not Christ? Why did ye say, Ye never were convinced of the
necessity of loving Christ before? I beseech you, Why have ye so many, and so
often, with such earnest Requests, even for Jesus sake, and as we had any love
for your Souls, desire Me, and the Congregation, to beg with Importunity, that
God would give you such an Heart now, that ye might love the Lord Jesus Christ
in sincerity; above all, with a Superlative Love, with a Predominant Love, with
all your Heart, and with all your Soul, that you might not be Anathema when
Maranatha? Were not these your own Words? Did not the Congregation hear them
Read? When I reviewed your Papers at Home, did not I sind these Words, and such
like, whereby ye did express the former Condition, and the present Desires of
your Souls? Tell me then, were ye in good earnest, or did ye jest with God and
Men, in desiring Prayers that ye might so love the Lord Jesus? If so, repent of
your Hypocrisy; lament your double Dealings; bitterly bewail such cursed
Dissemblings. If ye were in earnest, and your Hearts, as well as your Hands,
did guide your Pens, in Writing such Desires, and ye have indeed changed your
Love; or rather, God has turned your Love from Sin unto his Son, from the
World unto himself, I shall have cause to bless God that I Preached, and ye
heard what was spoken of this subject; then are ye my Joy, and Crown, and
Rejoicing, both now, and at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. And to you
that have this love wrought in your Hearts so lately, and to all the rest that
had like love to him before, I wish all the Blessings that are contained in
that Prayer of the Apostle, with which he concludes his Epistle; and I this
subject, Ephesians. 6.24. Grace be with all them that love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity. Amen.

The BLESSING, to the Lovers of CHRIST.
THE Psalm being Sung, all the People (as is usual) stood up: I kept my Seat
longer than ordinarily I was wont, which caused their Eyes to be the more
toward me. Then I stood up and said, Why stand ye gazing? Why are your Eyes so
intent upon me? What can I say more? What more do ye expect? The Blessing?
What! All of you? What! Whether ye love Christ or no? Alas! If God Curse, how
can I Bless? I have day after day, set Life and Death, a Blessing and a Curse,
before you, and must it not be with you according to your own Choice? If ye
will be blessed indeed, ye must love Christ; if ye will not love Christ, the
Curse, and not a Blessing, waits for you, though ye here wait for the
Blessing. If ye would not go without the pronouncing of the Blessing, from
hence to your Homes, love Christ; oh love Christ: Oh at last be persuaded to
love Christ, that ye might not go from Christ's Bar to the Flames of Hell
(without his Blessing) for ever. I have done for this time and Text, when I
have said the Words of my Text, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let
him be Anathema Maranatha; and let all the People that dare, (least they should
wish a Curse upon themselves) say Amen. And for you that have set your Hearts
on Christ above all, I beg from the Father of Mercies, that Grace might be with
all them that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, and let all the People
say, Amen.

What lively Countenances, what Affections, what Tears and Cryings, with the
Spirits working, were caused, do not expect that I should tell.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the
Poultrey.
THere is now in the Press, and will suddenly be Published, An Exposition of
the Assemblies Shorter Catechism, with Practical Inferences from each Question.
By John Flavell, Minister of the Gospel.

Charnock's Works in Two Vol. Fol.

Rushworth's Historical Collections, 3d Part, never before Printed; containing
the Principal Matters which happened from the Meeting of the Parliament 1640.
to the end of the Parliament 1644. in 2 Vol. Fol.

Geography Rectified; or Description of all the World in all its Kingdoms,
Provinces, Countries, etc. Also Government, Commodities, Coins, Weights, etc.
Illustrated with about 80 Maps. By Robert Morden, 4to.

The Morning Exercise at Cripplegate; or several Cases of Conscience Resolved
by sundry Ministers. In 4to.

A Supplement to the Morning Exercise at Cripplegate. 8vo.

Specculum Theologiae in Christo: Or a view of some Divine Truths, which are
either Practically Exemplified in Jesus Christ, set forth in the Gospel, or may
be reasonably reduced from thence. 8vo.

Christus in Cord: Or, the Mystical Union between Christ and Believers.

Precious Faith, considered in its Nature, Workings and Growth. These three by
Edward Polhill of Barwash in Essex, Esquire


