More Shams still: OR A FURTHER DISCOVERY OF THE DESIGNS OF THE PAPISTS, To
impose upon the Nation the Belief of their feigned PROTESTANT OR Presbyterian
Plot.

By THOMAS DANGERFEILD.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin. MDCLXXXI.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir John More, Knight.
Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON.
My Lord,
HAD I given those Opportunities for men of ill Converse, and worse
Insinuations to have drawn me aside, as others have done, to accuse the
Innocent, perhaps I had had no Occasion to give your Lorship this Trouble: But
because the Enemies of the King, the Kingdom and the Protestant Religion,
observe my Resolutions fixed and constant to serve all three, to the utmost of
my Power and Capacity; therefore, rather than they will leave Plotting, they
have placed their little Sham Plots upon me too. However they go on in the old
Popish Track of endeavoring to render Scurrilous and Scandalous, the Person
against whom they raise their Batteries; Among the rest I find my slef most
terribly assailed by two of these Enginees of Defamation; by the one in a
public Pamphet; by the other in a written, but very malicious Letter,
cunningly distributed about the Town to several of the most Eminent Persons of
this City. Which being done, without the least Proof of the Charges therein
contained, I cannot but look upon it, as an intended Assassination of his
Majesty's most Royal Grace and Mercy toward me. This, my Lord, is that which
enforces me thus to appear in my own Vindication, lest the World should think
those Reproaches confirmed by my Silence, and consequently those Royal Favors
ill bestowed, as being unworthily forfeited. This it is that emboldens me to
make this Address to your Lordship, to show that I am not afraid of
Contradiction before so worthy and so great a Magistrate: Whose Zeal for the
Protestant Religion is so well known, that you disdain the Plotters of its
Destruction: Whose Charity, Generosity, and Candor are such, that you will not
lend a forward Ear to Scandal and Reproach: and whose Justice is such, that
should I be found imposing Falsehood upon your High Dignity, as you would be the
first to Condemn me to deserved Punishment, so you will be as ready to uphold
and vindicate the Innocent. And it is under the Protection of being so, that I
here presume to subscribe my self

My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble and most Faithful Servant Tho. Dangerfeild.

More SHAMS still etc.
THE best and most pious men that ever were in the World, could not avoid the
Scandals and Reproaches of venomous and malicious Tongues: Even the very Saints
and Apostles were not free. Nor could our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
so well behave himself in his unspotted Life, but that the Wicked had their
Scorns and Scoffs ready at hand to blur and defame his Immaculate Conversation:
Men as impious as Satan found out Accusations and false Oaths to betray his
Innocence, and either through the Credulity or the Obduracy of his Judges to
condemn and put him to Death. If then those devout and holy Persons, if Jesus
the Savior of the World, could not be safe, though it were in an Age when the
Crafts and Devises of Hell were not so well known, or at least so well
practiced among men as now they are, how can poor miserable Creatures not only
laden with Original Sin, but more obnoxious, once perhaps for Crimes
perticularly committed than the rest of their fellow Creatures, and the
Transgressions of Human Precepts, propose Immunity to themselves, more
especially when the most refined Villainies and Perjuries abound that ever were
heard of, such as neither the Memory of Man or History can Parrallel, by
swearing, forswearing, counterswearing, and all this made a Trade by
Men-Swearers, and Women-Swearers, that live by the price of Blood, who if they
can but fasten a moments Privacy upon a man, never leave till they have sworn
him out of his Life? Now is it in the power of Man to Divine when this their
thirst of Blood will be quenched, while they still under various Pretenses
endeavor to worry the people of God, and to annihilate the Immaculate True
Religion of Christ, set on to the End, that what the Jesuits began, but could
not accomplish by Clandestine Contrivance, they should finish by the accursed,
but most seemingly plausible Procedure of that Caitiff Jezebel. For always the
Jesuits were of opinion that the best Expedient to introduce Popery, and that
Hellish Sting in the Tail of it that Destruction of Mankind, called Arbitrary
Power, was to inflame the Nation by false Alarums, and impious Insinuations of
Sham-Plots, and Contrivances laid upon the Protestants, to whip and spur on
Prosecutions against the Innocent, hoping thereby to provoke them into Mutiny
and Rebellion, that so there might be a Color to call in a Foreign Power, the
more easily to accomplish their Destruction.

Another sort of Men (so called) there are, who encourage, abett, and uphold
those Instruments of Satan, and their inferior Tools, who are of such a
malicious and venomous Tincture in themselves, that the least appearance of
Morality or Virtue, or the least Inclination to Penitence or Reformation in
another, so cu^s them to the heart, that if he be not a Proselite of their own,
that is a Convert to, their wicked Designs, he must be presently persued at the
heels with a sort of Cur-like Observations, on purpose to forestal him in the
good Opinion of Men, and to render him Odious for well doing; as if Reformation
and the Embracing of a Christian course of Life in him were Wickedness and
Impiety, or that his former m^scarriages were never to be blotted out. A piece
of Charity which would never be owned by any but a Papist, that Abhorrer of all
Mercy, from whom the Protestants are never to expect any favor: So that it is
no wonder I should be so Viperously bitten by one that either professes or
upholds, a Sham Politic, called Religion, that bears such an Antipathy to
Charity, that would shut Heaven Gates, and no^ suffer the God of Mercy himself
to forgive any but such as they should approve of. I have observed, though
perhaps not so well read as my Persecutor, that the great Creator, whom Man
offends Millions of times more than Man can offend Man, declares himself that
he is willing to receive a Sinner at what time soever he repents; and that
there is no one Attribute in which he more glorifies himself than in that one
Attribute of his Mercy. I have also observed from the words of our Savior,
what great rejoicing there is in Heaven at the recovery of one lost Sheep. But
the Custom alters with the Place; for certainly never was there such Madness,
Fury, Cursing, Swearing, Drunkning, Whoreing, Backbiting, Railing Fretting,
Fuming, Grinning and Girning, at the retrieving of one Penitent Sinner, as I
have observed in my self. All which makes me apt to believe, that that same
Person of Quality (so reported to be) who wrote those celebrated Observations,
called, Observations upon a late Libel, called a Letter from a Person of
Quality to his Friend, concerning the Kings Declaration etc. was rather led by
the Custom upon Earth, than instructed by Heaven; for besides that the work
does not seem to be any way inspired by reason of its insipidness; it has this
Paragraph, for I shall give it no other Title, till I have Dissected it.

It is said Dangerfeild was a Rogue, granted, and yet as I hear, this Rogue was
brought into both houses just before the Debate, to whip them up into the Bill
of Exclusion, but now they tell a very strange thing, which is, that
Dangerfeild is become truly honest. It is much, and in my Opinion, it is a
lower kind of Transubstantiation to believe Dangerfeild is honest, when nothing
is visible but the Knave. That this man should be made honest would be a mighty
Cure, and such a one as some of his Doctors would be loath to work upon
themselves. In the mean time I cannot but put them in mind that it looks a
little Popish, not only to give a general Indulgence to such a known Sinner,
but immediately to make a Saint of him. If the gathered Churches can do such
Miracles, it is well, but if they should endeavor to put false ones upon the
World, it might disparage their Prudence, and lessen their Reputation; of which
I am so tender, that in kindness to them I give them this Warning of it.

It is said Dangerfeild was a Rogue, granted. With Mr. Person of Qualities
leave, it is not granted, I was no Rogue, nor was it said so by any but Mr.
Person of Qualities Gang. For before that time he talks of, I had received mine
and his Sovereigns gracious Absolution for my past Transgressions: So that it
is apparent, this Paragraph was jostl'd in by head and shoulders by the
Observator, to call me Rogue, that he might cast an aspersion on both Houses of
Parliament then sitting: For says he, And yet this Rogue was brought into both
Houses to whip them up into the Bill of Exclusion. The Paraphrase of which runs
thus, Dangerfeild, then no Rogue, though unpardoned, when he was brought up to
kiss the D. of Y's, hand etc. to whip up the Sham Plot, afterward became a
Rogue by discovering of the Secret: and being brought into both houses to
declare the Truth of the business, to the end they might be able to justify
such high and national Proceedings against the Party accused, he was still the
same Rogue; from whence that it must be gathered from his words, either the
Parliament had Rogues brought before them to spur them up to look after the
Kingdoms Safety; or otherwise, that the Grand Counsel of England, and the
Noblest in the World, suffered themselves to be Dog whipped by a Rogue into an
ill Act: Which is the most scandalous Imputation that ever any Person of
Quality could have invented where withal to defile his own Nest. Now was it
less injurious to the honor of his Majesty to vilify that Pardon, which was
therefore given me, to the end I might be qualified to appear before those
great Assemblies; the very business for which I am by the Observator called
Rogue? This is the Quondam C. J. S. with the Image of his dear Mrs. Celliers
before him all over -- The unlucky fate of your high flown Observators now a
days to be still against Parliaments, and consequently against the Rights and
Liberties of their Native Country. But, says he, This Rogue was brought into
both Houses just before the Debate.

And thus the Observator is not only contented to scandalize both Houses, but
more irreverently to asperse them with an Untruth: For the disguised Person of
Quality must of necessity in this believe me, in regard the Journals of the
House will otherwise correct him; wherein he will find that I had not been at
the House of Commons Bar, not in twelve days at least before the Bill of
Exclusion passed, save once, which was to acquaint the House concerning the
defect of his Majesty's Pardon to me; so that the words, just before the Debate
to whip them up, must needs be looked upon either as an Excursion, or
Deviation, or what ye please to call it, from the Truth, or else a most
Malicious Supposition.

As to the Imputation upon the House of Lords, true it is, that I attended
several days in expectation of being called in, to inform that, as I had done
the other House, how far the D. of Y. had been privy to the Designs of Mrs.
Celiers, but had for a considerable time failed of admittance, and
understanding that the Bill was just ready to be brought up, I was very
importunate to give my Information before the Bill came; and accordingly made
my Application to a Noble Peer upon whose Motion, as I humbly conceive, I was
called in, where I related the whole Truth to the best of my knowledge. Now was
I a little glad of having the opportunity to deliver my self just before the
coming of the Bill; as beleiving that nothing could more concern the
Preservation of the True Religion and Established Government, the Safety of his
Majesty's Life (whom God preserve) the ancient and just Rights, and Liberties
of the Nation, than the Bill of Exclusion did: and besides I thought it no
small honor to my self, that it was in my poor Capacity, having Truth and
Justice on my side, to contribute to the warmth of debate about the passing of
a Bill in the Lords House, which the Commons had passed with so much Vigor and
Resolution but just before. Now for doing this, which I have reason to think,
was one of the best Actions I ever undertook in my Life, here comes an
Observator, with a farc'd Paragraph, and calls me Rogue, and Parliament
Spurrer. And yet, if he be the Author, who is so reported to be, of those
Observations, he was formerly of another mind, what ever Collyrium has cleared
the eyes of his Judgment: For I well remember that a little before the meeting
of the last Parliament which convened at Westminster, I met with a Person of
Quality, in a certain place, at which time amongst other discourses, I took the
liberty to give him the Epitome of those Hellish Designs wherein the Papists
had engaged me; which being done, his Lordship did me the honor to make this
Reply Verbatim as follows. I am so well satisfied that there has been and
stillis, a most Hellish Plot of the Papists against the Kings Life, our
Religion and Government, and to enslave us to a Foreign Power; and I find such
Demonstration attending all the Discoveries thereof, that for my part I am
satisfied there is none but Fools or Knaves, and those must be in it too, that
at this time of day doubt the truth of a Popish Plot. Nay he that has but
honor and honesty enough to be concerned for the safety of his own private
Affairs, cannot but acknowledge himself most highly indebted to the Discoverers,
for what he now enjoys; and for my part my Concern for the Protestant Interest
is such, that I desire all men, when ever I am found in the Disbeleif of a
Popish Plot, or any ways acting in the least matter or thing whatever, contrary
to the Interest, Safety, and well Being, of what I said to you before, (meaning
as I suppose tbe Kings Majesty, the Protestant Religion, and Government) to
slight, and deem me the worst and basest of Men.

And yet I have a strong jealousy concluding from rational grounds, that this
is the very Person that at this time of day, so confounds the Popish Plot, so
vilifies the Protestants with Shams and fictitious Contrivances. I am credibly
informed, he is the only Person whose Zeal and great Concern for the
prosecuting and detecting of Popish Traitors and Treasons, has now transformed
it self into the shape and real belief of a Presbyterian Plot; but pray Heavens
he be not the only person that can be found to be in that Presbyterian Plot,
when a Parliament comes to look into the bottom of it; and its well if he have
not made use of my name for a Color only, that he might the more freely lay
out upon the Parliament, for addressing against him. This is the Person of
Quality that so be-Rogues me about whipping the two houses into the Bill of
Exclusion.

A Town top Metaphor that no way agrees with the before mentioned Expressions,
the Dignity of the Assembly, nor my business at that time. Yet for all this,
notwithstanding so great a change of Opinion, and such an importunate Desire to
all Mankind, of which I may be looked upon as a Morsel; I have a greater
deference for Persons of Dignity, than to condemn him from his own Lips, as he
has setenc'd me for acting according to my Duty.

But now they tell a strange Thing. Why what is that? Do the Beasts in Epping
Forest begin to speak Arabic? Or has the Thames flowed over the Traitors heads
upon London Bridge? No, none of these whipping Miracles neither. What then? Why
Dangerfeild is become truly honest. Truly I have heard of far greater Miracles
than this, among the Observators Friends the Papists, I have heard of several
Hypocritical Luberly Friars that have scraped acquaintance with the Virgin Mary
in Heaven: Others that have been Sainted. Shall it be no wonder for a Company
of Leacherous Dominicans to be the Virgin Mary's only Favorites in Heaven, and
is it such a Wonder that I should become trnly honest? But I find the Temper of
this Paragrapher: He is so Spotless, so clear from Stain or Blemish of Sin,
just ready for Elisha's Chariot, that he cannot endure to hear of the return of
a Prodigal Son. No -- let him be whipped back to his Actions again with a
Wannion. The Coldness of his Charity has condensed the word Knave into a
Visible Substance, so that it comes out of his Mouth, like his breath in a
Frosty Morning; and all this while the only reason why the Knave is so visible
to him in me, is, because he supposes me to have been Lasher to the two Houses.
But if that be all, seeing his Majesty has been pleased to Absolve me from my
former Transgressions, and I defy any person to charge me since, I shall
presume fo far by virtue of the Kings prerogative of Mercy, as to believe my
self as honest as the Person that see's the Knave so visible in me. And so his
hard strained Simile of Transubstantion vanishes into it is original Nonsense.
But says he, persisting in his malice, That this Man should be made honest,
would be a mighty Cure. What is this but to snarle at Heaven it self? For
Conversion is a Cure from thence. He then that Questions the strangeness of
such a Cure, calls in doubt either the Power or Practice of the Almighty, as if
it were an unusual thing with God to work such Cures. I would gladly know of
the Paragrapher wherein I have been dishonest either to him or the public. If
I whipped up the two Houses by speaking Truth, I was neither Rogue nor Knave: If
I did not, he was bound in Conscience, if honest, to have convinced the World
of my defects. Otherwise all he says must be looked upon as mere insinuation of
some conceived Malice, and an overweaning hatred of Reformation. To which if
any Doctors of mine, as he calls 'em, have been instrumental, it was their Duty
so to do; and an evil piece of severity in him to abuse them for it.
Nevertheless he lets fly at Random at certain Individuum Vagum's, Heaven knows
whom, and tells them, It looks a little Popish, not only to give a General
Indulgence to such a known sinner, immediately to make a Saint of him. But he
mistakes the point extremely. I never received any such kindness at their
hands. It Is to the Kings Indulgence that I ow my forgiveness in this World: Nor
can I tell, why the Supreme head of the Church, may not as Lawfully and with as
much Authority forgive on Earth, as the Paragraphers dear friend the Pope. Had
I been fond of General Indulgences, or been ambitious of a Saintship, I should
have moved in the same sphere of Iniquity from whence the Kings most Royal
Clemency redeemed me. Which had I done, I make no question but I might have had
a General Indulgence from the Paragrapher himself; Now what he means by their
making a Saint of me, I know not; I am apt to believe he was himself in a
Popish dream when he said it. I must confess the next way to be a Saint, is to
converse with good and virtuous men, and so to be made a Saint, I think is much
better than to be made a Devil with those incarnates from whose wicked Society
I am so happily retird. In the mean time what a severe Interpreter of other
peoples actions is this same Paragraphers? Men cannot cherish the sprouting
blossoms of Reformation and Penitency, with the Common Acts of kindness and
Civility, but whip, they must be said to Saint the person they favor.
Certainly the Papists and their adherents, are the most cruel people in the
World, that make so many Saints themselves, and will not permit my Doctors to
make one. But as severe as they are, if any Doctors do make me a Saint, I am
resolved I will make one shift or other to slip in in the crowd. And again, I
promise the Paragrapher that whoever they be that may make him a Saint, I will
neither envy him, nor trouble my head about it.

In the last place he falls upon the Gathered Churches, lays the Miracle of my
Conversion to their charge, and very gravely Cautions them to finish their
work, upon the high forfeitures of disparaging their prudence, and lesning
their Reputation. So eagerly does this Nimrod of inveteracy pursue me through
all Societies of Men, as if he envied me a being upon Earth, and therefore
resolved to hunt me out of the World. Thus did Satan appear among the Angels of
God, to heap accusation upon accusation against Innocent Job: And thus the
Observator endeavors to Whip up the gathered Churches into an ill opinion of
me. But suppose the Miracle should be accomplished, as I trust it is; I hope
the Observator will not exclaim against Justice, if the disparagement of
imprudence and the lesning of Reputation should redound to himself. For my
party I look upon this Shimeian Paragrapher, as proceeding from Providence,
contrary to the intent of the Writer, to make me the more wary of my future
demeanor. For certainly it would whip up any man of Ingenuity, how prone soever
to vice, to prosecute his intentions of a reformed life, if it were but to
spite the fury of such a malicious adversary. As for the Gathered Churches, as
he calls them, he acknowledges both Prudence and Reputation to be among them.
But withal, by way of Tenderness would insinuate to the World, that he beleives
that the Nut-shel which contained Homers works would comprehend both. Otherwise
he could never be so idle as to think, they would forfeit those precious Jewels
of Prudence and Reputation to uphold a Rogue or a visible Knave or cherish a
known sinner in his Wickedness. But the mark at which he shoots is apparent.
For having fixed the Characters of Rogue and Knave, upon me, he endeavors by
the same Artifice to undermine the Prudence and Reputation of the Gathered
Churches, by pretending them to be my Abettors: With the Stilletto of a Tender
Caution wounding both their Reputation and Prudence at once, which he seems to
be so nice of. In all which he does but verify the Text of Holy Writ, whose
Oracles never fail, which tells us, that the Tenderness and Mercies of the
Wicked are Cruelty. Thus the Prudence of the Gathered Churches distinctly
discerns, and more than this; for they cannot but be almost assured from the
venomous Symptoms of this Paragrapher, that their present persecutions proceed
in some Measure from his Councles, and that if a new Writ de Haeretico
Comburendo were let loose again, he would be as active and as nimble as 'ere a
Bonner or Gardner in England ever was to remove these eye sores of the
Protestant Religion from his sight. Nor do their Reputation less appear, by
their Patient suffering the Scorns and Contumelies which are daily thrown upon
them, with the same Patience, and enduring the Disturbance of their
Consciences, by awaking dormant Acts against them; And all this to Exasperate
their Loyalty, and incense them to incur their Sovereign's Displeasure: While
the Dreams and Buffoonries of the Observator and Heraclitus are fostered and
encouraged, to lighten and inflame our Divisions; those pretty Motions that are
blindly moved through the Fatal Cunning of Jesuitism, by the great Wheel of
Romish Consultation. Those Corrosives of imbittered Language, that keep our
Wounds still festring, which else might soon be closed without the least
appearance of a Scar. Proceedings so much the more to be wondered at, that we
should be vexing and tormenting the Native Protestants of the Land, at the same
time when the Kingdom rejoices to be the far applauded Sanctuary of Exiled
Foreigners of the same Profession, exterminated from their Estates, their
Callings and their Habitations, only for the same Crimes of Conscience and
Protestant Religion.

Having thus as I hope wiped off the Stains of Printed Reproach, cast upon me
by those I never in my Life provoked or injured; I am now to give an Account of
an Accident that lately befell me in Essex. An Affair that has made such a great
Noise in the World, and set the Clacks of all my Adversaries a going, even to a
Midwives Vanity: and would have made a far louder Din, had not my Innocence,
Scanned in the face of Justice, brought me off.

A Gentleman, a Friend of Mr. Colleges, understanding I was to take a Journey
into Essex, and that I was well acquainted at Waltham, desired me to take that
place in my way; and to discourse with one George French an Innkeeper in that
Town, to know what he could truly testify concerning the Life and Conversation
of one Heynes an Irishman, who was expected to give Evidence against College
at Oxford, and if I could judge him to speak any thing material, that I would
serve him with a Subpena, he giving me one at the same time. At first, I
refused to engage in this Affair, as being an Evidence for the King in the
Discovery of several Treasons and Villainies of the Papists; but the Gentleman
pressing it upon me, and withal telling me that I was as much obliged to use
all lawful and honest means to preserve the Kings Subjects, as to testify
against them upon any Legal Prosecution, and having no knowledge more than what
was Popular and Common talk of what was laid to Colledge's Charge, no way
concerned either for, or against him; on the other side Personally knowing
Hayns to be a most Notorious Papist, that had corresponded with Mrs. Celiers,
and the Popish Lords in the Tower, and one that had been employed of her to run
of Errands to the Prisons, and perticularly between her and my self, when I was
a Prisoner for Debt in the Kings Bench, upon these Considerations I thought my
self, as much obliged to do that piece of honest service to Mister College, as
the Gentleman was willing to have me, and took Horse upon the Sunday after
Evening Prayer, and rode to the said George French's house at the Kings Arms in
Waltham, designing to stay there all Night. Being showed into a Chamber, I sent
for the Master of the house, who neither knew me, nor I him. I asked him his
name, and how long he had kept the house. To which he replied his name was
French, and that he had kept the house about two or three years; that he had a
few years before served the Right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury, in the
Station of an Under-Groom, by which means he had got together a small parcel of
money, and happening withal to marry an industrious woman, (he meant one of
Buscon(...) Ladies of Industry) all helps brought him into a capacity of taking
that House. Then he began to relate the Disasters he had met with since he
undertook that employment, particularly that about a year before, he had
entertained three Irish-men, who continued with him till they had run Forty or
Fifty pounds in his debt, that they were often visited by one Heynes; that one
Mr. Ohara, Who was one of the Three before mentioned, took upon him to pay the
Debt^ upon which the other two came away for London, but that Ohara continued
in his House for some few days after; in which time Ohara took an occasion to
quarrel with him, which gave him an oppertunity of swearing he would do the
Innkeepers business, and be revengd upon him: Soon after, to make his words
good, Ohara came to London, and upon Information given to Sir George Treby
Recorder, he procured a Warrant to apprehend French for Clipping and Coining. A
happiness many of the Irish have by the benefit of their Consciences, that they
can pay Debts with a jerk, and not be constrained to lie lurking and gusling
away their precious tune in White-Fryers among Sharpers.
About a day or two after this, French having some extraordinary business to
London, in a Coach upon the Road (and within the County of Middlesex) met Ohara
and Haines, who imediately seaz'd, and carried him before Mr. Raynton, one of
His Majesty's Justices of the Peace; who, upon what the Warrant imported,
committed French to Newgate.

French thus took up, before th time of Prosecution, Ohara desires to withdraw
his Information; but being told how Villainous such practices were, and how
liable he had made himself to an Indictment of Perjury, better considered of
the matter, and going to Newgate to French, sell upon his knees before him, and
(with an Irish Ohone) besought his pardon, offering to repair all the damages
he had suffered by that Imprisonment; withal declaring, that what he had ^worn
against him was all false; For some my be greater Rogues then others.
that he was made Drunk and put upon it by that Villain Haines (for so he
called him) and promised to take care about his discharge at the next Sessions,
which was accordingly done. Upon this relation, which is verbatim as I had it
from French, I served him with a Subpena, whereupon he demanding my name, I
told it him. This being over, French leaves me, saying he would acquaint his
Wife with it, whom he promised to bring up; and entreated me to rightly inform
her about it, being big with Child, least she might possibly be too much
concerned for the absence of her Husband; and going away, leaving the Subpena
upon the Table, but before he saw his Wife, he went into the next Room, in
which was a Quartermaster belonging to one of my Lord of Oxford's Troops, who
goes by the name of Bruff, and four or five Troopers more, who had been tossing
the Glasses about all that day, (as French informed me) and to them he makes
his complaint, swearing he had been served with something called a Subpena to
go down to Oxford, to be a witness for one College, upon which, Bruff desired
to see the Warrant, which French fetched him. He, upon perusal, swore Damn him,
that could not force him to go, because there was neither Hand nor Seal to it;
that it was a new design to draw him into trouble, by making of him be a
Witness against the King; that it was a piece of Forgery, etc. and then asked
French who gave it him? He answered one Dangerfield. Presently says the
Coxcombly pollitician of a Quartermaster, do you go and tell him here are four
or five Gentlemen would be glad to drink a Glass of Wine with him, to have an
oppertunity of acknowledging the good services he has done by his discovery, to
the King and Country; for if I get but once into his Company, let me alone to
affront him. Upon which, French returning to my Chamber door, made a stand, and
there related the desire of the aforesaid Company, Bruff all the while standing
behind him; I answered French, I was a little disturbed with riding, and was so
unfit either to take, or make a visit, that I did intend so soon as I had supped
to go to Bed: Upon which Bruff forced himself into my Room, swearing Damn him,
the Company were honest drunken fellows, and that they were resolved to drink a
Glass of Wine with me, and then he sat down. Whereupon I demanded if he or any
of his company knew me, or if he thought I knew any of them? to which he
answered no. Then I told him my circumstances would not allow me to be in
company of persons I knew not; withal excusing to him what rudeness I could
not avoid being then guilty of, for that I could not allow him to stay longer
than the drinking of one Glass of Wine; then he swore, Damn him, he did not
intend to stay any longer with me, and desired me to drink any health to him,
what I pleased, which he promised to pledge and be gone: To this I answered, I
did not accustom my self to drink healths, in regard it was the only promoter
of quarrels. He replied, that was only about the healths of women; and then
pressed me to drink the Kings health. I told him I was unwilling to drink any
health at all, for many reasons, some of which were these; First, the Lords day
was not expired. Secondly, that the King had caused a Proclamation to be
published, showing His Majesty's dislike about drinking of any health. And
thirdly, It was not visible to me, wherein I could in the least measure
contribute to the Kings service by the drinking of his health; but if he would
undertake to make out that it did, I should think my self as much obliged, as
he seemed earnest to have it done, and that with a heart as full of Loyalty as
he, or e're a man living. Upon which he took upon him to make me understand how
it would be serviceable to the King, for me to drink His Majesty's health, by
this Interpretation: For says he, This Quartermaster was a profound
Bacchanalian, of the Order of the Holy Eumenides; and had read all the Folio's
of the famous Asdriasdust Tissofican all over, and has made comments upon them:
but bring him a Point of War, and you gravel him presently.
To drink a health, does imply the honor, goodwishes, and highest obligations
to service imaginable; and in fine, after one man has drunk another health,
it is to be understood from that very time, that he becomes his Slave and
Vassal, and therefore, in such a time of distinction as this is, he thought
every loyal hearted man, that loved his King as he ought to do, oblidged to
that interpretation, is an argument prevalent eenough to drink the Kings
health. To this I replied, the King, I humbly conceived, only expected a
peaceable and quiet obedience from his People, whom His Majesty calls good
Subjects, not Slaves or Vassals; and I could not hold my self obliged to take
any notice of his interpretation. Then he pressed me in the Common Dialect of
Civility, intimating how much I was obliged to answer the request of a
Gentleman and a Stranger, and in my own Room too. To that I reply*d, that he
was only a presumtive guess that had by his carriage, rendered himself more bold
than welcome because not invited; but yet since he had put the thing by the way
of Common Civility, I would not be behind hand with him; and then I promised to
drink the Kings, provided he would not impose any other health upon me: Upon
which he let fall a Rapsodie of Oaths and Curses, wherein I thought he had
bound himself as fast as that sort of Troopery engagement could hold him. But
he little regarded those ties: For I had no sooner filled his Glass but he
begins the D. of Yorks health upon me. Whereupon I stood up and declared I
would not drink it, because of the interpretation which he himself had made but
just before of health drinking; and for that, I had a Thousand reasons best
known to my self, besides as many well known to the world, why I would not
engage my self, to be his Highnesses Slave or Vassal, and so I refused his
health. Then he began to catch at the expression, Reasons best known to my
self; and said, he would give me one convincing argument for my drinking that
health: I being full of curiosity to hear that, desired him to declare what it
was; then he insisted that the Duke being of the Church England, His Majesty's
Royal Brother, and next Heir to the Crown, and prayed for in the Church
according to the appointment of the Canon Laws thereof, I ought to, and that
was the very reason that induced him and many Thousands besides to drink his
Highnesses health. To Which I replied, that though the Duke were prayed for as
a branch of the Royal Family, in a distinct Prayer; yet I could not understand
that either that Prayer, or the Common Laws of the Church, had made any
appointment for drinking his health, and therefore I refused it; adding, that
if he were no better acquainted with Martial, than he seemed to be with
Ecclesiastical Affairs, he was very unfit to serve the King; and so I desired
the Bugbear to withdraw; for which he call*d me Son of a whore, and gave me
some other Thunder-thumping complements of the same nature, which I very
patiently took, finding his behavior such, as if he had the Popes Pardon or
dispensation in his Pocket, for his own security, in case he had cut my Throat.
And therefore I courted him diverse times to march off, which at length he did,
discharging, as he went, such Volleys of flaming Oaths, as if his Jaws had
been the vent of Aetna.

When he came into his own Room, he and his Crew, drank my Damnation, That must
be forgiven him, as being done by the appointment of the Ecclesiastical Cannon
Laws, which he had studied.
and while he continued there, I went to Supper, having sent for the Woman of
the house, to whom I declared how I had served her Husband with a Subpena, to
go the next day, being Monday, toward Oxford; and then I asked if she would be
content to spare him for five or six days? she answered yes, if the business he
went about were just and honest, and that he might have his charges borne. To
which I answered, the business was just and honest; for which I referred her to
the words of the Subpena, (viz.) that he was to testify the Truth according to
his knowledge, in a Cause between the King and etc. and that what Money the Law
did allow to other Witnesses in such Cases, I did promise to see paid to her
Husband. The Woman seemed very well content, and after Supper leaving mine,
went into the Troopers Room, where by that time, they and the man of the House
were gotten sufficiently Drunk; in which condition they laid their heads
together to paraphraise upon the writ of Subpena. Says Bruff, Dam him for a
Dog that made that Subpena, (speaking to the Woman) it is a shamm, and a design
to dram your Husband into some more Roguery. Then says the Woman, For you must
know there are a sort of Industrions Women that use to swear at this rate.
Damn that Dog, Dangerfield, for I will have his business done before he goes
hence. Damn me, says Bruff, do, well all help you. I being in my own Room, and
hearing this threatening Dialogue, thought I had reason enough to apprehend my
Life in danger. Thereupon I sent my man for the Master of the House three
times, but he still brought me word he was so Drunk that he could not come;
which answer he had every time from the Wife, who as often as the Husband
attempted to stand up; she struck him down again with a swinging Curse or two,
These are other marks of an Industrious woman.
interlarded with slaps of the Face. Then I sent several times for the Woman,
but neither was to be persuaded. Presently hearing an extraordinary noise
amongst 'em, I thought they were putting themselves into a posture to do my
business, (as they had all called it but just before.) Whereupon I betook my
self to my Sword and Pistol, resolving to stand upon my Guard, knowing the Law
justified Self-preservation; as being in my own Room, and besides, having
nothing wherewith to fasten the Door, I found my self so much the more exposed.
Then 'twas that I sent my man into the Street to call a Constable, or raise the
Town, with all speed, that I might be safe; who was no sooner gone from me, but
in came Mother Industry, Sir (says she) I understand you sent diverse times for
my Husband, then for me, and now for a Constable, I cannot understand your
meaning by it. And then stepping out of the Room she Swears, Dam her, my
business should be done before the Constable could come. Which was no sooner
said, but in comes the Quartermaster, who confidently demanded, what was the
matter with me, and what apprehensions of danger I had that made me send for a
Constable, and put my self in that posture of defense. (for then I cocked my
Pistol) To this I replied (drawing forth my Sword, and making a scratch on the
boards of the flowr between him and me) Sir, you are the Person from whom I
apprehend my Life to be in Danger, (I having heard all your Design) and this
being my Room, and my Castle, you having twice forced your self into the same,
without being requested thereto by my consent, either be gone, or else I will
certainly fire upon you, then the woman (for she was in the Room all the time)
pushed him into a char, swearing and cursing at the old rate, that he should
stay there for her pleasure. Then I told them I knew their design was upon my
life, and if he did attempt to come over that line or scratch upon the boards
before the Constable came, I would Pistol him, laying my Sword by at the same
time, and recovering a holster Pistol, which I also cocked and held in my Sword
hand, as thinking my self more secure with two, than with one Pistol and a
slight Sword. Upon this, the Woman whispered to Brnff, who as soon stood up,
draws his Sword and whistled, which was no sooner done but in came four or five
Ruffian-like Fellows, which I afterward understood to be the Troopers who had
been all the time in the next Room waiting for notice. Two of them Bruff
commanded to stay in the Room, and the rest to fetch their Carbines: which was
accordingly done. Then he commanded the Peace (as he call*d it) and me to
deliver my Pistols, at which time I must confess it was in my mind to have
fired; but it pleased God in his Infinite Mercy, for so it fell out, I had just
time enough to consider, that I was all alone, and among People who jointly
sought my Life; and if it should happen that I should kill one of them, tho it
were in my own defense, and my self invaded by them in my own Room; yet I
could not tell how the Devil might put it into their hearts to svvear the
thing upon me; so that I rather chose to capitulate for my life upon their
terms, and be at their mercy, than to run the hazard of being Hanged; for that
in which case I had reason enough to know, the Plea of my Innocence could do
me no service: Thereupon I told the Quartermaster I would deliver my Pistols,
provided I could have any tolerable Security for my Life. Then he Swore Dam
Him, I should have none (pressing upon me) Was not his Honor sufficent enough
for me to depend upon? He (as he said then himself) had fought diverse Prizes at
the Bear-Garden, And yet notwithstanding these reasons, many Whelps of Bitches,
do question the Honor of the Bears themselves. But it seems, according to that
Quartermasters Arguments, he is no complete Gentleman, that has not read Harry
Baily's Titles of Honor, as well as Seldons.
had been in diverse Land and Sea Fights, And should such an Eternal Son of a
Bitch as I was, question his Honor? Upon this, I resolved upon the
considerations aforesaid, not to fire; and so turning the Muzles of my Pistols
outward (not having time to uncock them) to prevent Mischief, I surrendered my
self to this man of Honor; which I had no sooner done, but as soon the
Quartermaster, catches hold of my Pistols, and turns the Muzels of 'em to my
Breast, struggling to trip up my Heels, at which time I being somewhat stronger
in my left Arm, than he was in his right with which he held my hand, I forc*d
the Muzle of the Holster-Pistol by the hollow of my Body, and passed it under
my Arm, believing it their secure: But having been wounded several times in my
right Arm and Shoulder, I wanted strength to secure the small Pistol as I had
done the other, upon which Bruff pressed so hard, that my Thumb which was on
the top of the Cock, and my Forefinger which was at the Tricker fly'd off,
then down went the Cock, giving fire to the Powder that was in the Pan. However
by the Infinite goodness of that God who knew the Innocence of my Cause, the
Pistol did not Discharge; which had it done, it must undoubtedly have killed
me; for it was Laden with a Bullet sru'd on, and the Muzle was exactly at the
middle of my Breast. Now that I might be so much the more induced to admire and
value that infinite goodness of God, which had so miraculously delivered me, I
have made trial of the same Pistol, diverse times since exactly as it was then,
and it never faild to discharge, this being the second deliverance of that
kind, which has hapened to me within this six Months; for all which, I
bless that God whom I serve, that he has made me know, it is he only is able
to deliver; for all which I submit my self to his infinite Grace and Goodness,
and now return to our Quartermaster, who by this time, with the help of his
Fellovv Ruffiains having gotten the Pistols out of my hands, fell upon me with
a most outrageous Violence. Toar all my Linen and Clothes, not without some
remembrances of the Woman's Malice, who would now and then lend her helping
hand with some small Cuffs at my Face; and because their usage to me was too
soft, she would often cry to them, Damn him, Murder him, Kill him, Kill the
Dog. And indeed I expected no other; for they drew me by force, out of my own
into their Room, where, under pretense of searching for small Arms in my
Pockets, they intended to take my money: But my telling rhem it would make 'em
liable to Indictments for Robbery, they desisted in that, but not in their
blows upon my head and face, till the Constable come, who was no sooner entered
the Room, but the Quartermaster, not giving me leave to speak, commanded the
Constable to secure me till the morning, that I might be brought before a
Magistrate, telling him how he had been forced to keep the peace; upon which,
this being the very Constable which my man brought, (whose name is Thomas
Vines) he took me back into my own Room, where I had the oppertunity of
informing him what had happened to me, which he little regarded, but still
suffered the Quartermaster and his train to come into the Room and abuse me. By
this time it was near one of the Clock, so that I resolved not to go to Bed;
but when it was day, to take my Horse and make my complaint to some Justice of
the Peace, little dreaming that the Constable for whom I sent, only to keep the
Peace for the safety of my life, would have had the impudence to detain me
longer than I had pleased; so that about Five a Clock in the morning I was
preparing to be gone, and thanked the Constable for his care about me; but he
swore he would not suffer me to go, until I had been before a Magistrate. I
demanded if he understood the duty and office of a Constable? or if he thought
himfelf safe to detain me without a Warrant, there being not the least
appearance of injury that had been done to any but my self? or if he looked
upon the Quartermasters command to be as vvarrantable to them both, as if it
had been given by a Civil Magistrate to whom such matters only belong? To all
which, he replied, he well understood his business (and so 'tvvas a sign) and
would not suffer me to stir from my Room. Nevertheless the Constable thinking
I had touched him to the quick by what I had said, goes into the Town to
advise (as I since understood) with one Tho. North, the High Constable of that
Hundred, to whom he stated the Case, fearing that what he had done in detaining
me was not warrantable, it being only the command of a Millitary person. To
which, the High Constable, who was either as much Knave or Fool as any of 'em,
replied, that he would justify him in what he had done; and ordered him, if I
did attempt to be gone, he should knock me down, or use any other violence what
he pleased. Upon this the Constable returned, and told me he had very well
considered his business, and found himself justifiable, though he killed me, if
I offered to be gone. Whereupon I submitted, only demanding what Magistrate he
intended to have me before? and when? His answer was, whom he pleased, and his
own time. When I found him so huffy, I gave him to understand how much he was
mistaken in that point; for that the Law did allow me the liberty of choosing my
Justice, provided it were in the same County, and I were not taken upon a
special Warrant: but it was all one to him, for he little regarded what I said,
only in a short time after he gave me notice to prepare my self. But I was more
surprised when I understood what they intended and had contrived to swear
against me: For I had overheard the Quartermaster, who told the Woman of the
House they were all undone, if she did not stand their Friend, for they could
not justify what they had done, unless she would swear the Peace against me.
That she soon promised to do. And that made me consider of taking some friend
along with me to be my Bail; and I accordingly sent for one, that came, and
upon my relation of the business, was as willing to go, as I was to desire him,
being well satisfied how much I had been abused.

My Friend being gone before, the Constable whispers me to this effect, Sir, I
believe you are doubtful of what is intended to be sworn against you, and least
there should be occasion for Bail have sent for that Friend, which I do assure
you need not have been. For notwithstanding what has happened about my
detaining of you, yet you had better make use of and depend upon me, who will
be bound for you as far as a hundred pounds goes. For that person which you
intend for your Bayl is a Presbiteryan, and will do both you and himself, much
prejudice, should he appear in this Affair. Now as for my friends being of any
other persuasion than that of the present Church of England, as it is
Estabish'd by Law, I knew to be most notoriously false, and had sufficient
reason to think my friend the Constable, as great a Rogue as any of the rest,
whoes best principles are all sorts of Debaucheries, and therefore I thought my
self so much the more obliged to have a friend: Because I saw all they drove
at, was to triumph and rejoice at my Committment to Prison. After this, we
set forth toward the Justices, vvhoes habitation was about four miles from
Waltham, who has formerly been best known by the name of Mad Wroth: A person
as fit for the purpose, as my accusers and the Constable were. Before him, the
Woman testified what the Troopers and she had agreed upon before, the heads of
her Information being here set down, as they were taken by that Officious
Just'ass, who out of his abundant care and Zeal (but for what he hardly knevv
himself) took the pains to ride over to Whaltham that very same day, to take
fresh examinations, or rather to temper with suborn vvitnesses against me, as
perhaps he may one day be sencible off.

Lucy French made Oath before Squire John Wroth the 15th. day of August 1681.
That Thomas Dangerfield drew his Sword and Pistol at her, and swore he would
kill her. That he told her she must take leave of her Husband, for she should
see him no more, that he told her the Subpena which he had served upon her
Husband, was in favor of my Lord of Shaftsbury, that he did give her Husband
instructions what to say when he came to Oxford, on the behalf of College.
That he the said Dangerfield did swear he would dye upon his sword point, if he
did not ruin both her and her husband, before he went out of their house, that
he came not out of kindness to the house, but to do them hurt; that he would
cause her Husband to be put in the Garet, that he would procure their License
to be taken away in a months time, etc.

With this and such kind of stuff did our Justice make shift, to patch up an
Information; which when it was taken, and as I thought, all things over as to
that, I desired my Defense might be heard; to which he replied, This Justass
was certainly cut out, to fulfill the ancient Proverb, The Devil corrects Sin.
Or had a certain Charm, by which such Country Gentlemen, us be is, in
Commission as they call it, instead of Polton's Statutes, awaken Drowsy or
rather Bowsie Justice. But here we may see what such a Country Justice can do,
when he has the Law in his own hands.
The Law did not allow such Rascals, as I was, any defense: And besides, I
stood there charged with Subornation, and had taken part with my Lord
Shaftsbury, whom he said was the greatest Traitor in the Nation; That I had
refused to drink the Duke of York's health, because he was a Papist: But then
he swore, Damn him, he knew the Duke to be a better Protestant than I was, with
a great deal more of such like impious Riff Raff. Then I told him, I thought
the rest of the Justices of the Peace, would scarce be of his opinion at the
Quarter Sessions: To which, he swore, Damn him, but he was sure they would.
However, Sir, said I, you are not Parliament Proof. With that, he swore, Damn
him, he vallued not a Parliament, a Fart for a Parliament. Then I held up my
Finger and bid him have a care; upon which, he became somewhat mild, and
offered to let me go upon Bail, which I had ready, and so the heat was over.
But just when I was coming away, says he to me, pray Sir, let me desire you to
inform your self well about the persons which put you upon serving of this
Subpena; for your cannot choose but find, they had a design to embroyl you by
it, A fine insinuation this, to dull my memory about his durty, Billingsgate
expressions concerning Parliaments.
and to leave you in the Briars, whereby your prossecuting and detecting of
Papists, and the Popish-Plot, might be rendered useless. Pray, says he again,
take my advice, and sift it to the bottom: And if you find it as I say, make
use of me to represent your discovery to the King, which shall serve to
restore you to my good opinion again; which you have at present lost by
appearing in so foul a thing, as serving the Subpena.

Now let all the world judge whether or no, this Gentleman had not a design to
suborn me to charge Mr. Colleges Friend, from whom I had the Subpena; with a
design to destroy my Evidence in the Popish-Plot? And whither or no the
overflowing of his Gall has not carried him so much beyond the sedate and mild
behavior of a Civil Magistrate, that I had just cause to think him as bad a
person as the Woman who had sworn so falsely against me? For how likely a thing
is it, that I who never knew the Woman, nor spoak to her in my life before, nor
had ever heard of any the least injury, either her self or any thing relating
to her had done me, should attempt to kill her, to threaten either her, or her
Husbands Life or Ruin, as she had sworn.

But now to show you what became of this affair, which Mr. Justice Overdo, by
his double diligence had taken no small pain to Nurss into a Subornation, I
shall tell you in a few words. Being bound over to the Quarter Sessions which
opened at Chelmsford the 4th of October, I attended, and the Evidence being
heard against me, and my Defense against that; the thing I stood charged with
seemed so improbable, that the Court (not being of Squire John's opinion,
though he had pawned his Soul upon it,) by their great Justice and Honor,
discharged both me and my Bail, leaving those malicious Prosecutors to my
course at Law; which I soon made use of, for I straight way procured a Bill to
be drawn up against Slouch the Quartermaster for the assault, and preseuted it
to the Grand Jury, who upon direct Evidences found it Billa vera; upon the
knowledge of which, the Bacchanalian Svvash-Buckler, notvvithstanding all his
health-drinking, leaving, fearing the process of the Courr would reach him,
flead, but our Justice remained behind, biting and punishing his Lips that had
so unadvisedly published his Ignoronce in the Law, his contempt of Heaven, and
slght of Salvation, finding himself not only liable besides to a just complaint
in Parliament, but in the Interval, obnoxious to several Informations in the
Crovvn-Office! not only for his misbehaviour in this single affair, but for
several most notorious misdemeaners by him committed, at a Special Sessions
held at Epping in the Month of September, which he may be sure to hear of on
both sides his Ears. As also how basely he has represented the Kings Person
to the whole Country?

That which follows now, is such a piece of unparralel'd Impudence, as nothing
but a Devil in that horrible Shape of a Papist would be guilty of. The Copy of
a Letter which was sent to the Honorable Sir Thomas Player, there having been
some Scores containing the same matter, sent by the Penny-Post to diverse other
Eminent Citizens and Persons of Quality. Which Letters by the Style, the hand
Writing, and the most notorious and apparent stories and defamations hodg
podg'd together in the same, sufficiently demonstrate them to be contrived and
sent abroad by some Rascally lying Priest, and subscribed by the two first
Letters of that so Famous Female Politition, Madam Cellier's Name. The Letter
runs thus, Verbatim.

I cannot but extremely concern my self about your great misfortune, in having
any thing to do with that Monster of a Man Dangerfield: who though his carriage
among you seem very demure, and his cunning such that he yet passes for a very
honest man, and is hugged and caressed by many Eminent Citizens (as I my self
have been an Eye Witness too) yet I can assure you, since the King came from
Windsor, he has been to kiss his hand, and has given such a Catalogue of Name,
charged with such desperate, bloody, and Villainous Treasons, and that for the
most part against no small Persons; that when I first heard the account
thereof, it made my Hair stand an end, admiring how it was possible for a man
to have so much of the Devil in him, and to conceal it thus long, and so well,
as to be taken for the greatest miracle in a Correction that has happened in
these latter days.

For my part, I am of the Church of England Established by Law, and yet have
the Charity to be concerned to see how that subtel Emissary, that true Emblem
of his Lord and Master, Shaftsbury, (who is certainly a Papist in his heart,
and would hazard both Body and Soul to destroy the least thing bearing the name
of a Protestant were it in his Power) gulls and leads you poor unthinking
Fanatics about by the Noses, when in very deed he is at the same time
endeavoring to destroy all that industry and pains, which you have been so
long taking, to secure Religion, Liberty, and Property, and instead of that
thing called Unity (then which the thinking men of our Church nothing more
desire) he is using far worse means than any of those Shamming Villains have
yet done to inflame the Nation, (...) put us all into Mutiny and Confusion.

As for what is past in relation to College and others, it is very
insignificant; and all those Irish, and the rest of the Tools, had rendered
themselves useless; and you will see them as much slighted shortly, because
they cannot go through-stitch with what they undertook.

But I can assure you, Dangerfield is too cunning a Rogue, to miscarry in such
a weighty Affair, where his Neck is so much concerned; and has taken such good
Notes (as he calls 'em), and brought such considerable Persons of Quality, in
Disguises, into your several Clubs and Meetings, that, for ought I see, if the
Great God stand not firmly by you, you are all lost as one Man.

It makes my very Heart bleed, to find such Villains have any Being on Earth;
much more to live in Conversation with, or have any room in the Opinions of
honest Men.

I cannot give you an Account of any the Particulars of his Hellish Design as
yet; but hope my Diligence in the discovery thereof, will afford you more in a
short time; till which, take this, as it imports perfect Truth, and the great
esteem I have for the safety and wellbeing of your self, and all sober honest
Men.

Sir, Yours in all lawful Services, E. C.
August 31. 81.

From this Letter all Men of Reason, that wilfully will not close the Eyes of
their Understandings, may easily deduce the Character of the whole Popish Gang,
of which this same Jesuitical Caution-monger seems to be one of the great
Bell-weathers. There is in it Malice, Envy, Treachery, Inhumanity,
counterfeited-Friendship, Forgery, Dissimulation, Lying, and that particular
Vice which gave to Satan the additional Name of Devil, or Diabolus, False
accusation; which makes out the Character of a Papist to be Envious, Malicious,
Treacherous, Inhumane, a Counterfeit-Friend, a Forger, a Dissembler, a Liar,
and a False-accuser: A Vice so much detested and abominated by all the Saints
in Heaven, that one of the Reasons set down in the Revelations why they gave
Glory and Honor to God, was this, Because the Accuser of the Brethren was cast
down into the Bottomless-pit.

Now to show the World that this same Son of Mischief, who wrote the foregoing
Letter, has accumulated to himself all those rare and diabolical Qualities
beforementioned, and made himself the very Pandora's Box of all the Infections
that destroy Common Morality; his Malice, his Envy, and his Inhumanity appear
in this, that believing me to be in the favor of worthy and good Men, he
endeavors to canker their Friendships toward me; as if all other Men were to
bear me hatred, because it would be a thing acceptable to the envenomed rancour
of him and his Party; and because he thinks, if they should forsake me, I
should be abandoned by all the World beside. Then, thought he, necessity would
constrain the miserable and forlorn Wretch to seek for succor, to unsay what I
have said, to unswear what I have sworn, and make my self the Opprobrium of the
World, as others have done. No, no, Sir, you were mistaken in your Measures; I
am not a Person of those tottering Resolutions, to be shaken by your Paper
Engines: Nor shall all the Necessities in the World make me recede a Tittle
from what I have asserted in the Face of the Nation; but shall be ready to
appear again, whenever called, with the same boldness and the same Truth that
redeemed me from the Vassalage of a burdened Conscience. His Counterfeited
Friendship and Dissimulation appears in his being so extremely concerned for
the great Misfortune of Sir Thomas Player, and other Eminent Citizens, for
having any thing to do with that Monster of a Man, Dangerfield: By which he
shows himself an exact Follower and Admirer of his Doctor St. Judas, to pretend
a kindness, and trouble for their Misfortune, while he was seeking to betray
them with a Kiss. For, his kind Paper, and his deep Concerns, were Contrivances
to probe their Hearts. Had those worthy Gentlemen showed any Signs of
Commotion, had they seemed to have been startled at the News and Discovery of
such a Monster of a Man, thence they would have argued a certain Guilt: And
then you should have had those Miscreants observing every Motion and Lineament
of their Faces, like Picture drawers; then you should have had 'em diving into
the very bottom of their Breasts, like Indians for Pearly Oyster-shells: Nor
would they ever have left 'em, till they had found, though it had been but a
Barley-corns-worth of Probability; knowing well what a Mountain of Treason they
could have built upon such a small Foundation. But such was the firm and
unspotted Loyalty of those Gentlemen, that all the Efforts of this same
Hell-prompted Son of Belial proved unsuccessful.

But now to compass his Design, and to make out his Kindness, Dangerfield must
be a Monster of a Man: For the Papis's never use to slander, but they do it to
purpose. And indeed I Will say that for him, hitherto he has laid the Plot of his
Lie like an Artist; it is all super-fine Roguery, all Wimble-Mischief. But alas!
by and by, through the diverting Direction of Providence, the Fool spoils all
again, and down comes the whole Machine of his Forgery upon his own Head. For,
says he, tho Dangerfield pass for a very honest Man, etc. yet I can assure
you, since the King came from Windsor, he has been to kiss His Hand, and has
given such a Catalogue of Names, charged with such desparate, bloody, and
villainous Treasons, etc.

A Man had been finely served now, that should have made a Lying Match, and
laid a round Wager upon this Fellow's Head. Certain it is, that this same
Intelligencer could not choose but be assured, that at the same time all this
was false; and yet he has the impudence to make His Majesty Himself concerned.
Had he no body to put his Fables and his Stories upon, but upon the King? Could
he not be content to forge an impudent Untruth, but his Villainship must be so
detestably insolent, as it were to bespeak the Royal Attestation to make it
probable? However, I gain one extraordinary Happiness by it, of which I am not
a little proud, that I have the Great Exemplar of Justice on my side, to acquit
me from so foul a Reproach; to whom I humbly appeal, and at the same time
provoke the Engraver of my Monstrosity to do the same. Nay, he goes on, driving
the Nail to the Head, and thinking to clinch it of the other side: The Treasons,
quo' he, were so desparate, bloody, and villainous, that when he first heard
the account thereof, his Hair stood on End.

He would seem by these Words to be a Person that used to be frighted with his
own Shadow; but he is too desperate a Knave to be so easily scared. Some say it
was the Devil that stood at his Elbow, to help his Invention, that made his
Hair stare: But that can never be neither; the Visit of a dear Friend, such as
the Devil is to him, can never be terrible to any Man: Therefore there must be
some other Reason why his Hair stood on end: I think I have it; His Conscience
appeared to him in the ghastly shape of Treason and Murder, mantled with
Perjuries and High-Treasons, with a Glory of Hell-sire encircling her Brows;
and that put him into a terror for a while: but it seems he had a Charm, and
sent her packing with a vengeance; for he has no sooner done with one Lie, but
he begins another immediately.

For my part, says he, I am of the Church of England established by Law. Which
if he be, I durst be bound to do Penance with Nebuchadnezzar. He of the Church
of England! Rather of some of those West India Congregations that worship the
Devil. No Man can believe him to be of that Church, of which no sooner has he
professed himself a Member, but he presently divests it of the true Character
of Christianity: For, says he, I am of the Church of England, yet have the
Charity to be concerned, etc. As if Charity, without which there can be no true
Religion, were not a thing usual in the Church of England; only he had picked
up a little by the bye. Truly the Church of England is very much honored by
such a Member. But the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of England, I hope,
is too well known, to be cankered by such a polluted Gangren as he. They say,
indeed, that Persons infected with the Plague are still de(...) infect others;
and this, I make no doubt, was the ^^^son why he professed himself to be of the
Church of (...) For, thinks he, if I could persuade the World, that the Members
of the Church of England were without Charity, Liars, and Forgerers, like
himself, what a fine Church would he make of it? And thus you see how he levels
his Porcupine Quills at all, in particular, in general; here, there, and every
where; as if he thought that Scab of himself were sufficient to Leprosy the
whole Church of England.

But wherein does his Charity consist? Why, in being concerned to see how that
subtle Emissary, that true Emblem of his Lord and Master Shaftsbury, who is
certainly a Papist in his heart, gulls and leads you poor unthinking Fanatics
about by the Noses.

One would think a Person of so much Charity, a Man of more Charity than all
the Church of England beside, might have reserved about the quantity of half a
Scruple for me too, and not in the midst of all his Charity have shown himself
so transported, and in such an agony of raving and railing: And all this to
usher in a Lie, as long as from Dan to Beersheba, spun up with a great deal of
curiosity and study, and yet not worth the while: It being impossible for a Lie
of such a magnitude to continue long concealed. For Lies of this sort, like
Fireworks thrown in the middle of the Street, spend themselves with a Bounce,
and do no more mischief. And thus it is a strange thing that I should have been
all this time inflaming the Nation, and putting all into Mutiny and Confusion,
and no body hear of it. Nay, I am persuaded, that had this same Lie-framer
known it himself, he would not have been sparing to have given a piece of
Intelligence so conducing to the Nations safety and my Ruin.

In the Conclusion, he says, he cannot give any account of the Particulars of
this Hellish Design. Hereby the Devil may see what a great care he ought to
take, and what a Watch to set over that Creature Man. Here is a little
Conjurer, that has been using his Art, and summoning from the Infernal Regions
a whole Squadron of Lies, to assail my Reformation; and the active Hobgoblins
are busy at work: when on a sudden out drops an unwary bit of Truth from the
mouth of their Master, and then they all vanish; as our Grannams of old used to
tell us, the Devil was wont to take his Heels upon the recital of a Gloria
Patri, or a Dose of Holy Water. For now he is plain with all, and tells the
World, he cannot give any account of the Particulars of this Hellish Design.
Where I shall leave the Fool groping in the dark, desiring him nevertheless,
That when he has met with his Tinder-box, struck a Light, and overtaken the
Particulars which he is hunting after, he will be so candid as not to conceal
the least Tittle of his Knowledge, to the end he may in some measure acquit
himself from being those three things, which otherwise I must needs take him to
be; that is to say, a Liar, a Fool, and a Knave.

FINIS.

