Fears and Jealousies Ceased: Or, an Impartial Discourse, tending to
Demonstrate, from the Folly and ill Success of the Romish Politics, that there
is no Reason to Apprehend any Danger from Popery. In a Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
YOurs I received, and to my no small admiration, find that you still continue
to stuff your Letters with the old Common place Discourses of Fears and
Jealousies, and of the Dangers we are in at present; but not content with this,
you are pleased to give me a most Tragical Description of our future condition;
How our Church is to be destroyed, Protestants set together by the Ears, whilst
our Popish Enemies shall stand by, clap us on the back, spit in our mouths, and
hearten us on to cut one another Throats: Who (as you say) when they shall be
cloyed with the Sport, will take the Sword out of our Hands, finish the Work we
have so bravely begun, by dispatching those that remain; or at least, reducing
them to submit to that heavy Yoke, which we see our Miserable Brethren of
France groan under at this day.

These things set off with the advantages of your Popular Air and Style, some
Weeks ago, might perhaps have made a deep Impression, not only in the thick
Skulls of your Country Neighbors, but likewise in the Minds of those that are
more conversant in the World; certain it is, that something of that Nature did
startle many, that in all outward appearance, seemed to be much clearer sighted
than our common Pretenders to Politics. Nor indeed were they much to be
blamed, who could scarce persuade themselves that our Church was designed to be
maintained in its Ancient Splendour, when such undue Methods were taken to
extinguish the most eminent Lights within it. What hopes had we of enjoying our
former Peace and Tranquillity, when we saw every little Canting Pamphleteer not
only suffered, but encouraged, nay hired, to foment our Animosities, to widen
our breaches with their scurrilous Libels, and by impudent Forgeries, endeavor
to exasperate the Rabble against their Superiors; whilst in the mean time our
Dissenting Brethren without, instead of joining with us against the Common
Enemy, were allured with Pensions to pursue their petty Quarrels with all the
Rancour imaginable; and our dangerous Assenting Brethren tempted with
Preferments to betray us from within. Who could imagine that our Government was
safe, when we saw all those Prudent Laws which our Wise Ancestors were a making
for above these hundred years, ready to be blown away at one blast? What Person
could be secure of his Birthright, or Body Politic of its Rights and
Privileges, considering the havoc that was lately made in our Corporations
and Universities? These Considerations, I say, some small time ago, were able,
no doubt, to Conjure up again the Old Devil of Fears and Jealousies, which
perhaps, had things remained in the same Condition, all the Eloquence of our
State Orators could never have been able to lay. But now to use the Learned
Expression of a late Dull Philosophical Scribler, Cessante Causa tollitur
Effectum. His Majesty has by one Act rendered the Malice of our Enemies as
impotent as their Arguments; he has made all our Fears to vanish; he has
secured our Rights, Laws, and Religion; in a word, he has as it were
reestablished the Church of England. It is this insurmountable Bulwark that
must be first undermined, before any attempts can be made, with the least
success, upon our Religion and Government: But whilst it stands firm and
unshaken, as we have now all the Reason in the World to believe it ever will,
in vain torment we our selves with Jealousies, in vain do the Factious
Malcontents suggest to us their Chimerical Dangers of Popery, and its
inseparable Concomitants, Tyranny and Slavery: And I don't doubt, but I shall
be able in the following Discourse, to make it clearly evident, That all
Insinuations of that Nature, are at this time of the Day, altogether as
groundless, as the spreaders thereof show themselves the most ungrateful of Men
toward his Sacred Majesty.

I suppose, by the Liberty I have already taken, you will not suspect that I
would go about to Banter you with the Shams of an Occurrencer, or endeavor to
wheedle you into a destructive security, by the base and detestable Artifices
of the French Politicians, who at that very Instant of time, when the
Revocation of the Edict of Nantes was drawing up, gave out several
Declarations, in which they made the most solemn Protestations that it should
be kept inviolable. No, I shall discover my thoughts to you with the Sincerity
of a Protestant, and that Freedom of Speech which is the Inborn Right of an
Englishman. I shall Impartially weigh, to the best of my Capacity, all those
Reasons which make this Phantom of Popery appear so terrible to us, and don't
at all doubt but that I shall easily make it evident that it is but a vain
Shadow, and that we are so well sprinkled with Holy Water, that it has no power
to approach to hurt us.

Now in the first place, I suppose you will agree with me, that before Popery can
gain any ground upon us here in England, it must first take possession of, and
strongly fortify it self in the Noddles of a great part of the Rabble, it is
from hence that the Booted-Apostles must be raised, This must be the Seminary
to furnish us with Missionaries, to Convert such as have any Brains in their
Heads, which as Dear Joy says very well, must certainly be first beaten out,
before there be any room for Popery. Let us see therefore, whether it be
seazible for our Romish Friends to gain such a Party amongst us, as thereby to
entertain any hopes of effecting their Designs.

If we consider the good old Popery in its pure Naturals, we shall find it to
be such a hideous Monster, as the most Ignorant and Stupid amongst us, will be
so far from being enamored with, that the most effectual way to create in them
an irreconcilable aversion to it, is to let them but have a view of it. But
its Holy Mother, the Church, you will say has been a long time a Tricking up this
sweet Babe of hers: The Damm has been above these Hundred and Fifty years a
licking her Cubb into some more agreeable Shape, it is confessed; and instead
of a shapeless innocent Lump (I mean in Comparison of what it is at present)
has produced a most Ravenous Beast of Prey, one Paw of which, is certainly more
terrible to us than its whole Body was to our Forefathers. Let us cast our eyes
a little upon our Neighboring Kingdom of France, where, as it is confessed by
all, that above any place in Europe the most Refined Popery is established;
(for as for Spain, it does for the most part jogg on after the old rate still;
and in Italy, that is an Article of Faith one Post Day, which is Damnable
Heresy another.) If we look into France, I say, and behold with what barbarous
cruelty they use the poor Protestants there, what unheard of Torments they make
'em endure, we shall find that Hanging, Burning, and Cutting of Throats, is but
Plain Work, in comparison of the more exquisite Inventions of those Modern
Executioners. Now if these be the Effects of Refined Popery, I leave you to
determine what Stomach People can have to fall in love with our Super-Refiners.

But you will object perhaps, that whatever concerns France, is wholly Foreign
to us; and that the greatest part of our Nation is not to be moved with any
thing but what we our selves see acted, or at least remember done. As to the
former part of this objection, I answer that the same Causes must necessarily
produce the same Effects; We see that our Converters brought over their
Doctrine along with them from France, a little mended I must confess according
to their poor Abillities: They pursued the same Methods to propagate it as the
French did before they took off the Mask, and had not his Majesty been
Graciously pleased to stop their Proceedings, there is no doubt but that their
Endeavors would not have been wanting to imitate to the Life, if not to
improve the Original.

As to the second part of the objection, I will suppose it at present to be
true; that most men here are wholly ignorant of the Affairs of their Brethren
abroad: Yet have they learned from the Actions and Writings of the Propagators
themselves, enough to make them for ever detest that Religion, which suggests
to her Followers such treacherous means, as they have used to introduce it: To
prove which I need only put you in mind of some of their brave exploits for
which they will never be forgotten in England; and from hence you may easily
imagine how mightily they are like to prevail amongst us.

You cannot but remember how in his late Majesty's Reign, the greatest part of
those Persons who had distinguished themselves for their Loyalty to their
Prince, and Affection to their Church, seeing a most Powerful Party of the
Nation furiously enraged against the whole Canaille of these Miscreants, took
compassion on their sufferings, and without over-curiously examining their
Case, but judging by themselves that it was impossible for Animals in Human
shape to be guilty of what they were accused, snatched them out of the fire,
though they burnt their own hands by the bargain; stood in the Gap betwixt them
and Death, and abandoned themselves to the Fury of the incensed Multitude, to
preserve these Wretches. Now after such signal obligations one might reasonably
expect some small signs of Gratitude from them to their Protectors; But they
that did so knew them not; and they that had unwarily Nourisht them in their
Bosoms, soon found what a Generation of Vipers they had to deal with: Who as
soon as they were warm fell a Hissing and Spitting their Venom at their
Benefactors. Surely we might have hoped for at least that Favor at their hands
which the Cyclops gave to Ulysses, to be the last objects of their outrageous
Malice: But these more Savage Monsters of Ingratitude scorned to follow the
steps of any in their Villainies, and were resolved to become an Original
themselves never to be imitated.

But I will yet suppose that there are many Englishmen, who out of the
abundance of their Charity, will absolve these good Fathers of what has been
hitherto said, and lay all the fault at the door of Holy Church. The C. of E.
they will say was the greatest obstacle to the Introduction of Popery, she
therefore must be destroyed, let the means to bring it about be never so
Infamous: Their Religion dispenses with all those petty toys called Honor,
Conscience, and Morality, whenever her own advancement is concerned. Well,
granting these to be the Principles they sucked from the Breasts of their Holy
Mother, yet a Man would think they might have the sense to conceal them from us
Heretics, or the Common People at least; the most part of which are not so
very conversant with the Casuists, as to have their stomachs prepared to digest
so crude a Doctrine. But if we take a short view of their late Actions, we
shall find it to be a matter of Controversy, whether they have not shown
themselves not only to the Discerning part of Mankind, but even to those of the
meanest Capacity, to be greater Fools than Villains.

This is a bold Assertion, I confess, especially in a matter where the Reverend
Fathers the Jesuits are concerned: But I Will appeal to any one whether it be
possible for a more stupendous piece of Folly to enter into the thoughts of
Man, than that which our Wise and Politic Missionaries were guilty of, when
they had the Confidence to maintain, not in a Corner, but in the Face of the
whole World, such Forgeries, which there was not a Boy, whose Memory served him
for five years, but might discover, and at the same time give the Good Fathers
the Lie in their Teeth. Who would blush for these men, when he sees in their
Writings the Church of England accused of all the Extravagancies of some fiery
Dissenting Zealots in the late Plot time: The Church of England men, not
excepting the Bishops themselves, represented as the Contrivers, Promoters, and
Managers of the Bill of Exclusion: Nay, and one that had never known any thing
of our concerns, would guess by their Libels that the whole Church had been
resolved into a Camp in the time of Monmouth's Invasion, and that all her
Members had sworn to live and dye with the Rebel; when at the same time, I need
not tell you how notorious it is to all that have ever heard any thing of our
late Transactions, that it was for the Height of their Loyalty to their late
Sovereign, their Zeal for His present Majesty's Service, in opposing the Bill
before, and the quelling of the last and dying efforts of his Enemies, since
his coming to the Crown, that was the great occasion of all those Heats and
Animosities, which our Common Adversaries (whose preservation was not the least
ingredient toward the enflaming of them) have endeavored since to make so
great an advantage of. But shall we be angry with these Ingenuous men who have
thus Represented us? By no means; let them alone and have Rope, and (as the
Proverb says) they will hang themselves. They can do us no greater Service than
continue to rail at us; the best Arguments in the World to make People detest
and abhor them, are their own elaborate Writings: For can you think it possible
that any Idiots should be so senslless as to believe these Persons in the
Stories they tell, of some Hundreds of years standing, when they find so many
gross Impostures in reports they make of things that were done, as it were, but
Yesterday?

I cannot therefore help smiling, to see you so serious in bringing forth one
of your main Reasons for your Fear of Popery; and that is forsooth the profound
Politics, which the Managers of that Party have been always so famous for. Not
many years ago we might perhaps have apprehended something from them of that
Nature, whilst we are still prejudiced in their Favor; by all the Histories of
the last age, whereby we learn that in those days they never acted any of their
more eminent Villainies, till their Plots were so laid that they could scarce
fail of success, and apparent advantages to the Cause.

It was only upon such well grounded Designs that they raised Rebellions, and
Murdered Princes and others in their Persons and Reputations; It was for the
Advancement of the Catholic Church, that they contrived, and carried on the
Holy League in France; against Henry the 3d, and his Majesty's Grandfather
Henry the 4th, and to secure it, Murdered them both. It was to put this Nation
into perpetual Confusion that they endeavored to blow up his Majesty's other
Grandfather King James the first, together with the best part of the Nobility
and Gentry. They Encouraged and assisted the Scotch Rebels against his Father
K. Charles the first, that they might set us Heretics a cutting one another
Throats: It was to reduce the Low Countries to the Obedience of the Holy See
that the Prince of Orange was Assassinated. It was to create an abhorrence in
the minds of people against Heresy, that they Banter'd the Poor Ignorant
Spaniards, and made them believe that Englishmen ever since the Reformation
were shaped like Dragons; and reported all about the World that the Devil was
run away with Luther alive.

But, as there are certain Periods of time for the Rise and Fall of all other
Arts and Sciences, so it is no wonder if we find a sensible Decay in the once
so flourshing Politiques of the Religious Society; It is manifest to all men
what wretched Bunglers our Present Awkward Pretenders to them have showed
themselves. For though it cannot be denied that they, Poor Souls, have always
discovered a willing mind to imitate the most Notorious of their Predecessors
in their most execrable Crimes; nay, and I dare say that for them, they are so
well become Conscience proof, that as far as the promoting of any Mischief
goes, their weak endeavors shall never be wanting to surpass them if it were
possible. Yet if one shoud enquire how the Catholic Cause has thrived under
their hands; he will soon find that instead of Effecting any of those Glorious
Enterprises which their Brave Ancestors by executing, have rendered their Names
deservedly Infamous, to all succeeding Ages; they with all the Bustle and
Clutter they have made in the World, have gained nothing but the Odium of all
Mankind; without being guilty of any thing that looked like a design, or at
least but such as has been so poorly laid, that the most short-sighted might be
able to look through with half an Eye; they have exposed the Weakness of their
Cause to the Contempt of Wise men, and its Deformities to the scorn and
detestation of all others. These things being certainly true, as I am able
further to prove, if you or any one shall make the least doubt of them, I must
beg pardon of the Reverend Fathers of the Mission, if I entertain so mean an
Opinion of them, as to think that their Common Sense is at last vanished, as
well as their Honesty and Learning.

By mentioning their Learning, I find I had almost forgot that to be one of the
weighty reasons of your Fears; which I cannot but wonder to see you lay so
great a stress upon at this time of the Day. Time was indeed when we
entertained a very Favorable opinion of their Learning, of which they,
especially the Jesuits, have made such Noisy Brags all over Europe; a while ago
we thought it was in the power of their Elaborate Eloquence to lead Captive
some silly Women; Ay, and that they could by pure dint of Sophistry, confound
the addle brains of some Crazy-men too. But now the Good Fathers have by
indefatigable Industry, and all the success imaginable labored to undeceive
the World in this point, and let us, who expected such mighty things from them,
know that we were much mistaken in thinking that they, Poor Men, were in the
least guilty of any thing that looks like a Scholar.

I cannot advise you, my Friend, to a more infallible Remedy to cure your
Ignorance in this point, nor inflict a more severe Penance upon you for it,
than to desire you to read some of their Writings; and if you are not then
fully convinced, beyond all contradiction, by undeniable Arguments of their
own, that they are as perfectly endued with all the Dullness, Stupidity, and
Duncery as is possible for Pedants, that have received any tincture of Letters,
to be, I Will be content to give up the Cause. But lest your Mortification should
be too great, in toyling your self by turning over that great and nauseous.
Dunghill which the Rabble of their Writers have made; to deal as gently with you
as I can, I shall (letting alone their most Incomparable Preachers,) only
recommend to your perusal a brace of their Cock Controvertists, and such I Will
assure you as are leading men among the Jesuits too, and when you are become a
little acquainted with them, you may easily guess what the Poor Under-pullers
are.

The two mighty Heroes I mean, are the Profound Sabran, and the Accurate
Pulton. Now were it possible for the Fable to be true, of the Mountains being
with Child, lying in, and being brought to Bed of a Mouse, (O how will the
little Curs snarl at me here for my Nonsense) and I were invited to the Labor
as Gossip, I am sure the whole Comedy would not force a greater laughter from
me, then I find my self inclined to, when I seriously think of these men, when
I consider with my self what a couple of Tools they have here sent us over from
beyond Sea, to persuade three Nations out of their Senses.

When you first set your eyes upon the Great Sabran, you will find him look so
big, that Captain Hackum himself, with his trussed up Whiskers, does not carry
half the terror in his Countenance: But, alas, when he comes to enter the
Lists, you will see his Learned Adversary Mr. G. put him to such miserable
shifts, by tracing his Thefts, discovering his Forgeries, and Baffling him when
he makes but the least offer of an Argument to defend himself withal, that even
you will pity him; I am sure I did as far as the great Esteem and Affection I
bear for the whole Party would permit me.

But yet, not to defraud the Father of his due praise, I cannot forbear doing
him Justice, by taking notice of a very notable Stratagem of his. (You may
wonder perhaps, after what has been said to hear that any such thing should
proceed from him) but a Stratagem I do assure you it was, and such a one as had
it but hit, would have smelt not a little of the Genuin Spirit of an Ancient
Jesuit. When his Antagonist, like another Peleus, had Mauled this our Proteus,
first in the form of Sabran, then in the likeness of Natalis Alexander, and
battered him under the Shapes of so many supposititious Fathers, he was
resolved at last to appear as fierce as a Lion, (a Smithfield one) and up
starts he in the figure of a Non-Con-Parson, and falls a bleating most terribly
at his Adversary. But that Jilting Baggage Fortune, which loves to thwart all
Wise undertakings, brought our Sly Man under the same Misfortune as she did a
more subtle Animal of the same species, who had clothed himself with the Lions
Skin, and was discovered by his long ears. For to confess the truth, he managed
the Intrigue so clumsily, that the subtle Mr. G. presently spies out the Jesuit
under the borrowed Cloak, strips him of his Disguise, and exposes him to the
laughter of all men.

But now to help a poor lame Dog over the Style, and wipe off the scandal that
might be cast upon the Holy Church, out comes another Reverend Father of the
Society; who with Hands and Eyes, as it were, lifted up to Heaven, solemnly
declares that they never have been tampering with Dissenters, never appear in
Jumps and little Bands, but abhor, renounce, and detest, all manner of
Dissimulation and Disguisements, in what ever concerns Religion.

But to say nothing of the R. Dr. Sh. whom I will not dishonor by bringing him
into competition with this Varlet, I must beg Mr. G's pardon for keeping him in
such bad company all this while: What shall we do then for one to match this
our Dreadful Champion? Truly we shall be at a great loss, for the Footman has
so often foiled, tript him up, and laid him on his Back, that henceforward,
even Porters and Cobblers will think it a Disgrace to be put into the Ring
against him.

But though the Unfortunate Sabran has been thus stripped of his Learning,
Politics, and Common Sense; yet his Philosophy will never forsake him; there is
none, I Am sure, that can deny him to be perfectly endued but more especially
about the Forehead) with all the Apathy of a most accomplished Stoic; for
notwithstanding all his Disgraces, he has still the Courage to live, and in
England too, the Scene of his Follies.

The Judicious Mr. Pulton, may perhaps take it ill that I have been so long a
coming to him, but it is very probable that I shall some other time take an
occasion of staying with him a little longer than he desires. I am a little out
of breath at present, and therefore shall only tell him that I have read some
of his Works, with as little prejudice as it is possible for one to entertain,
that has the least knowledge of Popery; and all the punishment I would desire
should be inflicted on the overgrown Grammarian, for all the Nonsensical
Ribaldry wherewith he has pestered the World, is, That he were put a little
while under old Busbys lash, he would then find, that did he use no better
Arguments in a Declamation, than he does for his Religion, he would receive more
stripes then Choerilus, for betraying his Cause.

But to conclude, Sir, I doubt not but that by this time you perceive how
despicable a thing this once so terrible a Bugbear is, you see what small
reason we have to be afraid, where no occasion of Fear is; If that party ever
had any advantage over us, it proceeded from our own timorous Apprehensions of
them. But they have now been so kind as to let us know that all their Plots and
Contrivances against us, ought to be so little the objects of our Dread that
they are beneath even our Contempt and Scorn. Our safety, as it is inseparable
from that of the C. of E. so it is now together with it established upon so
solid a Basis, that it is impossible for all the Southern blasts to shake it.
His Majesty has at last so effectually secured us in the enjoyment of our
Religion and Laws, by restoring to the Church such Prelates as are Infer^our to
none of those of the Primitive times, to the State, such of the Nobility and
Gentry, whose Integrity and Honor are Proof against the strongest Temptations.
Let us not therefore show our selves unworthy of such Great Favors from our
King, and Injurious to those Worthy Persons, to whom he has entrusted our
Welfare, by continuing to entertain our Groundless Suspicions. We have now
nothing to Fear, but the Dismal Effects of Popular Fears. Let us therefore
endeavor as much as in us lies, to Allay them, lest we run our selves into
greater Dangers than those we seem to Apprehend.

Sir, I am Yours, T. D.


