APOCALYPSE, Chap. 11. Its accomplishment showed from the Lady ELEANOR.
THus Reader in a word to thee, what the unsealed words of this Prophecy
imports; We even in the same Estate with them, called well Spiritually hardened
Egypt, and sinful Sodoms great City (pointing expressly to the Spiritual calling
in the last days what incurable Blindeness Arrogance begets: Here impeached of
the sin against the Holy Ghost, guilty of the blood of these his sacred
Ambassadors slain by them: the Prophet Daniel and John, no inferior prophets,
their Books being interpreted by the same Spirit they wrote, and these
Imprinted at Holland, Anno 1633. immediately seized on, shrouded in a loose
sheet of paper: their embalmd bodies about Doctors Commons, the good hour
waiting for of their resurrection wounded in that barbarous manner, assaulted
by merciless, desperate men, unto a senceless, saltless age sent; bidden,
Remember her looking back, Lots faithless Wife, who neither discern the time,
know not the voice of the prophets, enemies to the Churches deliverance (Micah
4.) promised, at last, the downfall of her foes, come upon themselves have
fulfilled it: By filling the measure up, reaching to Heaven: an account but
current heretofore, never complete till now the holy Ghost in such manner
blasphemed: The invincible truth termed madness, the Prophets Testimony as
extant on Record, and published, sentenced detestable, as if any thing were too
hard for the Lord in his appointed time: whose dead bodies trodden underfoot
daily, or swept out like weekly Occurrences, those truths; and proceeding with
the brutish fact committed on these sacred VVitnesses, or Ambassadors arived
what their entertainment; though not ignorant what power extraordinary endued
with: wonders of the highest kind at their word, waters turned into blood,
War foreshewed, Heaven shut, and the like, smite the Earth with plagues as
often as they speak the word, yet these rash wretches such a vexation their
presence, clad in Sackcloth, etc. gratify with presents making merry, as the
manner by stoping one another mouths, to make up the Breach; triumphing over
their corpse slain by the Beast coming out of the smoking pit or Abyss, as
appears, making War with them, with his furious Train, armed at all points
this British beast.

Not a little wild concerned in it, because showed in this manner: He must be
killed (verse) which harms them, touches a leaf of the Tree of Life, a violent
death, whose doom be he whatsoever, verse. 5. cap. 11.

And though since see it true, visible as their unexpected Resurrection and
Ascension, beheld by their very Enemies, eye witness of it: Gentlemen no less
slighted, then by those impious persons insenced at their Testimony, supposed
such an impossibility in those profane feasting days, adored by his riotous
Lords, Courted by his Concubines, with Belshazzar, born under a like malevolent
Planet: And though needless any farther showing, concerning in the last time,
the last days approach to be revealed out of the Prophet Daniel and the
Apocalypse, one a Phoenix of great Babylon, the other an Eagle, his flight from
Patmos Isle, of times tyranical Reign cut off, and his cashiered Generation;
suffering for which glad tidings murdered by wretched caytiffs (verse.)
confirmed both by their Resurrection and Ascending: and whose scaled writs
reserved for the end, not opened to be till then or served. Notwithstanding of
Times mystery thus, his being bidden, Arise and measure the Temple; after the
seven thunders voices uttered, proclaiming of a certain in what century, sworn
in his wrath, Times being no longer; He forbidden to measure the Court, leave
it out, given to the Gentiles; of whose treading under foot 42 months the
City, as follows, signified by the Temple of God, the year of God how about
1642. from his leaving the High Court, etc. unto Nazebies blow given him, just
three years and a half, even from Jan. 1641. unto Anno Dom. 1644. complete,
that Ascensions feast and cities solemn thanksgiving. And thus as the heavens
one contained in another, under that great victory obtained, shadowed out the
general day of Judgment not far off; whereat the holy prophets and Elders not
more rejoicing, then the ireful Nations enraged; like those so many thousand
prisoners brought up, etc. filling every place like Hell, likened to that great
Earthquake 1645. after the aforesaid feast, when a List returned with Names,
etc. ver. a remnant only escaping, giving glory to God, or took their flight,
as showed (v. 13.) all pointing to the present century; as moreover 7000 slain
by the cities fall, the tenth part of it in the same hour, etc. confirmed by
the divided number of Seven, a time and times and half (or part.) And so much
for measuring out of these times of division never such; and the third woe said
to come quickly, showing the other two are past: what signs and woeful tokens
visited with (to wit) monstrous levied Taxes devouring young and old, and
Engines of war those pieces in a moment destroying, men by Sea and Land
innumerable, as though Hell let loose, the Devils short, etc. And for these in
special, let so much suffice of Heaven opened, or the Temple of GOD, etc.) with
the two Candlesticks, and two Olive Trees anointed ones, passing over the
General, what war has bin waged against the Old and New Testament, and two
Sacraments, the sum of it, oil in their lamps, or watchful, etc. including your
Holland Ambassadors welcome, and that the Cedar if not spared, or the root, let
the Firtree beware, the branches must not be too bold, between whom (the King
and Bishops in hot blood) to judge referd to those two divided brethren, one
returning a cross answer, the younger as free of his fair language, prohibits
deferring to give God the glory, or going about to deceive him, with I, I, etc.

FINIS.

